<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871110-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Crash Survivor:Broker Firm ThrivesBy Stressing ServiceOver Flashy Products---Amid October's Destruction,Tiny Rothschild SecuritiesOf Chicago Did Just Fine---Sam's Conservatism Lives On---By Hal LancasterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   More than a week after the market tumbled through the glass into Wonderland, the telephone lines at Rothschild Securities Corp. still crackled with customers' anger and apprehension.    &quot;Of course you're upset, you have every right to be,&quot; Robert Karger, the firm's 76-year-old chairman, crooned soothingly to one caller. In the next row of cubicles, Paul Adelson, the 77-year-old executive vice president and secretary, reassured another. &quot;Three points off?&quot; he said. &quot;In this kind of market, $3 is nothing.&quot;    Their assurances carried the weight of firsthand experience. When the stock market last crashed in 1929, Mr. Adelson was a young Rothschild clerk; Mr. Karger, a son of the firm's founder, Samuel Karger, came aboard three years later, in the depths of the depression that followed that crash. Recent events, then, haven't come as a frightening new experience but as a reaffirmation of old truths. &quot;You have to put money aside to weather any storms,&quot; Mr. Karger counsels. &quot;There will always be storms.&quot;    In the stormy history of the securities industry, Rothschild Securities -- which isn't connected with L.F. Rothschild Holdings Inc., the New York brokerage firm jolted by a $44 million loss last month, or with any other similarly named firm -- is but a dot on the page. It should have vanished long ago, another victim of the market's frequent shock waves, its insatiable appetite for capital and its appeal to acquisition-minded corporate giants.    But Rothschild has endured for nearly 80 years under family control. It has seen two world wars, a depression and many recessions, regulation and deregulation, consolidation and computerization. It absorbed the crash of '29 and will survive the meltdown of '87.    In fact, while big brokerage firms warned of significant losses from their trading operations last month, tiny Rothschild was having one of its best months ever, thanks to the commissions generated by unprecedented trading volume. The privately held firm won't disclose profits, but Rothschild hasn't posted a monthly loss since January 1982.    Rothschild stayed alive through the years by steadfastly refusing to risk its own capital for the sake of growth and by stressing customer service over flashy new products. In the go-go Wall Street world -- and even within Rothschild -- some translate that into fear of flying. &quot;The only reason Rothschild is still alive,&quot; says a veteran Wall Street executive with an air of disdain, &quot;is that it just didn't die.&quot;    No big risks, no big rewards. No big regrets, either. &quot;We were solid and conservative,&quot; says Robert Karger's son Richard, the 41-year-old president and the third generation of his family to run the firm. &quot;When you do that, you can miss opportunities, but you can miss the pitfalls, too.&quot;    Since returning from a stint at New York's Brown Brothers Harriman andamp; Co. in 1975, Richard Karger has introduced some new products in an attempt to wean Rothschild from its reliance on an aging corps of retail brokers. Nothing, mind you, that risks company capital. An acorn couldn't fall that far from the family tree. He has focused instead on fee-generating businesses like investment-advisory and pension-management services for small fry missed by the big brokers. &quot;We can't get too far afield,&quot; he explains. &quot;We can't be a mini-Merrill Lynch.&quot;    This, then, is a glimpse of a stock-market survivor. Some may view it as an indictment of timidity in a business built on risk; others may see it as an argument for conservative management in a business plagued by waves of failures. It is one of business's basic quandaries: whether to risk much to build empires, or to risk little and survive. The beauty of Rothschild Securities resides entirely in the style of the beholder. Its story illustrates, in any case, how stunning events can shape a company's direction for generations.    ---   Shortly after the turn of the century, Samuel Karger headed for Chicago to get in on the stock-market boom. His family had been selling beef to coal-mining camps in Michigan for nearly 40 years by then, but many of the mines were closing. Young Mr. Karger figured he had everything he needed to start a brokerage firm in those unregulated days -- enough friends who wanted to play the market and a mother-in-law with $50,000.    Thus, in 1908, was born the autonomous Chicago office of Rothschild andamp; Co., a New York firm founded by Mr. Karger's brother-in-law, Monroe Rothschild. Within a decade, Mr. Rothschild died and Mr. Karger showed his conservative bent by closing the New York office. &quot;It was a big mistake,&quot; says John Karger, 79, another son of Samuel's who for years was the firm's floor trader in New York but now is a broker there with another firm. New York, he says, &quot;is the center of the financial world; if we'd stayed here, the company might have grown much larger.&quot;    But it was the 1929 debacle that etched Sam Karger's flinty conservatism forevermore in granite. The prelude to the crash may sound familiar to today's investor: buoyant optimism in a raging bull market, rampant speculation in overvalued securities. &quot;Cab drivers, elevator operators and everyone else was buying stock, mostly on margin, mostly way over their heads,&quot; says Robert Karger.    Brokerage houses fueled the fire by lending investors up to 90% of the purchase price of stock. Why not? How could anyone lose with stock values continually soaring? Entertainer Eddie Cantor joked that his brother's blood pressure shot up and was split four for one. A bullish Sam Karger printed business cards on thin steel sheets with &quot;Buy U.S. Steel&quot; engraved on the back.    The joyride ended abruptly on that bleak October day. About 75% of Rothschild's accounts had been trading on margin; most had to be liquidated to pay back the loans. For days, Sam Karger slept on the couch in his office and reserved hotel rooms nearby for his weary staffers, who worked nearly round the clock to assess the carnage.    Robert Karger tells of the wealthy businessman who calmly signed over stock in a private company to erase his debt to Rothschild; soon thereafter, he committed suicide. Mr. Adelson still remembers a man wearing a velvet coat who was selling apples on a street corner.    Through the '30s, brokers sat around for days with little to do, as Americans struggled with poverty and with shattered confidence. &quot;I'd ask my father why the hell we were in this damn business,&quot; Robert Karger says. &quot;He'd say, 'Don't worry, it'll get better.' But he worried plenty.&quot;    The firm nearly folded. But Sam Karger made the painful decision to cut costs drastically. The day of the crash, Mr. Adelson recalls, a note scrawled on the office blackboard heralded an immediate 15% pay cut. Two more cuts followed within a year. Employees were laid off. The firm dropped its back-office operations, contracted with Harris, Upham andamp; Co. to handle its books and even moved in with Harris Upham for a while. &quot;One room, no windows,&quot; Robert Karger recalls grimly. &quot;I didn't know if we'd make it.&quot;    More ambitious firms didn't, including Richard Whitney andamp; Co. Mr. Whitney, the longtime president of the New York Stock Exchange, was unable to accept new realities -- and got caught embezzling customer funds to finance his continuing speculations. When his firm's demise was announced to a hushed exchange in 1938, John Karger recalls, &quot;It was like saying God was dead.&quot;    By then, Sam Karger's speculating partners had also been wiped out, and he had taken some lumps as well. His pet stock, U.S. Steel, hit a depression low of $21 a share after a free fall from $262. If that could happen, he reasoned, nothing was certain. He never traded on margin again. His aversion to risk -- and Rothschild's limited future -- was firmly set.    ---   Through their years of running the firm, Sam and Robert Karger rarely strayed from Sam's strict definition of the brokerage business: &quot;You want to buy, we'll buy,&quot; he would say. &quot;You want to sell, we'll sell.&quot; He vetoed purchases of new public offerings for the company account, a risk most of his contemporaries routinely took for the promise of big resale profits if the company took off.    With few exceptions, Robert Karger continued that reluctance to undertake new ventures, despite the clamor from partners who wanted a more competitive roster of products to offer clients.    A flirtation with underwriting lasted through two issues before it was jettisoned as too risky. Mr. Adelson would return from monthly seminars in New York, brimming with revenue-producing new ideas -- &quot;only the people here didn't think they were as great as I thought,&quot; he says.    When Mr. Karger did yield to the clamor from his brother and others, he regretted it. Despite several years of profitability, an over-the-counter trading operation was disbanded in 1981 after it absorbed a sudden sizable loss when the market dropped. &quot;We were profitable again within three months,&quot; says Samuel Lieberman, who managed the operation and was later allowed to spin it off, &quot;but they just didn't want the risk or exposure of a trading operation.&quot; Says Richard Karger: &quot;Year to year, Lieberman made money, but there were some wild, month-to-month swings.&quot;    After that, the New York office, which had been reopened under John Karger, was closed again; Mr. Karger is still bitter about the episode, his nephew Richard concedes.    A commodities-futures operation lasted less than three years after producing big losses for customers and the company, which got stuck with a $300,000 debt from a Mexican client who invested in pesos just before a major devaluation. The company still hasn't collected all the debt after years in court. &quot;That shook my dad to his senses,&quot; Richard Karger says, smiling.    ---   Robert Karger peers through the slanted skylight of Rothschild's glitzy new quarters in a Chicago high-rise. &quot;Dad feels uncomfortable in offices like these,&quot; Richard Karger says. &quot;He says the customers will think we've absconded with their money.&quot;    He is equally uncomfortable with the wild new world of Wall Street, with its shadow markets, program trading, junk bonds and risk arbitrage. &quot;I hope things get back to normal soon,&quot; he says, shaking his head. &quot;This is worse than Las Vegas could ever be.&quot;    Most firms have been forced to take those gambles in the decade since institutional-buying clout crumbled the old, fixed-commission structure, causing some firms to lose a third to a half of their revenues. The new Wall Street requires &quot;more and more capital,&quot; says Edward O'Brien, the president of the Securities Industry Association, &quot;more capital for underwriting, more capital for position-taking.&quot;    At the retail end, the emergence of discount brokers further squeezed small, full-service firms. But the core of Rothschild's customers has remained loyal. Why?    Maybe it is things like the estate-asset valuations Rothschild does as a favor for longtime customer Paul Freeman. &quot;I intend to be with them as long as I live,&quot; the Chicago attorney says firmly.    Or maybe it is Rothschild's willingness to deliver stock certificates to customers' houses. Asks Richard Karger: &quot;Do you know any discount brokers who will do that?&quot;    On Black Monday, when brokers were as easy to reach as Ayatollah Khomeini, Rothschild brokers took the initiative, dutifully contacting clients to offer solace and support. The attentiveness paid off for Daniel J. Zakon, a vice president, who got a new account on referral; the steamed customer hadn't been able to reach his discount broker after repeated tries. Edward J. Malysiak Jr., another vice president, had dinner with nervous customers that Monday and Tuesday. It wasn't easy. &quot;You have to be prepared to take a certain amount of verbal abuse,&quot; he says.    Few of their customers were devastated, Rothschild brokers say. The pension accounts were substantially in bonds, which went up; even the more aggressive, equity-laden accounts mostly lost profits, not nest eggs. One big difference between 1929 and 1987: This time, only about 5% of Rothschild's customers were trading on margin.    Like everyone else, though, the Kargers wish the current uncertainty would just go away. Sam Karger wouldn't be pleased by today's frenzied atmosphere, Robert Karger believes. He says it is &quot;very disconcerting to anyone who has any conservative blood in his veins.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>