<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880104-0067 </DOCNO><HL> Mexico Looks for Friends Among Family </HL><AUTHOR> Dianna Solis and Alfredo Corchado </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   Imagine the lobbying power of 12 million people, united by a common heritage. Their affluence and numbers are growing. Clustered in big states, they draw more political and corporate courtship every year.    They are Mexican-Americans --the lobby that Mexico has failed to develop in the U.S.    Ever since the U.S. seized half its land mass in 1848, the Western Hemisphere's third-most-populous country has obsessively avoided any involvement in the affairs of the nation in first place. Mexico has been painfully slow to join the lobby on Capitol Hill against a restrictive U.S. trade bill. The door is closing on Mexican immigration just as the Irish promote their own made-to-order immigration bills. Greek-Americans have effectively marshaled Congress for continued U.S. foreign aid to Greece as it competes with Turkey for financial favor. Mexico hasn't begun to influence U.S. policy with the impact with which Jews in the U.S. have long promoted Israel's interests.    But in the past year, signs have appeared that Mexico may be ready to tap the awesome potential of its lost sons and daughters. An agency within Mexico's Interior Ministry has developed a plan for an acercamiento, a reconciliation or bonding. If it clears the obstacles --and there are major ones --the plan could lay a foundation for a new binational political force in North America on such issues as immigration, trade, foreign debt and Mexico's tarnished image in the U.S.    The acercamiento plan carefully avoids mentioning any effort to establish overt lobbying efforts in the U.S. To do so would violate the hard-set Mexican policy of refusing to intervene in the sovereign affairs of its neighbors --a policy born of Mexico's long and painful history of invasion and interference by outsiders. But the plan envisions an arousal of Mexican-American support for Mexico both in the U.S. and in Mexico itself --through Mexican-American investments in their ancestral Mexican states, for instance. It also calls for increased dialogue between the U.S.'s Hispanic leadership and Mexican leadership at the presidential level.    &quot;(The) diplomatic approach has become self-defeating,&quot; says Mexican Adolfo Aquilar Zinser, a senior associate at the Washington-based Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.    The demographics are hard for Mexico to ignore. Mexican-Americans and Mexicans living in the U.S. are the nation's fastest-growing ethnic group. By 2000, many demographers believe they will exceed blacks as the largest. Thus, the Mexican acercamiento document discusses in detail their potential role in changing the &quot;equilibrium of power&quot; in the border states of California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas. It takes particular note of the sway held by Texas and California in the Electoral College, though it makes no mention of the vast numbers of U.S. Hispanics who aren't registered to vote because of apathy, lack of citizenship or youth. Nor does it mention the historic low voter turnouts for general elections.    Mexico's plan to organize ties with Mexican-Americans represents a sea change in the generations of contempt harbored in Mexico toward them. Nationalistic Mexicans have viewed Mexican-Americans as vendidos, traitors who abandoned their ancestral land, tongue and culture. They have been derided as pochos, a people &quot;bleached&quot; by gringo exposure.    But now &quot;the shift is real, obvious and powerful,&quot; says Rodolfo O. de la Garza, a University of Texas professor who studies Mexico-U.S. relations. &quot;Pocho,&quot; he says, &quot;is dead.&quot;    Dying, perhaps --but not dead, for many U.S.-Hispanics have painful memories of pocho-bashing. Thirty-year-old, California-born Lydia Sanchez Bracamonte emotionally recalls her Mexican cousins calling her la pochita. &quot;I felt less than a Mexican,&quot; she says. &quot;'Where did I belong?' I would ask my mother.&quot;    There's hardly any guarantee that Mexico can enlarge cultural and economic ties into political ones. Mexico faces a severe credibility problem with some Mexican-Americans, due to Mexico's deep economic inequities and the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, which has controlled Mexico for nearly 60 years.    Domingo &quot;Nick&quot; Reyes, an El Paso, Texas, health-care administrator whose mother emigrated from Mexico, has a fulfilling career assisting immigrants in the city's poorest barrio --immigrants who are vivid evidence of Mexico's inability to provide for its own. &quot;Unlike Mexico, Israel doesn't have to sell itself to Jews,&quot; he says. &quot;Mexico does. We were and we still are driven out of our own country.&quot;    Resentment flared during the recent celebration of Mexico Independence Day in Chicago when eggs started flying around a visiting banker from Mexico. &quot;Bunch of rats,&quot; grumbled a 21-year-old immigrant, Gloria Gamez. &quot;They live in the best homes, drive the best cars and make the best salaries. Meanwhile, we have to leave the country to find opportunities here.&quot;    Finally, the U.S. government has never exactly encouraged the Mexican-American community to rally around Mexico. Indeed, not far from the State Department stands a firm reminder to U.S. diplomats that Mexico welcomes no interference. It is a sober-looking statue of Mexico's most revered president, Benito Juarez, with the inscription, &quot;Respect for the rights of others is peace.&quot;    Following the devastating Mexico City earthquake in 1985, a high State Department official issued a harsh, nationally televised rebuke to Mayor Henry Cisneros of San Antonio, Texas, for organizing an airlift of supplies. Elliott Abrams, assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, urged the mayor to stay out of Mexico. But Mayor Cisneros, a politician with a cordial relationship with Mexican officials, made the trip anyway.    With a growing stake in U.S. policy, Mexico simply needs friends, say policy analysts on both sides of the border. The U.S. Treasury's move last week to ameliorate some of Mexico's debt woes underscored how tied Mexico is to outside banks because of its $110 billion in foreign debt. Congress has moved to stem the flow of illegal immigration that impoverished Mexico has viewed as an economic &quot;safety valve&quot; for its people, as peso devaluations hurt their ability to buy basic goods. In an increasingly global economy, Mexico is the third-largest trading partner of the U.S.    And despite the obstacles --the years of pocho-bashing, an enduring suspicion of the Mexican government and their assimilation into the cultural mainstream of the U.S. --many Mexican-Americans still harbor an unwavering love for the homeland, for la patria.    Their affection was visible in a darkened Houston amphitheater last month, when Latinos celebrating Mexican Independence Day applauded through one cultural whiplash after another. Cowboyheeled mariachis serenaded them with the moody melody &quot;La Malaguena,&quot; then burst into &quot;Twist and Shout.&quot;    Meanwhile, in Chicago, crowds six-people deep lined 26th Street for the Mexican Independence Day parade as though it were, well, St. Patrick's Day. Tears welled up even in the eyes of Carlos Arango, who left Mexico bitterly after witnessing bloody deaths in the 1968 government crackdown of student protests during the Olympics. &quot;I feel happy, pained, sad,&quot; he whispered.    In many ways, it is first-generation immigrants --even former opposition leaders such as Mr. Arango --that make acercamiento possible today. As part of a Chicano delegation to Mexico, Roman Martinez, a Texas state representative, discussed immigration with Mexican officials because, he explains later, so many of his constituents are Mexican citizens illegally residing in the U.S. &quot;My district would not have been created if not for the undocumented,&quot; Mr. Martinez says.    Historically, the drive for an improved political relationship has been strongest with U.S. Chicanos. Julian Nava, former U.S. ambassador to Mexico and a Chicano, says he often repeated this message to Mexican officials: &quot;You are missing out on an enormous lobbying group that will be of benefit to bilateral relations.&quot;    But Mexico-born Antonia Hernandez, who heads the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund, for one, remains frustrated over Mexico's cautious pace in U.S. affairs --as well as the social inequities that continue to propel Mexicans north. &quot;They are going to have to get their house in order,&quot; she says. &quot;It is reaching a point where the paciencia&quot; --the patience&quot; --is wearing thin.&quot;    ---   Ms. Solis is a reporter in the Journal's Houston bureau; Mr. Corchado, in its Philadelphia bureau. </TEXT></DOC>