<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0173 </DOCNO><HL> International: South Korean Opposition Presses Probes Of Former Regime's Alleged Misdoings </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph P. Manguno (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST NOC </CO><IN> STK SCR ARO NUK UTI </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With the Olympics over, South Korea's opposition-controlled National Assembly is moving with renewed determination to investigate alleged misdeeds by former President Chun Doo Hwan and his family and friends.    But the legislators have taken on such a heavy caseload that analysts are skeptical much new information will come out. They also expect the inquiries to be hampered by lawmakers of the ruling Democratic Justice Party, by time constraints and the inexperience of Korean lawmakers in conducting such inquiries. Last week, 16 standing committees opened a 20-day audit of 564 government agencies. The right to pursue such an inquiry had been stripped from the Assembly 16 years ago but restored when the constitution was revised last year.    The audit will center on four agencies that have long been immune from inspection: the president's office and residential compound, known as the Blue House; the Army Intelligence Command; the Defense Security Command; and the National Security Planning Agency, formerly known as the Korean Central Intelligence Agency.    At the same time, a special investigative committee began issuing subpoenas to witnesses in 44 cases of alleged wrongdoing by the former president, his family and friends. Allegations range from stock-market manipulation and extortion of major businesses to brutally suppressing a 1980 civil uprising in the city of Kwangju.    The audit immediately ran into problems when ruling-party lawmakers walked out of committees examining Blue House affairs Friday, ostensibly to protest opposition behavior in an unrelated matter. At the same time, opposition leaders concede that the investigative committee will never get to all 44 Chun-related cases. Kim Dae Jung, president of the chief opposition party, expects the panel to end up just &quot;choosing a number of cases that clearly demonstrate the pattern of corruption by Chun and his friends.&quot;    What the opposition and the Korean public want, says Mr. Kim, isn't revenge or punishment. &quot;We want him to come forward, make a sincere confession and apology to the people, then go back to his home town,&quot; he says.    The first cases on the agenda involve the Kwangju incident and the Ilhae Institute, a foundation financed by the captains of Korean industry under Mr. Chun's direction and given his pen name. Critics allege Ilhae was used to channel ill-gotten funds to Mr. Chun and his family.    Other cases are likely to include: a government-induced collapse of the giant Kukje-ICC business group in 1985; attempts by Northrop Corp. of the U.S. to sell F-20 fighter jets to Korea in the early 1980s; and the 1985-86 contract-award process for two nuclear-power plants.    The first signs of the confrontation ahead came last Thursday when eight witnesses subpoenaed to testify in the Ilhae probe failed to appear, including Kim Ki Hwan, the institute's president; Chang Se Dong, former head of the National Security Planning Agency; and An Hyon Tae, who headed Mr. Chun's presidential security force and is now his chief secretary.    The committee issued new subpoenas requiring the eight to appear this Friday. It also is considering subpoenaing Mr. Chun himself; Seoul Mayor Kim Yong Nae; Chong Ju Yong, chairman of Ilhae and the founder and honorary chairman of the giant Hyundai business group; and Yang Chong Mo, former chairman of the Kukje-ICC group.    Meanwhile, former First Lady Lee Soon Ja was subpoenaed to testify before the Assembly's education-information committee to answer questions about her fund-raising methods for the Saesedae, or New Generation, Foundation. Separately, the Assembly's public administration committee agreed Friday to subpoena Mrs. Lee to answer questions about the foundation, which she founded and still chairs.    The former president's younger brother, Chun Kyung Hwan, was sentenced last month to seven years in prison and fined more than $5 million for embezzlement, bribery and using his influence with the president to enrich himself while he was head of the New Community Movement, a government-sponsored rural-development agency. The Justice Ministry has forbidden 14 other relatives, including the former president's elder brother, Chun Ki Hwan, from leaving the country while investigations are under way.    The ruling Democratic Justice Party, which Mr. Chun founded in 1981 and which continues to govern, says the opposition wants to conduct an inquisition of the former president. &quot;The backward-looking opposition continues to harp on Mr. Chun and the past, while ignoring the future,&quot; says a DJP spokesman. But the three opposition parties, which together control the Assembly, say there can be no moving ahead until there is an accounting of the Chun administration's alleged misdeeds.    That is a major dilemma for President Roh Tae Woo, Mr. Chun's hand-picked successor and a longtime friend and army buddy. Aides say Mr. Roh wants to put the past behind and get on with his ambitious agenda for redefining the nation's economic, political and foreign-policy goals. But they acknowledge that he has been unable to bring himself to break his bonds of friendship and loyalty to Mr. Chun.    As chief of the army's capital garrison command in 1979, Mr. Roh played a pivotal role in the coup that brought fellow Gen. Chun to power. Later, as a member of three Chun cabinets and then chairman of the ruling party, Mr. Roh helped him consolidate power.    In his first budget address to the National Assembly last week, Mr. Roh said that &quot;if conspicuously bad things were done, they need to be brought to light through cool-headed examination.&quot; Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam, head of another major opposition party, say President Roh assured each of them last month that he would persuade Mr. Chun to confess and apologize for any official wrongdoing and repay any ill-gotten funds. </TEXT></DOC>