<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: U.S. Policy on Southern Africa Is Emerging As Potential Flash Point in Presidential Race </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Southern Africa's wars echo in the politics of this presidential year.    Vice President George Bush and Gov. Michael Dukakis -- the almost certain Republican and Democratic nominees -- are deeply divided on the direction of U.S. policy in the region. From the left, the Rev. Jesse Jackson fans the Democratic flames. On the right, Republicans are pressured from corporate boardrooms to evangelical churches.    The debate commands little public attention yet, but is high in emotion and revealing of the two men who will compete head-to-head in the fall. The loyal Mr. Bush weds himself to the administration's record in the region. But 7 1/2 years have achieved only limited diplomatic success and provoked dissent in party ranks. Senate Republicans dealt President Reagan a bitter defeat by helping to override his veto of South Africa sanctions in 1986; among those most critical was Kansas Sen. Nancy Kassebaum, a potential Bush running mate.    Mr. Dukakis, by contrast, commits himself to wholesale -- critics say moralistic -- changes abroad. The Massachusetts governor would end U.S aid to South Africa-backed forces in Angola and forbid any American relationship with Pretoria's intelligence services. He promises to seek sanctions against South Africa in the United Nations and endorses mandatory disinvestment by U.S. corporations within six months and new penalties on multinationals that export petroleum to South Africa.    In party platform sessions this week, Mr. Jackson is demanding -- and likely to get -- language putting South Africa in the same category as Libya and Iran as a &quot;terrorist state.&quot; The provision is part of the civil-rights leader's drive to broaden the apartheid debate to include lesserknown wars in Angola and Mozambique. The force of his personality is heard in the street rhymes of a black Brooklyn rap group, whose song &quot;A.F.R.I.C.A.&quot; is used by anti-apartheid forces to educate listeners about the region.    By pushing the issue forward, Mr. Jackson raises the stakes for the region and the united black vote Democrats need in November. As the campaign heats up, this pressure could fracture whatever bipartisan truce the State Department hopes to preserve with Congress. &quot;The anti-apartheid movement has always presented apartheid to the American people as an internal South African issue,&quot; says Jackson adviser Jean Sindab. &quot;To go beyond is very hard (but) if we don't do it now we're lost.&quot;    The response is most powerful among black voters, where apartheid touches an emotional chord reaching across class lines. In ads placed on black radio stations through the South, Democrats used the issue in 1986 to help oust Republican senators who backed President Reagan on the sanctions vote.    Mr. Dukakis must mobilize the same vote in November. Moreover, the debate fits his broader promise to be an activist president committed to human rights. Christopher Edley, a senior adviser, dismisses the argument that sanctions are ineffective and appears delighted at the prospect of challenging Britain to veto a future American initiative in the United Nations penalizing Pretoria.    &quot;It wouldn't make Dukakis uncomfortable,&quot; Mr. Edley says. &quot;One would hope it would make Margaret Thatcher uncomfortable.&quot;    But some Democrats worry that Mr. Dukakis's posture may reflect a naive idealism. Moderates in Congress are divided on the merits of cutting economic and intelligence relationships with Pretoria, and now that the party stands a chance of winning back the White House, some are reluctant to risk limiting the next president's options. &quot;There's something to be said for not cutting off all your bridges,&quot; says New York Rep. Matthew McHugh, who sits on both the the House Intelligence Committee and the Appropriations subcommittee governing foreign operations.    From the left and right, Mr. Dukakis is criticized for his reluctance to apply force. He won't rule out sending arms to help Mozambique defend itself against brutal guerrilla forces run from South Africa, but is plainly hesitant despite the presence already of British instructors helping to protect railroads important to the region. Even Sweden has sent signals it will take steps to protect its investments, and proponents argue that despite its Marxist character, the survival of the multiracial Mozambique regime is crucial to the very goals Mr. Dukakis states for the region.    Mr. Dukakis's rejection of military aid to South Africa-backed insurgents in Angola puts him at odds with not only the administration but an expanding number of Democrats. Though uneasy still about the operation, committees in Congress accepted a secret funding increase for the guerrillas recently, and the House Intelligence Committee yesterday voted to exempt Angolan-related military matters from any ban on intelligence sharing with South Africa. The administration is seeking to use its leverage now in negotiations linking the removal of thousands of Cuban troops in Angola with South Africa's withdrawal from Namibia to the south.    Reagan administration officials believe that Angola, like Afghanistan, could be a place where the Soviets are willing to pull back from regional conflicts. The September target date set at the Moscow summit appears unlikely to be met, but South Africa may feel pressure too if only because it may be a long time before it sees another U.S. administration as friendly as this one. Even George Bush portrays Pretoria as a &quot;pariah state.&quot;    Africa's future doesn't stir in Republicans the same response as among blacks, but the debate brings out a rich mix of corporate interests and staunch anti-communists, including the Christian right. The Angolan insurgency pays $600,000 annually to retain a suburban Washington lobbying firm that chiefly lobbies Congress but whose principals are former business partners of Mr. Bush's campaign manager, Lee Atwater. A representative of the firm has had contacts with Mr. Bush's staff to urge a favorable mention in his speeches, and the vice president vows support for the &quot;freedom fighters&quot; as long as the Luanda regime retains foreign troops.    The Mozambique guerrilla force known as RENAMO, created by intelligence forces of what was then Rhodesia and passed on to South Africa, is treated more gingerly by Republicans since a State Department report documenting brutalities, but it retains conservative allies. Mr. Bush's campaign has taken steps to sidetrack any platform fight on this issue but opposes security assistance to Mozambique and as recently as last December urged a reconciled unity government with the &quot;insurgents.&quot; Mozambique &quot;is a flash point issue for a lot of anti-communists,&quot; says conservative strategist Howard Phillips.    The State Department's support for the Mozambique government -- including nonlethal security aid -- has put the department at odds in the past with not only the political right but also the late Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey. RENAMO was championed by conservatives under the &quot;Reagan Doctrine&quot; banner of support for anti-communist forces, and as settlements are reached in better-known wars in Nicaragua and Afghanistan, littleknown Africa moves closer to the spotlight as a remaining battlefield. </TEXT></DOC>