<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0059 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Halt on Navy Contract Payments Points to Wider Cutoff of Other Projects </HL><AUTHOR> Edward T. Pound and Andy Pasztor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MD GD UIS GE LIT UTX EMR EMH TRW VAR WX AIRSY GT LOR </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Pentagon's abrupt decision to halt payments on $1 billion in Navy electronics contracts foreshadows a much wider cutoff on dozens of projects tainted by the unfolding defense procurement scandal.    Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci announced the halt in payments Friday after a federal court in Dallas unsealed government affidavits spelling out alleged bribery and influence-peddling by consultants working for contractors seeking the electronics jobs. The move sent shock waves through the defense industry, as dozens of still-sealed affidavits likely will be unveiled in coming weeks, and probably will set off similar moves by the Pentagon.    The prospect of repeated suspensions could cause a cash squeeze for smaller contractors and subcontractors. It also could snarl a growing share of the government weapons-buying system.    &quot;The possibility of a monumental administrative and legal nightmare is showing itself,&quot; said one senior procurement specialist at the Pentagon. Government officials are particularly worried because future affidavits may allege wrongdoing on larger defense jobs than the ones covered by Friday's suspension. Prosecutors have said they are looking at as many as 85 contracts.    It's known that federal investigators are looking into whether consultants obtained inside information or exerted improper influence on two of the Navy's largest programs -- the advanced tactical aircraft and the electronics systems for the Aegis cruiser. Halting payments on those projects could stanch the flow of billions of dollars through the defense industry and produce delays for the Navy. McDonnell Douglas Corp. and General Dynamics Corp. have teamed up to develop the tactical aircraft. Unisys Corp. and the RCA subsidiary of General Electric Co. are working on the Aegis electronics.    The Aegis electronics systems are one subject of a separate Defense Department investigation into the downing over the weekend of an Iranian commercial airliner. The incident occurred after an Aegis cruiser mistook the large passenger jet for an attacking F-14 fighter. The Navy touts the Aegis as having the world's most sophisticated sensor and radar systems.    In the past, the Defense Department has suspended contractors only after they have been indicted or convicted of procurement fraud. The decision in this case to stop payments on the electronic contracts followed a meeting Friday between Secretary Carlucci, Undersecretary for Acquisition Robert Costello, Pentagon general counsel Kathleen Buck and Navy Undersecretary Lawrence Garrett.    The Pentagon is coming under pressure from Congress to crack down on contractors involved in questionable dealings. Before Friday's meeting, House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin (D., Wis.) wrote a letter to Mr. Carlucci urging some action against the implicated contractors. &quot;We must make clear to the public that we are moving with speed and firmness to protect the public's interest and to assure that no firm can profit from ill-gotten gain,&quot; the lawmaker said.    Two days earlier, Mr. Costello was grilled for hours by members of the House Armed Services Committee. Some panel members charged that he has been too easygoing with arms-makers. &quot;There's been tremendous political heat,&quot; said one of Mr. Costello's aides.    Friday's action froze all payments on nine Navy electronics contracts mentioned in the Dallas affidavits, and suspended any new contracts for the companies to continue work on the equipment. In addition, the Pentagon said it is reviewing all contracts with four concerns mentioned in the affidavits: Litton Industries Inc.; the Norden Systems unit of United Technologies Corp.; Hazeltine Corp., a unit of Emerson Electric Co., and Emhart Corp.    The largest contract for which the Navy stopped payments is a $712 million job given TRW Inc., to produce onshore communication centers for submarines. The Pentagon also halted funds on a $150 million communications system being provided by Litton and a $118 million contract being sought by Norden for an &quot;advanced tactical air command central,&quot; a mobile communications system used by the Marine Corps.    &quot;This is an extraordinary action,&quot; said Eldon Crowell, a Washington attorney who often represents defense contractors. &quot;Is this a precedent for action on other affidavits?&quot;    According to senior Pentagon officials, it is. &quot;This foreshadows other actions,&quot; said one. However, he and other department officials say they don't want to shut down production lines for important weapons systems. One approach they might take later is to allow work to continue on tainted contracts, but bar companies from retaining any profits. Rep. Aspin endorsed this approach, saying it would &quot;simultaneously protect the national security and the public purse.&quot;    At TRW, a spokesman said the Pentagon action &quot;caught us completely by surprise.&quot; He added that &quot;to our knowledge, we aren't under investigation.&quot;    In response to the Pentagon action, a Litton spokesman said Friday that the company hadn't been notified officially of the halt in payments and that he &quot;didn't know what the allegations are, if any, or (what is) the government's basis for stopping payments.&quot;    The Pentagon hasn't made clear how long it will hold up payments on the contracts mentioned in the affidavits. Nor has the department said what action it will require from the companies before it resumes payments.    By all assessments, the cloud over the contracts -- and others yet to be implicated -- could hover for months. Investigators have said that a first round of criminal charges probably won't be filed before late fall, and that the bulk of their work isn't likely to be finished until next summer at the earliest.    Pentagon officials are voicing frustration that the Justice Department hasn't shared much information about the investigation. However, prosecutors argue that they are precluded by the secrecy of grand jury deliberations and other factors from providing military brass with specific information about contracts implicated in the unfolding scandal.    The documents released Friday -- including excerpts of wiretapped conversations involving a Navy purchasing official and two private consultants -- provided the first detailed look at how investigators contend the Pentagon's contracting system allegedly was corrupted by systematic marketing of inside bidding information. Moreover, the court papers shed light on the way some contractors allegedly contrived to play a major role in drawing up specifications favorable to them on contracts for which they later intended to compete.    According to the documents, for example, Navy purchasing official George Stone repeatedly provided consultant Mark Saunders sensitive information related to bidding for the contract to develop the Marine Corps' air command center, a $118 million job sought by Norden, among others. The government's filing alleges that Mr. Saunders quickly passed on the information to another consultant, Thomas Muldoon, whom the government says currently works for Norden on the project.    However, as a result of the Pentagon's decision Friday to freeze the contract, Norden said it no longer is seeking the job.    The government says Mr. Muldoon also has been a consultant for Litton, Hazeltine and Emhart. Mr. Muldoon also has had consulting contracts with Unisys.    Hazeltine said federal investigators have told it that &quot;neither Hazeltine nor any current or former employee is the target of the current investigation.&quot;    Mr. Saunders, according to the court papers, told Mr. Muldoon in December 1987 that the government &quot;has decided to eliminate all but two companies&quot; from the final competition for the Marine Corps contract. He allegedly described the information he was passing on as &quot;extraordinarily private.&quot;    The government &quot;believes that Saunders is paying Stone for information he is now receiving,&quot; according to the court papers, which were signed June 10. The affidavits allege that Mr. Muldoon was receiving &quot;$8,000 per month&quot; from Litton, and that he paid Mr. Saunders &quot;$4,000 out of that&quot; amount.    Attorneys for Messrs. Saunders and Muldoon have maintained that their clients didn't do anything improper, and Mr. Stone's attorney declined to comment. None of the individuals named in the affidavits has been charged with any crime.    The court papers also alleged that Mr. Saunders improperly tried to help a unit of Palo Alto, Calif.-based Varian Associates Inc. secure certain Navy radio contracts.    The government has maintained in other filings that disclosure of such details threatens to jeopardize the investigation, reveal confidential sources and discourage witnesses from cooperating. However, other federal courts are less likely to support those arguments in light of last week's disclosures.    Meanwhile, law-enforcement officials said that investigators are examining the fierce competition that developed between military contractors over a $168.9 million contract to build a prototype surveillance blimp for the Navy. The contract, which called for the blimp to be equipped with radar for detecting attacks on U.S. warships, was awarded in June 1987 to a joint venture of Pittsburgh-based Westinghouse Electric Corp. and Airship Industries Ltd., a British concern.    The Securities and Exchange Commission is reviewing whether insider-trading occurred in the over-the-counter stock of Airship Industries shortly before the blimp contract was awarded, according to someone familiar with the inquiry. That inquiry focuses on whether Navy leaks of information about who would win the contract affected trading in the stock.    A Westinghouse spokesman said the company was cooperating with the SEC, but said the inquiry doesn't involve trading in Westinghouse's stock. Airship's chief spokesman in the U.S. couldn't be reached.    The Westinghouse-Airship venture received stiff competition from Goodyear Aerospace Corp., a unit of Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co. Goodyear Aerospace was acquired during the competition by Loral Corp. Federal criminal investigators searched Loral's Akron, Ohio, Defense Systems Group last month, seeking information on the blimp project.    Loral declined to comment.    A Westinghouse spokesman said that company's facilities hadn't been searched.    Criminal investigators appear to be focusing on the activities of William Galvin and William Parkin, well-connected Washington consultants who advised Goodyear Aerospace on the blimp project. Both men have figured prominently in the fraud and bribery investigation. Mr. Galvin, who has represented many defense contractors, has emerged as a central figure in the scandal, along with former Navy Assistant Secretary Melvyn Paisley, once a close personal and business associate of Mr. Galvin.    The blimp was designed to float at 5,000 feet for two or three days without refueling and was to serve as an aerial platform for providing an early warning to a Navy fleet in the event of attack. Westinghouse would supply the electronics and Airship the blimp-making expertise. Pentagon officials said that competition was intense because the project had the potential of growing into a $5 billion order for airships. But that hasn't happened; the project has been kept alive as a research program, but production has been postponed indefinitely because of budget pressures.    Questions about the contract award were raised in the past by Rep. Thomas Sawyer, (D., Ohio), whose district includes Akron. He said that the current criminal inquiry might shed light on why the contract was awarded to the Westinghouse-Airship venture, which submitted a bid $10 million higher than Goodyear's.    Mr. Sawyer said he began looking into the matter because word had leaked prematurely that the Westinghouse-Airship venture had won the contract. He said that Airship had scheduled a news conference to disclose its victory even before the Navy made its announcement.    ---   Tim Carrington in Washington and Gregory Stricharchuk in Pittsburgh contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>