<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880602-0095 </DOCNO><HL> PAC Attack: Big-Money Politics Must Face the Voters In California June 7 --- If They Back a Crackdown And Public Financing, Congress Could Be Next --- Call It Son of Proposition 13 </HL><AUTHOR> Michel McQueen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MKT </IN><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> SACRAMENTO, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Talk about strange bedfellows. In favor of the proposition is a coalition of liberal do-gooder groups -- and some major corporate fat cats. Opposed is a lineup of conservative Republican politicians -- and the liberal Democratic speaker of the assembly.    It's politics in Lotus-land, the cradle of trends from Hula Hoops to dancing raisins. Another movement may be about to come reverberating out of here. It's an attack on runaway campaign spending.    A Proposition 13 for politicos, you might call it. Just as that California initiative a decade ago sparked a national property-tax revolt, voter approval of publicly financed campaigns and curbs on fund raising next Tuesday could energize national efforts to do the same thing to congressional races. A loss could set back those efforts.    The issue is money -- a spiraling cycle of political giving and spending that lends new meaning to the California nickname the Golden State. In 1986, candidates here spent $57.1 million trying to win just 100 legislative seats. Twelve of the races soaked up more than $1 million each. And in a single election for a vacant state-senate seat last year, the two rivals spread around nearly $3 million -- or $22 a vote. This for a job that pays $40,816 a year.    Where does all that money come from? More and more, the answer is from political-action committees, much of it channeled through the state's top politicians. It comes increasingly from interest groups, in other words, and in big chunks. That pattern, in contrast to many small donations from many people, raises worries about what the lawmakers do in return.    &quot;You as a citizen have a right to expect that your elected representatives are going to serve your interest and not the person who shoves the most bucks into {their} war chest. And the least that can be said is, you have a right to question that,&quot; declares Ross Johnson, a GOP state legislator from Orange County.    &quot;I don't think we buy votes,&quot; replies Allen Pross, executive director of the California Medical Association's PAC. No, it's different, he explains: &quot;What we do is we buy a candidate's stance on issues.&quot;    His PAC has been the single biggest donor to state lawmakers in the past five elections, according to figures from the organization Common Cause. It gave California candidates $274,712 last year -- when only a single seat was up for election.    Besides cash, the PACs send lobbyists. So entrenched are lobbyists in Sacramento life that capital denizens call them &quot;the third house,&quot; after the senate and the assembly. By day they roam the corridors of the elegantly restored statehouse. By night they populate -- and pay for -- endless rounds of cocktail receptions and seafood buffets, at $500 to $1,000 a head. But the feeling is growing that the third house is getting too large.    The result of that sentiment is not one but two ballot propositions to radically change things. One, Proposition 68, would sharply limit political donations and spending, while creating a degree of public financing of campaigns. A rival, Proposition 73, would limit contributions only, not spending, and would bar public financing.    A third group implores people to just say no to both proposals. Its nickname: the &quot;No-No&quot; committee.    Gov. George Deukmejian, a conservative Republican, is a leading member of the group that wants to deep-six both 68 and 73. But so is Willie Brown, the liberal and charismatic assembly speaker, who also happens to be king of the state's political fund-raisers. Last year, without even a campaign to run, he raked in $1.8 million.    Mr. Brown argues that limiting what candidates could raise or spend would ensure defeat for challengers, because incumbents can use their offices to reap free publicity. &quot;My name is already out there,&quot; he says. &quot;I've been on every news show, I do a column in every newspaper in my local district, I've got somewhere between six and eight staff people that work full time doing ward-heeling-type things. Tell me how you beat me? You beat me {if} I'm serving time.&quot;    Maybe so, say proponents of Proposition 68, but it's incumbents who actually get the contributions, far more than challengers. Prop 68 backers are buoyed by evidence that resentment of political money and special-interest influence is growing; the latest California Poll by Mervin Field showed that voters who were aware of Prop 68 favored it by more than 3 to 1. But the majority hadn't heard of either proposition, which polling officials say is consistent with past initiative campaigns, when voters made up their minds late. And in the campaign's final days, opponents could strike a responsive chord by arguing against using public funds to pay for political campaigns, especially at a time of budget problems.    The battle over campaigns has all the heat of a political race itself, and all the odd alliances. The Prop 68 coalition spans the spectrum, from California Common Cause to the California Business Roundtable of top chief executives, and from the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund to the California Newspaper Publishers' Association. They operate from outposts ranging from a Common Cause lobbyist's battered Ford Escort to the 37th-floor board room of McKesson Corp. in San Francisco.    The coalition has about $450,000 for a media campaign and is struggling to raise more to fight opponents' expected last-minute rush. One night it collected quarters on the street outside a political fund-raiser, which was going on inside the tony Firehouse restaurant in Sacramento. The Hollywood Women's Political Action Committee helped organize a catered affair at the Beverly Hills home of producer Bud Yorkin, with the help of producer and liberal activist Norman Lear. The survivors of Jesse Unruh, the late assembly speaker, donated $100,000, a tribute to the man who once said, &quot;Money is the mother's milk of politics.&quot;    The diverse supporters have diverse motives. Some corporations are tired of being asked for money. The requests go beyond the subtle, some say. Sue Simmons, a public-relations executive who manages a campaign fund for McKesson, says, &quot;I've had several phone calls where people have said, 'The senator is chairman of this committee, and it would be helpful if you made a contribution if any legislation is going to come up.' I've hung up.&quot;    Some lawmakers, for their part, are tired of asking for money. Assemblyman John Vasconcellos, a liberal San Jose Democrat, complains, &quot;I've got 12 fundraisers on the board this year. I have a person who works full time solely on fundraisers. I'd rather have a full-time person to work on policy.&quot;    Fueling the drive has been a report by the California Commission on Campaign Financing, a privately financed and nonpartisan group, that documented the rapid rise of campaign spending. In 1984, it says, legislative candidates got 92% of their money from outside their districts. The trend continued in the 1986 elections. The candidates, the commission concludes, have come to rely on &quot;two separate constituencies: the district residents who vote for them and the statewide contributors who pay for their campaigns.&quot;    Proposition 68 would let individuals give no more than $1,000 per candidate per election, and major organizations no more than $2,500. That's a far cry from, say, the $81,600 Speaker Brown got just from the California Medical Association in 1985 and 1986. Donations to candidates by the political parties also would be capped, and candidates couldn't raise money in non-election years.    Perhaps more significantly, total spending would be capped at a small fraction of what some candidates spend now. Assembly candidates could spend no more than $375,000 for the primary and the general election together; state-senate candidates no more than $600,000.    Then there's the public financing. A candidate would get $5 from a state fund for every dollar he raised from a home-district voter who hadn't given him more than $250. Small contributions from outside the district would be matched $3 to $1, up to a maximum of $75,000 in public funds in an assembly primary and $112,000 in the general election. Limits for state-senate candidates would be higher.    A deal like this might cost the state $9 million an election, some neutral experts estimate. Opponents of Prop 68 say it would cost much more.    The public-financing feature of Prop 68 is part of the reason Prop 73 exists. That late-coming rival initiative would restrict contributions, but not candidates' spending. It would expressly bar public financing, even wiping out some public-financing setups recently enacted locally.    The money to put this proposition on the ballot came partly from the grand-champion giver, the California Medical Association PAC. It donated $25,000 to get it off the ground. But now the medical PAC opposes both measures. The state Chamber of Commerce, which once backed 68, switched over to 73 about two months ago.    Critics of Proposition 73 call it a sham designed to confuse voters. A key co-sponsor, Democratic State Sen. Joseph Montoya, calls this idea &quot;an absolute distortion.&quot; Backers, including GOP Assemblyman Johnson, note that the measure would cover all state races from the governor to the state legislature. It would ban such incumbent perks as government-financed newsletters.    And it would spare the state the consequences of public financing, which, claims an opponent like Senate GOP leader Kenneth Maddy, would open the door to allowing &quot;extremist candidates, such as the Nazi Party and Ku Klux Klan members, to spread their hateful messages with tax dollars.&quot;    The newest entry into the fray is the group called &quot;NO on Propositions 68 and 73.&quot; Aiding it have been Speaker Brown and the medical association's Mr. Pross, as givers give to preserve the right to keep on giving. Mr. Pross's group has chipped in $100,000 for No-No so far.    Mr. Pross stops just short of calling public financing socialism. But his ally, Speaker Brown, takes just the opposite tack. He lambastes Proposition 68 precisely because it falls short of full public financing. The initiative would &quot;permanently block any opportunity to get public financing of political campaigns,&quot; Mr. Brown says. Proposition 73 he dismisses as a cleverly designed partisan effort to favor GOP donors over Democratic ones.    Another argument against either initiative comes from State Senate President pro Tempore David Roberti, a moderate Democrat who last week donated $200,000 from his political funds to the No-No's. He says the skyrocketing campaign spending may mean that candidates are trying harder to reach the voters.    &quot;California is not Delaware. California is a huge media market, and it costs money to reach that market,&quot; he said in a recent speech. &quot;The first response when you hear that an election cost $3 million is, 'Isn't that a shame?' Maybe it was. I think the first response should be, 'Did we reach enough voters?'&quot;    Voters are allowed to check yes for both initiatives, so it's possible for both to pass. If so, the one getting more votes apparently will prevail in areas where they conflict. Three-quarters of the states limit campaign financing in some way, though not through public financing, and either proposition would add California to the list. More significant, though, are the ripples that would be felt nation-wide. A win would encourage another try in Congress, mainly by Democrats, to pass campaign-finance changes, including public financing of congressional campaigns.    &quot;This is historic,&quot; says Fred Wertheimer, the president of Common Cause. &quot;It would fundamentally change the political process in California -- and rebalance the way power is exercised, in favor of citizens. This would be very, very powerful. It won't assure victory or defeat in other states or at the national level, but it will be looked at closely.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>