<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880328-0094 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Kerner 20 Years Later </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   After the assassination of Martin Luther King 20 years ago this April, upheaval followed in black America. Through much of the spring and summer of 1968, blacks rioted in cities around the country. The widely accepted explanation for the riots was that they were an expression of blacks' frustration that their civil-rights victories hadn't brought them more fully into the American mainstream. The result was the 1968 Report of the National Advisory Committee on Civil Disorders -- the now famous Kerner Commission report.    The 20th anniversary of Kerner has prompted conferences and retrospects to address a single, key question: How much, if any, progress have blacks made since 1968?    Twenty years ago, Kerner warned: &quot;Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black, one white -- separate and unequal.&quot; White society was &quot;deeply implicated&quot; in the plight of impoverished blacks. &quot;Pervasive discrimination and segregation in employment, education and housing had resulted in the continuing exclusion of great numbers of Negroes from the benefits of economic progress.&quot;    To quell the &quot;state of crisis&quot; among blacks Kerner proposed a national policy of &quot;ghetto enrichment&quot; to bring poor blacks into the mainstream of American life. &quot;These programs will require unprecedented levels of funding and performance,&quot; Kerner stated plainly. &quot;Hard choices must be made, and, if necessary, new taxes enacted.&quot;    Kerner recommended that the government create two million new jobs for blacks over a three-year span; that it use its powers to integrate school systems throughout the country; that it expand the scope of the welfare system to include greater numbers of blacks; and that it expand various existing public-housing programs. With a massive commitment, said Kerner, the U.S. could produce &quot;quick and visible progress&quot; for black Americans.    America made that commitment. At the time Kerner was released, Lyndon Johnson's Great Society was already in full bloom. Richard Nixon succeeded him in 1968 and didn't or couldn't reduce the growth of this effort. Many of Kerner's proposals were institutionalized-jobs programs, busing, entitlements, public housing.    Now 20 years later we're being told that nothing has changed, that we didn't get much of anything out of the programs and policies that were adopted in the wake of Kerner. Why not?    It seems as if something must be wrong here. The riots stopped. One logical explanation would be that conditions must have improved in line with Kerner's suggestions and we should be hailing the success of the report, rather than bemoaning its failure. Alternatively, the Kerner prescription wasn't properly fulfilled but the riots went away anyway, which means the report's analysis of the riots was totally wrong.    The fact is, that after 20 years and billions of dollars of spending -- as advised by Kerner -- the black underclass is larger not smaller. And its problems -- illegitimacy, illiteracy, drug abuse, chronic joblessness, crime -- have become virtually intractable.    But that stark reality doesn't tell the whole story about black America 20 years after Kerner. If a Kerner addendum were published today it might possibly proclaim that black America itself is now essentially two societies, one upwardly mobile, one hopelessly impoverished -- largely separate and unequal.    For the black underclass, the central image of its continuing despair is the public-housing project, the product of vast federal outlays and planning by social scientists. The result is undeniable: It is devastation. Families were placed in public-housing projects with little concern for the character of the person or persons in these &quot;neighborhoods.&quot; Earnest, hard-working families -- &quot;poor but proud&quot; -- were compelled to live side by side with irresponsible and often pathological neighbors. Eventually the projects were overrun by drug peddlers, pimps, gang lords and other criminals.    While the black underclass has lost ground by practically every measure over the past two decades, the black middle class has enjoyed tremendous gains. Census Bureau figures indicate that the top one-fifth of black families received 47.4% of total black income in 1986, compared with the lowest fifth, the black underclass, which received only 3.4%. Over the past 20 years, the number of black families that appears in the highest income category by Census measurement ($50,000 or more in 1986) nearly doubled, to about 9% of all black wage earners. At the same time, the number of black families appearing in the lowest income quintile ($5,000 or less) increased by nearly one-third, to 14% of black wage earners.    The disparity between middle-class and underclass blacks in income, and practically every other important measure, can be attributed almost entirely to family structure. Families together produce progress. Broken families produce loss.    Today, more than 70% of poor black families are headed by unmarried women. In contrast, more than 80% of &quot;intact&quot; black families (those with both husband and wife present) are &quot;un-poor,&quot; as defined by the Census Bureau. And while overall black family income has been relatively flat since 1968, the income of intact black families has increased markedly -- by 26%, according to the Census Bureau.    Nearly all this was predicted before the Kerner report ever appeared.    Three years before Kerner, Daniel Patrick Moynihan published an article on the growing threat to black family life (later published in longer form as &quot;The Negro Family: The Case for National Action&quot;). Like Kerner, Moynihan warned of a crisis. But unlike Kerner, which brought a generalized social indictment of the entire country, Moynihan argued that black progress was blocked by internal factors, most important the breakdown of the black family and increasing idleness among black men.    &quot;The problem of family life emerges as one of the most deep-rooted of Negro problems,&quot; Mr. Moynihan wrote. Even then, fewer than half of black children reached the age of 18 having lived all their lives with both parents. This would prove harmful to black development, Mr. Moynihan warned, because &quot;the stability and quality of family life are a prime determinant of individual and group achievement.&quot;    When the family breaks down, Mr. Moynihan argued, young men ultimately lose a sense of character and responsibility. &quot;There is one unmistakable lesson in American history: A community that allows a large number of young men to grow up in broken families, dominated by women, never acquiring any stable relationship to male authority, never acquiring any set of rational expectations about the future -- that community asks for and gets chaos. Crime, violence, unrest, disorder . . . are very near to inevitable.&quot;    Almost unanimously, the civil-rights establishment -- blacks and whites -- denounced the Moynihan thesis. Many accused him of &quot;blaming the victim.&quot; Three years later, the Kerner Commission's report was well-received in practically every quarter. Now, 20 years later, it is evident that the major shortcoming of the Kerner Commission report was that it gave little attention to the problems and pathologies brought on by the breakdown of poor black families, many of which were already evident by 1968. Kerner advocated what amounted to an anti-poverty policy. It turns out that Moynihan was right. What the underclass needs most is a pro-family policy. </TEXT></DOC>