<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880513-0157 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Canadians to Choose Those They Dislike Least </HL><AUTHOR> Jan Boucek </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CANDA TAXES </CO><DATELINE> TORONTO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The bloom is off the rose for Canada's socialists, and the once mighty Liberals are bleeding from a thousand self-inflicted wounds. Conservative Prime Minister Brian Mulroney will have to work hard to lose the next election, something he's quite capable of doing.    A year ago, the socialist New Democratic Party was jostling the Liberals for top spot in the opinion polls while the ruling Tories floundered behind the undecideds, scoring in the low 20% of voter support. Now, with an election likely this fall, the three parties are bunched together in the polls.    Much of the NDP's popularity in the past two years has been due to its clean hands. As a marginal third party that never governed the country, it carries no baggage from the past. Its leader, Ed Broadbent, an earnest professorial type, looks squeaky clean next to the battle-scarred Mr. Mulroney and John Turner, the Liberal leader. The NDP is trying to soften such radical policies as nationalizing banks and pulling Canada from NATO by suggesting that these wouldn't be a priority for any NDP government. Nevertheless, the policies remain fundamental to the party's philosophy.    Last month, the NDP was dealt a severe blow in the Manitoba provincial election. The province had been ruled by the party off and on since the early 1970s, a supposed testament to the NDP's governing skills. However, when a provincially owned car-insurance network -- an ill-conceived nationalization experiment adopted by several provinces a decade ago -- plunged deeply into the red, premiums skyrocketed and destroyed the myth that government-owned enterprises are immune from real-world economics. The NDP government fell on the issue, and in the subsequent election lost more than half its seats, allowing the Conservatives to form the new government. The loss means there is no provincial NDP government and, therefore, no pool of candidates with a successful track record in government for the federal party to draw upon.    The official opposition Liberal Party is in sorry shape; it's a wonder it remains at or near the top of opinion polls. The party, strapped for cash and deep in debt, regularly cuts its staff at headquarters and pleads for funds to pay the rent or telephone bills.    The immediate source of the party's woes is the continuing challenge to Mr. Turner's leadership, the most recent coming last month when half the party's Members of Parliament demanded his resignation. This backbiting reflects the ideological struggle for the soul of the party since the departure of Pierre Trudeau. With 10 years in Toronto's financial community prior to assuming the Liberal leadership, Mr. Turner is seen by interventionist Liberals, who were dominant under Mr. Trudeau, to be from the right of the party. The left wing longs for the kind of forceful government that spawned the National Energy Program, kept a watchful eye on foreign investment and pumped money into any and all worthy causes. For this group, any problem can be solved with a well-funded government program.    Mr. Turner has pandered to this element of the party, vowing to tear up Mr. Mulroney's free-trade agreement with the U.S., ban cruise-missile testing by the U.S. in Canada and introduce a variety of new social programs. In the process, though, Mr. Turner has driven from the party (or at least to its sidelines) the more realistic Liberals who recognize that Canada hasn't yet paid for its past profligacy and can't afford to cower from the U.S. behind protectionist barriers. These alienated Liberals are the ones with the money, and they've stopped giving.    Working in the Liberals' favor, though, is Canadians' pride in their nationalized health-care system, heavily subsidized universities and generous unemployment insurance -- even if these have been paid for with borrowed money and the ceding of defense and research and development spending to the U.S. Time and again, Canadians vote for more of the same and could easily do so again, especially if they're not offered a real alternative. Even Mr. Mulroney's triumph four years ago was predicated on his pledge to honor the &quot;sacred trust&quot; of Canada's social-welfare system.    But Canadians slowly may be learning the cost of all this well-meaning generosity. Just last month, the Liberal government in Canada's biggest and wealthiest province, Ontario, stuck taxpayers with a 1.3 billion Canadian dollar tax hike. For two years, the Ontario government had spread money around with reckless abandon. It was rewarded with a massive re-election victory last fall, but now it's time to pay the bills, so the sales tax, personal provincial income tax and assorted sin taxes are all going up.    With the socialists apparently having peaked and the Liberals in disarray, what does Mr. Mulroney have to worry about? Plenty. Canadians have been turned off by his hyperbolic blarney. A series of alleged conflicts of interest involving cabinet ministers and early mismanagement of trivial matters lost Mr. Mulroney the good will with which he had been swept into office. These days, folks just don't like Mr. Mulroney.    To be sure, Mr. Mulroney would be going into an election riding a strong economy with unemployment at its lowest level in seven years. Most Canadians favor a free-trade agreement with the U.S., and tax reform will increase take-home pay on July 1. Tory coffers are overflowing and the party's much vaunted campaign machinery is idling in election readiness. More than 200 Tory incumbents in a 282-seat House of Commons make for a pretty good starting point.    However, Mr. Mulroney's regime has irritated many of the Conservatives' bedrock supporters -- the anti-statists who waited 20 years to reverse the Liberals' expansion of the state. On a whole host of issues, this group of Tories feels slighted. On assuming office, Mr. Mulroney raised taxes rather than trim big-ticket social programs. He is extending bilingualism's reach throughout the country. He appointed an anti-American socialist as ambassador to the United Nations. He worked hard to defeat a free vote on the reinstatement of capital punishment. He leads the British Commonwealth in seeking tougher sanctions against South Africa.    Much of this anger is centered in the West, long resentful of central Canada's domination of politics and the economy, but also the Tories' strongest electoral base. Western Report publisher Link Byfield characterizes the fringe parties that have grown out of this resentment as &quot;peat fires that burn underground but, once in a while, really catch fire.&quot; He also detects greater apathy in the Tory vote as Mr. Mulroney's regime is viewed as increasingly similar to previous Liberal governments -- both dominated by central Canadian interests.    Still, Allen Gregg, the Tories' pollster, told this reporter that he's &quot;far more positive now than at any time in the past two years. . . . The intensity of negatives {against the Tories} is fading while the sense of well-being is increasing in every region.&quot;    ---   Mr. Boucek is editor of the Canadian Dow Jones News Services. </TEXT></DOC>