<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871119-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Businessmen as Born-Again Budget-Cutters---By Doug Bandow</HL><DD> 11/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Deficit reduction is in the air. Not only have Congress and the president's men sat down to arrange a fiscal compromise, but nearly 200 corporate executives, investment bankers, professionals and former public officials have signed newspaper ads pleading for federal frugality as part of what they call the Bipartisan Budget Appeal.    The group's organizer, Peter G. Peterson, a former secretary of commerce, has become the high priest of parsimony, receiving confession from a host of business and other civic leaders whose organizations have spent years cashing government checks. The executives' surprising repentance may have been triggered by their glimpse of the Wall Street version of hell -- the stock market crash.    The fiscal penitents were far too modest to boast publicly about the financial sacrifices that they will have to make to fulfill their new faith. But their stories, which show the power of economic chaos to dramatically change individual lives, need to be told.    Perhaps the most dramatic born-again budget cutter is Chrysler's Lee Iacocca. His company, of course, required a massive federal loan guarantee to avert bankruptcy; Mr. Iacocca has also endorsed federal health insurance, a higher gasoline tax, more stringent fuel-economy regulations, tighter auto-import controls, and a government &quot;industrial policy,&quot; all of which could improve his firm's earnings.    Another fiscal sinner who has repented of much is Dwayne Andreas, the head of Archer-Daniels-Midland. ADM received a $29.2 million subsidy for its gasohol operation last year alone; in the past, Mr. Andreas has lobbied such congressional friends as Senate Minority leader Robert Dole to impose draconian restrictions on alcohol fuel imports.    Then there are Budget Appeal supporters Frank Shrontz and T.A. Wilson, Boeing's president and chairman, respectively. Over the years, Boeing has benefited from so much subsidized credit through the Export-Import Bank that the agency has been informally called &quot;Boeing's Bank&quot;; before Messrs. Shrontz and Wilson's surprise conversions, Boeing consistently mobilized to oppose any proposal to cut Ex-Im funds. Other executives representing major Ex-Im Bank customers who have turned to the faith of fiscal responsibility include Douglas Danforth, chairman and CEO of Westinghouse; W.F. Bueche, head of Allis-Chalmers; and Mr. Iacocca.    Yet another reformed budget-buster is Jay Pritzker, chairman of Hyatt. A half-dozen of his firm's hotels have been subsidized by Urban Development Action Grants, a federal slush fund for local building projects.    Equally moving has been the transformation of the many company executives whose firms once besieged the Synthetic Fuels Corporation for loans and price guarantees. Among the former fiscal pagans who now worship at the altar of the balanced budget are Fred Hartley of Unocal, Edward Donley of Air Products andamp; Chemicals, Howard Allen of Southern California Edison, John Creedon of Metropolitan Life Insurance, John Hall of Ashland Oil, and Allen Murray of Mobil. In fact, the same John Hall who now publicly embraces fiscal responsibility was particularly outspoken in his advocacy of federal support for the synfuels industry.    Converts from companies that were double dippers -- like Mr. Murray's Mobil -- are especially important additions to the new budgetary faith. Mobil not only tried once to organize an industrywide synfuels consortium backed in part by federal funds, but one of its subsidiaries, Packaging Corp. of America, continues to buy subsidized federal timber. Other repentant Budget Appeal members whose firms &quot;live off the fat of the land&quot; for low-cost lumber are John Fery of Boise Cascade, Richard Madden of Potlatch, Philip Lippincott of Scott Paper, Burnell Roberts of Mead Corp., Brenton Halsey of James River Corp., and George Weyerhaeuser of Weyerhaeuser Co. How we should rejoice that so many who were once lost have now been found!    The evangelical budgetary fever sweeping corporate America has also captured James Pasman Jr., head of Kaiser Aluminum andamp; Chemical, and Edwin Tuttle, Pennwalt's chairman and CEO. Both of their firms receive artificially cheap electricity from the federal Bonneville Power Administration.    More dramatic, though, is Stanley Pace's turn from budgetary iniquity. His firm, General Dynamics, finds its mother's milk in federal defense contracts, as does Ruben Mettler's TRW. Mortimer Zuckerman, editor in chief of U.S. News andamp; World Report, J. Richard Munro, head of Time Inc., and Harold McGraw Jr., chairman of McGraw-Hill, all signed the Budget Appeal, atoning for years of postal subsidies. Similarly, guilt over the constant flood of federal research grants and student aid money may have caused fiscal sinners Howard Swearer, president of Brown University, and John McArthur, dean of the Harvard Business School, to kneel at the altar of budget restraint.    What could be more appropriate with the approach of Christmas than executives whose lobbyists once trod the corridors of Capitol Hill in search of government subsidies publicly renouncing their wicked ways? Indeed, who knows where these revivalist sentiments will stop? If the fiscal awakening spreads to members of Capitol Hill and the administration, we might even witness the Second Coming of the balanced budget.    ---   Mr. Bandow is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute. He once accepted a federally guaranteed student loan. </TEXT></DOC>