<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880518-0155 </DOCNO><HL> Detained Aliens Need a Bill of Rights </HL><AUTHOR> Martha F. Davis </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   More than four years ago, Prof. Peter Schuck wrote in the Columbia Law Review that &quot;the INS is among the most insular and chronically understaffed of federal agencies.&quot; He urged courts to &quot;actively scrutinize INS adjudications, demanding decision-making procedures of high accuracy, fairness and dignity.&quot;    Prof. Schuck might have written these words yesterday. Despite the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, the Immigration and Naturalization Service remains in a muddle. Money and attention directed toward the amnesty program and border control have had no discernible impact on the bread and butter of INS work: deportation, exclusion and asylum proceedings. It is left to the federal courts, reviewing appeals of decisions by immigration judges and the Board of Immigration Appeals and suits directly challenging INS decisions, to ensure that neither fundamental human rights nor due process are violated by the agency's actions.    Two legal conventions give the INS room to cut procedural corners in these cases. First, despite the high stakes, immigration proceedings are classified as civil rather than criminal cases. The Constitution guarantees criminal defendants the right of due process and the right to counsel. Aliens in immigration proceedings, on the other hand, have no right to counsel, and in deportation cases their due process rights vary depending upon the balance between their interest in staying in the U.S., the accuracy of existing procedures for protecting that interest and the costs of greater accuracy in decision making.    Second, aliens stopped at the border -- who have not entered the U.S. -- are considered to be &quot;excludable&quot; and have no constitutional rights at all. The difference between deportation -- proceedings against aliens who have entered the country -- and exclusion may be no more than a matter of a few minutes or a few miles, yet it means the difference between protection under the Constitution and no such protection.    These exercises in legal line-drawing give the INS room to maneuver. It can argue, for example, that indefinite detention of Mariel Cuban refugees without bail and without appeal is acceptable. The excludable Cubans have no constitutional or statutory right that says otherwise. The INS can argue that it is permissible to transfer aliens to remote detention centers, far from their lawyers, before conducting their exclusion hearings. And it can assert that it is fair to refuse to notify aliens of their right to apply for political asylum.    Two groups are pressed to the wall by these INS positions: the aliens and the federal courts.    Some of the aliens -- 3,800 Mariel Cubans -- reacted last winter by rioting at federal penitentiaries in Oakdale, La., and Atlanta. Detained for up to seven years without bail, with the INS considering their pleas for release at a snail's pace, and faced with the sudden prospect of wholesale deportation to Cuba, the Marielitos turned to violence. The deal they finally struck with their captors gives them considerably less than the rights the Constitution gives criminal defendants.    Under the new review procedure, detainees cannot present witnesses, they cannot cross-examine the charging party, and there is no independent decision maker. The government is judge, jury and prosecutor. Even so, the reviews currently in progress are revealing that a majority of the Mariel Cubans are eligible for release. According to the Justice Department, 1,337 of the 2,182 Cubans reviewed since the riots have been approved for release. The incredible fact is that even to get these minimal procedures, the Cubans had to coerce the INS into making a deal.    Recent weeks have brought encouraging evidence that courts are ready to intervene on behalf of aliens. Late last month, Judge David Kenyon of the federal district court in Los Angeles issued his decision in Orantes-Hernandez v. Meese, a class action brought on behalf of all Salvadorans detained for deportation. The Salvadorans claimed that they had been pressured by the INS into leaving the country without seeking political asylum.    Judge Kenyon accepted the Salvadorans' claims, finding that coercion and misrepresentation concerning the aliens' rights is &quot;officially condoned,&quot; amounting to a &quot;de facto policy&quot; of the INS. Ruling that the government must stop these practices, Judge Kenyon issued a bill of rights for Salvadorans detained by the INS. Approximately 750,000 Salvadorans are currently in the U.S. illegally and may be affected by Judge Kenyon's decision.    The list of rights is telling in its simplicity. Like the deal struck between the Mariel Cubans and the INS, Judge Kenyon requires only that the INS comply with minimal American standards of human decency and fairness. Judge Kenyon ruled, for example, that the INS cannot transfer a Salvadoran detainee for seven days after arrest. This is to allow a detainee time to consult a lawyer. He also ruled that prior to any hearing a detainee must be returned to the district where his lawyer is located. This is in response to testimony by lawyers that their clients are often transferred from detention center to detention center, without notice to their lawyers, making representation impossible.    Judge Kenyon further ruled that the INS must provide Salvadorans who cannot read and write with oral notice of their rights in both English and Spanish, and that they must have access to lawyers, telephones and accurate information concerning free legal services, as well as access to legal materials, paper, pencils, pens and typewriters.    The Salvadoran bill of rights goes on. The salient point, however, is that in the face of the INS's persistent disregard of the need for accuracy, fairness and dignity in its procedures, Judge Kenyon had no choice but to spell out each of these rights in full. Courts can and should follow Judge Kenyon's lead and police the INS. Better still, the INS should formulate policies for the treatment of detained aliens that reflect this nation's concern for fundamental fairness rather than cutting corners at the expense of human rights.    ---   Ms. Davis is a lawyer in New York. </TEXT></DOC>