<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0036 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SOUTH KOREANS ELECTED Roh Tae Woo as president by a wide margin.    With 83% of the vote counted, the ruling party candidate, who claimed victory, was leading with 37%. Opposition candidate Kim Young Sam trailed with 26.7%, and rival dissident Kim Dae Jung had 26.1%. More than 90% of eligible voters cast ballots in the country's first direct presidential election in more than 16 years. The opposition alleged fraud, but independent observers said they hadn't found evidence supporting the allegations.    Despite a warning by Seoul against challenging the election's outcome, opposition groups announced plans for rallies to protest Roh's victory.    ---   DEAVER WAS CONVICTED on charges of lying about his lobbying activities.    A federal jury in Washington found the former White House aide and Reagan confidant guilty of two counts of lying to a federal grand jury and one count of lying to a House panel investigating allegations that his lobbying activities violated federal ethics laws. Deaver was acquitted of two other counts of providing false testimony to the subcommittee and to the grand jury. He faces a maximum of 15 years in jail and a $22,000 fine.    A White House statement said Reagan and the First Lady were &quot;sorry to learn of the jury's decision&quot; in the case of their &quot;longtime friend.&quot;    ---   ORTEGA DECLARED a two-day Christmas cease-fire in Nicaragua.    Agreeing to a request by Managua's Cardinal Obando, the Nicaraguan president said that &quot;only offensives against our forces and the civilian population would be repulsed&quot; during the Dec. 24-25 truce. Ortega also said that Sandinista representatives would meet with Contra rebels Monday in the Dominican Republic. In Washington, Bush met with a senior Nicaraguan defector and said his disclosure of a planned Sandinista military buildup enhanced chances for Contra aid.    House Speaker Jim Wright confirmed the outlines of a planned $5 million to $6 million &quot;humanitarian&quot; aid package to the U.S.-backed Contra insurgents.    ---   CIA Director Webster has dismissed two officers, including the agency's former station chief in Costa Rica, and disciplined several senior officials for their roles in the Iran-Contra affair, intelligence sources said. A spokesman for the agency wouldn't comment on the actions.    ---   Shultz said the Soviet Union appears willing to support an arms embargo against Iran, but called a proposal to deploy a multinational force in the Persian Gulf &quot;entirely premature.&quot; The White House said it was leery about a Soviet offer to be included in such a U.N.-backed naval force.    An Iranian gunboat attacked a Greek-flagged tanker with rocket-propelled grenades in the southern gulf. Casualties weren't reported. Iraq, meanwhile, said its jets attacked three ships off Iran's coast.    ---   A court in Sicily convicted some of Italy's top Mafia leaders, sentencing 19 of them to life imprisonment. The trial of 456 defendants on murder, drug and extortion charges lasted 22 months. The court in Palermo also imposed lengthy jail terms on hundreds of organized-crime underlings.    ---   Israel sent hundreds of soldiers and several tanks to Gaza City in an effort to end more than a week of anti-Israeli unrest in the occupied territories. Three Palestinians and an Israeli soldier were wounded in a clash. The U.S. expressed concern at the continuing violence and urged restraint by Israeli forces and Arab residents.    ---   Judge Kennedy was endorsed by the head of the American Bar Association, which found him highly qualified for a seat on the Supreme Court. But the National Organization for Women expressed opposition to the U.S. appellate judge's nomination during Senate Judicary panel hearings.    ---   Gary Hart campaigned in New Hampshire a day after re-entering the race for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. He dismissed the personal questions that immediately confronted him, saying &quot;the public doesn't have the right to know everything&quot; about a candidate's private life.    ---   Panama's government will allow four opposition newspapers and two radio stations closed in July to resume operations. The announcement came after military chief Noriega said his problems with the U.S. began when he refused to help the White House fight Nicaragua's government.    ---   The House approved a welfare-reform plan requiring most recipients to participate in job-training and education programs at a projected cost of $5 billion over five years. The measure, passed 230-194, was sent to the Senate.    ---   A national mayors group reported that children and their parents currently make up one-third of the homeless in 26 U.S. cities. The study by the U.S. Conference of Mayors also found that a majority of those seeking emergency food are families.    ---   Bangladesh's President Ershad offered the opposition a role in supervising legislative elections as about 30,000 people marked the 16th anniversary of the country's independence from Pakistan with a rally calling for his ouster. Opposition leaders also renewed calls for general strikes.    ---   Austrian officials seized copies of the monthly magazine Weiner and filed a libel suit against its editor for a story saying President Waldheim accepted gold to save the lives of Yugoslav citizens in World War II. Waldheim has denied any involvement in war crimes in the Balkans.    ---   Romanian authorities launched a crackdown against government critics, placing several under arrest in an apparent attempt to isolate them from foreign visitors attending a Communist Party conference in Bucharest. At the close of the three-day forum, President Ceausescu said his tough economic policies would be maintained.    ---   Died: Herbert H. Goldberger, 69, chairman of Hills Department Stores Inc., Tuesday, in Boca Raton, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>