<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881013-0056 </DOCNO><HL> Law -- Legal Perspective: Using Tough Tactics, Drexel's Lawyers May Advance While Appearing to Lose </HL><AUTHOR> Laurie P. Cohen and Stephen J. Adler (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR STK </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><TEXT>   By all appearances, things couldn't be going worse these days for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and its co-defendants in the Securities and Exchange Commission's massive securities-fraud suit.    Shortly after the suit was filed Sept. 7, the defense lawyers protested the assignment of the case to Judge Milton Pollack, a no-nonsense 82-year-old jurist who they perceive as tough on white-collar defendants.    Then they needled the judge further by asking the federal appeals court to throw him off the case even before he had a chance to decide whether he should remove himself.    So far, the lawyers have failed to unseat the judge. And they have so antagonized him in the process that this week he accused three of the lawyers of professional misconduct and referred two of them to the chief judge of the district for possible disciplinary action.    Conclusion? The Drexel lawyers are off to a brilliant start. Indeed, a month into the legal fight, the consensus in the legal community is that though battles have been lost, the lawyers are succeeding where it counts most.    By focusing on the judge and contesting every procedural point, the high-powered group of defense attorneys, led by Arthur Liman, Peter Fleming, and Thomas Curnin, has managed to divert attention away from the SEC's 184-page litany of securities-fraud allegations.    They have goaded Judge Pollack into angrily castigating the attorneys during court hearings, thus laying the groundwork for an appeal of any decisions he makes in the case. They would base such appeals in part on the argument that they didn't get a fair trial because adverse rulings were the product of the judge's alleged bias.    And, perhaps most important, defense attorneys for Drexel, its junk bond impresario Michael Milken and others have served notice that they have the ability to outspend -- and possibly outmaneuver -- the government in what may be a long battle.    This hard-line approach is particularly significant in setting a combative tone for the defense if, as expected, criminal charges are filed against Mr. Milken and other individuals by U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani.    By moving to disqualify Judge Pollack for an alleged conflict of interest involving his wife's business interests, the defense lawyers &quot;have let everyone know they're being tough and aggressive,&quot; says Roy Black, a Miami defense lawyer. It's a strategy, he says, that's worked for a number of others, including International Business Machines Corp., which was the subject of a huge antitrust case in the 1970s.    In that case, although IBM was ultimately unsuccessful in disqualifying the judge, &quot;they put the court on notice that they had complaints and that the judge's actions would be subject to review and appeal.&quot;    There's no question that, as a battle unit, the Drexel team is an intimidating force. With at least 115 lawyers at work, it can rely on pure numbers to wreak havoc on the SEC's 15-lawyer group. Early on, for example, the defense lawyers tried to schedule 41 pre-trial interviews with witnesses in five different cities -- all on the same day. The judge didn't let them do it, but they made their point nonetheless.    When it comes to money, too, Drexel -- which is paying for Mr. Milken's and other co-defendants' legal fees as well as its own -- is going all-out. So far, according to defense lawyers, Drexel has plopped down at least $75 million already in legal fees. It is believed to be more than anyone has ever spent defending a lawsuit, and no case against Drexel is even close to going to trial yet. By comparison, in its much-ballyhooed bet-the-company case, Texaco Inc. spent a mere $55 million to fight an $11 billion judgment favoring Pennzoil Co.    Drexel lawyers argue that they need to spend this much money because the government begins with certain inherent advantages: the ability to investigate, offer deals to witnesses to win their testimony, and bring charges that are expensive to defend against.    The fight with Judge Pollack is particularly pleasing to the defense team because, they believe, they can win either way.    If they succeed in getting Judge Pollack to remove himself, they may get a new judge who is not as tough on defendants as Judge Pollack is reputed to be. In addition, a new judge might give them more freedom to begin compelling pre-trial testimony from key witnesses, such as imprisoned former trader Ivan Boesky. Judge Pollack has barred such testimony at least through the end of next month.    If they fail in their efforts to have another judge preside over their case, some defense lawyers say, they may still come out ahead because they at least will have set the stage for the argument that any adverse decision was tainted.    In hearings held Tuesday, Judge Pollack seemed to play into the lawyers' hands. He accused Mr. Fleming, a Drexel lawyer, of violating the lawyers' code of ethics; he termed &quot;presumptuous&quot; and &quot;impertinent&quot; a statement from a legal ethics expert supporting the lawyers' request that he remove himself from the case; and he referred Mr. Liman and fellow Milken attorney Martin Flumenbaum for possible disciplinary action.    Ultimately, the disqualification issue may not turn the case one way or another. Indeed, if criminal charges are filed, the criminal case will probably go to trial first, making the SEC case over which Judge Pollack is presiding much less significant.    But, says one attorney familiar with the defense, &quot;The defense attorneys want everybody to know that no one in this case will lie down and play dead.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>