<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Guinness Fires Its Chief Executive,Asks for Resignations of 2 Directors---Responding to British Probe,Brewer Also Severs TiesWith London Law Firm---By Gary PutkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP WNEWSFOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Guinness PLC, in a sweeping response to a British investigation of its share trading, fired chairman and chief executive officer Ernest Saunders, asked for the resignations of two directors, severed ties with a leading London law firm and named a new company stockbroker.    The moves, which came at a special board meeting yesterday, signal a new approach by Guinness toward the British government's widening inquiry into a possible illegal manipulation by the British brewer of its own shares.    The inquiry, by Britain's Department of Trade and Industry, has damped takeover speculation in Britain and prompted fears in the financial industry that many securities firms and professionals will be implicated in the probe.    Guinness, which until recently played down the investigation, now is moving fast to repair the damage it has caused. Guinness's share price has fallen 8% in a strong market since the inquiry was disclosed six weeks ago, and the company could be vulnerable to a takeover threat, London stockbrokers say.    Mr. Saunders agreed under board pressure last Friday to step down from his posts, but only until the end of the inquiry, under an arrangement in which he kept his annual salary equivalent to $565,000. The board's action yesterday means Mr. Saunders won't be paid and indicated that directors regard his role in the events under investigation as more serious than previously believed.    The board, in a statement, said it has decided unanimously &quot;that all connection between Mr. Saunders and the company should be severed forthwith.&quot; Guinness also said it &quot;urged&quot; Mr. Saunders to resign from the board. Under British law, directors may only be voted off corporate boards by shareholders, not fellow directors.    Guinness also said it has sent letters seeking the resignations of two of Mr. Saunders's appointments to the board -- U.S. attorney Thomas Ward and Arthur Furer, chairman of Bank Leu Ltd. in Switzerland. Both men were among Mr. Saunder's closest advisers, and Mr. Ward helped manage Guinness's takeover -- currently equivalent to $3.81 billion -- last year of Distillers Co. -- the main subject of the government's inquiry.    Mr. Saunders couldn't be reached for comment, and Mr. Ward and Mr. Furer haven't returned several phone calls in recent days.    According to British press reports, Bank Leu was involved in buying as much as $150 million of Guinness shares during the closing stages of Guinness's battle with Argyll Group PLC for control of Distillers. A 25% jump in Guinness's share price was crucial in deciding the outcome of the contested bid in the brewer's favor because its offer was priced mainly in shares.    Several other parties also were engaged in heavy Guinness buying at the time, including Rapid-American Corp. of the U.S., clients of British merchant bank Henry Ansbacher andamp; Co., and investors solicited by Morgan Grenfell Group PLC, Guinness's main financial adviser during the bid. Sources familiar with the buying program say it may have totaled more than $300 million.    In Zurich, Switzerland, yesterday, Bank Leu declined to comment on the reports, saying its relationship with Guinness was covered by Swiss bank-secrecy laws. In a statement, the bank said it was seeking Guinness's permission &quot;to cooperate with the DTI inspectors . . . and to comment generally.&quot; Although the board discussed Bank Leu's request yesterday, a Guinness spokesman declined to say whether any decision had been reached.    In another policy switch, however, Guinness said it would send a letter to shareholders in a few days describing further details of the inquiry. Under Mr. Saunders, the company had denied even knowing what the government was investigating.    In other actions, the board said it would stop using the London law firm of Kingsley, Napley &quot;by mutual agreement.&quot; Mr. Saunders had retained Sir David Napley, a leading criminal lawyer in the firm, as counsel during the investigation. The company had taken a tough legal stance under Sir David, demanding the return of $11.5 million sent by Guinness to Ansbacher, and threatening to sue over Ansbacher's claims that the money was used to purchase Guinness shares.    Guinness also named James Capel andamp; Co. as official company stockbroker, joining Cazenove andamp; Co. According to other brokers in Guinness shares during the bid, Cazenove handled a lot of the Guinness share buying that is under scrutiny.    Actions by Guinness's board have snowballed in the past week after testimony given to DTI investigators by Olivier Roux, who resigned Monday as Guinness's top financial strategist, and Roger Seelig, who resigned from Morgan Grenfell last month and was the main investment banker in the Distillers bid.    Mr. Roux's letter to the board that described his DTI statements were again cited yesterday as a reason for the company's actions. The contents of the letter aren't known.    Guinness directors -- on national television as they emerged from the three-hour board meeting -- looked, and sounded, relieved. &quot;I'm very happy with the way events have gone today -- we've hit bottom and now we're going up,&quot; Jonathan Guinness told a television interviewer. Mr. Guinness is an investment banker and a director who represents family interests on the board.    Lord Iveagh, a director and Guinness family member who was chairman for 24 years, said he felt &quot;let down&quot; by Mr. Saunders.    As more aspects of the Guinness-Distillers bid have emerged, a growing number of links have been seen to the U.S. investigation of merger speculator Ivan Boesky, who agreed to settle criminal and regulatory charges for insider trading last November. Information gathered by U.S. investigators in the Boesky case is widely believed to have started the British inquiry -- a belief reinforced by Bank Leu's admission that it had something to tell the DTI about Guinness.    Bank Leu has figured in the U.S. government's insider-trading crackdown. It was through Bank Leu's Bahamian subsidiary that Dennis Levine, a former investment banker, traded using inside information on forthcoming U.S. takeovers. Mr. Levine, who has also pleaded guilty to criminal charges, provided the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission with the information that helped snare Mr. Boesky. Mr. Boesky was actively speculating in the Distillers bid, and received a $100 million investment from Guinness two months after the bid was finished.    Asked yesterday whether Mr. Levine or Mr. Boesky knew Mr. Furer or had acted as an intermediaries between Bank Leu and Guinness, a Bank Leu spokesman said, &quot;I don't know.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>