<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880512-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Ad Fad: Marketers Turn Sour On Global Sales Pitch Harvard Guru Makes --- Spanning The World Appears Much Easier in Theory, But Works Well for Coke --- Parker Pen's Disappearing Ink </HL><AUTHOR> Joanne Lipman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> SAA </CO><IN> MKT </IN><TEXT>   Parker Pen Ltd. was doing just fine -- until it started listening to the Harvard Business School.    The global village is here, one of Harvard's leading lights announced to consumer marketers five years ago. People everywhere want to buy the same products and live the same way. Look at Coca-Cola. Levis blue jeans. Chinese food and croissants. The world has been homogenized, and smart companies sell standardized products the same way, everywhere.    Parker promptly put the theory into practice, tapping one advertising agency to create a single ad campaign to market its pens around the world. Just as promptly, profits plunged. Parker almost went broke.    For many, the global-marketing theory itself is bankrupt. In fact, the concept that once sent scores of executives scrambling to reconfigure their marketing strategies now has many feeling duped. Not only are cultural differences very much still with us, they say, but marketing a single product one way everywhere can scare off customers, alienate employees, and blind a company to its customers' needs.    And the customer, apparently, is always right. U.S. executives in search of global markets have found that the French don't drink orange juice for breakfast; that Middle Easterners prefer toothpaste that tastes spicy; that the Japanese like herbs in their cold medicines, and that laundry detergent is used to wash dishes in parts of Mexico.    All this has left Theodore Levitt, the Harvard professor who popularized the theory, stumbling on Madison Avenue.    &quot;Theodore Levitt's comment about the world becoming homogenized is bunk,&quot; says Carl Spielvogel, chairman and chief executive of ad agency Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, a unit of London-based Saatchi andamp; Saatchi Co. &quot;There are about two products that lend themselves to global marketing -- and one of them is Coca-Cola.&quot;    Global advertising generally doesn't work even under the best of circumstances, critics contend, because it's often mind-numbingly dull. &quot;It's marketing to the lowest common denominator . . . vanilla marketing,&quot; says Gary Stibel, a principal with New England Consulting Group in Westport, Conn. A 1984 print ad for Parker, for example, began, &quot;The Chinese invented the laque finish back in the 2nd century B.C. It occurred during the Han dynasty.&quot; That was the exciting part.    Prof. Levitt, currently editor of the Harvard Business Review, shrugs off the criticism. His theory, he says, &quot;holds more than ever. Globalization continues.&quot; One of the business world's most articulate academics, known for flashy writing as well as scholarship, Mr. Levitt has been teaching at Harvard for 29 years. A 1960 article, &quot;Marketing Myopia,&quot; made him a business celebrity, and he now sits on several corporate boards.    Even if some local tastes are different now, Mr. Levitt says, that doesn't mean they will be in the future. He points to the planned 1992 dropping of European customs and other barriers, which supposedly will make all of Europe one unified market. Companies are already standardizing European manufacturing, product packaging and ads to prepare for it. &quot;You'll find that 1992 is going to make a big difference,&quot; he says. &quot;The same thing will happen in other parts of the world. The necessity for thinking in those (global) terms continues unmitigated.&quot;    He also says that the specialized brands and small market niches proliferating now are only further proof of his theory. In a current Harvard Business Review article, &quot;The Pluralization of Consumption,&quot; he says, &quot;All the new segments show up everywhere. . . . Everywhere people want the same variety.&quot; People all over want ethnic fast foods like sushi, Greek salad and hamburgers; everyone, says the article, &quot;is in the same single segment, a segment that consists of people with plural preferences.&quot;    Mr. Levitt doesn't sound quite so dogmatic as his 1983 article, in which he declared that &quot;the world's needs and desires have been irrevocably homogenized.&quot; Now, in an interview, he says that &quot;'become' is the operative word, not 'is.'&quot;    Yet even companies that have succeeded with global products say international marketing works only with some brands, some places, sometimes -- and will never replace brands and ads geared to the locals. Coke may be &quot;it&quot; in 155 countries, but Coca-Cola Co. failed when it tried to export its Georgia Coffee, a canned coffee drink popular in Japan. Its Hi-C Soy Milk, a soy drink that's all the rage in Hong Kong, has few fans in the U.S. And Diet Coke &quot;clearly in many ways isn't appropriate for some undeveloped worlds,&quot; as Ira C. Herbert, Coke's chief marketing officer, tactfully notes.    &quot;What looks good as a generalization sometimes doesn't follow,&quot; says Richard S. Halpern, Coke's director of advertising research. &quot;The world is certainly becoming more globalized, but the global village is certainly not here, nor will it ever be.&quot;    Mr. Levitt, however, still has plenty of defenders, like Saatchi andamp; Saatchi, the acquisitive ad-agency conglomerate, which used his &quot;Globalize!&quot; battle cry as its own.    With offices in 58 countries, Saatchi creates ads for Procter andamp; Gamble Co.'s Pampers diapers world-wide, all using the same slogan: &quot;Even when they're wet they're dry.&quot; Says John Perriss, the company's world-wide media director, &quot;Our commitment to globalization remains and is undimmed.&quot; Perhaps not surprisingly, Mr. Levitt is a consultant to and director of Saatchi's two operating divisions.    When global marketing does work, it can save a company millions in manufacturing, packaging and advertising costs. Colgate-Palmolive Co., for example, introduced its Colgate tartar-control toothpaste in over 40 countries, each of which could choose one of two ads. (The one shown in the U.S. featured little men building a wall of tartar on giant teeth.) It estimates that for every country where the same commercial runs, it saves $1 million to $2 million in production costs alone.    Colgate has saved millions more by standardizing the look and packaging of certain brands, then consolidating the factories that make them.    But such savings are quickly destroyed if a global strategy bombs -- a too-frequent occurrence in the past few years, critics say. Parker's case was one of many. In 1982, the pen manufacturer was making about 500 styles in 18 plants; local offices in about 150 countries all created their own ads and packaging. Heeding the cry of standardization, Parker consolidated by 1984 to 100 pen styles made at eight plants. It got a single international ad campaign -- duly translated into myriad local languages.    But Parker's top executives didn't count on the resistance of bitter local managers. &quot;They really resented that the U.S. company was mandating what the advertising should be, and which ad agency they would use,&quot; a Parker spokesman says.    Profits sank, and Parker had a $12 million loss for fiscal 1985. By 1986, a group of its British managers had bought the pen business, and the senior executives who put the global program in place had been forced out. Today the company is again profitable, and local managers choose their own ads. Among the latest: patriotic U.S. magazine ads showing Presidents Reagan and Eisenhower using Parker pens to sign treaties.    The global strategy didn't cause the company's problems alone, the Parker spokesman says -- setbacks like a temporary plant closing also hurt -- but it &quot;contributed.&quot;    More often, cultural differences sabotage global efforts. Erno Laszlo, a U.S. skin-care brand, tried from 1982 to 1985 to sell its products identically everywhere. It had already convinced American clients they should follow a daily &quot;regimen&quot; using a series of its products.    But just try selling an identical regimen to fair-skinned Australians, swarthy Italians, and delicate Asian women. In Asia, skin-care customs varied widely from region to region.    &quot;It turned out never to be as simple&quot; as global marketing promised, says New England Consulting's Mr. Stibel.    Similar problems arose closer to home for McDonald's, when it expanded into Puerto Rico in 1981. Right off, it alienated Puerto Ricans with American TV commercials dubbed in Spanish. Residents were equally turned off by Hispanic ads imported from New York, which research showed looked too Mexican.    Finally, the San Juan office of Chicago agency Leo Burnett was called in to develop a pure Puerto Rican image for the chain. The result: commercials featuring &quot;McNaticos,&quot; a group of puertorriquenos who are fanatical about quality and service. According to Burnett, sales rose 4.4% after the campaign's introduction.    The ubiquitous Big Mac and Ronald McDonald notwithstanding, McDonald's says it isn't an advocate of global marketing. In West Germany the chain sells beer, while wine is served in France. Australian outlets used to offer mutton pot pie, and in the Philippines -- where noodle houses are popular -- natives go for McSpaghetti. McDonald's joint-venture partners, who run the franchises abroad, take charge of their own local marketing.    The fast-food mammoth does hold meetings for its various ad agencies and marketing executives around the world, and often reviews new ads. &quot;But we really rely on the people native to the country to develop marketing programs,&quot; says Peter Nelson, senior vice president, marketing.    Harvard's Mr. Levitt says such variations don't detract from his theory. &quot;If people want to talk about the little aberrations that occur on the periphery, and whip those little thumbfuls of soap into a lather to deny the reality of what I've said, that's their problem,&quot; he says.    &quot;The big thing McDonald's has done is taken that concept all over the world,&quot; Mr. Levitt adds. It doesn't matter that &quot;it has to talk in some countries in the same way it talked here 30 years ago,&quot; because the rest of the world will catch up. Again, he sounds much less dogmatic than his 1983 article, which said, &quot;Gone are the days when a company could sell last year's models -- or lesser versions of advanced products -- in the less developed world.&quot;    But the holes real life has shot through Mr. Levitt's theory have grown so wide in the past few years that criticism of it has mounted even within Harvard Business School. A tamer hypothesis by a lesser-known colleague, John Quelch, is winning adherents. Mr. Quelch's theory holds that only certain products can be marketed similarly -- in some places -- and only after variables like marketing mix and culture are analyzed.    The theory is &quot;a more complex analysis than a blanket statement that says globalize or die,&quot; says Mr. Quelch, an associate professor and a board member of Saatchi competitor WPP Group PLC. &quot;For a large number of products . . . there is still very little case to be made for standardization.&quot;    Many multinational companies agree with Mr. Quelch's approach. While Colgate toothpaste is available world-wide, for example, the company also markets some products regionally and others only locally. It makes a spicy toothpaste especially for the Mideast and sells a baby soap named Cadum only in France.    Similarly, PepsiCo creates commercials in the U.S. for its major brands and allows offices in other countries to choose, re-edit and dub the ones they want. But its overseas offices take charge of local promotions and ads for local brands, such as Shani, a thick currant and blackberry soda popular in the Mideast during the Moslem holy month of Ramadan.    These days, in fact, many companies seem more concerned about local marketing than global marketing. In February, Pepsi divided its U.S. operations into four regional companies in order to gear its marketing locally. Campbell Soup Co. in 1986 split the U.S. into 22 different regions, each with different marketing strategies. McDonald's retains 74 different ad agencies in the U.S. alone, serving 150 local advertising cooperatives.    &quot;What has happened to global marketing? I think everybody recognizes the world is a little more complicated than that,&quot; concludes Marc Particelli of the consulting firm Booz, Allen andamp; Hamilton.    He pauses. &quot;Nice fad, wasn't it?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>