<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880125-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Amnesty Program for Illegal Immigrants Spurs Increase in Fraudulent Documents </HL><AUTHOR> Martha Brannigan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   William Givens, a convicted forger, was up to new antics last spring.    His crime: immigration fraud. His business: an immigration-consulting firm in Chula Vista, Calif. His wares: phony rent receipts and rental contracts.    Mr. Givens sold the false documents for $2,000 to $3,000 a packet to about 30 illegal immigrants, the Immigration and Naturalization Service says. The immigrants then used the receipts to bolster claims that they had lived illegally in the U.S. since before Jan. 1, 1982 -- which would qualify them for amnesty under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.    Mr. Givens's case is one of the many scams spurred by changes under the new immigration law. He was sentenced to two years in prison after pleading guilty in federal court in San Diego last September to conspiracy and making false statements.    Although fraud is nothing new to the INS -- which for years has contended with arranged marriages and counterfeit alien registration cards -- the 1986 immigration law has created a market for a much broader category of fraudulent documents. Now, false telephone and electric bills, library cards, check-cashing cards, and sundry other ordinary papers are fetching big money as illegal immigrants scramble to document that they have lived in the U.S. continuously since 1982.    &quot;Documents are like dope,&quot; says Jesus Quintanar, an INS agent in Los Angeles. &quot;It's an extremely lucrative business.&quot;    The increase in immigration fraud, however, is hitting the INS at a time when it is short of experienced investigatorsand low on morale after years of reductions. Although the staff is now growing rapidly, many of the new agents will still be learning the ropes when the amnesty fraud investigations hit high gear. The INS last year hired about 240 special agents, restoring its force to near the 1,000 special agents it had in the late 1970s. And it expects to add 500 more by Sept. 30.    The fraud cases &quot;are pulling us in all directions and driving us up a wall,&quot; says Jack Shaw, INS assistant commissioner for investigations in Washington, D.C. The INS has about 40 fraud investigations under way and several others pending.    At the same time, the agency's responsibilities have increased under the new immigration law, and it can't begin to go after every fraud case, Mr. Shaw says. &quot;We're making a concerted effort now to prosecute a representative number of fraud cases. We can't do them all. . . . It has to be a compelling case of fraud.&quot;    Cases of amnesty fraud began appearing as soon as the new law took effect. INS officials allege that on May 4, 1987, just one day before the amnesty program began, Sharadhumar Patel ordered a copy of a U.S. immigration admissions stamp from Mid Tenn Rubber Stamp Co. in Nashville. With the stamp, the Madison, Tenn., motel keeper could falsify immigration papers so that illegal immigrants appeared to have arrived in the U.S. before 1982.    At least 32 illegal immigrants from India agreed to pay Mr. Patel $3,000 to $3,600 for his services, according to the INS. After dummying up the documents, Mr. Patel even accompanied the Indian nationals to assist them at INS interviews in a dozen cities, from New Orleans to Atlanta to Kansas City, Mo., says John Caplinger, INS district director in New Orleans.    Mr. Patel was indicted in federal court in Memphis, Tenn., last September on charges of falsifying immigration records for people seeking amnesty, and he pleaded not guilty. Lionel Barrett, Mr. Patel's attorney, says he is discussing a possible plea agreement with prosecutors. The INS says Mr. Patel is cooperating with authorities to implicate the immigrants and several others, including people who brought him business.    Because the INS is enforcing sanctions against employers who hire illegal immigrants, the market also has soared for fraudulent Social Security cards and alien registration cards, which can help illegal immigrants get or keep jobs. In Los Angeles, Jose Castillo-Ramos, a printer from El Salvador and himself an illegal immigrant in the U.S., sold Mr. Quintanar, the INS undercover agent, 3,950 bogus Social Security cards and 1,300 alien registration cards. The cards came with forged U.S. government-franked envelopes.    The agent made the purchases while posing as a hotel-chain manager who could provide the documents to the many illegal immigrants who worked for him. &quot;He told me I could claim I knew a corrupt government official,&quot; Mr. Quintanar says, &quot;to give the illegal alien the impression the card is legitimate.&quot;    In federal court in Los Angeles, Mr. Castillo-Ramos pleaded guilty to selling counterfeit documents and possessing a printing press and negatives to make counterfeit cards. He was sentenced to 3 1/2 years.    By far the biggest incidence of amnesty fraud involves illegal immigrants seeking amnesty under the special agricultural worker, or SAW, program. The program, designed to protect U.S. farmers from losing many of their laborers, is ripe for fraud because it is so simple, INS officials say. To qualify for amnesty, the immigrant workers have only to file an INS form and an affidavit from a farm supervisor saying they have worked in perishable crops on a U.S. farm for at least 90 days in the year ended May 1, 1986.    Such affidavits immediately became a sought-after commodity -- and some farm crew leaders and others began peddling false affidavits for $1,000 to $5,000 to illegal immigrants seeking amnesty. Many of the immigrants who file SAW papers, however, have never worked on a farm and know nothing about agriculture, INS officials say. In New Orleans, for instance, INS officials say three applicants claimed to have planted 105 acres of watermelon by hand -- a Herculean task -- using seeds the size of cantalopes.    After receiving hundreds of suspicious applications in Florida under the farm worker program, the INS created a special task force there and is toughening the scrutiny of applicants. Earlier this month as a result of the task force's investigation, 61 people, including several farm labor contractors, were indicted in federal court in West Palm Beach on charges of fraud related to farm worker applications. The investigation is continuing and more indictments are expected.    But some immigrant farm workers say the INS has overreacted and is now making it too difficult for applicants to qualify for amnesty. They say the INS is turning down legitimate applications and making excessive demands for documentation.    &quot;INS is more concerned about potential fraud than about making the SAW program work,&quot; says Kristine Poplawski, an attorney for the Farmworker Justice Fund in Washington, D.C. &quot;They're putting people through the wringer. It's gotten so legitimate people won't want to file.&quot;    Cheryl Little, an attorney for the Haitian Refugee Center in Miami, says INS officials now regard every farm worker's application as suspect and summarily deny many of them. Appealing the INS decisions has her office swamped in paperwork. &quot;In some cases, INS is asking the worker to bring in his crew leader with his driver's license and ID card,&quot; Ms. Little says. &quot;That's a tall order -- to get a crew leader to go in to INS.&quot;    Perry Rivkind, INS district director in Miami, says there is no merit to the charge that the agency has become overly zealous in scrutinizing SAW applications. &quot;There is no overreaction,&quot; he says. &quot;We're merely trying to root out fraud.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>