<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Economy: Power-Supply Forecasts Grow Pessimistic --- Can Independent Suppliers Pick Up Slack as Utilities Plan Fewer New Plants? </HL><AUTHOR> Bill Paul (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> UTI NUK ENV </IN><TEXT>   At New York's Mount Sinai Hospital last summer, surgeons scrubbed up as usual. But three times they operated with electricity from the hospital's emergency diesel generators, which kick in when voltage drops 10%.    Like many utilities, Consolidated Edison Co. of New York was rationing power to stave off blackouts. If some power-supply forecasters are correct, it was only the start of reliability problems likely to plague the nation in the form of widespread power shortages by the early 1990s.    &quot;Electricity is the flame of life and it will never go out. But it is about to flicker in the wind,&quot; crimping economic growth and inconveniencing millions, warns Andrew Hines, chairman of Florida Power Corp.'s parent, Florida Progress Corp.    Not all forecasters agree. Some say non-utility or &quot;independent&quot; power producers will make up for utilities' increasing reluctance, despite growing electricity demand, to build more power plants. But the long-term reliability of independent producers has yet to be tested. And whoever builds the next generation of power plants must struggle with environmental problems that make it increasingly difficult to choose an acceptable fuel. &quot;The uncertainties and pressures on the electricpower industry are going to grow,&quot; says Richard Zaren, planning director at the Electric Power Research Institute, the utility industry's research and development arm.    Since 1973, U.S. economic growth has gone hand in hand with increased electricity sales, even as oil consumption has declined. As more electrified manufacturing processes have supplanted oil-fueled ones, U.S. industry has become more efficient and more globally competitive.    All of which made this summer &quot;a stern reminder of the looming crisis in electric power supply facing parts of the U.S.,&quot; says Harold B. Finger, president of the U.S. Council for Energy Awareness, the nuclear-power industry's lobbying arm.    From June through August, torrid heat increased already robust electrical demand, forcing utilities from New England to the Carolinas to broadcast emergency appeals for usage cutbacks. In Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University acceded to the wishes of city officials worried about high electrical demand and closed its doors for only the third time in its 353-year history.    Even where the lights stayed on there were signs of future trouble. American Electric Power Co., based in Columbus, Ohio, and serving seven million customers in seven states from Michigan to West Virginia, hit demand peaks it wasn't expecting to reach until 1996.    Marie Corio, president of Applied Economic Research Co., a New York energy-forecasting firm, predicts that by 1995, the Midwest, Southeast, South Central, Middle Atlantic and New England regions will be short of capacity during periods of peak summer power usage. The result, she says, will be waves of brownouts and at least an occasional blackout. Other regions should escape relatively unscathed, she says.    &quot;We're behind the eight ball,&quot; says Elizabeth Hannon, president of Utility Data Institute, a Washington, D.C., firm that analyzes utility operations. The institute says that after a 20-year period in which the U.S. investor-owned power industry added an average of 20,000 megawatts of new capacity each year, the industry will add an average of less than 5,000 megawatts a year over the next several years.    Heeding these warnings, some power users are examining their options for the middle and even late 1990s, because it can take more than six years to get a power plant built and operating. Tom Gildersleeve, the Air Force's top civilian expert on electricity supply, says he is considering whether to seek out independent power producers. As a last resort, Mr. Gildersleeve says, the Air Force may even build its own generating facilities on some bases.    For their part, utilities say they are only being prudent with investors' money. They argue that they have been burned by inflation and the high cost of environmental regulations. Mostly, however, they accuse state-utility regulators of unjustly disallowing full recovery of plant-construction costs from ratepayers. While regulators have generally justified their actions on grounds that plants have come in way over budget, utilities feel regulators have simply bowed to public pressure to keep rates down.    Whatever the case, Mr. Hines of Florida Progress reflects industry sentiment when he says, &quot;Nobody can afford to bet the company&quot; by building a multibillion-dollar generating facility, then waiting to see if regulators will permit full recovery of its costs.    Still, some power experts doubt the shortages scenario. Joe D. Pace, executive vice president of National Economic Research Associates, an economic analysis and energy forecasting firm, says independent power producers will increasingly pick up the slack. Independents are a mixed group, incorporating a utility's own industrial customers, as well as professional engineering firms, gas-pipeline companies and others. Mr. Pace points to the recent experience of Dominion Resources Corp.'s Virginia Power unit, which sought bids from independents to supply a total of about 2,000 megawatts of new capacity and got offers for roughly seven times that much.    But independents face regulatory roadblocks. While most electric-utility regulation is at the state level, wholesale-power contracts, such as between an independent producer and a utility, are under federal jurisdiction. Currently, rates set by contract are subject to change by federal utility contractors. Thus some independents are having trouble obtaining needed financing, says Scott Spiewak, who publishes an independent-power newswletter.    Whoever builds the next generation of power plants faces complex environmental problems that may inhibit construction. Coal and nuclear, America's most plentiful indigenous fuel sources, account for the bulk of U.S. generating capacity. But coal has an acid-rain pollution problem that new technology is alleviating but hasn't yet solved. And nuclear power remains unacceptable to many Americans.    Meanwhile, oil, coal and, to a lesser extent, natural gas have recently been fingered in growing scientific suspicions that the earth's surface is rapidly warming -- the so-called greenhouse effect. Burning oil and gas releases carbon dioxide, which tends to trap solar heat in the earth's atmosphere.    &quot;The smoke's going to have to clear a little&quot; before power-plant builders know which way to turn, says Daniel Scotto, utility-bond analyst for LF Rothschild andamp; Co. in New York.    The greenhouse effect also poses demand-side uncertainty. A recent study by the Electric Power Research Institute found that just a one degree or so increase in the earth's temperature by the year 2015 might increase a utility's need for new electrical generating capacity by as much as 20%. </TEXT></DOC>