<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871109-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan FacesTough ChoiceFor Top Court---Ginsburg's Exit Again SpursBattle of ConservativesVersus GOP Moderates---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan faces a tough choice of picking a Supreme Court nominee who can be confirmed by the Democrat-controlled Senate or trying to placate conservatives who want a high-court justice they consider ideologically compatible.    Judge Douglas Ginsburg's withdrawal, following controversy over his marijuana use, once again turned the selection process into a battle pitting conservatives within the Reagan administration and the Senate against more moderate Republicans, including White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker.    Attention again focused on federal appeals court Judge Anthony Kennedy of Sacramento, Calif., who was flown to Washington by the White House Saturday night and, with the support of administration moderates, became the apparent front-runner.    A senior White House official said that Judge Kennedy was &quot;the leading candidate, but they are looking at other names as well.&quot;    But Judge Kennedy was the front-runner once before. In that round, Mr. Ginsburg was selected, under pressure from conservatives who objected to Judge Kennedy, including Attorney General Edwin Meese.    Yesterday, Senate and administration sources said conservatives are again mounting an all-out effort to block the choice of Judge Kennedy, whom they fear would be too moderate. Conservative senators planned to call White House aides yesterday to voice their objections.    When Judge Kennedy, 51 years old, was under consideration earlier, one administration conservative said, &quot;He would be too much like Justice Powell,&quot; a reference to Justice Lewis Powell, whose retirement June 26 created the court vacancy. Justice Powell was a moderate whose vote often tipped the balance between liberal and conservative wings of the high court.    Unless the conservatives succeed in blocking the choice of Judge Kennedy, an administration source said, an announcement is possible as early as today. The source said some White House aides want to make the announcement quickly to avoid letting the movement against Judge Kennedy build up steam.    After Judge Ginsburg's withdrawal Saturday at the urging of conservatives, President Reagan vowed to &quot;move promptly to name another nominee.&quot; But the prospects for action this year by the Senate Judiciary Committee or the full Senate are fading daily. A nominee such as Judge Kennedy would have a better chance of Senate action in 1987 than a more controversial choice. Moderate Democrats have told the White House that, so far, he appears confirmable.    If conservatives again derail Judge Kennedy, another name that has attracted some attention at the White House is that of David Souter, a 48-year-old New Hampshire Supreme Court justice and former state attorney general. He is a protege of Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.).    Some conservatives yesterday were touting James Buckley, a former New York senator and, since 1985, a judge on the federal appeals court in Washington, D.C., the court on which Judges Robert Bork and Ginsburg also serve. Mr. Buckley, 64, probably would draw opposition from liberals and moderates.    Other finalists last month, before Judge Ginsburg was picked, were William Wilkins, a federal appeals court judge in Greenville, S.C., and a favorite of South Carolina Sen. Strom Thurmond, senior Republican on the Judiciary Committee; and Ralph Winter, a Yale Law School professor who is now a federal appeals court judge in New Haven, Conn.    Mr. Wilkins, 45, earned poor marks from across the political spectrum when he served recently as chairman of a federal commission that drafted new rules for sentencing criminals in federal court. Mr. Winter is highly regarded in legal circles, but drew fire from a few conservative groups when his name was last considered.    In addition, Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) yesterday mentioned Edith Jones, 38, a federal appeals court judge in Houston and a former bankruptcy lawyer in Treasury Secretary James Baker's old law firm.    The selection of Judge Kennedy clearly would present the White House with tactical problems. President Reagan and his staff must figure out how to appease staunch conservatives, including Sens. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.) and Steve Symms (R., Idaho), who told the White House of their opposition to Judge Kennedy Oct. 29, shortly before Mr. Ginsburg was selected. These same senators, as well as Sens. Gordon Humphrey (R., N.H.) and James McClure (R., Idaho), were expected to make their views known to the White House again yesterday.    The opposition to Judge Kennedy apparently stems from a single opinion he wrote in 1980, in which the appeals court, based in San Francisco, upheld the Navy's discharge of three people for homosexual conduct. Conservatives object because Judge Kennedy's decision, unlike a similar one in another case written by Judge Bork, recites the Supreme Court's privacy decisions without criticizing them, including the 1973 decision recognizing a woman's right to an abortion.    Moreover, conservatives object because Judge Kennedy's opinion says that the Supreme Court's privacy decisions &quot;suggest that some kinds of government regulation of private consensual homosexual behavior may face substantial constitutional challenge . . . Such cases might require resolution of the question whether there is a right to engage in this conduct in at least some circumstances.&quot;    With Judge Bork having been defeated by the Senate, 58-42, and Judge Ginsburg having withdrawn, time is running out on President Reagan's opportunity to fill the Supreme Court vacancy.    To some in the administration, Judge Kennedy looks like the president's safest bet to fill the seat without a fight. But an aide to one conservative senator said yesterday: &quot;I don't think we're prepared to say he's the only one out there.&quot;    If the president makes another controversial pick, it is quite possible the seat will go unfilled until after the next president is inaugurated in 1989.    Yesterday, on CBS-TV's &quot;Face the Nation,&quot; Sen. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.), a Senate Judiciary Committee member, said: &quot;If the president will forget trying to make a short-term political statement and nominate someone the American people will see as qualified, we'll have hearings and appoint someone. If the president continues to make a political football of this, he won't have a nominee to the Supreme Court.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>