<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880613-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Quest Spans Globe to Prove Silver Scheme --- Was Hunt's Jet-Setting Social Or Part of Plot? </HL><AUTHOR> Ann Hagedorn (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM MER </CO><IN> PCS CMD </IN><TEXT>   Dinners, horse races and hotel visits spanning the globe from Paris and Zurich, Switzerland, to Bermuda and Lexington, Ky., are playing a major role in the efforts of a Peruvian mineral company to prove that the three Hunt brothers and others conspired to corner the world silver market in 1979 and 1980.    Minpeco S.A.'s suit against the Hunts, now in its fourth month in federal court in Manhattan, offers a fresh glimpse into the jet-setting world of the Hunts almost a decade ago and illustrates the complexity of trying to build a conspiracy case from a web of seemingly unconnected events.    To retrace the steps of the Hunts, Minpeco's lawyers spent five years amassing more than a million documents, including subpoenaed American Express receipts, hotel registrations and telephone records. Like puzzle pieces, the jumbled array of dates and places might eventually arrange themselves into a convincing picture of a conspiracy, according to the Minpeco attorneys from the Washington, D.C., law firm of Cole, Corette andamp; Abrutyn.    Minpeco is gambling that its high-cost, high-risk effort will pay off with a big jury verdict. Already Minpeco has obtained $64.7 million in pretrial settlements from six other defendants, including Merrill Lynch and Co.; Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America; AML Futures Inc., a now-defunct unit of Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Inc.; and E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., which since in a merger has become part of Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc.    &quot;No one would ever confess to having conspired to manipulate a commodities market, so you have to show compelling proof through circumstances,&quot; said Mark Cymrot, the lead attorney for Minpeco. &quot;You have to piece together the circumstances so that there's no other reasonable explanation than a conspiracy.&quot;    Minpeco, which filed its suit in 1981, is seeking $150.6 million from the Hunts. The big mineral concern, owned by the Peruvian government, claims it was damaged by the Hunts' alleged scheme of hoarding silver bullion to drive up the price. Minpeco had a large short position in the silver futures market, meaning that it would make money on declining prices.    Minpeco contends that the Hunts committed fraud and violated commodity and antitrust laws as well as federal racketeering laws. The Hunts maintain that their silver investments were a hedge against inflation, that world events triggered wild fluctuations in prices, and that Minpeco is looking for a scapegoat on which to blame its losses.    Nelson Bunker Hunt, the oldest of the three brothers and considered the potentate of the Hunt empire, took the stand for the first time late last month. In the weeks ahead, William Herbert Hunt and Lamar Hunt will testify. Prior to this, the Hunts have appeared before the jury only on videotape. The trial, presided over by Judge Morris E. Lasker, could continue for another three months or more.    Judge Lasker also has before him two large class-action suits, brought against the Hunts on behalf of other investors who had short positions in the silver market in 1979. There are also numerous individual suits claiming losses due to the alleged price manipulation. Action in these suits has been suspended pending the outcome of the Minpeco case, which is the first against the Hunts to reach a jury.    Also in limbo, pending the Minpeco case, is an administrative proceeding against the Hunts that was initiated in February 1985 by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission in Washington, D.C. An agency spokesman said the proceedings, once resumed, &quot;will likely be a long drawn-out affair. It's a very complex piece of litigation.&quot;    In the Minpeco case, there is much speculation that the Hunts will try to curtail the proceedings by offering to settle. Mr. Cymrot confirmed recently that the Hunts had previously offered Minpeco $20 million but that the terms were unacceptable to Minpeco. Paul J. Curran of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays andamp; Handler, the lead attorney for the Hunts, said he had no comment about any settlement talks.    In court last week, Nelson Bunker Hunt denied any conspiracy. He said the purpose of meetings with wealthy Arabs prior to January 1979 was to sell silver to reduce his debts, not to find partners in a scheme to amass silver bullion.    Among other things, Mr. Hunt was questioned about his presence at an August 1979 dinner in Deauville, France, hosted by Mahmoud Fustok, a wealthy Arab investor and silver speculator. At the time, Hunt was touring France on the horse-racing circuit. True to the plaintiff's strategy, Mr. Cymrot wanted to know if Mr. Hunt and Mr. Fustok discussed silver.    Mr. Hunt, who said his friendship with Mr. Fustok was inspired by their mutual interest in thoroughbred racing, testified that he didn't recall talking about silver in Deauville that night. Instead, he reminisced that there was a buffet dinner with about 35-40 people present. &quot;You had to eat standing up because there wasn't any place to sit down. You had to balance your plate. That's not easy,&quot; he said with a slow Texas drawl. &quot;But if anyone came and talked to me I might have talked about silver. I just don't recall.&quot;    There were other questions: Did Mr. Hunt know that Mr. Fustok increased his stake in the silver market a few weeks after the dinner? And what about Mr. Hunt's visit to New York in January 1980? Did he know that Naji Nahas, an affluent Lebanese investor who then had substantial silver investments, stayed at the same hotel on the same nights?    Mr. Hunt said he did not know about Mr. Fustok's transactions in the silver market in the weeks following the Deauville dinner. And he consistently maintained that any changes in silver contracts subsequent to dinners or meetings were merely coincidences.    When Mr. Hunt said he did not recall seeing Mr. Nahas at the Regency Hotel in New York, Mr. Cymrot produced documents indicating that Mr. Nahas, through a third party, made the reservations for both men to stay at the Regency on the same nights.    But the plaintiff's conspiracy case kept running up against the social aspect of Mr. Hunt's travels. Mr. Hunt and Mr. Nahas were friends. And friends meet at hotels, dine together, and discuss mutual interests.    Moreover, Mr. Hunt has never denied that he occasionally talked about silver with friends who might have been fellow speculators. What he has denied is that he ever discussed a plan for amassing silver. Minpeco has the complex task of trying to prove through circumstantial evidence that such a plan existed. </TEXT></DOC>