<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880404-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Europe's Non-Model for Stable World Money </HL><AUTHOR> Michele Fratianni </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FORGN </CO><IN> FRX MON </IN><TEXT>   The European Monetary System was created in March 1979, partly as a reaction to the &quot;Carter dollar.&quot; The early consensus was that the system would not last because differences in inflation rates were wide and politicians, outside low-inflation Germany, were perceived to have no stomach to pursue disinflationary policies. After nine years the EMS survives.    To some observers and policy makers the system is a success worth being exported to the world at large. That, in essence, is the message delivered by French Finance Minister Edouard Balladur in his Feb. 23 article on this page. Before considering the desirability or feasibility of a World EMS, let us briefly review the essence of the EMS and its achievements.    The EMS borrowed from the old Bretton Woods setup the concept of exchange rates linked together through a &quot;par value&quot; system, with allowable bands of fluctuations. But it innovated by defining the reference point of the system, not in terms of a national money such as the dollar under Bretton Woods, but the European Currency Unit, a weighted average of European monies. The relative weights have changed slightly over time, with the deutsche mark, now just over a third of the total, the heaviest. Although this gives the German currency a preponderant influence, the arrangement satisfies a desire by the EMS countries not to single out one nation's money as dominant.    When a given currency diverges too much in its market valuation vis-a-vis the ECU, the country's authorities intervene in the exchange markets. Should this not work, the country is encouraged to adopt policy actions -- for example, a tighter monetary policy. Should these also fail -- or, more realistically, should the country not wish to adopt the corrective policy -- parity realignment occurs.    Three interpretations of the EMS exist: a narrow, a broad and a normative one. The narrow sees it as a system geared to reduce short-run exchange-rate variability without having any concern about the fundamental forces shaping the long-run movements of the exchange rates. The traditional justification for this type of arrangement is that high exchange-rate variability hampers the growth of international trade. The evidence to support this is weak. Ironically, despite the achieved lower exchange-rate variability, the growth of intro-EMS trade has declined both in relation to the pre-1979 period and in relation to non-EMS trade.    The broad interpretation is that EMS is a system designed to generate monetary coordination, though as noted, German monetary (and fiscal) policy has set the standard against which performance is measured, a feature that has actually benefited high-inflation countries. The 11 currency realignments under EMS haven't followed &quot;purchasing-power parity&quot; -- that is, the devaluations of the high-inflation countries' currencies have not fully compensated for the differences in inflation rates. In particular, France and Italy, by letting the franc and the lira appreciate in real terms vis-a-vis the mark, have exploited the low-inflation credibility of the Bundesbank. And in so doing they have reduced their national inflation rates at a lower cost than would have been possible through an independent monetary policy. Unfortunately, however, these two countries have had to resort to exchange controls in order to do this and to remain in the EMS.    The last interpretation views EMS as an intermediate step toward complete monetary union in Europe, with a common European money and a single European central bank. While this objective appears unrealistic today, the geographic, economic and political forces of Western Europe point in that direction.    At the world level, what can be drawn from this experience and analysis? The narrow interpretation of the EMS has too modest an objective to be worth exporting; the normative interpretation, on the other hand, is utopia. We are left with the model of the EMS as a mechanism to achieve international macroeconomic cooperation. Technically, a World EMS could elect the existing artificial-currency Special Drawing Rights -- a weighted average of the dollar, yen, mark, pound and franc -- as the counterpart of the European Currency Unit; and could duplicate many of the features of the EMS. The difficulties, however, do not stem from financial engineering but from political economy considerations. How would a World EMS operate? Collegially or hegemonically?    The U.S., because of the size of its economy and the international role of its money, and as the main provider of the West's nuclear umbrella, remains the natural leader of any cooperative arrangement. Yet the U.S. has little credibility as a supplier of a predictably low rate of inflation. The memories of Bretton Woods are still vivid among the directors of the Bundesbank. In the 1970s and the 1980s the U.S. has altered economic policies more frequently and abruptly than either Japan or Germany. Domestic rather than international considerations have motivated the bulk of these policy swings.    To be sure, there have been bouts of cooperation -- currently we are going through one -- but these have occurred after periods of domestically inspired policies that have ultimately failed. In sum, the U.S. cannot be for a World EMS what Germany is for the EMS. Despite the exceptional Volcker disinflation of recent memory, U.S. hegemony in the West no longer extends to the monetary field.    A collegial World EMS appears to be more plausible. Here again some doubts emerge. Differences of opinion concerning the &quot;way the world works&quot; would make cooperation difficult, if not altogether undesirable. Currently, the U.S. administration wants Japan and Germany to reflate their economies through stimulative budgetary policies. Germany and to a lesser extent Japan instead believe that the U.S. must reduce its budget deficit.    But suppose, for argument's sake, that disagreements about policy objectives and economic models could be overcome. What credibility would there be in an agreement signed, among others, by Treasury Secretary Baker calling for a significant reduction of the U.S. structural budget deficit? The agreement would have the same value of a treaty okayed only by the president. Congress may not approve the agreement; or if it does, there is no assurance that the agreement would be binding to subsequent legislatures. The feasibility of a collegial World EMS would be undermined, not only by political economy considerations, but also by low-credibility institutions.    What ultimately comes into question is the potential interest of the U.S. in joining a World EMS. Politically, the benefit of membership would be very small. The U.S. now is in an enviable position. It can pretend to be unable to do things to bring about international economic stability, and then ask others to carry the load. What results may seem to be coordination, but it shouldn't be confused as such.    ---   Mr. Fratianni is a professor of business economics and public policy at Indiana University. </TEXT></DOC>