<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN'S DIARY INDICATES he discussed Contra aid with Saudi King Fahd.    According to two sources familiar with the journal's account, Reagan and the monarch discussed Saudi contributions to the Nicaraguan rebels in a White House meeting in February 1985. The president, who yesterday denied soliciting Saudi funds, wrote that Fahd raised the subject. McFarlane had told congressional panels of the meeting, but said he was unaware of what had transpired. Meanwhile, congressional investigators said a $10 million donation by Brunei to aid the insurgents had mistakenly ended up in a Swiss bank account controlled by a shipping magnate.    McFarlane denied that he and other officials concocted a cover story last November to conceal potentially damaging details of the Iran-Contra operation.    ---   The House approved an amendment to the defense authorization bill reducing spending for Reagan's space-based antimissile system to $3.1 billion in fiscal 1988, far below the administration's $5.2 billion request. The House also voted against an amendment requiring full-scale testing of the Star Wars system.    The Soviet Union is preparing to present a draft treaty on intercontinental nuclear missiles that will include a ban on the placement of weapons in space, according to the chief Soviet arms negotiator in Geneva.    ---   Surgeons removed a healthy heart from a cystic fibrosis patient to give him a heart-lung transplant, which is usually done in tandem, then implanted his heart into another man, a spokeswoman for Johns Hopkins Hospital said. The operation apparently marked the first time that a heart from a living person was used in a transplant.    ---   Peres said procedural issues for an international Mideast peace conference had been worked out with Jordan, the U.S. and other parties. The Israeli foreign minister said an obstacle to the talks was Israel's lack of ties with the Soviet Union and China. Prime Minister Shamir reiterated his opposition to the international negotiations.    ---   The Reagan administration intends to sell 12 F-5E jet fighters to Honduras. A White House spokesman said the Northrop Corp. planes, costing $72 million, are to come from existing Air Force inventories. The sale would go through unless both houses of Congress vote within 30 days to block it, a Pentagon spokesman said.    ---   Thatcher faulted Britain's Labor Party, saying a victory for the opposition party in the June 11 general election &quot;would be the answer to the Kremlin's prayers.&quot; The British prime minister, a Tory, also refused to participate in a televised debate with Neil Kinnock, leader of the Labor Party, which advocates nuclear disarmament.    ---   Juan Ponce Enrile threatened to boycott the new Philippine Congress as Aquino-supported candidates appeared headed toward a Senate victory in Monday's congressional elections. The former defense minister, who is seeking a Senate seat, also predicted &quot;instability of unimaginable proportions&quot; if President Aquino's slate won.    ---   Prime Minister Pindling dissolved the Bahamian Parliament and scheduled an election for June 19. Pindling and his Progressive Liberal Party are expected to face a tough race. Unemployment is high and drug abuse rampant in the Bahamas, and Pindling and other officials are embroiled in a corruption scandal.    ---   The State Department accused Syria of continued involvement in international terrorism and said there weren't any plans to return the U.S. envoy to Damascus. The White House had recalled the ambassador in October, following the conviction in London of a Palestinian with Syrian ties who had attempted to bomb an Israeli jetliner.    ---   The U.S. will return to Tehran today more than $450 million in assets frozen after the 1979 Iranian revolution, the State Department said. A tribunal in The Hague last week ordered the return of the money.    ---   Violence flared in Malta following the inauguration of an opposition party leader as the island nation's new prime minister. Eddie Fenech Adami called for national reconciliation and improved ties with the U.S.    ---   South Africa's government extended its post-election crackdown on apartheid violations, saying it would act against companies that have illegally housed black or mixed-race workers in white areas. Pretoria declined to name any companies facing government action, but many of the firms are believed to be U.S. and European.    ---   South Korean riot police clashed with students demanding the removal of President Chun during demonstrations at universities in Seoul and Kwangju. In the capital, opposition lawmakers walked out of the National Assembly to protest Chun's refusal to reopen debate on constitutional changes to allow direct presidential elections.    ---   Mourners in Northern Ireland scuffled with police at two separate funerals for Irish Republican Army guerrillas who were killed in a weekend clash with security forces about 30 miles southwest of Belfast. Rioting also erupted on both sides of the border at rallies Monday to honor the guerrillas. </TEXT></DOC>