<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0089 </DOCNO><HL> About Face:Soviets Now Hail ChinaAs a Source of IdeasFor Reviving Socialism---But Free-Market PragmatismOf Deng May Not FitRussian Economy Well---No Hong Kong Role Model---By Mark D'AnastasioStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Deng Xiaoping first began opening up China's distressed, ideology-bound economy to market forces, the orthodox theorists of the Soviet Union sneered at the effort as &quot;Maoism without Mao.&quot; There was certainly nothing to be learned, they added, from policies that undermined such sacred Marxist notions as egalitarianism.    That was eight years ago, and before Mikhail Gorbachev's accession. By now it is clear that Mr. Deng's moves toward free enterprise and away from central planning, though not uniformly successful, have invigorated China's economy and improved the lives of millions, especially peasants. And suddenly Moscow is sounding a different theme.    For the first time, a broad spectrum of Soviet China-watchers are saying openly that the economic path taken by the Chinese plays a role -- in fact a central role -- in determining the policies of Mr. Gorbachev as he strives to stir his own nation from its economic torpor.    &quot;What is taking place in China is vitally important for us,&quot; says Evgenii Konovalov, head of the China department at Moscow's Far East Institute, a think tank that until recently waged a war of words on Mr. Deng's pragmatic policies. &quot;We now look at their reforms as if it were our own personal business.&quot;    China, explains Sergei Stepanov of the Institute of Economics of the World Socialist System, &quot;is the only other socialist country where the economy and the task of reform are on a similar scale with ours. For our purposes, that makes China our main foreign reform laboratory.&quot;    The U.S. takes an interest in all this, and not simply because of the implications for Soviet economic strength. One Chinese strategy has been to make more resources available for consumer goods by slashing military spending and production. To the extent the Soviets might aspire to ease their own military-spending burden, their interest in arms control might grow.    Yet major differences exist in the Chinese and Soviet economic situations, differences that call into question the transferability of Mr. Deng's methods. China remains a poor, backward developing country, while the Soviet Union long ago entered the ranks of industrialized nations. The Soviet economy isn't on the verge of collapse, as China's was when Mr. Deng began his reforms. China is freer to experiment, not seeing itself as the repository of Marxist orthodoxy and the model for other socialist nations. And there are differences in attitudes and economic traditions.    In his two-year effort to revitalize the Soviet economy, Mr. Gorbachev has taken such steps as letting the state pay more for higher-quality goods, permitting a construction company in Leningrad to go bankrupt, and opening doors to foreign joint ventures. This spring and summer his controversial program has culminated in several formal laws and decrees.    A law on individual activity legalizes small-scale businesses in 29 fields, including plumbing, carpentry, dressmaking, auto repair, tutoring and toy making, though the businesses can't hire workers. Second, a new law governing the 48,000 state enterprises aims to give local managers certain authority as of next January to make their own production plans, choose suppliers and even set prices. Third, a set of 11 decrees diminishes, accordingly, the extensive authority of central planners. The way is cleared for such new practices as wholesale trade and letting enterprises borrow money instead of relying on state grants.    Heated debate has accompanied these moves, and the resistance by bureaucrats who would lose power is far from over. Many industrial workers may be expected to resist another move, which would link wages more closely with performance.    China's liberalization is far more advanced. Its most notable success has been in agriculture, where Mr. Deng, in effect, abolished the collectives and returned to a family-farm system. Food production and farmers' incomes have soared, though there have been complaints of farmers neglecting important crops such as grain for more lucrative ones like vegetables.    Though socialism still predominates in China, its cities now teem with private food stands, restaurants, repair stalls and many other tiny businesses. Factories, rather than pitch all their earnings into a common pot, may retain a percentage of profits, from which factory managers can raise salaries or invest in plant modernization as they see fit. Despite a backlash against this capitalist onrush this year, in the form of a drive against the taint of &quot;bourgeois liberalization,&quot; China is holding to its path.    What gave the Chinese reforms their impetus was the sorry situation when Mr. Deng came to power in 1978. There was a sense of urgency for change, created by Mao's disastrous Great Leap Forward of 1958-1960, his traumatic Cultural Revolution, other abrupt shifts, periodic famines and decades of stagnant farm and industrial production. As a result, the bureaucracy hasn't been a fatal obstacle to change. &quot;It suffered during the Cultural Revolution&quot; too, writes Marshall Goldman of Harvard's Russian Research Center, and &quot;generally agreed with the need for far-reaching economic reform.&quot;    In the Soviet Union, where Communism has ruled twice as long as in China, the bureaucracy could still torpedo Mr. Gorbachev's plans. It is estimated to number an astounding 18 million people, a privileged elite whose power and perks depend on the status quo. &quot;We are much more entrenched in conservatism than the Chinese were when they started to change,&quot; says Fyodor Burlatsky, a Soviet journalist believed to be a Gorbachev confidant.    Another complication for the Soviets is ideology. Mr. Deng openly concedes that some of what Marx and Lenin said has become outdated, but Mr. Gorbachev, mindful of the Soviet role as mentor to the world's Communists, must carefully justify every move by citing the founders, blaming failures on misapplication of their precepts.    Not for the Soviets is the attitude of Mr. Deng that &quot;it doesn't matter whether a cat is black or white as long as it catches mice.&quot; Says a French diplomat: &quot;In Russia, what still counts most is the color of the cat.&quot; He predicts that &quot;intense concern over ideological purity will continue to bog down the Soviets for many years.&quot;    Besides its role as ideological touchstone, the Soviet Union's superpower military status rules out some of Mr. Deng's tactics. He could unilaterally demobilize a million Chinese soldiers and slash military spending to 4.3% of gross national product (by Western estimates), converting much of the armaments industry to building trucks, TV sets and washing machines.    The Soviet Union, with far greater military commitments around the world, can do no such thing. Western experts estimate it may spend as much as 14% of its GNP on defense, or about the percentage China was spending under Mao.    Mr. Deng's changes in agriculture provide the greatest inspiration for the Soviets. This is an area in which Mr. Gorbachev has so far achieved few changes, though he did manage to cut the farm bureaucracy by merging ministries, and collective farms now get fewer orders from absent managers on what to plant and where and when.    Like their Chinese counterparts, Soviet state and collective farmers now can sell above-plan harvests, up to 30% of production, in city markets and cooperative stores at free-market (that is, higher) prices. But such changes don't come anywhere near China's wholesale dismantling of collectivization.    Soviet experts interviewed now support wide application of some form of family farming. Some U.S. observers, though, say it may not work so well for them. &quot;The extended family in China is an enduring and powerful force,&quot; Mr. Goldman writes in his book &quot;Gorbachev's Challenge.&quot; But in Russia, feudal estates and later collective and state farms &quot;have been virtually the only form of land tenure.&quot;    Nor is there strong popular pressure to do away with the current Soviet farm system. In China, regional food shortages and starvation had driven peasants and party officials to desperation by 1978. &quot;On top of that there were a hundred million {Chinese} peasants who had absolutely no work, and some solution had to be thought up quickly,&quot; says Andrei Ostrovsky, a sociologist at the Far East Institute.    In contrast to China's reliance on manual labor, Soviet agriculture is highly mechanized. A wholesale switch to family farming would negate the economies of scale the Soviets have paid heavily to achieve over 50 years.    Despite this, &quot;the fast and successful development of agriculture through broad application of the family-responsibility system presents special interest to us,&quot; says Leonid Abalkin, director of Moscow's Institute of Economics and a close aide to Mr. Gorbachev. A form of family farming is being tried in the northern Caucasus, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, some mountainous regions of Georgia and other areas.    Mr. Burlatsky believes that &quot;we can apply this broadly in our country.&quot; The Chinese have scored their gains in agriculture, he recently wrote in the Soviet journal Literaturnaya Gazeta, mainly because &quot;peasants have a stake in the results of their labor like never before.&quot;    China's successes in satisfying consumer demands draw increasing interest among Soviet officials. Mr. Abalkin says with a hint of envy: &quot;On the scale of such a gigantic country as China, they have succeeded at resolving the not-simple problem of satisfying the market for consumer goods on the basis of cooperatives and individual labor activity.&quot;    Mr. Deng has gone so far as to authorize a vast return of free enterprise and private ownership of the means of production in small trade, manufacturing, and service industries. A few Chinese companies have even issued shares, and there are sleepy stock markets to trade them, though this obviously capitalist trend has been strictly limited in China.    The Soviets aren't about to try stock ownership. And even the most liberal Soviet economists can't rationalize private ownership of the means of production.    The Soviet Union has seen nothing like the explosion of private commercial effort occurring in China, where colorful signs for private shops and restaurants now reach into the shabbiest back alleys. China now has about 20 million private entrepreneurs, recent statistics indicate; peasants in rural areas man about a half-million cooperatives, engaging 4.5 million employees in industry, construction, transportation, catering and other services.    Free enterprise exists in the Soviet Union in the form of individual labor and cooperative enterprises. Recent legislation let individuals open shops, service businesses and restaurants.    But Western officials estimate the new laws have added no more than 200,000 people to the 100,000 already involved in small-scale enterprise under earlier legislation. Facilities and raw materials haven't been made available for cooperatives, and the fields in which moonlighting is now legal are already occupied by legions of blackmarketeers.    There are other reasons for the Russians' slow start. One is that the Soviet Union doesn't have a Hong Kong on its border to serve as an example, nor a huge community of entrepreneurial countrymen abroad wanting to invest. Hong Kong is also a source of Chinese-speaking management, technical and marketing skill.    A less tangible factor is attitude. Far fewer Russians than Chinese have a taste for the risks of business, Soviet analysts say. &quot;In Russia the entrepreneurial spirit was never developed,&quot; Mr. Burlatsky says. &quot;Just last century we were still a nation of serfs, and then the new system {Soviet Communism} was set up in a way that smothered all individual initiative.&quot;    Lyudmila Kondratova, a China specialist at the Institute of Economics of the World Socialist System, agrees: &quot;The attitude of most Russians is, 'We're getting our slice of bread, why take risks and start a business?'&quot;    Those who do feel entrepreneurial often face another obstacle. Says Mr. Burlatsky: &quot;The main problem is social jealousy on the part of bureaucrats. Local officials can't bear the idea of people making several times their salaries.&quot;    The Soviet press is full of stories about local party or state officials who, instead of facilitating free enterprise, quash every initiative. To cite just one example, officials in Krasnoyarsk shut down a cooperative of taxi drivers on the ground that its members were earning too much money.    In heavier industries, the Chinese, as they move toward less reliance on state planning and more on market forces and initiative, simply do what seems to work. For the Soviets, every change in industrial policy is an enormous strain, carried out only against recalcitrant opposition. The Russians are astounded that Chinese factories were permitted to switch over to new forms of self-directed management quickly without a carefully elaborated blueprint from higher authorities.    In joint ventures with capitalist countries, the Chinese, while managing to frustrate plenty of foreigners with their rules on taxation, supply of local workers and other matters, nevertheless have gone much farther than the Soviets. The Russians don't plan anything like China's special economic zones and 14 coastal cities where thousands of joint ventures with foreign capitalists are under way.    &quot;Our officials are being much more selective,&quot; says Mr. Konovalov of the Far East Institute. &quot;Still, we can't help admire what they have done in China. It's a remarkably varied use of foreign capital.&quot;    Ironically, he says that if any free-trade zones are opened in the Soviet Union they will be in areas near China. One possibility is Blagoveshchensk, across the border from Aihui in Manchuria. &quot;It could be a textile mill where we would employ Chinese workers,&quot; he says.    While Mr. Gorbachev pushed through legislation permitting joint ventures, Western analysts say the idea still faces powerful opposition. &quot;It isn't just the xenophobia; the Chinese are also xenophobic,&quot; says one West German banker with long experience here. &quot;The image of thousands of capitalist businessmen crawling around Russia is strongly distasteful to them. Superpowers don't beg their political competitors to show them the way to modernization. They're very proud of their industry even if it's a mess.&quot;    ---   Barry Kramer contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>