<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0019 </DOCNO><HL> U.S., Japan to Adjust Rates to Aid Dollar;Bonds Surge, Currency Improves Slightly---Fed's Tightening of Credit,Nakasone's Vow to ActSignal New Coordination---By Paul Blustein and Art PineStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. and Japan disclosed that they are moving jointly to adjust their interest rates in order to stem the dollar's decline.    Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker told a House subcommittee that the Fed has tightened credit slightly in recent days, sending the clearest signal yet that the central bank stands ready to defend the U.S. currency with higher interest rates.    Meanwhile, Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone told President Reagan he has ordered Japan's Finance Ministry and central bank to cut short-term interest rates. He didn't specify when or how large the cut might be, but he said the process already has begun. Nevertheless, neither the Fed nor the Bank of Japan was expected to alter its discount rate, the rate charged on loans to banks.    The double-barreled move was designed to help stop the dollar's slide by making it relatively more attractive for investors to hold dollars. Policy makers in both countries believe that the dollar has fallen enough, and that a further decline would cripple Japan's economy and dash hopes of alleviating global trade imbalances.    The dollar's drop has made Japanese products more expensive here, helping to improve the competitiveness of U.S. products. But the dollar's continued weakness is stirring fears of recession in Japan and of renewed inflation in the U.S. As a result, both countries are seeking to stabilize their currencies at current levels.    Mr. Volcker, in response to a reporter's question, said he &quot;absolutely and fundamentally&quot; believes the dollar shouldn't fall further. &quot;Cross my heart, hope to die,&quot; the Fed chairman added, alluding to financial-market concerns that the U.S. isn't serious about stabilizing the dollar.    The Fed's credit-tightening move may eventually lead to lower long-term interest rates for American consumers, home buyers and businesses if the action convinces Wall Street that the dollar will finally bottom out.    Although Mr. Volcker had suggested in early April that Japan reduce its rates to help avert the necessity for the U.S. to raise rates more sharply, Japan didn't agree to go along until this week. In the meantime, the Fed had been nudging U.S. rates up on its own, reflecting an apprehension that continuing loss of confidence and fear of new U.S. inflation was pushing the dollar down too rapidly.    Finance ministers from the seven largest industrial nations discussed the possibility of cooperative interest-rate changes at an April 8 meeting in Washington, but didn't reach any agreement. Japan finally responded after the Fed began tightening credit.    It wasn't immediately known whether West Germany would join Japan in cutting its interest rates. West German officials said during the April 8 meeting that they were sympathetic to such a move, but recently they have shown some resistance.    The U.S. has been prodding both Tokyo and Bonn to speed their nations' economic growth so they can absorb more of the world's exports and reduce the global trade imbalances. The U.S. has a $170 billion trade deficit, while Japan and West Germany have sizable surpluses.    Currency traders' concern over these imbalances has been a major factor in pushing down the dollar. Some analysts fear that unless these imbalances are corrected soon, a global recession will result.    Mr. Nakasone, who is visiting Washington this week, also reiterated his government's plans to enact a $34.5 billion economic stimulus package to help spur domestic demand. But the Japanese leader apparently supplied few new details about the package. U.S. officials have been hoping to review the specific elements of the plan to see what the effect might be; previous Japanese economic packages have proved far less effective than initially touted.    U.S. officials welcomed the announcement of Japan's planned interest-rate reductions. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said President Reagan told Mr. Nakasone: &quot;I'm very pleased to hear your comments.&quot;    And Treasury Secretary James Baker was quoted as having told Mr. Nakasone: &quot;The world is watching closely to see if the world's two largest economies can continue to act in concert.&quot; Mr. Baker has long been pushing for industrial countries to coordinate their economic policies more closely.    U.S. and Japanese officials said that despite the announcement of the Japanese interest-rate cuts, neither the Fed nor the Bank of Japan was expected to alter its discount rate. Instead, the Bank of Japan will try to push down money-market rates by providing reserves to banks more freely. The Fed, meanwhile, has been doing the opposite -- a procedure that Mr. Volcker referred to as &quot;snugging.&quot;    One reason for trying to influence money-market rates instead of cutting the discount rate is that Japan's discount rate already is a low 2.5%, while money-market rates there are just below 5%, providing plenty of room for reduction.    Mr. Volcker's comments came in testimony before the House Banking Committee's Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee. The Fed chief clearly was determined to spell out the central bank's current credit policy, something he usually tries to keep secret except at times when the financial markets appear to need reassurance about the Fed's intentions.    In response to a lawmaker's question about the recent volatility of interest rates, Mr. Volcker blamed concern in the markets about the dollar and the rising protectionist mood in Congress. He then added: &quot;In recent days, we've been a bit more cautious at the Federal Reserve in providing reserves&quot; to the banking system. &quot;We could be described as having a somewhat less accommodative policy -- a slight snugging approach, to use some of the market jargon.&quot;    That statement confirmed what many traders already had concluded about Fed policy based on the recent uptick in the federal funds rate, the overnight lending rate that banks charge each other, which the Fed is able to closely control.    By publicly confirming that the Fed has been tightening, Mr. Volcker sought to convince the markets that the central bank is determined to shore up the dollar. The move, he said, was &quot;consistent&quot; with his previous statements that the Fed's credit grip might be affected by the need to maintain stability in foreign-exchange markets.    He also said worries in the markets about inflation had played a role in the Fed's action. &quot;There is always the question of inflationary psychology, inflationary developments,&quot; he said, adding that the markets benefit from the sense that &quot;someone is minding the store on the inflation front.&quot;    Some analysts have questioned whether the Fed would actually raise interest rates given the economy's persistent weakness. And some have questioned whether the Fed had tightened in recent days, or whether interest rates were edging up for other reasons.    Asked by a reporter why he was disclosing the Fed's move, Mr. Volcker replied with tongue in cheek: &quot;We are always open and frank.&quot;    In other developments yesterday, President Reagan told Mr. Nakasone he would like to lift the tariffs he imposed in retaliation for Japan's apparent failure to fulfill its commitments under last summer's semiconductor trade accord. But Mr. Reagan said he will wait to see hard evidence that Japanese companies are complying.    U.S. officials said negotiators from the two countries would meet at least twice over the next few weeks to discuss the continuing dispute. No decision is likely, however, until Washington has a chance to examine sales figures for April, which probably won't be available until mid-May, the officials said.    Washington wants Japanese firms to stop &quot;dumping&quot; in third-country markets -- that is, selling their microchips below the cost of production or their fair-market value at home. And it wants Tokyo to allow U.S. producers a larger share of the Japanese market for semiconductors.    Japanese officials said senior officials of both countries would try to reach agreement on what it would take for the U.S. to lift the sanctions. It wasn't immediately clear, however, whether the officials would be able to complete their work by today. The prime minister is scheduled to leave Washington tomorrow.    During the Reagan-Nakasone meeting, Japan also rejected, at least for the moment, U.S. demands that it buy more coal from American producers. Japanese officials said Mr. Nakasone pointed out that U.S. coal still costs substantially more than coal from other countries.    Japan also reiterated plans to provide some $20 billion in new loans and aid to Third World countries over the next three years to help relieve their debt burdens. The money will be channeled through multilateral financial institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, and through Japan's export-credit agency and commodity sales programs.    (See related story: &quot;Biggest Gain in 10 Months Is Posted by U.S. Issues; Stock Prices Also Rally&quot; -- WSJ May 1, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>