<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Dire Straits:U.S. Ponders ResponseTo Any Iran ReprisalsFor Shielding Tankers---As Tehran's Rhetoric Rises,Washington Wants to BeFirm but Not Provocative---'Life Is Full of Lousy Options'---By Tim Carrington and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The idea seems simple enough: Paint over the name on the oil tanker Umm Al-Aish and rename it Surf City.    Ten other Kuwaiti tankers have been similarly Americanized. Possibly beginning as early as today, they will welcome aboard U.S. skippers, hoist American flags, and rendezvous with U.S. warships that will shield them from Iranian attack as they pick up new loads of Persian Gulf oil.    This change of maritime identity was a Kuwaiti idea, adopted by the Reagan administration largely to rebuild American credibility in the gulf after the Iran-Contra affair. But today, on the eve of its launch, the seemingly simple escort plan has mushroomed into one of the riskiest, highest-profile tests of American resolve the Reagan administration has undertaken.    The plan already has stirred dangerous passions inside Iran, and terrorism or other violence against the U.S. may well result. Washington has some ideas about how to respond, but Iran isn't another Libya or Grenada that would be easy to hit and forget. Moreover, any armed clash could close the very strategic &quot;opening&quot; to Tehran that enticed the Reagan administration into the Iran-Contra affair in the first place and perhaps even draw the Soviet Union further into the gulf.    Administration officials don't play down the importance the tanker plan has taken on. &quot;The initiative . . . has to show that we're willing when conditions dictate to accept the burdens of a superpower,&quot; says Richard Armitage, the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs.    Judith Kipper, a Middle East scholar at the Brookings Institution, summarizes the challenge more bluntly: &quot;If we blow this one, we won't be a superpower anymore.&quot;    With the U.S. reputation in the Middle East battered by the Iranian arms fiasco and the earlier failed peacekeeping mission in Lebanon, even the administration's critics don't want the U.S. to back away.    Yet the plan is fraught with risk; U.S. ships face the threat of attack from Iranian mines and speedboats that are hard to detect. In addition, some officials worry about terrorist attacks against U.S. business and military outposts in the gulf area. Most observers agree that if Iran chooses to attack American ships, the U.S. will feel compelled to respond.    &quot;You must retaliate or you have no credibility, even though by retaliating you are drawn further in and by retaliating you are taking actions we studiously avoided earlier in the administration,&quot; says Nicholas Veliotes, who was the assistant secretary of state for the Middle East in the first years of the Reagan presidency.    Yesterday, the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to order Iran and Iraq to observe a cease-fire in their nearly seven-year-old war. But Iran has already indicated that it is unlikely to honor the cease-fire.    Despite administration denials that the U.S. has abandoned its carefully crafted neutrality in the Iran-Iraq war, the escorts of Kuwaiti tankers look like a significant shift toward Iraq. Kuwait technically isn't involved in the war, but it is perhaps Iraq's closest ally. It has given billions of dollars in war aid. And a visitor to Iraq can see miles-long convoys of trucks carrying in military equipment from Kuwaiti ports that Iraq uses extensively to receive war materiel.    Iran hits tankers in the gulf to retaliate for Iraq's frequent attacks on Iranian ships and oil installations, and the Iranians have considered their ability to hit Kuwaiti tankers the most effective way they can strike back at Iraq.    Already there are ominous signs that Iran is angered by the much-publicized U.S. decision to help a country that supports Iraq. American officials believe the recent kidnapping of American journalist Charles Glass in Lebanon was carried out by pro-Iranian groups reacting to the growing American presence in the gulf. In the past three weeks, Iranian speedboats have attacked an American-chartered tanker and a French cargo ship.    How did the administration get into this awkward position of protecting tankers from Iranian attack less than a year after it was selling weapons to Iran?    The chain of events began last December, when Kuwait, concerned over an escalation of Iranian attacks on gulf shipping, asked the U.S. Coast Guard to give some Kuwaiti tankers American flags and protection. The request, which arrived as the Reagan administration was in chaos over the revelation of its arms sales to Iran, languished for weeks.    But the matter took on urgency in January, when the U.S. discovered that the Kuwaitis were discussing a similar plan with the Soviets. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, always cautious in committing American forces to trouble spots, strongly backed an increased naval presence in the gulf to head off the Soviets. The newly installed national security adviser, Frank Carlucci, and his aide for the Middle East, Robert Oakley, also advocated the plan as a way to restore American credibility in the region.    The internal support was so strong, in fact, that the administration urged Kuwait to let the U.S. protect all 11 tankers it wanted to re-flag and to keep the Soviets out. The U.S. quietly enlisted Saudi Arabia to help persuade the reluctant Kuwaitis to trust the Reagan administration. In March Kuwait agreed to fly American flags on all 11 tankers -- but then kept the Soviets in the game anyway by chartering three more Soviet ships. It isn't clear what steps the Soviets will take to protect these ships.    Now it is largely up to Iran to determine whether the operation results in a crisis or a quiet American success. Iran has carefully avoided directly challenging the U.S. in the past, and many in Tehran will be loath to do so now because they still think Iran needs a more constructive long-term relationship with the U.S. And initially Iran's response to the American plan to escort Kuwaiti tankers was surprisingly low-key.    But Iran's attitude seemed to change after an errant Iraqi missile hit the USS Stark in the gulf this spring and focused world-wide attention on the expanding American presence in the Persian Gulf. Iranian leaders may have concluded that &quot;with all this hype they've got to respond,&quot; says Gary Sick, who followed Iran in the Carter White House.    So Iranian rhetoric has turned vituperative, and American officials worry that the rhetoric itself could lead to violence. Iranian officials may feel compelled to order some kind of attack to back up their heated rhetoric and save credibility. Or zealous Iranians and their Shiite Moslem admirers elsewhere in the Persian Gulf could read the rhetoric as tacit authorization for attacks on American targets.    Perhaps more ominous, Iran's complex internal political struggles may inspire some Iranian faction to provoke the U.S. Iran's rulers appear to be split between a camp led by Parliament Speaker Ali Akhbar Hashemi Rafsanjani that wants an opening to the West and a group that is fervently opposed to dealing with the West. The inspirational leader of the anti-Western camp is believed to be Mehdi Hashemi, a protege of Ayatollah Hussein Ali Montazeri, the man designated to succeed Ayatollah Khomeini as Iran's spiritual leader. Mr. Hashemi is believed to be in jail for excesses in his work as leader of an organization devoted to helping revolutionaries abroad, but his network of followers is believed to be functioning.    The rivalry between these camps &quot;is still playing out throughout the region,&quot; says Robin Wright, a scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace who has written extensively about Iran. Now, she fears, the hard-line camp may want to pull off an attack to provoke a confrontation with the U.S. that would end talk of an American-Iranian rapprochement and disgrace officials who want one.    Government and private analysts alike don't think the Iranians are likely to mount a frontal attack, because that would invite large-scale retaliation. &quot;They'll have to draw a line between not wanting to spread the war and doing something,&quot; says Ruhollah Ramazani, an Iranian-born scholar at the University of Virginia.    So terrorism or an indirect attack that can't be traced to Iran is considered more likely. American intelligence analysts have sketched out a list of sites the Iranians may see as targets for terrorist strikes, including a port the U.S. Navy uses in Bahrain, Kuwaiti military facilities, Arabian-American Oil Co. in Saudi Arabia and U.S. embassies.    The murky risks leave America's military leadership unenthusiastic about the gulf mission. &quot;Life is sometimes full of lousy options,&quot; says retired Gen. P.X. Kelley, who was the Marine Corps commandant and a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff when the decision was made.    Moreover, the Joint Chiefs had to balance the need to send in added forces to shield the tankers with the desire not to send in so much firepower as to be provocative. &quot;We don't want to appear to be in a position of doing a military, overpowering act,&quot; says Adm. Carlisle Trost, the chief of naval operations. He says that by augmenting the existing Mideast task force with three warships, protection should be adequate. But he adds, &quot;That doesn't mean that we have a no-risk situation.&quot;    The Navy, in fact, appears to be least equipped to defend itself against the unconventional military threats the Iranians are most likely to use. Mines, which the Iranians could float in the path of tankers, could damage or even sink a frigate or a destroyer. The Navy isn't taking minesweeper ships to the gulf, but officials say they will call in a fleet of minesweeper helicopters if the Iranians lay new mines. The U.S. also may ask Saudi Arabia to use two of its minesweepers to help patrol the area. So far, a dozen mines have floated up in the northern gulf near Kuwait.    Swedish-made fiberglass boats employed by the Iranian revolutionary guard also pose a tough threat. The craft can travel at 40 or 50 knots and often hide behind buoys or rigs in the gulf and launch sudden attacks. They elude radar detection because of their small size and are hard to gun down because of their speed. Iran has about 100 of the speedboats, based at as many as five locations along the gulf coast. Many of the boats are equipped with rocket-propelled grenades. An attack by two or three simultaneously would be particularly difficult to counter, according to a retired naval officer formerly assigned to the Mideast force.    The heaviest Iranian threat, but the least likely to be used, is the Chinese-made Silkworm missile, a high-speed anti-ship weapon with a 1,100-pound warhead. &quot;That particular weapon system could close the Straits of Hormuz tomorrow,&quot; says Sen. John Warner, a Virginia Republican who visited the gulf last month.    U.S. ships carry Phalanx Gatling guns and Standard missiles to intercept the Silkworm. Some U.S. officials say the Silkworm lacks the precise guidance system of the other systems, such as French-made Exocet missile, which struck the USS Stark in May in an unintended Iraqi attack that killed 37 crewmen.    The chief reply to Iranian threats is the promise of U.S. retaliation. &quot;If the Iranians strike militarily at the U.S., we will respond, at a time and place of the president's choosing,&quot; says the Pentagon's Mr. Armitage.    One approach military planners contemplate is to target Iran's revolutionary guard but not the army or government. Theoretically, this approach could split the Tehran military regime. Moreover, by going after the guard, the U.S. would hit the force most likely to damage American ships and prestige, one official argues.    But analysts agree that the U.S. would be constrained in reacting. A tit-for-tat response would probably spur Tehran to renewed outbursts. A more decisive strike would risk drawing in the Soviet Union on the side of Iran, despite Iran's historical reluctance to move too close to its big Soviet neighbor.    Any kind of a reprisal attack may end for years the Reagan administration's dream of reestablishing a constructive relationship with Iran, a strategically important country with huge oil and gas reserves and a population larger than all the gulf Arab countries combined. &quot;If there's an incident, I'd say there's an excellent chance the U.S. will respond with air strikes against Iran,&quot; says James Bill, an Iran expert at the College of William and Mary. &quot;And that would be a disaster, a strategic disaster.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>