<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's Own Words on Iran-Contra ScandalYield No Clear Picture of What He Really Knew---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan's own chief of staff, former Sen. Howard Baker, set the standard for investigating White House scandals when he asked during the Watergate hearings: &quot;What did the president know and when did he know it?&quot;    Congress now is boring in on that same basic question during hearings on the Iran-Contra affair. Eventually, investigators may get a clear picture of President Reagan's role and knowledge -- but they won't find it in the president's own words so far.    This week, Lt. Col. Oliver North, a former National Security Council aide who was at the center of the affair, testified that he thought President Reagan had approved his activities, but that later the president told him he didn't know of the diversion of Iranian arms-sale profits to Nicaragua's Contras. Col. North said he sent his superiors several memos requesting presidential approval for the diversion, but doesn't know whether President Reagan ever saw them.    Next week, congressional investigators will continue focusing on the president's involvement when they question former National Security Adviser John Poindexter.    A look back at Mr. Reagan's own public statements since the affair became public last fall indicates that many of the president's comments have been uncertain, misleading or false. He has revised or contradicted most of his early comments, and sometimes his version of events has shifted within the course of a single day.    Here are some questions about three aspects of the Iran-Contra scandal -- arms to Iran, aid to the Contras and presidential style -- and comments Mr. Reagan has made at various times over the past eight months in addressing the issues:    Arms and Hostage Trades   Was the U.S. involved in a secret arms deal with Iran?    The speculation . . . to us has no foundation.    -- Nov. 6   During the course of our secret discussions, I authorized the transfer of small amounts of defensive weapons and spare parts for defensive systems to Iran.    -- Nov. 13   Did the U.S. trade arms for hostages?    We did not -- repeat, did not -- trade weapons or anything else for hostages, nor will we.    -- Nov. 13   Let me just say it was not my intent to do business with Khomeini, to trade weapons for hostages, nor to undercut our policy of anti-terrorism.    -- Dec. 6   A few months ago I told the American people I did not trade arms for hostages. My heart and my best intentions still tell me that's true, but the facts and the evidence tell me it is not.    -- March 4   It sort of settled down to just trading arms for hostages, and that's a little like paying ransom to a kidnapper.    -- March 26   Did the administration approve ransom payments to free hostages?    There's no way that you can discuss ransom or do (terrorists) any favor which makes taking hostages profitable.    -- March 19   I'm having some trouble remembering (whether he approved a $2 million bribe and ransom plan). But then I want to tell you that there were so many things going on and so many reports and some of this was during that time that I was laid up in the hospital and so forth. . . . But it's possible that what we're talking about was use of money to pay people and hire individuals who could effect a rescue of our people there. And I've never thought of that as ransom.    -- May 15   Who was the U.S. dealing with in Iran?    It was an opportunity presented by people evidently of some substance in the Iranian government. . . .    -- March 19   But never -- and this has been, I'm afraid, misportrayed to many -- we were not doing business with the Khomeini's government.    -- June 11   Was the Iran initiative a mistake?    I don't think a mistake was made.    -- Nov. 19   I am not going to disavow it. I do not think it was a mistake.    -- Nov. 26   We did not achieve what we wished, and serious mistakes were made in trying to do so.    -- Jan. 27   It was a mistake.    -- March 4   Was another country involved in helping the administration send weapons to Iran?    We, as I say, have had nothing to do with other countries or their shipment of arms or doing what they're doing.    --Nov. 19, about 8:15 p.m.    There was a third country involved in our secret project with Iran.    --Nov. 19, about 9:30 p.m.    Aiding the Contras   What did President Reagan know of solicitation of private aid for the Contras?    I don't know how that money was to be used and I have no knowledge that there was ever any solicitation by our people with these people.    -- May 5   As a matter of fact, I was very definitely involved in the decisions about support to the freedom fighters. It was my idea to begin with.    -- May 15   I didn't know who they (private contributors) were, and I never asked, and I never asked how they did it.    -- May 27   Did President Reagan personally ask third countries to aid the Contras?    If I were going to answer any questions, I'd say no.    -- May 12   I have not myself directly ever engaged in soliciting from other countries, but I know that this wasn't even prohibited by the Boland Amendment (restricting American aid to the Contras).    -- May 15   Exactly what does President Reagan know about the diversion of Iranian arms sales funds to the Contras?    And the only thing that, apparently, from what has been learned so far in these investigations, that, evidently, those with this bridge loan, evidently, put a retail price instead of our wholesale price for the weapons. And thus, there was more money paid than we had asked for. Now, that's where my knowledge ends.    -- April 28   As a matter of fact I have, over and over again, told the Washington press corps and told the leaders of Congress that the only thing about which I have no answer is the apparent funds in the Swiss bank accounts supposedly that came from our shipment of arms to Iran.    -- May 19   Style and Personnel   Did everyone in the administration support the policy?    Yes (when asked whether Secretary of State George Shultz and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger supported the policy). . . . We have all been working together.    -- Nov. 7   In the case of the Iranian arms sale matter, both Secretary Shultz and Secretary Weinberger advised me strongly not to pursue the initiative.    -- March 14   Does the president support the congressional investigations?    I, more than anyone, want these investigations to proceed so that I know, and will know, what has been going on that had been kept from me in various covert operations.    -- March 19   I've never heard so much hearsay in all my life that wouldn't be permitted in a courtroom for a minute and a half, and it's taken as gospel by those who want to go further with this.    -- June 16   What is the president's opinion of the aides who carried out the Iran-Contra policies?    Lt. Col North . . . is a national hero.    -- Nov. 26   John Poindexter is an honorable man.    -- April 28   As disappointed as I may be in some who served me, I'm still the one who must answer to the American people for this behavior.    -- March 4   ---   Key Dates in the Iran-Contra Affair    Nov. 3, 1986 A Lebanese magazine, Al Shiraa, reports that the U.S. had been supplying arms to Iran and that former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane visited Tehran.    Nov. 13, 1986 President Reagan makes television speech confirming arms sales.    Nov. 25, 1986 President Reagan fires Col. North and announces resignation of National Security Adviser John Poindexter; Attorney Gen. Edwin Meese discloses that funds from the Iran arms sales were diverted to the Nicaraguan Contras.    Dec. 2, 1986 Reagan administration asks that an independent counsel be appointed to investigate the Iran-Contra affair.    Feb. 26, 1986 The Tower Commission releases its report criticizing the White House for mismanagement in the Iran arms-sale policy.    May 5, 1987 Congressional hearings on Iran-Contra affair begin. </TEXT></DOC>