<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861218-0132 </DOCNO><HL> America's Labor Federation Turns 100---Public Sector Sees Organized Labor Boom---By Mark A. de Bernardo</HL><DD> 12/18/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   While the decline of organized labor has been thoroughly documented and reported, what often is overlooked is that it would be much more devastating but for increases in unionized federal, state, and local government workers. This surge in public-sector unionization will have major -- and perhaps troubling -- ramifications.    The percentage of the work force that is unionized has been cut in half in the past 40 years -- from 35% in 1945 to 23% in 1980 and less than 18% in 1985 -- and is now comparable with that of the early 1930s.    In a 10-year period ended in 1983 -- the most recent years for which individual union statistics are available -- the United Steel Workers lost 44% of their members, the United Mine Workers 42%, and the United Auto Workers 32%. But during the same period, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, the largest public-sector union and an AFL-CIO affiliate, increased its membership by 66%, or 381,000 members.    Public-sector unions are becoming an increasingly large part of the AFL-CIO in particular. In fact, at some point in the not-too-distant future, government workers are likely to outnumber private-sector workers among its rank-and-file.    In 1960, only one in 20 union members was a government worker; today, one in three is. The non-government unions are running a race in reverse.    Why is one sector of the union movement -- government employees -- growing, while virtually all other sectors decline?    The answer is that government managers generally offer little or no resistance to union-organizing drives. While private employers are more sophisticated and more successful at resisting unions today, the country's largest employers -- governments -- surrender unconditionally. Governments have a monopoly; they do not feel the need to be competitive.    Public officials, generally facing elections and reelections, often believe that government cannot in any way appear to &quot;oppose&quot; collective bargaining. This leaves the workers themselves at a significant disadvantage. Facing pressures and persuasiveness from one side and neutrality and silence from the other, is their choice regarding union representation truly an informed one? As non-union employees, it is more likely that government workers could have flexible work rules and a merit system for promotions and raises. They would also not have to pay union dues or support union political goals.    And what about all of us as citizens? Are we not entitled to have our government, as management, forcefully represented in the collective-bargaining process? Ultimately the taxpayers pay the bills -- and we may be paying more to get less when state, local, and federal government entities leave the door wide open and uncontested for the union organizer.    As union membership in the private sector continues to decrease, and union leaders increasingly admit that they have to look to government for help, the role of unionized officials -- particularly at those agencies enforcing labor laws -- becomes more important. Public-sector union leaders, particularly if their members constitute a majority of union members, might gain the leverage to dictate not only AFL-CIO policy, but in many cases government policy. The risk is that the governed will lose much of the authority they exercise over those who govern.    Bureaucrats favorable to unions could decide, for example, which employers are to be inspected, how big their fines will be, and which administrative appeals will be reviewed.    It is not just what is done on the part of government officials, but also what is not done. Recent congressional hearings on the Hobbs Act's federal anti-extortion provisions produced numerous examples -- including Lancaster, Pa., Port Huron, Mich., and Maui, Hawaii -- of the reluctance of unionized police forces to enforce the law against violent strikers because of their sympathy with the strikers' cause. By their acquiescence, they not only failed to prevent the injury of management and replacement workers and the destruction of property, they in effect encouraged it. This is union &quot;brotherhood&quot; at its worst.    There are similar risks of unionized government entities acting in alliance with private-sector unions embroiled in a labor dispute to deny or disrupt fundamental government services to the employer involved -- including anything from firefighting to trash collection. If the union loyalties of government workers transcend the public good, we all suffer.    Furthermore, increased government unionization brings with it more strike activity. Strikes against the public interest, including disruption of such vital services as police protection and public education, are often illegal but still carried out. The best known example is the Professional Air Traffic Controllers' strike in 1981 -- one that threatened public safety and was conducted in clear defiance of the law. The government's response was decisive and effective, but such reactions remain very uncommon.    One way around the problems created by the increasing unionization of government workers would involve more privatization of government services. If more and more government functions -- such as custodial services and public transportation -- are contracted out to the private sector, taxpayers will also save money.    A private sector that is largely non-union and a government that is largely unionized will also have fundamental philosophical differences over the size of government. While the sentiment in the U.S. generally favors less government, it is in the interests of public-sector unions that we have more government. This is conflict we don't need at a time of increasing concern about deficits and the high cost of government.    ---   Mr. de Bernardo, an attorney, is manager of the labor-law program at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. </TEXT></DOC>