<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0155 </DOCNO><HL> Portugal's Once-Ravaged Economy Is Now Booming---Common Market Membership,Political Stability Give Lift to U.S. Ally---By Nicholas BrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BARREIRO, Portugal  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Communist-dominated General Confederation of Workers in this grimy industrial city found itself in an awkward position recently. Not so long ago, it had campaigned successfully for the state to take control of a fibers maker, Fibras Sinteticas de Portugal S.A.    Now, the state was turning around and offering to sell workers shares in the enterprise. That smacked of capitalism. On the other hand, the terms -- including a 60% discount from market rates -- meant easy profit for takers.    &quot;Workers don't have much experience in this sort of thing,&quot; says Helder Mendes, a union delegate at the plant. &quot;But in the medium term it's a way of earning a bit of money. We're not in a true socialist system, so we opted to buy.&quot;    Indeed, all but two of the company's 438 employees, Communist union leaders included, snapped up all the shares they were allowed. &quot;I could have sold a lot more,&quot; says Joao Dotti, the managing director, who feared the issue would flop but is now considering a second one.    The operation in February was tiny, involving only a 2.6% stake in a little-known firm. But it symbolized an economic shift whose implications are huge, not just for Portugal but for the entire Atlantic alliance.    Thirteen years after a military uprising thrust this Indiana-sized nation of 10 million people from right-wing dictatorship to the brink of left-wing totalitarianism, Portugal is breaking out of the economic shackles created by half a century of political mismanagement.    Strikes are becoming less frequent, company profits are improving, foreign investment is pouring in and the tiny stock market is booming. Membership in the European Community, which Portugal joined 16 months ago, and growing political stability have provided the impetus for an unprecedented leap forward. The result: Portugal is at last poised to become a modern Western-style economy.    &quot;In the last two years, more has happened than in the last 20 or the last 50,&quot; says Jaime d'Almeida, managing director of an investment banking company called MDM. Adds Pedro Caldeira, a stockbroker: &quot;The whole economy is different with Portugal in the European Community. Everything is moving. You can see new companies being created every day.&quot;    To be sure, Portugal has a long way to go. Its agriculture is antiquated, much of its industry is uncompetitive, and a once far-flung empire has long disappeared. The economy is also hobbled by obsolete telecommunications, an entrenched bureaucracy, a shortage of managers and a huge public-sector spending deficit. Poverty is widespread; in Lisbon, ultra-modern hotels and office buildings compete for space with shantytowns and slums.    But the mood has changed dramatically in the last couple of years. The country has moved steadily toward the center since the 1974 revolution, and now that its economy is being liberalized, a new sense of purpose is in the air. &quot;There's an effort of modernization that is going to pass through all sectors of the economy,&quot; says Raul Capela, the chairman of Bank Totta andamp; Acores.    Other Western nations have every reason to welcome Portugal's recovery. Linked by close historical and cultural ties to the rest of Europe, it's a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, occupying a strategic position on the edge of the Iberian Peninsula. A recently renewed bilateral agreement with the U.S. gives American planes the use of key mid-Atlantic refueling facilities in the Azores. Portugal's modernization will cement ties with its allies further.    &quot;Since 1974, Portugal has completed a transformation whose final result is its political, economic and strategic integration in Europe,&quot; says Philippe Moreau-Defarges, European affairs analyst at the French Institute for Foreign Relations.    Even present political uncertainties don't seem to trouble the picture. Elections on July 19 could for the first time since 1974 provide a government capable of surviving to the end of its four-year term.    Analysts expect Prime Minister Anibal Cavaco Silva's Social Democratic Party to improve its 30% share of the vote and possibly, with conservative allies, even to emerge with a parliamentary majority. The only likely alternative would be a minority coalition led by the Socialists, Portugal's second-ranking party that also favors free-market economics.    For a nation that four years ago was teetering on the brink of economic disaster, it's a welcome turnaround. In the early 1980s, as Portugal lurched from one coalition government to another, a balance-of-payments crisis forced it to sell gold from its reserves and rush to the International Monetary Fund for help.    The cure, a sharp reduction in workers' purchasing power in 1983 and 1984, was bitter but helped reduce inflation from a peak of more than 30% and restore stable growth. Now, Portugal has a balance-of-payments surplus and is heading for economic growth of between 4% and 5% this year, well above the West European average. Inflation is expected to fall to 9%, from 11.7% last year.    The man credited with administering the cure is Mario Soares, prime minister in three governments and president since February 1986. A pragmatist, he skillfully maneuvered to reduce Communist influence, initiate economic liberalization and lead Portugal into the Common Market.    Mr. Soares, who will be visiting the U.S. next week for talks with President Reagan and business leaders, says Portugal needs a period of tranquility to tap its productive energies. &quot;I want to make my country a modern country, in the vanguard of Europe,&quot; he said in an interview.    As the economy expands, moves are under way to deregulate financial markets and encourage investment by foreign firms. A state monopoly on banking ended in 1984; a plan to revise the Marxist-influenced constitution would enable the gradual return to the private sector of all the banks, insurance companies, chemical firms, steelworks, shipyards, and other concerns nationalized in 1975.    In the meantime, with Common Market aid, new highways are being built and telecommunications are being improved. After three years of decline, fixed capital investment rose 9.5% last year and a similar increase is slated for 1987.    Even leftist strongholds like Barreiro are feeling the pull of economic liberalization. Barreiro gained a reputation for Communist agitation in the early days of revolution, and Communist flags still fly in its narrow, shabby streets. Unemployment in the area is about 20%, double the national average, and rising.    For all the bad news, Fibras Sinteticas de Portugal -- the company that recently sold shares to workers -- is a beacon of light in the city of 60,000. The plant, built and run with the help of Japanese technicians, is clean and modern.    It was created in 1973 by a now-nationalized industrial concern and Mitsubishi Rayon Co. of Japan, which retains a 15% stake alongside the state's 81%. Though the joint venture went through tough times, it has recently been increasing output -- and is making a profit. A year ago, it obtained a listing on Lisbon's over-the-counter market.    For employees, the shares they bought have proved a financial boon. Priced at $23.75 -- a 60% discount from the market price of about $59 -- they've since gained to more than $68. The business community views the sale as an important test of public attitudes, and a harbinger of denationalization. &quot;It was a watershed,&quot; says Alex Dyce, the general manager of Barclays Bank PLC's operations in Portugal.    If entrepreneurship is making headway in places like Barreiro, it's flourishing elsewhere. In Oporto, a group of young engineers has developed an advanced computer-guided cutting system for clothes manufacturers. At nearby Vizela, a textiles firm has branched out into high-technology farming. At Marinha Grande, a firm making industrial molds has captured a large slice of the U.S. market.    Foreign investment, though small by comparison with neighboring Spain, nearly tripled in the first quarter of this year from the same 1986 period to $67 million. But if the Portuguese welcome outside help, they've come to realize they ultimately can depend only on themselves.    &quot;Before the revolution, we looked to emigration and to (Portuguese colonies in) Africa for prosperity,&quot; says Mr. Caldeira, the stockbroker. &quot;Now we are looking for our own country, and we're beginning to understand that we must take our future here.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>