<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880901-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   WALESA APPEALED to workers across Poland to end their strikes.    The Solidarity founder, who conferred for three hours with officials of the Communist government in Warsaw, urged the striking workers to settle local grievances with management in an effort to end what is considered the country's worst wave of labor unrest in seven years. The meeting between Walesa and the government was the first since 1982. He said the national issues of guaranteeing trade union pluralism and legalizing the outlawed Solidarity union would be addressed at future discussions promised by the government, an aide said.    A Solidarity official said that Walesa was holding talks with striking workers at Gdansk's Lenin shipyard and that the strike there could end soon.    ---   A JETLINER CRASHED at Dallas-Fort Worth Airport, killing 13 people.    The Delta Air Lines plane, carrying at least 107 people, burst into flames as it crashed on takeoff, officials said. Many of the survivors scrambled to safety after the 15-year-old Boeing 727 broke open. The airline said about 30 people were injured. The flight originated in Jackson, Miss., and was bound for Salt Lake City when the incident occurred. The cause of the crash wasn't known, but an official cited a possible engine problem.    A Chinese jet with 89 people aboard skidded off the runway while landing in heavy rain in Hong Kong and crashed into the sea. Seven people died.    ---   Aides to Jesse Jackson said Dukakis staffers have told the civil-rights activist to avoid campaigning in several states considered to be the base for traditional Democratic blue-collar voters. The Democratic presidential nominee's campaign aides denied making any such demand of Jackson.    ---   The Kremlin confirmed that Soviet-based fighter aircraft were used recently to aid Afghan ground troops as they battled anti-government rebels. In Kabul, Afghanistan's foreign minister reportedly proposed a meeting with his counterparts from Pakistan, the Soviet Union and the U.S. to discuss peace efforts.    ---   The U.S. threatened to suspend or terminate the 1972 ABM treaty unless the Soviet Union dismantles a radar complex in Siberia. The Reagan administration, which issued its statement at arms talks in Geneva, contends that the Krasnoyarsk radar installation violates the missile accord.    ---   South African prison officials moved black nationalist Nelson Mandela to a private clinic from Cape Town's state-run Tygerberg hospital, where he was being treated for tuberculosis. It wasn't clear whether the 70-year-old Mandela, who has been serving a life jail sentence, remained a government prisoner at the clinic.    ---   Burma's government warned demonstrators who have taken over state offices to leave them immediately &quot;or face the consequences.&quot; Soldiers, meanwhile, conducted house-to-house searches for striking engineers who closed Burma's largest oil refinery. The engineers and other workers have gone on strike to press for democracy.    ---   Perez de Cuellar failed to arrange a meeting between the chief diplomats of Iran and Iraq as peace talks in Geneva remained stalled for a fifth consecutive day. The U.N. secretary-general's efforts came as Tehran called for volunteers for the war front despite a cease-fire that began Aug. 20.    ---   Researchers in Utah reported new evidence that genes play an essential role in the development of colon and rectal cancers. The scientists said in this week's New England Journal of Medicine that about one-third of white Americans inherit one or more genes that make them susceptible to the cancers.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir has called for changing Israeli policy to permit civilians and soldiers to open fire on Arab stonethrowers without shooting warning rounds first, an aide said. In Geneva, PLO leader Arafat pledged that the uprising in the Israeli-occupied territories, which began last December, would continue &quot;until victory.&quot;    ---   Chile's President Pinochet called for support from opposition leaders after violent protests over his nomination as the only candidate in an October presidential referendum. Anti-government protesters had clashed with riot police in Santiago and other cities Tuesday. Three people were killed and more than 800 were arrested.    ---   The Census Bureau reported that the poverty rate was nearly unchanged last year at 13.5%, but poverty among blacks increased substantially. The bureau also said that the inflation-adjusted median income of all families grew for the fifth year in a row, finally topping a 1973 record.    ---   Chinese government officials announced a freeze on major price increases this year and next. The State Council's measures, an attempt to avert panic buying by China's inflation-wary consumers, amounts to a retrenchment in Beijing's plans for economic changes.    ---   A bomb exploded in an apartment in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, killing two people. The Irish Republican Army said the device had been rigged as a booby trap for British soldiers. In Stuttgart, West German authorities detained two suspected IRA members as they tried to cross the border from the Netherlands carrying weapons.    ---   Died: Harold S. Mohler, 69, former chairman of Hershey Foods Corp., in Hershey, Pa. . . . Joseph P. Fox, 74, former chairman of Champion Products Inc., Tuesday, in Rochester, N.Y., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>