<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Toward a Real Defense Buildup </HL><AUTHOR> Gregory A. Fossedal </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE CNG DEF </G><TEXT>   Congress and the Reagan administration are well on their way to passage of the largest cut in military spending since the 1970s -- arguably the biggest since 1955. The common wisdom is that this follows record peacetime defense hikes. Yet a review of recent history belies the notion of a massive defense buildup, and makes the present debate on cuts more serious.    A 1985 Pentagon report shows that real growth in defense budget authority peaked at a 12% annual rate in 1981. By 1982, other government figures show, money spent for defense was falling below levels that Jimmy Carter had campaigned on, and Ronald Reagan had called inadequate, in 1980. In 1984, defense spending began to level off, and has declined in real terms since 1985.    One reason for declining defense spending -- and declining public support for it -- is that people don't think the money spent so far has been spent well. They're right. Rep. Jim Courter (R., N.J.) puts the dark defense picture this way: &quot;Officials who imagine that we're not losing (the arms race) are grossly misinformed, and therefore grossly irresponsible.&quot;    Since 1980, pay and morale have been raised from extremely low levels. This needed to be done, but since pay historically occupies 30% or more of the defense budget, bringing military salaries up to a more equitable level is a very costly business. It's hard to name another area in which the U.S. position has improved markedly.    The number of nuclear warheads on U.S. intercontinental missiles and bombers has declined since 1980. Our shrinking submarine fleet is increasingly vulnerable to Soviet attack. Slow cruise missiles, of debatable penetration capability, constitute the only significant addition to U.S. strategic forces.    According to the Pentagon, the Soviets spend multiples of what we do researching and deploying defenses against nuclear weapons, and have the only deployed shield against them on the planet. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, in a report cited favorably by George Bush, argue that the Soviet Union would win a defense deployment race with the U.S.    Conventional balance? Even the administration complains that U.S. forces suffer from too-low readiness. Our position in Europe is not better, and probably worse. Ex-National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane wrote in 1986: &quot;In the past five years . . . the Soviet Union has produced as many fighter aircraft as the U.S. and her NATO allies, four times as many helicopters, five times as many artillery pieces, 12 times as many ballistic missiles, and 50 times as many bombers.&quot;    Still, Americans take the sensible view that they elect presidents to sustain the balance of power. They will doubt &quot;standing-tall&quot; platitudes only when real-world events put the lie to White House talking points. Today, to give President Reagan's detente its due, the calm international surface just doesn't seem to indicate dangerous currents below. The Soviets are pulling out of Afghanistan, or seem to be; taking missiles out of Europe, or say they are; moving to cut strategic and conventional forces, or at least negotiating cuts. They are even glasnosting the gulag.    That's not my version of events. Yet it's the world according to Reagan, the most anti-Soviet president in history. And any proof that he is wrong -- that the Soviets will use agreements to solidify military superiority, and continue dominating such countries as Afghanistan at a lower cost -- may not come for some time. This undermines support for defense spending.    Two more factors shaping the new budget-cut consensus were the nuclear freezeniks who took to the streets early in the decade and the military reformers who at about the same time began to attract great attention to overpriced spare parts.    Both groups helped inculcate the (correct) notion that merely spending money doesn't necessarily increase U.S. might. The administration helped, too. &quot;By spending it so ineptly,&quot; a former aide to Rep. Les Aspin (D., Wis.) says, &quot;they broke the perceived link between spending more and having more security.&quot;    Ironically, what the administration mainly did -- as a laudatory 1981 Washington Post article noted -- was simply request a little more money for old Carter programs like the MX missile and B-1 bomber. Then Congress, making matters worse, cut many weapons like the MX back to inefficient, high-cost-per-unit, production levels.    Meanwhile, though resisting proposals for a nuclear freeze, test ban, and narrow reading of the anti-missile defense treaty, the administration gave their premises great credence. From 1981 on, nearly every briefing paper from the Pentagon or the White House, nearly every Reagan speech, emphasized that one of the main goals of any buildup is to spur negotiations. Secure forces were presented not as an end in themselves, but as a means to arms control; treaties became not a means to security, but an end in themselves.    Arms-control progress claimed by the Reagan administration may not so much reverse the dynamic as redirect it. A recent newsletter for the Freeze Voter Education Fund says: &quot;In 1988, the peace community (can) re-emerge as a champion of American strength, strength forged through investment in education and kids, competitive technologies, and social welfare.&quot; Changing these trends will require more than a frontal assault on anti-defense congressmen, or speeches about the need for vigilance. Ronald Reagan tried both. Rather, those concerned about U.S. vulnerability will have to rethink their tactics, and maybe even propose a policy change or two -- taking a cue from the freeze supporters and military reformers.    Here are three concrete ideas:   1) Fund things people like. When the question is framed right -- and framing questions the right way is what leaders do -- about three out of four Americans favor building a defense against nuclear weapons. They do this knowing better than many scientists that defenses are never leakproof. One way to rebuild support for defense spending, then, is to shift emphasis to the popular idea of actual &quot;defense&quot; -- i.e., things that shield people from weapons. By contrast, one way to undercut both Star Wars and the Pentagon generally is to reassure voters that the strategic defense initiative involves only tentative research on a perfect shield. This reinforces the opposing message that Star Wars is a costly boondoggle.    Americans might also support a new effort to compete in the high frontier of space generally: say a contest among contractors to design a big, simple rocket to boost things into space cheaply. They probably would back a stepped-up war on terrorists, especially if U.S. might were used boldly: lots of Libyas and Grenadas, no more Lebanons or Nicaraguas.    2) Find things to cut. Doves plow a little money into a pet project each time they slash the budget. Hawks should propose a few cuts with every call for strong defense. Someone is always talking about closing unneeded military bases. These and the teeny-weeny, easy-to-shield-against Midgetman missile should both be cut. Yet they're just a start. Why hasn't someone, for example, proposed a line-item veto covering only the Pentagon?    Likewise, everyone opposes the boom in defense-oversight bureaucracies in recent years. Or rather, they oppose it in theory. Despite hot air from Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), Rep. Aspin, and a blue-ribbon commission, the budgets and staffs of Congress, the Joint Chiefs, the Defense Logistics Agency, and a dozen-odd other agencies are as much as several dozen times their 1960 levels. Why not slash this Military-Congressional Complex? This would not only trim waste directly, but reduce time delays that drive up the costs of many programs. This would even be the key to eliminating those big-ticket toilet seat covers and hammers.    3) Reduce obligations to our European allies. Administrations Republican and Democratic have tried pleading, signing agreements, and issuing threats. Yet nothing seems to persuade U.S. allies to pick up their own Eurotab. Happily, there is an alternative that has not yet been tried and that will work: Set a reasonable date, say 10 years off, for the removal of all U.S. troops from Europe. Invest half the savings to build a 900-ship Navy, field a strategic defense, and counter Soviet advances by aiding Third World freedom fighters, as such non-doves as Melvyn Krauss, William Safire and Irving Kristol have argued.    The few Pentagon success stories during the Reagan years generally follow one of these suggestions. The popular Star Wars program, for example, has enjoyed the most rapid funding growth this side of AIDS research, despite cuts from requested levels. To many, ex-Navy Secretary John Lehman was the best and brightest of Caspar Weinberger's aides, winning support for a 600-ship navy and building most of it on time, under budget. It's no accident that he was an early student and critic of the over-regulated procurement mess.    Defense buildups generally come after a campaign in which the political outs are able to charge the ins with sloth or incompetence, as in the campaigns of 1960 and 1980. Something for George Bush and Michael Dukakis to think about.    ---   Mr. Fossedal is John M. Olin media fellow at the Hoover Institution. </TEXT></DOC>