<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0164 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Catholicism's Misplaced Priorities---By William McGurn</HL><DD> 09/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> CASTEL GANDOLFO, Italy  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ever since Urban VIII built this hilltop palazzo in 1624, Catholic popes have come here to escape the unforgiving Roman summers and enjoy the breezes off Lake Albano below. John Paul II is no exception. Dressed in white, slightly stooped, only he manages to look cool and collected during a brief audience with a group of sweating U.S. congressmen and their entourage.    Whether the pope will remain as cool during the 11-day pastoral visit to America that begins this week is another question. Unlike the welcome accorded him in 1979 on his honeymoon visit, John Paul's reception this time round will likely be hotter than anything thrown out by a Roman sun, and it's no secret that those most anxious to see him are those with an ax to grind. Outside the church, for example, he faces protests from Jews upset at the papal audience granted to Austrian President Kurt Waldheim. Inside there is opposition from feminists and homosexuals, not to mention clergy at odds with the Vatican's reassertion of doctrinal orthodoxy.    Yet the fixation on the pope's strained relations with what are after all special-interest groups deflects attention from a far more disturbing development: That although the traditional institutions of American Catholicism still speak with the tongues of angels they have become as sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal in the area of social thought. Where once American Catholicism contributed mightily to the church social teaching -- views ultimately vindicated at the Second Vatican Council -- today it shows virtually no appreciation of the moral underpinnings of a system grounded in the &quot;laws of nature and of nature's God.&quot; By contrast, those countries that have been thought the most hidebound and backward -- Poland, say, or the Philippines -- have been the most innovative in applying Catholic social principles to their particular circumstances.    &quot;The paradox is that the American progressives who want the pope to be more 'American' hate America,&quot; says Michael Novak, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute.    &quot;One seldom hears from them a good word about America in either its fundamentals or its practice. In most current arguments they're likely to take the side of the non-democratic, non-capitalist Third World and to offer nothing but criticism of the United States.&quot;    A comparison of American church leaders with their co-religionists elsewhere suggests the parochialism of American concerns. In Poland, for example, the church helped bring about the only free trade union in the Communist world, Solidarity; with 10 million members and a vast network of co-ops, schools and underground press, it represented one of the few true partnerships between the working and intellectual classes. And in the Philippines it was the traditional symbols of popular piety -- rosary beads and statues of the Virgin Mary -- that were used to topple the Marcos dictatorship, not the faddish tracts of the liberation theologians. All the while the American leaders worry about whether or not there ought to be altar girls.    Of course, a moral defense of the American system is not to deny the country's serious moral problems that blaze across the TV screen every evening. No one could confuse the U.S. with the City of God, and even in the best of societies we sinners far outnumber the saints. But it is perverse not to acknowlege that the American system has provided the best model of hope in this modern world for those struggling peoples yearning to breathe free. What the Catholic church in America should be offering such a system is not so much particular answers on given political and economic issues but a framework for conducting the public debate.    The tragedy of the situation today is that the U.S. Catholic church shows no appreciation of its own impressive institutional strength as a model worthy of emulation: It runs or administers 238 colleges and universities, 1,408 high schools, 7,772 grade schools, 810 hospitals and dispensaries, 743 child welfare centers, along with myriad other day-care centers, old age homes, social-welfare services and charitable organizations -- frequently at a lower cost and a higher quality than the alternatives. On top of this there exists a thriving press consisting of 173 Catholic newspapers and 259 magazines with a combined circulation of more than 23 million.    John Paul's scheduled meetings with various segments of his American flock highlights the diversity even within the fold: Cubans in Miami; blacks in New Orleans; Mexicans in San Antonio; native Americans in Phoenix; and Poles in the Detroit suburb of Hamtramc. In short, the huddled masses of Emma Lazarus are still the backbone of the church, although today they are likely to speak Spanish. It is to these people and their dreams that the pope will appeal, a la Reagan, over the heads of the church's institutional and bureaucratic elites.    For the promise of American Catholicism parallels the promise of America herself: immigrant Irish, Italians and Poles who languished in their own -- often Catholic -- lands yet flourished under America's &quot;novus ordo seculorum.&quot; The result is that today, older Catholic ethnic groups have outstripped virtually every other ethnic group save Jews and Asian-Americans in terms of economic achievement. At the same time, the American church has emerged as the wealthiest and most generous member of the Roman Catholic body. For these reasons, and especially in wake of the Second Vatican Council's stand in favor of religious liberty and an increased role for the laity, the church in the U.S. seemed poised to what Lutheran pastor Richard John Neuhaus has dubbed the &quot;Catholic Moment&quot;: the construction of &quot;a religiously informed public philosophy for the American experiment in ordered liberty.&quot;    Sadly, the reality has been quite the opposite, with the post-Vatican II era seeing a clerical intrusion into virtually all aspects of secular life. On the political level, for example, the bishops have issued pastoral letters on nuclear arms and economics, in which they have endorsed a host of dubious policy recommendations, involving interpretation of principles traditionally left to the layman's conscience and expertise. Indeed, for all their talk about opening up the church, the so-called progressive wings of American Catholicism tend to be the most medieval in identifying the church solely with the clergy, as the chairman of the theology department of the Univeristy of Notre Dame, Rev. Richard McBrien, did in a recent article entitled &quot;The Hard-Line Pontiff.&quot;    It's by no means clear, for example, that American Catholics lose sleep over Charles Curran's &quot;right&quot; to teach Catholic theology or whether Seattle Archbishop Raymond Hunthausen is able to exercise all the powers of his office. Even less representative of the average Catholic parishioner is the political agenda of official pressure groups such as the U.S. Catholic Conference or the innumerable diocesan Justice and Peace Commissions.    &quot;The high-profile issues in the American Catholic church tend to reflect the preoccupations of the mid-level bureaucracy -- the clergy, those in religious life and those who are church professionals,&quot; says the editor of the weekly National Catholic Register, Francis X. Maier.    &quot;But what really concerns people in the pews are the bread-and-butter issues like family and spiritual life. They are worried about getting a good education for their kids and passing on their values.&quot;    As for the bishops themselves, their recent forays into politics betray an impatience with Catholicism's traditional understanding that such complex moral problems as economic justice and warfare involve striking a difficult balance between competing goods and unavoidable evils. Instead, church leaders have increasingly moved toward a neo-fundamentalist approach, in which knowledge takes a back seat. In an article in Policy Review based on a random sampling of the bishops themselves, for example, Dinesh D'Souza showed most of them to be appallingly ignorant on the most elementary political and economic concepts underlying their position papers: how much of the U.S. budget went to defense, what marginal tax rates were, the extent of the Soviet military power, etc.    &quot;The problem with the American church leadership is that it has tended to identify politics with Washington, D.C., and the number of votes in Congress,&quot; says George Weigel, president of the James Madison Foundation and author of &quot;Tranquillitas Ordinis,&quot; a book on Catholic thinking about war and peace. &quot;They claim to come before congressional hearings as teachers and pastors and then they give you 20 pages of policy analysis and micro-management.&quot;    From Charles Carroll's signing of the Declaration of Independence through the bishops' 1884 pastoral describing the founding fathers as &quot;the instruments of the God of nations in establishing this home of freedom&quot; to John Courtney Murray's spirited defense of what he called the &quot;American proposition,&quot; U.S. Catholics historically have argued with Tocqueville that there exists a special congruence between their faith and the American system. Over the decades this was the case American Catholics made to both anti-Catholics at home and anti-Americans in the Vatican. It is a case that especially needs to be made in a century that has already seen the rise of two totalitarian monsters. Unfortunately, it is a case that is not being made by American Catholic leaders, whose parochialism blinds them to the fact that the man now sitting in the chair of St. Peter is probably the most modern of them all.    &quot;The pope's intention is not to drive the bishops out of politics,&quot; says Mr. Weigel, &quot;but to urge them to engage politics at its most substantial level -- what is the good society. And the bishops cannot do that if they are perceived to be simply a faction in a partisan camp.&quot;    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>