<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870403-0136 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Real-Life Family Feud Puts Soaps to Shame---By Patricia Bellew Gray</HL><DD> 04/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   For four months last spring, J. Seward Johnson's six children battled his widow in court over his $500 million estate. The children and their stepmother, a former Johnson chambermaid, eagerly served up evidence of past and present family sins -- incest, adultery, attempted suicide and attempted murder.    Barbara Goldsmith wades into this lurid swamp with all the energy and curiosity of an entomologist. Her &quot;Johnson v. Johnson&quot; (Knopf, 285 pages, $18.95) is the first book about the battle to hit the stores, and sometimes the author's haste is evident in the book's lack of organization and its oral-history style. Still, the thoroughness of her reporting captures all the tawdry drama and farce of the longest and probably the costliest will contest in U.S. history.    J. Seward Johnson was the second son of the founder of Johnson andamp; Johnson, manufacturer of such products as baby powder, Band-Aids and Tylenol. He was a profligate whose keenest interests were women, sailing and the breeding of cows, in that order. He left the running of the family business to a domineering older brother and concentrated instead on indulging every whim his money could buy.    During the Depression, he had a goat and a cow shipped to Bermuda so he could enjoy homebred milk. Once, when he was a patient at the Medical Center at Princeton (N.J.), he had a high-ranking hospital administrator personally chauffeur him home to his estate to see if familiar surroundings would help relieve his constipation.    Mr. Johnson was an abysmal father who, by turns, ignored his children and lavished gifts on them. He sexually abused his eldest daughter when she was a child. After he divorced his first wife, he banished her to a chauffeur's cottage and the children to a rat-infested chicken coop on a corner of the family estate in New Jersey. He wouldn't answer a note pleading &quot;my life is hell&quot; that his son had written after a suicide attempt, but he once rushed a favorite dog to Cornell Medical Center for cancer treatment.    Despite their father's cruelties to them, Mr. Johnson's children were like a pack of pitiful strays sniffing around his doorstep, hoping for a few scraps of his affection or his fortune. They didn't bare their fangs until after his death, when they discovered that he had disinherited them and a favorite charity, and left his fortune to their stepmother, Barbara &quot;Basia&quot; Piasecka Johnson.    Mrs. Johnson's is a classic rags-to-riches tale. A beautiful, blond refugee from Poland, she was a $100-a-week chambermaid on the family estate when she caught the master's eye. As Mr. Johnson's third wife, she reveled in the things his fortune could buy, filling their new mansion with art and antiques. He died at the age of 87, having changed his will 22 times in his last years. Mrs. Johnson got the final nod, but it landed her in court and in the public eye.    Her stepchildren attacked her reputation with a parade of witnesses who told of Mrs. Johnson yelling at her servants and her husband. Her buying sprees got a lot of attention, too. She spent $2.2 million on antiques two weeks before her husband succumbed to cancer.    But Mrs. Johnson proved that she could more than match her stepchildren's mudslinging. Her most lurid revelations involved the eldest daughter, who had once accused her estranged husband of having a homosexual relationship with the hitman he allegedly had hired to kill her.    Mrs. Johnson also tried to polish her own image. She told the judge that she means more to the people of Poland than the pope. Her first witness was a nun who swept up and down the corridor outside the courtroom dispensing to reporters a business card that read: &quot;Nun 40 Years -- Geriatric-Psychiatric Nurse Testifies!!! TELLS IT LIKE IT WAS!&quot;    Also hovering around the case was a troupe of 210 lawyers. Ms. Goldsmith turns up a wealth of embarrassing details about them. Mrs. Johnson used the offices of the prominent New York law firm Shearman andamp; Sterling to meet with an astrologer who drew up a chart on the case for her. The consultation was arranged by the wife of a senior partner.    Ms. Goldsmith is tough on Mrs. Johnson, but she is too soft on Mr. Johnson's middle-aged children. The book's most insightful comment on them comes from a column by Jimmy Breslin of the New York Daily News, who wrote: They are &quot;considerably older than children but have done so little to distinguish themselves since childhood that all in the courtroom refer to them as 'the children.'&quot;    In the end, after four months in court, the children and the charity got their money. Mrs. Johnson got to salvage what was left of her reputation in peace. The lawyers got $24 million in fees. But in the end, what little honor and dignity this family ever had was sacrificed. No one could ever reasonably claim to have won this quarrel.    ---   Ms. Gray covers legal affairs from the Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>