<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880324-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Media See Whites-Only White House </HL><AUTHOR> Alexander Cockburn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A generation ago, white bigotry stood at the schoolhouse door, barring black progress. Today, a black is running for president and once again bigotry is trying to bar his path. This time it takes the form of the national press.    If the press had its way, the Rev. Jesse Jackson would not be running; blacks would not be voting for him; whites would be ignoring him. In fact, some days even now you would have a hard time knowing that the Rev. Jackson is running, unless you had the good fortune to trip over one of those little box scores of the primary and caucus races. These show that Mr. Jackson is neck-and-neck with Michael Dukakis, that Americans are considerably more open-minded than the national press, and that many of them have been listening to Mr. Jackson.    Election campaigns are supposed to be opportunities for the voters to ponder new ideas, review the propositions on offer, consider fresh avenues to the future. So here came Jesse Jackson, with an armful of very specific ideas on health care, education, drug abuse, military spending, foreign policy, industrial reconstruction and progressivity in the tax system.    How did the headline writers, editorialists and pundits react? Mostly with one voice: &quot;What Does Jesse Jackson Really Want?&quot; By which they were offering the profoundly racist notion that since it was obviously out of the question for a black man to try and be president -- Mr. Jackson's proclaimed goal -- he must have some secret agenda.    No one asks, &quot;What Does Al Gore Really Want?&quot; He is white and so it's fine for him to set his eyes on the White House. No one writes those knowing, smoke-filled-rooms columns speculating about the kind of deal Al Gore will be willing to cut at the Democratic Convention.    Racism looks through people. Mr. Jackson has had his full share of this treatment. Time and again he has been the Invisible Man. Of all the results on Super Tuesday, none was perhaps as immediately striking as Mr. Jackson's win in Alaska. People think of Alaska as quintessentially white, and not some relic of the old slave South where Mr. Jackson is allowed to do well among &quot;his&quot; people. He won in Alaska and it took the Washington Post till the following Saturday to record the fact, in three short paragraphs. That was the day he had a powerful victory in South Carolina, an event the Washington Post celebrated the following Monday with the headline &quot;Democrats' Problem Magnified in South Carolina,&quot; atop a familiar screed about the flight of the white male working class from the Democrats.    Many people may have been highly surprised by Mr. Jackson's historic victories on Super Tuesday. Though many polls accurately recorded his growing strength, the news stories accompanying these polls had the usual immense difficulty in mentioning the difficult name of Jackson. This was true in the case of the New York Times and the Washington Post.    Already, on the eve of Super Tuesday, it was clear that Mr. Jackson was attracting a significant measure of white support. Unless the U.S. Bureau of Census has been lying all these years, Vermont, Maine and Minnesota are not known as having substantial black populations. There are scarcely more than a thousand blacks in Vermont, yet Mr. Jackson got 27% of the vote. In Minnesota, where the non-white population is 4%, he got 20%. The Minneapolis Tribune relegated this upset of Paul Simon to the end of its lead news story. In fact, Mr. Jackson won the congressional district in Minneapolis, just as he came first in Maine's two major cities, Portland and Bangor. Overall in Maine, he came second, with 30% of the vote in a state that is less than 1% black.    On Super Tuesday, Mr. Jackson came first in five states, second in 10 more. Simply as an achievement in American political history, an epochal showing by a black man, one would have thought this would be a major story. It wasn't, at least in most of the newspapers I saw. Only the New York Post gave Mr. Jackson the front page, with a big banner headline -- &quot;Jesse's Dixie Magic.&quot; Other than that, headlines mostly concerned Messrs. Dukakis and Gore, whose strategy was supposedly vindicated by the results.    But Mr. Jackson did a lot better than Mr. Gore. In fact, he won the popular vote, but he didn't get the Gore treatment. He got something else, symbolized in analysis in the Chicago Tribune the next day. The Tribune's writer conceded Mr. Jackson had done &quot;slightly&quot; better than in 1984, but his &quot;white voters appear to be from both very identifiable and very small minorities themselves. Many of them are politically active homosexuals whose organizations have endorsed his candidacy, and the rest are the residue of the radical and counterculture movements.&quot;    This notion that Jesse Jackson might be making waves, but of a dubious sort, was taken up again last Sunday by Tom Fiedler, political correspondent of the Miami Herald. &quot;The Campaign: An Absence of Passion,&quot; was the headline for Mr. Fiedler's reflections, which were adorned with a photograph of Bobby Kennedy.    The one thing you cannot accuse Jesse Jackson of is an absence of passion, so I looked to see how Mr. Fiedler dealt with him. There he was, in the 11th paragraph, performing his usual role of usher, introducing the real (white) candidates: &quot;But, with the exception of Jesse Jackson, they . . .&quot; Mr. Fiedler did get around to Mr. Jackson in the end. It turned out that his &quot;call to action, ironically, is not unlike that of George Wallace's. &quot;One of the features of Mr. Jackson's coverage is the frequency with which pundits admonish voters in kindly spirit that a black candidate would be fine, just so long as his name isn't spelled Jackson. &quot;He would have to be a candidate with a cool, conservative style and a message that was mainstream and not threatening to the status quo,&quot; William Shannon advised in the Boston Globe recently. He probably meant the decorous Rep. William Gray of Pennsylvania, who has always been the pundits' black candidate of choice.    Received wisdom is taking its usual beating this year at the hands of voters. Received wisdom says you need millions of dollars to run. A New York Times editorial reaffirmed this, right after Mr. Jackson had his March 8 victories on $100,000 in TV advertising time. Received wisdom says this country is still on a rightward path and left populists can win only the &quot;marginal&quot; support of radicals, blacks and gays. The man from the Chicago Tribune should check the opinion polls on opposition to aid for the Contras, and note that it has been running at 60%.    This is more than &quot;residual&quot; radicalism. A table printed on the front page of The Wall Street Journal earlier this week showed how wealth has been shifted to the top 20% from the bottom 80% over the past few years. There is a constituency for a left populist campaign this year and Jesse Jackson is finding it. That's the story and the media are shunning it because Mr. Jackson is black. The media say he could never be president because not enough whites will ever support him. How do they know? Aren't election campaigns intended to persuade, to convert, without the mainstream media telling the voters that it's a race for whites only?    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>