<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880922-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   MOSCOW IMPOSED a curfew in a disputed region following a wave of violence.    The official Tass news agency said the Nagorno-Karabakh territory had been placed on &quot;special status,&quot; with curfews imposed on the regional capital of Stepanakert and a district of Azerbaijan just outside the area. Meetings and rallies also were banned. The steps were taken after renewed violence flared between Armenians and Azerbaijanis over control of the territory. In Armenia's capital, hundreds of thousands of people massed outside the republic's parliament to demand annexation of the area.    Shevardnadze warned of &quot;some emergency action&quot; in Nagorno-Karabakh, where ethnic violence has flared sporadically since February.    ---   Haiti's coup leader attempted to quell a growing military revolt by naming a new armed forces chief and retiring nine commanding officers. The move came as soldiers who staged Sunday's coup mutinied against more commanders, dumping them handcuffed in front of army headquarters in Port-au-Prince as crowds cheered.    ---   Burma's Gen. Saw Maung was named prime minister by a nine-member governing council that he appointed Tuesday. He led Sunday's coup that toppled civilian President Maung Maung. As the government sought for a third day to crush dissent, Rangoon radio acknowledged that more than 140 people had been killed in the crackdown.    ---   Reagan accused House Speaker Wright of talking indiscreetly about U.S. intelligence matters, but stopped short of denying Wright's claim that the administration used the CIA to forment civil unrest in Nicaragua. Congressional sources said the disclosure could jeopardize legislation to tighten Congress's control over covert operations.    ---   Lebanon's President Gemayel met in Damascus with Syrian President Assad in an effort to agree on a new Lebanese leader and avert a threatened takeover by Lebanon's army. Gemayel's term expires tomorrow, and Parliament is to hold an election today. Christian leaders have rejected a candidate favored by Syria and the U.S.    ---   Rioting erupted in Shreveport, La. Authorities said hundreds of angry blacks looted or burned stores and clashed with police after a black man was killed by a white teen-ager in what one witness described as a drug transaction gone sour. The riots didn't result in any serious injuries.    ---   Shevardnadze said he would present proposals on chemical weapons and strategic nuclear arms to the U.S. He didn't elaborate. The Soviet foreign minister is to begin two days of talks today with Shultz in Washington before traveling to New York to attend the U.N. General Assembly session.    ---   Federal researchers are exploring a possible new biological weapon against cells infected with the virus that causes AIDS. Scientists at the National Institutes of Health are studying a chemical that seeks and kills AIDS-infected blood cells without harming healthy ones.    ---   Morton Thiokol officials said troubleshooters found more than 1,000 possible problems during the redesign of the space shuttle booster rockets. The maker of the rockets said a handful of the hazards were fixed while others are being treated as unavoidable risks.    ---   Japan's government said Crown Prince Akihito soon would assume the official duties of Emperor Hirohito, who remained in serious condition caused by an intestinal hemorrhage. As hundreds of people gathered outside the Imperial Palace, Hirohito's doctor said he wasn't sure if the 87-year-old monarch's internal bleeding had stopped.    ---   The Bush and Dukakis campaigns settled a dispute over the height of the lecterns to be used in Sunday's presidential debate in North Carolina. But the makeup of the panel of journalists to pose questions to the candidates remained unresolved. The Democratic and Republican nominees continued to prepare for the confrontation.    ---   A bomb exploded at South Africa's main bus terminal for white commuters in Johannesburg, injuring as many as 19 people, police said. Separately, black activist Winnie Mandela said U.S. officials have placed restrictions on communication with the media by three anti-apartheid leaders who took refuge at the U.S. consulate in Johannesburg.    ---   Investigators for a Senate panel reported that &quot;overwhelming evidence exists&quot; that Iraq subjected Kurdish villages to poison gas attacks last month to break an insurgency by the minority Kurds. The staff members of the Foreign Relations Committee said the attacks were part of a plan to depopulate Iraqi Kurdistan.    ---   Gandhi traveled to India's Punjab state for the first time since 1985 and urged Sikhs and Hindus to fight Sikh extremists seeking a separate homeland. More than 6,000 paramilitary troops surrounded the Indian prime minister, whose government has expressed concern that the separatist movement could become a full-scale civil war. </TEXT></DOC>