<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880217-0162 </DOCNO><HL> The Gulf: Iran's Once-Annual Offensive Proves A Mirage </HL><AUTHOR> Kenneth R. Timmerman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Every February, to mark the anniversary of its Islamic revolution, Iran launches a major offensive. This year should have been no exception. Iraqi President Saddam Hussein, in an address to the Iraqi army in January, noted that Iran had mobilized some 250,000 troops along the war front. The Iranians had been making noises about an attack for months.    But last Friday, the anniversary of Ayatollah Khomeini's violent ascension, brought no giant onslaught. This disappointment had become evident before the significant date: Earlier in the year Western observers estimated that the Iranian buildup was significantly smaller than that of previous years and of no great military threat. &quot;The Iraqis generally have the capability to withstand it,&quot; U.S. Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci said recently in Paris. Other Western officials agreed that current Iranian troop strength was not a cause for concern. The image of hordes of fanaticized youths sweeping over Basra, and then Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, can recede into the nightmarish depths from which it arises periodically to haunt Western strategists.    On the ground, signs have begun to appear for the first time that Iran has had difficulty mobilizing sufficient forces. On Jan. 5, Tehran extended the term of duty by four months of all soldiers currently serving under the flag. The following day, Tehran radio announced doctors, dentists and paramedics were to be called up for a month's service at the war front. During Friday prayers on Jan. 15, the speaker of Iran's Parliament, Hojjatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, warned the gulf states against aiding Iraq &quot;or be punished&quot; during the coming Iranian offensive. Mr. Rafsanjani also revealed Iran had decreed its first-ever mandatory call-up of students since the start of the war. Until then, Tehran had relied on volunteers for the bulk of its front-line troops, allowing young men eligible for two-year national service to choose to enter either the Regular Army or the Revolutionary Guards Corps. This time many of the draftees were assigned to the Guards Corps, where they can expect to bear the brunt of the fighting.    But the mobilization campaign has fallen far short of the mark, despite a series of conferences held in Tehran last summer to study means of stepping up recruitment. Ali Reza Afshar, deputy military commander of the Revolutionary Guards Corps, was put in charge of this year's effort -- but at most some 100,000 have heeded the call for a new army. Like the French at the end of the Napoleonic Wars, everyday Iranians feel they have sacrificed enough to a regime whose benefits appear increasingly dubious.    Without the numbers required to launch a massive offensive, the Iranians will content themselves with a series of point attacks, linked and highly publicized, but with limited strategic value. Guerrilla activity, spearheaded by the People's Mojahedin in Iraq, also may have contributed to keeping Iran's planners off-balance.    And Iranian strategy itself has changed. The turning point was reached early last year, which was heralded by Iranian leaders as the &quot;Year of the Final Offensive.&quot; Iran threw everything it had into the Kerbala campaigns. Yet it lost upward of 100,000 dead and wounded without achieving the strategic breakthrough at Basra it required. Iran's Supreme Defense Council started a re-evaluation of overall war plans in April 1987. By November, Mr. Rafsanjani announced Iran would replace the massive offensives of the past with a new strategy of &quot;continual blows.&quot; The new policy combines a buildup in trained reserves, a heavier reliance on conscription, and a &quot;financial &quot;jihad&quot; to squeeze the better-offs by forcing them to make heavy contributions to the war -- or face mandatory enrollment of their sons in the Revolutionary Guards Corps. In fact, the policy amounts to little more than a war of attrition. Iran appears to have abandoned all hope of crushing Iraq on the battlefield, and now intends to divert its energies to the political arena.    What has changed from the nearly victorious Iran of 1987? For one thing, efforts by the U.S. government in the wake of the Iran-Contra hearings to cut off Iran's supplies of sophisticated weaponry have begun to pay off. Iran's air force, which flew more combat missions last year than for several years combined, once again has dropped to a fleet of about 60 serviceable aircraft from a high of more than 110. Armed-forces morale has hit a new low. The air force lost several planes last year to friendly anti-aircraft fire, and many pilots have deserted -- with their aircraft. Friction between the regular armed forces and the Guards Corps has increased sharply, with armed clashes breaking out on several occasions in recent months. To capitalize on this dissent, a former army officer, Col. Hassan Agilipour, recently announced the formation of a shadow government-in-exile in Paris with some links to the military hierarchy in Iran. Meanwhile, scenting a potentially explosive rupture, Iranian President Ali Khamenei has taken several measures to strengthen the Regular Army. He's promoted a dozen officers to the rank of brigadier general -- a rank that disappeared with the advent of the Islamic Revolution.    On the economic front, the nation's industrial base is in shambles. The latest U.S. State Department estimate of Iran's gross national product announced a 50% drop from 1985 to 1986, down to $75 billion, and unofficial estimates for 1987 figure a further plunge. With Iran's oil exports on the decline, the situation can only worsen. Meanwhile, Iraq has strengthened its position by boosting oil exports.    Iranian officials object that projections such as these fail to take into consideration the growing value of barter agreements, which virtually have come to replace hard-currency transactions. However, even a healthy barter trade has done little to solve inflation, which the government estimates at 40%. Nor has it helped the nation's four million or so unemployed. Factories lie idle, major industry has been bombed into rubble. One recent analysis predicted that if the war ended today it would take Iran 20 years to return to the level of development it had achieved by 1965.    The leadership in Tehran slowly seems to be waking up to the economic chaos threatening the country. Add in the looming succession crisis after Ayatollah Khomeini, and growing internal dissent, and the picture is of a faltering revolution. Although few analysts are ready to predict a restoration of the post-Napoleonic sort, still the historical lessons of a revolution that has spent its course are all too obvious.    ---   Mr. Timmerman, who edits Mednews, a newsletter on the Middle East, will publish a book in May on arms sales to Iraq and Iran. </TEXT></DOC>