<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0141 </DOCNO><HL> At Mr. Gatti's Place In Venezuela Bush, The Glitter Is Gold --- But Everything Else Is Drab In the Wildcatting Rush; Will Big Boys Move In? </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Cohen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM BP N </CO><IN> PCS CMD </IN><DATELINE> LAS CLARITAS, Venezuela  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Amalfi Grossi Gatti is a very rich and religious man. Fingering a silver crucifix, he receives visitors in an office deep in the jungle adorned with photographs of the pope. Men toting rifles patrol outside.    &quot;This is my city,&quot; he says, gesturing toward a settlement of wood and corrugated-iron shacks where an estimated 25,000 prospectors, traders, prostitutes and hangers-on improvise temporary homes. &quot;People respect me because I am cruel.&quot;    Mr. Gatti is king of Venezuela's gold rush-lord and protector of 100,000 acres of southeastern Guayana province. There are no police here, no official controls. Just Mr. Gatti and his militia. And gold. His wealth is a matter of much speculation, but it is believed that more than $1 million of gold is produced here each month. His cut is 20% to 40%.    Gold fever is spreading in Latin America these days. Experts estimate production has almost doubled in five years, to 191.1 tons, and the potential is enormous.    But as places like Mr. Gatti's testify, the Latin American gold rush is vastly different from recent booms in the U.S., Canada and Australia. So far, this one has belonged to small diggers and wildcatters, most of them operating outside the law. Much of their output is &quot;unofficial&quot; -- smuggled to other countries or used to launder narcotics profits. International mining concerns have generally stayed away.    Now that may change. The big companies are moving in, and this is causing more than a little anxiety all around.    To the south, Brazil alone &quot;offers the greatest untapped possibilities outside Siberia and Antarctica,&quot; maintains Geoffrey O'Toole, a geologist at British Petroleum Co.'s Brazilian mining unit. The country is already the non-Communist world's fifth-largest gold producer, though still largely unprospected. Venezuela also claims impressive, but smaller, reserves.    &quot;If you're looking for elephants,&quot; reasons Mr. O'Toole, &quot;go to elephant country.&quot; In addition to BP, mining companies from Canada, South Africa, Britain and the U.S. have begun to nose around.    Their problem, however, is fear. They worry that by moving in with sophisticated techniques and high-dollar mining hardware, they will almost certainly be accused of running roughshod over the armies of small diggers who eke out a living from gold.    Brazil and Venezuela have close to a million small-time prospectors, fiercely attached to the land they work. Most live in violent, virtually unpoliced settlements. On occasion, when mining companies have sent in geologists, threats and even murders have occurred.    At times, the wildcatters -- known in Brazil as garimpeiros -- have simply taken over sites. Seven years ago, they invaded a mine at Serra Pelada in northern Brazil in which the state mining company, Companhia Vale do Rio Doce (CVRD), had invested $30 million. They are still there.    &quot;I'm not prepared to send guys out carrying guns,&quot; says Gregory Moseley, director of Brazilian exploration for General Mining Union Corp., a big South African firm.    In addition, because of their numbers, the wildcatters enjoy wide political support. Gold prospecting serves as a safety valve in recession-hit economies. The multinationals can ill afford to be blamed for creating economic havoc; they already face enough other legal, fiscal and political uncertainties operating in South America. Their very interest in joining the gold rush recently inspired a nationalistic backlash among Brazilian legislators.    &quot;Multinationals in Latin America have to use kid gloves against a bunch of starving panners,&quot; a U.S. geologist says.    The wildcatters indeed are panners. They use 19th century techniques with a 50% recovery rate: ore is ground, washed down sluices and mixed in pans with mercury, which draws the gold into nuggets from the sludge. They work only the surface, or alluvial, gold; underground veins remain untouched. Last year, 84% of Brazil's production was of this type. &quot;It's an absurd situation,&quot; says Domingos Drummond, CVRD's director for gold.    Perhaps. But gold fever doesn't inspire rational behavior, as a visit to Mr. Gatti's world shows. The hub of the area is Kilometer 88, a gas station that sprawled into a town and now even boasts an air-conditioned strip-joint.    The town is dank and dingy. Small gold buyers' stalls abound, where diggers shorten their lives by using blow-torches to burn off toxic mercury from their nuggets. Rumors also abound: that $1 million a day changes hands, that there are 100,000 diggers in the jungle -- and that the multinationals are coming.    Captain Rivas, the Kilometer 88 police chief, says things are &quot;out of control.&quot; Gold seeps over borders into Brazil and Colombia. Police don't venture into the bush, where Mr. Rivas believes there are many narcotics fugitives, because they have no four-wheel-drive vehicles or helicopters. A government official lamely explains that the dirt track into the jungle can't be paved because the &quot;Toyotero mafia&quot; -- owners of four-wheel-drive Toyotas who operate a taxi service -- is opposed.    From Kilometer 88, it is a jolting half-hour ride through jungle to Las Claritas. The jeep approaches a mine from the wrong side; a gunman fires a warning shot. Behind barbed wire, boys wallow in a vat of filthy water and mercury, panning the muck left by the sluices.    Farther on, 41-year-old Jose Antonio Ponce stands knee-deep in mud at the bottom of a pit hacking at the reddish earth. He says he averages three grams of gold a week, earning him $150 a month after he pays his commission to Mr. Gatti -- not bad in Venezuela. &quot;At night we play dominos or blow money on whores,&quot; he says. Some come here to earn money for their families, he adds, and some to buy drugs.    It has been pouring. Mud is oozing, and even the 400 prostitutes have taken shelter. Out of this madness -- mounds of earth, gaping pits, treacherous tracks, belching pumps and dredges -- Mr. Gatti's offices appear, distinguished by a satellite dish in the yard.    The Italian is seated at a small desk. There is a wooden crucifix on the wall as well as the silver one around his neck. He has an announcement. He is ready to sell out.    He even has a buyer in mind: Greenwich Resources PLC, a large London-based mining company that has been prospecting in Venezuela for three years. Mr. Gatti explains to John Sutcliffe, a Greenwich geologist, that he arrived here 20 years ago with &quot;four Indians and a boat.&quot; Now, he is getting old. While the gold here has hardly been touched -- &quot;hardly nibbled at, my friend&quot; -- he is ready to cede control.    Mr. Sutcliffe is convinced the land contains a huge amount of gold. Mr. Gatti has also installed a fuel pipeline to Kilometer 88, and has over $2 million in equipment.    But there are problems. The government-granted concession to the land runs out in February 1989. Also, it turns out that the lease-owner isn't Mr. Gatti but a U.S. widow who died last year without known descendants. Mr. Gatti was her chief contractor; he subcontracts to others.    Then there is the December presidential election. The favorite, Carlos Andres Perez, nationalized the country's mineral resources when last in office in 1975. That doesn't inspire confidence. Nor does that mass of small diggers.    Roger Davey, who directs Greenwich's Venezuelan operations, rules out a deal until the future of the lease is clarified. Even then, an arrangement would have to be reached with the wildcatters. &quot;You couldn't kick these guys out,&quot; he says, &quot;you'd be sabotaged.&quot;    Such are the frustrations facing multinationals in Venezuela. Over the past three years, Greenwich repeatedly tried and failed to form joint ventures with the Venezuelan Guayana Corp. (CVG), a government company that controls the state mining company. Finally, this year, a bargain was struck. But with the leases drafted, CVG asked Greenwich to prove all its Venezuelan employees have paid their taxes. &quot;It's the sort of thing that makes doing business here hell,&quot; says Mr. Davey.    Nor can one know how policy will veer next. The Venezuelan Mining Ministry endorses foreign investment and says it opposes &quot;irrational mining&quot; -- the wildcatters. But at the same time a state company is investing in mills in Guayana to buy and process ore from them.    Getting a piece of the gold rush elsewhere in Latin America isn't much easier, though. In Brazil, the government acknowledges that at least part of the billions needed to exploit the country's mineral potential must come from multinationals. Yet a clause in the draft constitution could bar foreign companies from exploration and exploitation.    Vast tracts also have been reserved for the garimpeiros, and Omero Araujo Neto, a senior official at the National Department of Mineral Production, says the government is committed to defending them.    That confounds Stephen Sopher, chairman of the Brazilian unit of Canada's Inco Ltd. He opened the company's office 19 years ago. Inco's first gold operation, a $70 million joint venture with a Brazilian company, will begin production next year. &quot;People don't realize it can take 20 years to get a project going,&quot; he says.    Nonetheless, Inco isn't leaving. Nor are the other big companies, even if the draft constitution goes unamended. They will take minority positions if necessary. But Brazil's potential could go untapped, and &quot;major new investment that could come here will go instead to Canada, Australia or the United States,&quot; predicts one foreign mining official.    The garimpeiros don't intend to go away, either. They are getting organized. Joseph Young, editor of a Sao Paulo mining magazine, says some of them are now fronts for small to medium-sized companies that prefer not to pay taxes. The diggers have also formed a union. &quot;It's not the garimpeiros who invade,&quot; says its leader Ivo Lubrinna de Castro. &quot;It's the multinationals.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>