<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870325-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Religious Groups Push for Radio Licenses,Stirring Fears Among Other Broadcasters---By Michael TottyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) </IN><TEXT>   Turn your radio on.    Increasingly, amid the classical music and volunteer announcers at the left side of the FM dial, listeners hear two discordant sounds: the growing voice of fundamentalist Christian radio and competing stations' cries that religious broadcasters are overrunning the noncommercial airwaves.    The Federal Communications Commission in the early 1950s set aside space in the FM spectrum for local, nonprofit, educational programming. Most of the frequencies went to school districts, colleges and universities and community groups; only a fraction of the stations provided religious programming.    All this is changing. Religious organizations are now making an aggressive drive for noncommercial radio licenses. Since 1983, the largely conservative Christian groups have filed two out of three applications for new licenses, and as of last August held one-fifth of the 1,367 existing licenses and construction permits.    Although few broadcasters contend that religious organizations should be barred from the educational band, some argue that the groups use their stations as fund-raising tools or to promote sectarian religious and political viewpoints. &quot;If you're going to allow religious groups to proselytize, what about other groups?&quot; asks Henry Geller, a former FCC general counsel. &quot;What about atheists, or labor unions or the chamber of commerce? Where does it end?&quot;    Religious groups downplay any problems. &quot;People always feel threatened by some conspiracy theory,&quot; says Ben Armstrong, president of the National Religious Broadcasters. &quot;It's more a perception than a reality.&quot; Besides, they argue, bona fide religious instruction is being provided. &quot;It's an educational tool as well as an entertainment ministry,&quot; says Craig Hulsebos, program manager for the 27-year-old Family Stations Inc. network.    The secular broadcasters' concerns were heightened in recent years by the activities of two fundamentalist Christian networks -- American Heritage Radio and the VOICE Network -- whose affiliates have flooded the FCC with applications. The two networks urged local churches and individuals to apply for broadcast licenses, provided for a fee all the legal and engineering help needed to obtain the license and promised 24-hour-a-day programming -- including easy-listening Christian music, news and Bible instruction -- once the station was on the air.    The networks have since gone out of business, and many of their affiliates have closed shop or transferred their permits to other owners. But the problems remain, critics say. They contend that the two networks offered what amounts to radio-station starter kits designed to appeal to those with little or no radio experience. As a result, they assert, those affiliates that do go on the air will have to rely heavily -- if not entirely -- on outside programming, leaving little room for programming aimed at the specific needs of the local community.    Even if they don't go on the air, the affiliates can keep local educational organizations from using the band. For example, when Yellowstone Public Radio in Billings, Mont., sought to increase the power of a small affiliate station in nearby Bozeman, it found the frequency it needed was already granted to the Montana Educational Broadcasting Foundation, an American Heritage affiliate. The foundation got the license more than two years ago, but has done nothing to put a station on the air, Yellowstone charged in a complaint to the FCC.    What's more, Yellowstone alleges, the Montana foundation isn't incorporated in Montana, and the address given on its application turned out to be an empty field. The FCC is investigating whether American Heritage actually controlled the license, in violation of FCC rules barring hidden ownership. Charles B. Moore, listed in FCC filings as president of American Heritage, says the network has gone out of business. He won't elaborate, but Joseph Brinig, a lawyer who handled the network's FCC filings, says most of its 30 permits have been transferred to other groups.    The majority -- including the Montana permit -- went to the University Broadcasting Foundation in Dunwoody, Ga., Mr. Brinig says. University has proved to be an elusive organization. There isn't a phone listing for the foundation in Dunwoody. John Fain, named in FCC documents as foundation secretary, says he thinks it was sold but isn't with the group any longer and doesn't know who bought it. &quot;It was just something my name was used for, and I don't know anything about it,&quot; Mr. Fain says.    If such dealings leave community groups frustrated, a case in Dallas has them scared. There, community station KNON-FM has been under siege from religious organizations seeking its license. The station, plagued with money and technical problems, went silent for several years. It returned to the air in 1983, opening its studio to gay community groups, local gospel organizations, Spanish-language broadcasts and rap, salsa and country swing music.    Last November, an FCC judge recommended giving the frequency to the Criswell Center for Biblical Studies, an affiliate of the First Baptist Church of Dallas with growing media holdings. The unprecedented decision, which KNON is appealing, came despite arguments that Dallas already has two religious stations -- one owned by the Criswell Center. &quot;No one (in Dallas) is doing broadcasting like KNON,&quot; says William Thomas, executive director of the National Federation of Community Broadcasters. &quot;That has been something the FCC has usually considered.&quot;    But the judge said the station wasn't meeting its community obligations. He said &quot;financial disaster and neglect&quot; caused the station's long silence. And he said the local license holder wasn't even the real power behind the station, the same charge community groups often make in criticizing religious networks. In reality, he ruled, KNON was controlled by the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, or ACORN, a nationwide activist group. An attorney for the station says that while KNON and ACORN share common political and social concerns, the station is &quot;distinctly independent&quot; of the community group.    If the judge's decision is upheld, community groups fear it will encourage religious groups to step up their challenges of existing licenses. And fighting those legal battles may be too much for some shoestring budgets to bear. &quot;One hour of a lawyer's time will buy a lot of programming,&quot; says Tom Thomas, a broadcasting consultant and past director of the community broadcasters' federation. </TEXT></DOC>