<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0134 </DOCNO><HL> The Best Way to Get the Lead Out?---By David A. Todd</HL><DD> 02/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) </IN><TEXT>   Last week Congress voted to override President Reagan's veto of the Clean Water Act and to provide $18 billion in construction funds for sewage-treatment plants. This limiting of sources of water pollution is a direct and meaningful way to protect public health and the natural environment, often more effective than legislating permissible levels in streams, lakes and aquifers. Such a constructive approach is lacking in the Environmental Protection Agency's proposals to limit lead in drinking water.    Last November the EPA informally proposed lowering the permissible level in drinking water by more than half, to 20 parts from 50 parts per billion. The agency bases its proposal on a study that found that at least 38 million Americans were drinking water with lead concentrations that the EPA considered dangerous. If the quality of water supplies could be brought to the new level, the EPA predicts that the U.S. might save $800 million in costs related to health and public-works maintenance.    The EPA has reason to be concerned: Lead is dangerous in small amounts to the kidneys, reproductive organs, and nervous and circulatory systems. It also can damage piping, meters, valves and other equipment. There is a consensus in the EPA and among the public that hazardous sources of lead should be reduced and lead levels in water decreased. However, it is not at all clear that lowering legal limits for lead in our drinking water is the best response. Strong evidence exists that stricter environmental standards for water quality have actually led to increases in the amount of lead that is dispersed in the environment. Short-term, small-scale gains are likely to lead to long-term, large-scale problems that will not easily go away.    The environmental standards in question largely affect the lead-recycling industry, which falls under the control of a number of laws related to health and the environment, including the Clean Water Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the National Ambient Air Quality Standards, and the Occupational Safety and Health Act. These laws stipulate permissible levels of lead in air, soil, surface runoff, and workers' blood. They also require equipment to control emissions from stacks and effluent pipes, to monitor groundwater quality and to protect workers' health. Finally, the companies are asked to obtain liability insurance to cover them in case of an accident. Taken together, these requirements cost the industry roughly six cents per pound of lead processed. The cost of compliance with federal regulations has become a significant burden for the industry recently.    Like a number of other basic metals industries, the lead sector has faced huge gluts and hard times in the past six to seven years. Lead prices have plummeted, from 78 cents a pound in 1979 to less than 19 cents a pound in 1985. Coupled with the cost of federal regulations, the collapse of the lead market has hurt the industry.    The recycling segment of the lead industry has been hit particularly hard, since the recyclers tend to be smaller companies, with narrow profit margins, forced to follow prices set by the major mines in Missouri. A good picture of the recycling industry can be seen in the battery-processing group, which handles some 75% of the scrap lead in the U.S. With lower prices for lead, the price that these recyclers can offer for lead/acid batteries has fallen from as high as $5 per battery to around 30 cents today. The new prices brought in only 58% of spent batteries in 1985, down from 87% as recently as 1980. The upshot of this, and the relevant aspect as far as the environment is concerned, is that this year roughly 28 million batteries will not be recycled and a total of 260,000 tons of lead will simply be scattered in the environment.    This doesn't look like it will be a passing problem. The recent hard times may have inflicted permanent damage on the lead-recycling industry and suppressed recycling rates for a long time to come. For example, in the late 1970s, there were reported to be 300 battery breakers (which open the batteries and remove the lead) in the U.S.; by 1986, only five were left. Of 80 American secondary smelters (which melt and form the lead) producing in 1983, only 23 remained two years later, with only 60% truly operational. From a smelting capacity of 1.2 million tons per year in 1981, the U.S. capacity has dropped to 700,000 tons. The lead-recycling industry is a shambles, and more lead is passing out of the economy and into the environment each year.    All this brings us back to the proposed EPA regulations. The EPA proposes lowering lead levels in drinking water by 30 parts per billion, and, if adopted and successful, the new rule would effectively remove something less than 500 tons of lead per year from the nation's water supply. At the same time, the regulations would press the government to more strictly control possible sources. The lead-recycling industry would be an obvious target. A recent survey suggests that as many as 70% of the secondary smelters in the nation are already operating in violation of present environmental laws. The government would be justified in requiring new expenditures for better controls and remedies, and would have the legal basis for fining or shutting down those recyclers that did not comply.    The real question here, though, is not whether the government is justified, but whether such a course makes any sense. When operating at full tilt, the secondary smelters recycled over 800,000 tons of lead each year. Environmental regulations and market conditions have already caused the annual loss of 260,000 tons of lead, recycled once upon a time, but now sent to landfills and roadside ditches. There is concern that stricter environmental controls and more effective enforcement will close many of the recyclers that remain. The EPA now must weigh the present benefits of removing less than 500 tons of lead in drinking water, and outlawing the recyclers that currently prevent more than 500,000 tons of lead a year from possibly reaching future water supplies.    The lead-recycling industry was and is an example of the economy's ability to take care of its own waste. In a sense, the economy can and has worked like nature, with an intricate system of predators and scavengers, a food chain and a decay cycle. Regulation should focus on constructive measures, laws that encourage the system to cleanse itself.    In the case of lead, a productive approach would shore up lead recycling by placing cash deposits on lead products, and by requiring metal sorting and resource recovery in municipalities. In the long run, this effort would reduce the amount of lead lost to the environment and would limit a health threat and an economic cost.    ---   Mr. Todd is an independent environmental consultant in Houston. John A.S. Adams, professor of geochemistry at Rice University, gave generous assistance in the preparation of this article. </TEXT></DOC>