<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880531-0064 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV PROPOSED a reduction of superpower conventional forces in Europe.    During a meeting with Reagan on the second day of the U.S.-Soviet summit in Moscow, the Kremlin leader offered a three-step plan calling for cuts of 500,000 troops by both sides. U.S. officials termed the plan a ploy. Reagan and Gorbachev reportedly made progress on reductions in long-range nuclear arsenals, and the two sides neared agreement on two secondary arms-control understandings that may be signed today. The treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles, ratified Friday by the Senate, will be finalized tomorrow. Following the arms session, the president met with a group of monks and with Soviet dissidents. He again challenged the Kremlin to improve human and religious rights.    Former Moscow Communist Party chief Yeltsin accused party ideologist Ligachev of blocking Soviet political changes and said he should resign.    ---   A car bomb exploded in a residential district of mostly Christian eastern Beirut, killing at least 20 people and injuring nearly 80 others, police said. Responsibility wasn't claimed, and police expressed concern that Moslem and Christian extremists had begun a new exchange of car bombings in the city's 13-year-old sectarian war.    A Lebanese newspaper predicted that four college teachers -- three Americans and an Indian resident of the U.S. -- would be freed soon. The four have been held hostage since January 1987, and are believed to be in Beirut's southern slums. Syria has sent about 2,400 soldiers to the area to end fighting between rival Shiite militias.    ---   Dukakis conferred with black supporters and said that Jackson would be offered a major role at the Democratic Party's convention and in the fall presidential campaign. Meanwhile, Bush confirmed a weekend report that he recently met with Meese, who pledged to refrain from any activity that could jeopardize Bush's campaign.    ---   Yugoslav Communist leaders warned that an economic austerity program launched Saturday could provoke new social and political upheavals. Belgrade devalued the dinar by 19.4%, tightened wage curbs, removed controls from 40% of imports and 60% of prices and scrapped foreign-exchange restrictions.    ---   Pakistani opposition officials expressed optimism that they might be able to field candidates in national elections following Sunday's dismissal of the government. President Zia dissolved the National Assembly, fired the premier and dismissed the cabinet. He said they had failed to maintain order. Zia also pledged elections within 90 days.    ---   Thousands of Arabs defied a call for a general strike and went to work in the first failure of such a protest in the six-month-old Palestinian uprising in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Underground Arab leaders had urged the strike to keep attention focused on the territories during the U.S.-Soviet summit in Moscow.    ---   South Korean riot police battled thousands of students during an anti-government rally in Seoul. The radical students called for the overthrow of President Roh's government and the removal of more than 40,000 U.S. troops from South Korea. The violence erupted as the opposition-controlled parliament held its opening session.    ---   Pope John Paul II appointed an Australian prelate as the Vatican's deputy secretary of state, the Holy See's second-highest diplomatic post. Archbishop Edward Cassidy succeeds one of the 25 prelates whose appointments as cardinals next month were announced Sunday by the pontiff.    ---   Costa Rican President Arias said he was confident about progress being made in peace talks between Nicaragua and the Contra rebels. Sandinista and rebel negotiators concluded a third round of peace talks Saturday in Managua, agreeing to meet again next week. Both sides agreed to maintain a cease-fire that was to expire this week.    ---   Sikh religious leaders dismissed all five of the religion's high priests and accused them of collusion with India's government, according to news reports in New Delhi. The move, viewed as certain to further divide Punjab's Sikh community, followed gunbattles earlier this month at the Golden Temple in Amritsar, where 46 people were killed.    ---   Afghan leader Najibullah opened a multi-party national parliament with a call to anti-Kabul guerrillas to abandon their eight-year war and join the government. A Moslem rebel leader in Peshawar, Pakistan, said the guerrilla forces -- who have escalated attacks recently -- currently control about 90% of the Afghan countryside.    ---   Died: Siaka Stevens, 82, former president of Sierra Leone, Sunday, near Freetown. . . . Ernst Ruska, 81, Nobel Prize-winning physicist and inventor of the electron microscope, Friday, in West Berlin. </TEXT></DOC>