<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880107-0009 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Biden vs. FDR </HL><SO> </SO><G> CNG JUS </G><TEXT>   Senator Joseph Biden, writing on the page opposite, now offers a new reason why Judge Robert Bork is a conservative ogre while Judge Anthony Kennedy is not. The latter is more liberal and open-minded, the senator tells us, because he had some kind words to say for &quot;substantive due process.&quot;    What a howler. Getting rid of the doctrine of substantive due process was the whole reason for Franklin D. Roosevelt's famous attempt to pack the Supreme Court. This famous legal concept reached its high point in Lochner, the notorious 1905 case that invalidated New York's working-hour regulations. FDR had to get the courts to drop substantive due process, with its right to &quot;liberty of contract,&quot; to proceed with the New Deal and the alphabet-soup agencies regulating everything from wages and hours to the price of wheat in Ohio. The famous &quot;switch in time that saved the nine&quot; averted the court-packing, but also made substantive due process a relic of the past. We're not sure how far Judge Kennedy wants to go in reviving it, but we do imagine that Senator Biden will be surprised to find himself in the fore of the fight, say, to invalidate the minimum wage, rent control and the progressive income tax.    This bit of history, we should have thought, would be remembered even by someone who ranked 76 out of 85 at Syracuse Law. But after stepping down as a potential president to merely chairman of the committee in charge of confirming Supreme Court justices, Senator Biden's remaining mission in life is to justify the lynching of Judge Bork. If Judge Bork had uttered the phrase &quot;substantive due process,&quot; he surely would have been cudgeled as a reactionary. But in Judge Kennedy's testimony it suddenly becomes a sign of progressive jurisprudence. To the senator, as to Alice's Humpty Dumpty, the words mean what he chooses them to mean.    The same disposition explains the senator's eccentric litmus test, the Ninth Amendment. This amendment, which says the enumeration of rights in the federal Constitution does not deny other rights, has not been the rationale for deciding a single case in the history of the Supreme Court. Its only conceivable relevance is that activist legal scholars such as Laurence Tribe want to use it as an open-ended invitation to write their own views into the Constitution. And on this, the senator to the contrary, Judge Bork and Judge Kennedy testified to essentially the same view.    Judge Bork testified that, aside from two justices citing the Ninth Amendment in the Griswold contraceptive case and Chief Justice Burger's passing reference in a press right-of-access case decided on several other grounds, this amendment is not a part of constitutional debate. He said that the most likely meaning was that &quot;the enumeration of these (rights) does not entitle judges to override state constitutional rights.&quot;    Judge Kennedy said much the same thing: &quot;(Madison) was writing and presenting a proposal at the time when state constitutions went somewhat further than the Constitution of the United States, the Virginia Bill of Rights. And in my view, one of his principal purposes, simply as a statesman, was to give assurance that this was not a proclamation of every right that should be the right of the free people.&quot; Later, no longer speaking of &quot;my view,&quot; he added, &quot;The court has rarely found occasion to refer to it. It seems to me that the court is treating it as something of a reserve clause, to be held in the event that the phrase 'liberty' and the other spacious phrases in the Constitution appear to be inadequate for the court's decision.&quot;    Judge Kennedy ridiculed the idea that the Ninth Amendment frees judges to create new rights: &quot;(Madison) first of all wanted to make it clear that the first eight amendments were not an exhaustive catalog of all human rights,&quot; he said. &quot;Secondly, he wanted to make it clear that the state legislators, that the state ratifying conventions, in drafting their own constitutions, could go much further than he did. And the Ninth Amendment was, in that sense, a recognition of state sovereignty and a recognition of state independence and a recognition of the role of the states in defining human rights. And that's why it's something of an irony to say that the Ninth Amendment can actually be used by a federal court to tell a state court that it cannot do something.&quot;    In other words, it would be perverse to use an amendment guaranteeing federalism to detract from state autonomy, for example by allowing federal judges to create new rights against states and enforcing them in federal courts. Under Justice Kennedy, the Ninth Amendment will not be the activists' dream that some liberals hoped. Indeed, to the extent his view seems different from Judge Bork's, it is even stronger.    In all of this Judge Kennedy looks more and more like an excellent choice. But Senator Biden's historical fiction should not obscure what happened in the Bork case: A gang of liberal yahoos trashed a Supreme Court nominee not merely because he was a conservative, but precisely because he was also the nation's leading constitutional scholar. </TEXT></DOC>