<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871102-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Politics PushU.S., SovietsInto Summits---Same Pressures May MakeCompromise DifficultIn Nuclear-Arms Talks---By John Walcott and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Domestic troubles are driving President Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev toward summit meetings this year and next, but may make it harder for both leaders to compromise on the pivotal issues of long-range nuclear missiles and space-based missile defenses.    The Soviet leader will visit here for two or three days beginning Dec. 7 to sign a treaty eliminating the superpowers' medium and short-range nuclear missiles. Following a series of meetings Friday, Mr. Reagan and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze also spoke optimistically about scheduling another summit in Moscow next spring to conclude a revolutionary agreement cutting both countries' strategic arsenals in half.    The Soviets' adamant opposition to the president's Strategic Defense Initiative has always been the chief obstacle to a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START) and, now, to a Moscow summit in 1988. But after his meetings with American officials last week, Mr. Shevardnadze stressed that the Kremlin considers cuts in strategic weapons the &quot;key problem&quot; and he seemed deliberately to soft-peddle Soviet hostility toward the so-called Star Wars program.    Despite the optimistic tone struck by both sides Friday, there is no indication that Mr. Reagan is willing to accept new restrictions on his Star Wars program or that Mr. Gorbachev has abandoned his efforts to kill it. In fact, the two leaders are under pressure at home, from both familiar enemies and traditional allies, and the political climate may make it harder for them to strike the fundamental bargain needed to clinch a strategic arms deal.    &quot;I think they both have less freedom of action than they had last year at Reykjavik,&quot; the 1986 summit where the two leaders discussed the abolition of nuclear weapons, said William Hyland, the editor of Foreign Affairs magazine.    As Mr. Gorbachev prepared for an important speech to be delivered today at the opening celebration of the 70th anniversary of the Russian revolution, opposition to his efforts to restructure the moribund Soviet economy has surfaced in the Politburo, the nation's top policy-making body.    In a startling revelation of disunity, a top Communist Party official over the weekend confirmed that one of Mr. Gorbachev's staunchest allies, Moscow party boss Boris Yeltsin, in a speech two weeks ago, had pressed the top leadership to move more aggressively on reforms and lambasted those standing in the way. The party official, Anatoly Lukyanov, indicated that the conflict could result in Mr. Yeltsin's resignation.    A summit meeting and a new arms control treaty could help bolster Mr. Gorbachev in his battles at home, but the Soviet leader must take care not to come away from an encounter with Mr. Reagan empty-handed.    Last week, the chief of the Soviet military staff, Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev, warned in an interview with the New York Times that deep cuts in strategic weapons could pose a threat to the Soviet Union unless they are coupled with new restrictions on Mr. Reagan's Star Wars program.    After his first meeting with the American leader, in Geneva in 1985, Mr. Gorbachev was criticized by some of his colleagues for not securing American concessions, especially on space-based weapons. Agreeing next year to a radical strategic arms treaty without guaranteeing the demise of SDI also could be politically risky.    Mr. Reagan finds himself in a similar bind. The approaching Washington summit and the treaty eliminating intermediate-range nuclear forces (INF) will provide, at least in the short term, a needed boost to his prestige. But the INF treaty won't be ratified without opposition from conservatives and, as the 1988 campaign gathers steam, any concessions the president makes on SDI in order to secure a strategic arms treaty will provoke even greater protest.    GOP conservatives' strategy was suggested in a statement released late Friday by one presidential contender, New York Rep. Jack Kemp. Mr. Kemp, a longtime supporter of the president's SDI program, criticized the almost-completed INF treaty, then, more bluntly, warned the president not to make any concessions on SDI in order to negotiate a strategic arms agreement. &quot;SDI is not and cannot be a bargaining chip, but must be America's insurance policy.&quot;    Though the Senate seems certain to ratify the INF treaty, Mr. Reagan may need to proceed cautiously on SDI and other issues to avoid complicating the ratification process. Sen. Alan Cranston (D., Calif.), a supporter of the treaty, warned yesterday on NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; that conservative senators may fight the pact by attaching &quot;reservations or amendments that would in effect kill it.&quot;    Allegiance to SDI already has become a litmus test for the Republican right. &quot;We're not going to give up the SDI,&quot; Kansas Sen. Robert Dole, another GOP presidential candidate, insisted on &quot;Meet the Press.&quot;    But a compromise on space-based missile defenses appears to be the most important obstacle to a strategic arms agreement. In recent weeks, the Soviets have made modest moves toward resolving two other outstanding issues, setting limits on specific types of long-range missiles and establishing provisions for verifying compliance with a strategic arms treaty.    During Mr. Shevardnadze's visit to Washington, U.S. and Soviet officials suggested that an agreement pledging both sides to abide by the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty for seven to ten years could clear the path toward a strategic arms treaty; the ABM treaty prohibits deployment of space-based missile defenses. But Mr. Shevardnadze acknowledged in a news conference late Friday that there was no discussion last week of the overriding question: how the ABM Treaty applies to the administration's plans for testing and developing missile defenses.    Moreover, Mr. Reagan's national security adviser, Frank Carlucci, said yesterday on &quot;Meet the Press&quot; that interpretation of the ABM Treaty &quot;is not something that should be negotiated with the Soviets.&quot;    But a treaty cutting strategic weapons is critical both to Mr. Reagan's plans for a missile defense and to making an INF agreement meaningful. The Reagan administration has renounced the existing SALT II arms agreement and, without new limits on long-range weapons, the Soviets would be free to overwhelm a Star Wars defense with new nuclear warheads and to replace their intermediate-range missiles with long-range ones. </TEXT></DOC>