<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0141 </DOCNO><HL> ABA Is 'Dining With The Devil'</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Following is a transcript of a speech delivered last month by Soviet human-rights activist Anatoly Koryagin at the American Bar Association's annual meeting in San Francisco. In his speech, Dr. Koryagin urges the ABA to abrogate its two-year-old &quot;declaration of cooperation&quot; with the Association of Soviet Lawyers, which states that both nations' lawyers are &quot;pledged to the rule of law.&quot;    Dr. Koryagin, a psychiatrist, spent six years in prison for &quot;anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda&quot; after publication of an article in which he wrote about Soviets who were forcibly committed to psychiatric hospitals for their political beliefs. He was allowed to emigrate to Switzerland in April. Articles about him have appeared on this page.    The Assembly of the ABA voted 156 to 32 to retain the declaration.    To say that the American Bar Association has concluded an agreement with the Association of Soviet Lawyers is simply not true. Any professional association is a voluntary union of professional individuals who form a self-governing organization. In the Soviet Union there are no such associations in any field, including the legal area.    The ABA has signed an agreement to cooperate with one of the departments of the party-governmental apparatus of the U.S.S.R., which is represented by party functionaries with a legal education. These are primarily workers of the KGB and members of the procuracy, who are carrying out party orders, which include making use of their contacts with American lawyers in order to reap propaganda successes and then neutralize the negative attitude toward Soviet repressions that exists in the West.    In signing this &quot;declaration of cooperation,&quot; American lawyers have agreed to consider the ASL lawyers as their rightful counterparts and to respect those laws that Soviet lawyers are serving. But have they forgotten that the Soviet legal system has always been used as the first and foremost instrument for carrying out the repressions in the U.S.S.R., and that now and at all times these very same repressions are put into practice by the Soviet legal system? Soviet jurisprudence carries the major burden of responsibility for the deaths of tens of millions of victims of the Bolshevik regime.    Over the years Soviet lawyers have contrived &quot;cases&quot; against innocent people and have sent them to their deaths, they have carried out investigations and the ensuing trials, and they have inspected the concentration camps where the prisoners were sent. There are no crimes that Soviet lawyers have not committed, and now these lawyers are partners of America, which has given us the Bill of Rights.    I was tried in the Soviet Union three times and each &quot;trial&quot; was an insult and a mockery of the rule of law, because during these trials the lawyers were also a part of the prosecution. Whenever I recall the English saying &quot;if you want to dine with the devil, you should use a long spoon,&quot; I always think to myself: How hungry must someone be, in order to dine with the devil?    Were there any special factors involved that forced the ABA to sign this agreement with the Soviet lawyers, an agreement that it surely would not have signed with a similar association from South Africa or Hitler's Third Reich? No, there were not. Those in the ABA who support this agreement probably hope that it will help them develop contacts and a dialogue with the Soviet Union that, in turn, will help bring about some positive transformations in the Soviet legal system. But this is only an illusion.    Honest American lawyers will never be able to influence the mindset of KGB members who are carrying out their assignments. And these Soviet lawyers are already claiming that the observance of human rights in their country has reached such a high level that now even the Americans are standing with them shoulder to shoulder as equal partners. And while they are using this agreement as a smoke screen, they continue to promote lawlessness in their country. It is indeed true that &quot;good intentions pave the way to hell.&quot; No, dining with the devil isn't worth it.    Perhaps some people think that in the framework of today's glasnost policy of Mikhail Gorbachev the prospects that this lawyers' agreement may do some good are much greater. But this is also not correct, because glasnost is also a screen, albeit a denser and firmer one. . . .    I and my unfortunate brothers, Soviet labor camp prisoners, believe that American lawyers should not have any official or informal contacts with official Soviet legal organizations, but they should strive to broaden their contacts with Soviet lawyers on a private basis.    With such an arrangement the number of Soviet lawyers who will be involved will be smaller, but quantity will be substituted by quality. The American Bar Association has an excellent example to follow in dealing with Soviet professionals who are involved in the punitive process: namely, that of the American Psychiatric Association.    At the present time the allegorical story of people sailing in the same boat is often cited. Envision for a moment a case in which a doctor must cross a river in order to help a man who is sick, while a burglar wants to reach the other shore in order to rob and murder that man. Should the doctor cooperate with the criminal and cross the river in the same boat? I believe he should not. It is one thing not to have the opportunity to do good, but it is a different thing to help promote evil. I ask you to think about this.    ---   (Translation by Ludmilla Thorne of Freedom House.) </TEXT></DOC>