<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Kidder Is Fined $25.3 Million, SettlesInsider-Trading, Other SEC Allegations---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In a precedent-setting enforcement action, the Securities and Exchange Commission levied $25.3 million in penalties and imposed stringent controls on Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. in return for settling sweeping allegations of civil insider trading, &quot;parking&quot; and other securities-law violations.    The settlement is the second largest in the SEC's history, exceeded only by the $100 million paid by arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky last November to settle insider-trading and other securities-law charges.    For Kidder, the settlement achieved an overriding goal: It allowed the old-line securities firm to escape criminal prosecution. In an unusual statement, Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani praised the cooperation of Kidder and its parent, General Electric Co., and announced that he won't prosecute Kidder. In its settlement, the company didn't admit or deny wrongdoing.    However, Kidder still faces the possibility of private civil lawsuits. These could be brought by individuals and companies who might claim they were damaged by Kidder's allegedly unlawful trading, by disclosure by certain Kidder employees of confidential corporate information, or by the firm's other alleged securities-law violations.    As part of the settlement, Kidder also agreed to disband its arbitrage department and halt indefinitely stock-market takeover speculation by the firm.    Kidder is the first major firm implicated in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal to settle civil SEC charges. Though the SEC could have pressed for even greater monetary damages under the Insider Trading Sanctions Act, the negotiating stand adopted by the SEC was tough. The severity of the settlement thus indicates that other firms, and not just individuals, may be held accountable for any wrongdoing.    &quot;Plainly, it's a precedent,&quot; John Sturc, associate director of enforcement at the SEC, said of the Kidder settlement.    &quot;This is not getting off lightly,&quot; said Alan Bromberg, a securities-law professor at Southern Methodist University in Dallas. &quot;The implication is that anything less than full cooperation and a housecleaning may lead to criminal prosecution. I see a real turning of the screws&quot; on securities firms.    Announcement of the settlement ends much of the uncertainty that has shrouded Kidder since February, when former Kidder takeover specialist Martin A. Siegel pleaded guilty to two felonies after admitting that he exchanged inside information with Mr. Boesky and Robert M. Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. Mr. Freeman has denied those allegations.    Mr. Boesky has pleaded guilty to a felony connected with the insider-trading investigation and is awaiting sentencing.    In a statement, Kidder said that &quot;we are obviously pleased&quot; by the U.S. attorney's decision not to prosecute. The firm said the payment to the SEC, while substantial, represents less than 4% of the firm's capital. Kidder added that GE is providing Kidder with an additional $100 million of subordinated debt capital.    &quot;As far as the firm is concerned, the slate is wiped clean,&quot; said Gary P. Naftalis, a partner at Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin andamp; Soll, which represented Kidder.    But uncertainties persist for some current and former Kidder officials. The SEC said pointedly that its investigation of possible wrongdoing at Kidder continues, and the U.S. attorney made no mention of individuals in his announcement that his office wouldn't prosecute the firm.    In its complaint, the SEC unveiled charges that individuals at Kidder parked stock to hide Mr. Boesky's ownership and falsified books and records. People familiar with the investigation said that Mr. Siegel had nothing to do with the alleged parking and that other individuals at the firm entered into the scheme as an accommodation for Mr. Boesky. Kidder officials confirmed that the SEC is currently investigating allegations of parking at the firm.    The SEC complaint alleges that Kidder engaged in a parking scheme with Mr. Boesky's Seemala Corp., designed to conceal Seemala's ownership of securities and the fact that Seemala was in violation of net capital rules. The complaint charges that Kidder agreed to hold securities for Seemala, and that Seemala would buy back the same securities in a short time, receiving all profits or losses.    Specifically, the complaint said that on July 2 and 3, 1985, Kidder purchased from Seemala 350,000 Unocal shares for a total of $10.4 million. On Aug. 5 and 6, Kidder sold 200,000 Unocal shares to Seemala for a total of $5.9 million, the complaint added. The complaint said that Seemala told Kidder to sell the remaining 150,000 shares of Unocal in the open market, because Seemala no longer wanted the shares. As a result of the Unocal transactions, Kidder had a $2,000 trading loss and incurred unstated carrying costs. But it made $68,750 in commissions -- twice Kidder's normal rate.    Neither the SEC nor Kidder officials would identify any individuals responsible for the alleged parking scheme. Given the nature of the alleged scheme, a number of Kidder officials would have been involved, the people familiar with the investigation said.    The SEC complaint also identified for the first time a number of stocks of companies about which Mr. Siegel allegedly received inside information. The stocks are Continental Group Inc., St. Regis Corp., General Foods Co., Houston Natural Gas Corp., Unocal Corp. and R.H. Macy andamp; Co.    With the exception of Macy, all the stocks were previously identified by this newspaper as likely to figure in any criminal charges filed against Mr. Freeman and two former Kidder arbitragers, Richard Wigton and Timothy L. Tabor.    People familiar with the government's case said Macy's stock isn't likely to figure in any criminal charges, although they said there is sufficient evidence to support civil insider-trading charges with respect to the stock.    The complaint didn't mention Mr. Freeman of Goldman Sachs. Rather, it alleged that Mr. Siegel swapped inside information with an arbitrager who was a partner at another New York investment bank. However, that individual is Mr. Freeman, according to people familiar with the case.    The SEC's complaint alleged that the unnamed arbitrager disclosed inside information to Kidder through Mr. Siegel, and that Kidder's risk-arbitrage department purchased or sold securities and options based on the information, thereby making profits for the firm, or avoiding losses. The profits formed the basis for the $25.3 million penalty.    The SEC alleged that Kidder unlawfully earned a total of $13.7 million from 1984 through February 1986. The firm disgorged that money as part of the settlement. Of that amount, $5.8 million allegedly was made after the Insider Trading Sanctions Act went into effect. Under the act, double damages of $11.6 million were levied on that portion.    Previous criminal charges against Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor that named only two stocks, Storer Communications Inc. and Unocal, were dismissed, but the government has vowed to seek new indictments against the three, containing broader charges. All have asserted their innocence.    Although Kidder neither admitted nor denied the SEC's allegations, people familiar with GE and Kidder's decision to settle said officials of the two companies and their advisers who examined the available evidence concluded that the government has a very strong case. Moreover, any case against Kidder would have been especially strong, they said, since Mr. Siegel, a former high Kidder official, had admitted criminal wrongdoing for which the firm would likely be held accountable.    &quot;Did you ever know someone who admitted a criminal act that they didn't do?&quot; asked one GE official. One person close to Kidder said the stigma of a criminal prosecution and conviction would have been &quot;disastrous&quot; and &quot;intolerable&quot; to the firm.    Kidder's settlement was widely viewed on Wall Street as having serious implications for Goldman. In a statement, Goldman said that &quot;Kidder undoubtedly has good business reasons&quot; for its decision. Goldman has said repeatedly that it has conducted a thorough investigation that exonerated Mr. Freeman and found no wrongdoing by anyone at the firm.    &quot;We continue to believe in Bob Freeman's innocence. Our attorneys have advised us that Kidder's settlement will have no effect whatever on any possible trial of Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor,&quot; the firm said. Mr. Freeman remains head of arbitrage at Goldman.    Should Mr. Freeman go to trial and be convicted, Goldman would probably face civil SEC charges, and the U.S. attorney would likely seek a criminal indictment against the firm, according to people familiar with the government's investigation. Goldman might still face SEC charges even if Mr. Freeman is charged and exonerated, since the burden of proof in civil cases is lower than in criminal cases, they said.    In what was viewed by some as a veiled message to Goldman and other firms implicated in the scandal, Mr. Giuliani heaped praise on the cooperation of GE and Kidder and provided an unsually detailed explanation for his decision not to seek criminal charges.    In his statement, he said that &quot;because GE decided at an early stage to cooperate fully with the government, began institution of vigorous structural, management, policy and trading reforms, and reached an appropriate agreement with the SEC, the public interest has been well served.&quot;    In an interview, Mr. Giuliani added that Kidder has &quot;escaped a stigma, but they haven't escaped paying every single dollar that they're required to pay. You can't put a corporation in prison.&quot;    As previously reported, Kidder paved the way for the SEC settlement and staved off an indictment by implementing a management shake-up that included ousting its chief executive officer, Ralph D. DeNunzio, and other high officials. Mr. DeNunzio remains chairman and hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing. Kidder earlier suspended Mr. Wigton and stopped paying his legal fees, as well as Mr. Tabor's.    In what may become a precedent for other securities firms, Kidder agreed not to resume arbitrage activities before implementing a series of tough controls. According to the SEC's order in the case, Kidder compliance officers would be required to analyze every &quot;significant&quot; securities position taken by the firm's arbitragers to ensure compliance with securities laws. They would have to inquire into the reasons why the position was taken and the information known to the people making the investment decision.    However, GE has no intention of allowing Kidder to engage in arbitrage anytime soon, if ever. &quot;Risk arbitrage can't be run without inherent risks and conflicts,&quot; said one person close to GE. Such decisions could give impetus to proposals for legislation that would ban securities firms from takeover-related arbitrage, given the apparent failure of self-policing mechanisms.    Kidder also agreed to hire an outside consultant approved by the SEC to review its policies and procedures. The consultant is expected to recommend management systems to detect any insider trading by employees and to maintain the &quot;Chinese Wall&quot; separating securities trading and investment banking activities. Kidder agreed to implement the consultant's recommendations.    Kidder will be subject to periodic scrutiny by an outside reviewer to ensure that the consultant's recommendations are carried out, the SEC said.    Kidder agreed to be censured by the SEC. The SEC also issued temporary orders exempting Kidder and certain affiliates from legislation that would otherwise bar Kidder from managing money. E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. received a similar exemption after it admitted check-kiting felonies in 1985.    Although the prospect of civil suits still looms, Kidder's $25 million payment is small potatoes by GE standards. In the first quarter, GE earned $624 million, or $1.37 a share, on $8.32 billion in revenue. Analysts have said GE Chairman John F. Welch Jr. has been very upbeat about the firm's earnings for the remainder of the year.    In addition, Kidder's earnings have set year-to-date records, GE said, despite a near-shutdown of arbitrage operations after Mr. Wigton's arrest and suspension last February.    The SEC could have sought far greater penalties against Kidder under the Insider Trading Sanctions Act than it did. An SEC official said the agency could have sought damages of three times Kidder's alleged unlawful profits, plus treble damages for allegedly unlawful profits made by anyone else involved in the scheme. The act holds violators responsible for all unlawful profits attributable to the alleged scheme. But the SEC official noted that the amount of damages sought by the agency is discretionary.    ---   Janet Guyon and William Power contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>