<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0059 </DOCNO><HL> Losing It All: Complex Tale of ManWho Shot Stockbroker in Miami---By Martha Brannigan and Sydney P. FreedbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MERSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last Thursday, Arthur Kane anxiously visited his Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. stockbroker's office here to check stock quotes. A regular tape watcher and an active trader, he had seen his $4 million market stake nearly wiped out by the market's crash. That afternoon, the 53-year-old investor seemed unusually agitated.    &quot;He was darting from one Quotron to the next, frantically trying to push out prices that would suit his need,&quot; says Rabbi Brett Goldstein, one of about a dozen Merrill Lynch clients who would see Mr. Kane at the suburban office two or three times a week. &quot;But it wasn't happening. Things were getting worse and worse. It was like a death spiral.&quot;    On Monday, Arthur Kane became a terrifying footnote to the Crash of '87. He entered the Merrill Lynch office and shot dead the office manager, seriously wounded his longtime broker and put a bullet through his own right temple.    The shootings were the worst personal tragedies to come out of the market crash so far. But in their aftermath, the story of Arthur Kane -- a heavyset, graying, bespectacled man -- has become, if anything, more bizarre. On the surface, it appeared that Mr. Kane, who was highly successful -- and leveraged -- in the market until the crash, was pushed over the brink by desperation over his deteriorating financial position. But it's already becoming clear that his story is far more complex, involving several criminal cases, mystery about the source of the funds he invested and possible ties to organized crime.    --Until 11 years ago, Arthur Kane was Arthur Katz, a Kansas City, Mo., lawyer who, among other things, was disbarred after participating in an elaborate scheme to defraud insurance firms by staging phony auto accidents. In 1976, the Justice Department took him into its Federal Witness Protection Program and gave him a new identity as Arthur Kane. A Justice spokesman says there had been threats on Mr. Katz's life, though he won't elaborate.    --About then, Mr. Kane helped federal prosecutors in Philadelphia crack a big stock-manipulation scheme in which he was a peripheral figure. His efforts helped send an associate of the late mobster Meyer Lansky to prison. Mr. Lansky, whom prosecutors for decades described as the financial brains of organized crime, lived on Miami Beach -- a short drive from the Miami suburb where the Justice Department relocated Mr. Kane. A Justice Department spokesman says Mr. Kane was placed there because &quot;it was considered to be a safe area for him.&quot; Even with Meyer Lansky nearby? &quot;Yes.&quot;    --Mr. Kane also helped prosecutors in a mob-related Kansas City case. Federal prosecutors say that in 1978 he helped unravel an insurance fraud there in which a lawyer named Ira Keith Witschner was eventually indicted and convicted. Ronald Reed, former U.S. attorney for the western district of Missouri, says Mr. Witschner, who died in 1985, had ties to organized crime. The Kansas City Star reported in 1979 that Mr. Witschner was allegedly involved in financing a heroin trafficker, an arson-for-profit scheme and a fencing operation, among other things.    --Mr. Kane himself served time -- as Mr. Katz, interrupting his new life to do so. He pleaded guilty to federal charges stemming from his earlier Kansas City insurance fraud, in which accidents were staged and phony insurance claims filed, and he served six months. Mr. Kane cooperated with prosecutors in that case and helped convict several lawyers in his old firm.    --One of Mr. Kane's old Kansas City law partners -- A. Henry Tager, whose conviction in the insurance-fraud case was reversed on appeal -- claims that Mr. Kane continued the fraud even as he was cooperating with authorities. &quot;He was settling cases left and right&quot; involving fraudulent insurance claims, Mr. Tager says. He says he was as surprised as anyone when Mr. Katz disappeared to assume a new identity -- and claims Mr. Kane took with him four antique desks belonging to Mr. Tager. &quot;There was no way I could find him,&quot; he says. &quot;After a year or so, I gave up.&quot;    Others persevered. In switching his identity, Mr. Kane left behind some of Mr. Katz's debts. In 1978, for instance, Irving Trust Co. sued him for fraud in Manhattan federal district court after he refused to return $207,148 the bank had wrongly transferred to a brokerage account of his outside the bank. Rather than simply allow the error to be reversed, Mr. Kane quickly closed the brokerage account. The suit identified the defendant -- by then living as Mr. Kane -- as Arthur Katz, and the papers were served through the witness-protection program. Court records show he paid a judgment of $207,148 plus interest and attorneys' fees -- but not until April 1983.    --Whatever the reasons for Mr. Kane's being made a protected witness, the Justice Department defends him strongly, saying he was an &quot;ideal&quot; witness from 1976 to 1978. &quot;He was willing to help us on other cases that he was aware of,&quot; a Justice spokesman says. The spokesman says Mr. Kane hasn't worked with the department since 1978. But he adds that after Mr. Kane's suicide Monday, Gerald Shur, head of the witness-protection program, flew here to offer condolences to the family and &quot;to make an assessment of their need for security.&quot; The spokesman says Mr. Kane had no direct ties to organized crime.    --A big question is where Mr. Kane got the funds he invested through Merrill. Police say that soon after moving here, he opened the account, in his wife's name, with about $500,000. He didn't add funds to the account and seldom withdrew any.    --It's unclear whether some of the money came from the frauds in which he admitted participating prior to changing identities. Dennis Taylor, a former Justice Department attorney who prosecuted the Philadelphia stock-manipulation case, has asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to investigate Mr. Kane's stock activities and the source of his funds.    --The source may have been Mr. Kane's wife, Judith, who, according to a report in the Kansas City Times, comes from a wealthy Kansas City family. (A relative at the Kane household said Mrs. Kane wouldn't comment.) Not only was the Merrill Lynch account in her name, she also was listed as owner of the family's house (six bedrooms, four baths, a swimming pool and appraised for tax purposes at $430,257) and four of the family's six cars: a 1985 Toyota, a 1984 Datsun, a 1983 Mercedes, and a 1980 Cadillac. Two other cars, a 1986 Pontiac and a 1987 Cadillac, were in her husband's name.    --Whatever the source of funds, both for his investments and for his affluent life-style, it clearly wasn't his job. He was employed, because of his Justice Department sponsors, as a claims representative for the Social Security Administration, earning $29,676 annually when he died.    --Mr. Kane's real love, in business terms, seems to have been the stock market. In a federal court deposition, Mr. Kane once said he was seduced by the stock market in 1968 when he joined an investment club set up by his cousin. At the time, he was making $500 to $600 a month as a lawyer. He remarked that when he saw one astute trade by a friend, he was &quot;deeply impressed. I had never seen anything like that.&quot;    David W. Russell, his lawyer from Kansas City days, says: &quot;He was the kind of person who could take $30,000 and turn it into a couple or three hundred thousand.&quot;    During much of this decade's bull market, Mr. Kane was trading $2 million to $3 million in stocks each month. He focused on takeover stocks, and he was heavily leveraged. At the end of September, for instance, his stock portfolio had a market value of about $11 million, but that included $7 million in margin debt.    And then the market fell apart. Arthur Kane's fortunes collapsed with it.    During the crash, Merrill Lynch began making margin calls on Mr. Kane's account and selling his stocks, including shares in Merrill Lynch itself, when he failed to meet the calls. In the end, police say, his holdings had dwindled to about 30,000 Telex Corp. common shares bought on margin. Merrill Lynch was squeezing him to meet a margin call on those securities, and the market was going against him.    &quot;It was kind of a joke -- find out what Kane's doing and do the opposite,&quot; says one Merrill Lynch client. &quot;If he's buying, sell. If he's going long, go short.&quot;    Mr. Kane grew deeply depressed. He showed up for his job only once last week, for about an hour on Wednesday; the other days he called in sick. Police say he told family members he might kill himself -- and he was so upset about the market that he kept throwing up. He spent more and more time at the Merrill Lynch office, checking stock quotes. &quot;He was markedly shaken,&quot; says Rabbi Goldstein.    Last Friday, along with his usual stop at Merrill Lynch, Mr. Kane made an unusual stop: at a gun shop, a few minutes down U.S. Highway 1 from the brokerage. He coolly priced weapons, told the clerk he'd be back, then left without buying. He said he wanted a gun because he felt threatened, police say.    On Saturday and Sunday, he repeatedly phoned his broker at home. On Sunday, he visited the gun shop again, with one of his daughters. He tried to buy a gun in her name, police say, but the shop clerk refused, finding the request odd because Mr. Kane already had indicated his intention to buy a gun himself. The Kanes left without making a purchase.    Later that day, Mr. Kane returned and paid $327.60 with his MasterCard for a .357-caliber Magnum revolver and bullets. Under a local ordinance, he couldn't take possession until the next day.    At 7:30 Monday morning, he called in sick to work -- and asked his boss if the government's life insurance covered suicides. The boss was concerned and promptly drove out to his house, but was reassured by the visit and left.    At 9:30, Mr. Kane drove to the Merrill Lynch office. When he learned the market was down in early trading, he left and drove to the gun shop. He picked up the revolver he had bought the day before. Then he stopped at a nearby department store and bought a $39.99 brown vinyl briefcase, paying cash and telling the clerk he didn't need the box it came in.    He returned to his car and drove to his broker's office. </TEXT></DOC>