<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870226-0085 </DOCNO><HL> White House, in Its Iran Affair Moves, IgnoredThe Intelligence Apparatus It Claimed It Rebuilt---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last Sept. 26, President Reagan visited the super-secret National Security Agency in Maryland and spoke of the importance of preventing leaks of sensitive intelligence material.    &quot;You protect the secrets and hold them in trust for your fellow citizens, and there can be no excuse for breaking that trust,&quot; he told employees of the government's electronic-eavesdropping agency. &quot;Let us remember that those who would take it on themselves to declassify vital information endanger all of our lives, our freedom, and our way of life.&quot;    At almost the same time, however, back at the White House, the president's lieutenants were preparing to deliver American intelligence secrets to Iran -- over the strenuous objections of the country's senior career intelligence professionals.    It was the fourth time in 1986 that the White House had ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to prepare a package of secret U.S. intelligence on the Iran-Iraq war that could be handed over to private arms dealers for delivery to Tehran as part of the failed effort to barter for the freedom of U.S. hostages.    The aides told worried CIA officials they were acting under the authority of Ronald Reagan himself, who has the legal authority to declassify secrets.    But the incident points up an important pattern in the long Iran-Contra affair. The Reagan administration -- which prides itself on rebuilding U.S. intelligence capabilities and zealously guarding secrets -- ignored, excluded or overruled U.S. intelligence professionals again and again.    Congress, the public and even many CIA experts were kept in the dark. But the White House shared U.S. intelligence secrets with fanatical leaders in Tehran, with foreign middlemen the CIA mistrusted, and even with former officials once tied to the renegade ex-CIA agent Edwin Wilson, now in prison for providing explosives to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi.    &quot;When you get to the point where you trust the Ayatollah Khomeini with information you won't give the speaker of the House, you've got things mixed up,&quot; charges Sen. Daniel P. Moynihan (D., N.Y.), former vice chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.    Sen. Moynihan, who was also a U.S. ambassador, argues that the Iran affair was &quot;a deep disservice to the career guys&quot; in U.S. intelligence. CIA Director William Casey, a political crony of the president, was involved, of course, along with a few hand-picked CIA aides. But the project was launched without the career professionals at the agency who normally plan and oversee covert operations.    Not all career intelligence officers, of course, were totally in the dark or totally opposed. As the arms-sales effort dragged on, some top professionals got involved in parts of it, even though the CIA apparatus wasn't in charge. There is already criticism in Congress that these top career officers went along too easily with policies they privately thought unwise. Robert Gates, the career man who has been nominated to succeed Mr. Casey, is being castigated for following dubious orders too easily as Mr. Casey's deputy and looking the other way when he encountered hints of the diversion of funds to the Contras.    The report of Mr. Reagan's own Tower Commission, due out today, may shed more light on how the professional U.S. intelligence community was dealt with in the Iran affair. But there is already a wealth of material on the public record that provides details of the CIA role.    Ironically, given the CIA's later discomfort with the project, the original White House justification for it was a memo written in May 1985 by a top CIA Mideast analyst, Graham Fuller. Mr. Fuller, dissenting from the agency's mainstream analysis, raised an alarm about possible Soviet gains in Iran and proposed efforts by the U.S. to build ties to the anti-American Tehran government, including possible arms sales.    The Fuller memo was seized upon by the National Security Council staff in the White House, where there was a deep preoccupation with freeing American hostages held in Lebanon by terrorists loyal to Iran. Under orders from former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, a draft presidential directive was written in June 1985 authorizing arms sales to Iran. This NSC document was attacked in writing as &quot;absurd&quot; by Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and as &quot;perverse&quot; by Secretary of State George Shultz.    Unlike the two secretaries, Mr. Casey became an early personal advocate of the arms-sales idea, possibly because of his penchant for flashy foreign operations and his deep anger that one of the hostages was William Buckley, the CIA station chief in Beirut. But Mr. Casey bypassed the normal covert-operations mechanisms of the CIA and assigned hand-picked individuals to do particular tasks.    In fact, a year later, when a new official CIA analysis was issued over his signature discounting Mr. Fuller's theory of a great Soviet threat to Iran, neither Mr. Casey nor any other official involved moved to halt the arms sales.    In the summer of 1985, according to the report of the Senate Intelligence Committee and information disclosed in the press, the idea of selling arms to Iran in hopes of getting the hostages released moved on a fast track at the White House, but without the initial input of these career CIA professionals or even the benefit of information in CIA files.    For instance, a key factor in the rapid progress of the plan was encouragement by Israeli officials, who insisted to Mr. McFarlane that there were &quot;moderates&quot; in Iran who might foster ties to the West and help get the hostages freed. The Israelis also proposed that the U.S. rely on an Iranian arms dealer, Manoucher Gharbonifar, whom Israeli officials claimed was a reliable intermediary with these &quot;moderates.&quot; Mr. McFarlane accepted these Israeli views, and led the fight to persuade President Reagan that summer to permit indirect arms sales by Israel in order to build ties to Tehran and get the hostages freed.    But he later testified that he was never apprised of information in CIA files that raised questions about both Israeli motives and Mr. Gharbonifar's reliability.    The CIA had detailed information showing a long pattern of previous Israeli arms sales to Iran from 1982 to 1985, a period when the U.S. was urging Jerusalem to withhold arms from Tehran. But Mr. Casey never shared this information with Mr. McFarlane, according to Senate investigators. In fact, the Senate report says Mr. Casey denied to Mr. McFarlane press reports of the long pattern of Israeli-Iranian arms dealings.    And the CIA had long been convinced that Mr. Gharbonifar was unreliable and a liar. In August 1984, in fact, the CIA had notified other government agencies that Mr. Gharbonifar was a &quot;fabricator&quot; who shouldn't be relied upon. The Senate report says the CIA had information he had been involved in drug-smuggling as well.    These CIA suspicions were borne out in the following months. Mr. Gharbonifar failed a polygraph test in January 1986, which indicated he might be acting under the control of Iran to deceive the U.S. In February 1986, Col. North complained that Mr. Gharbonifar had given Iranian officials a distorted translation of U.S. statements. And in March 1986, when a retired CIA Iran expert was brought in as translator as a result, the expert, George Cave, was &quot;horrified&quot; to learn of Mr. Gharbonifar's pivotal role. Mr. Cave had cut off agency dealings with Mr. Gharbonifar in early 1983 because &quot;I found him to be a fabricator and a liar,&quot; he told the Senate committee.    But Col. North, a private NSC consultant named Michael Ledeen, and even Mr. Casey, continued to endorse Mr. Gharbonifar at key points in the enterprise.    And Mr. Gharbonifar wasn't the only person the White House relied upon in the operation who was mistrusted by intelligence professionals. Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and a friend, ex-CIA agent Thomas Clines, were used by Col. North in both the Iran and Contra ends of the arms shipments. But both men had past ties to Mr. Wilson, the renegade ex-CIA agent who went over to Libya and is now in jail. Gen. Secord's ties to Mr. Wilson had helped force him out of a high-level Pentagon job, and a company of Mr. Clines's, financed with help from Mr. Wilson, pleaded guilty in a scheme to bilk the Pentagon on arms shipments to Egypt.    When an arms-shipping network run by Gen. Secord showed up in Central America as part of the complex operation run by Col. North, CIA agents there raised alarms. But Gen. Secord, Mr. Clines and an associate, Albert Hakim (who has admitted funneling U.S. corporate bribes to Iranian officials in the 1970s), continued in a central role and were entrusted with secrets denied the Congress and many federal officials. In fact, last year Mr. Hakim was employed as a &quot;second channel&quot; to Iran when Mr. Gharbonifar's efforts failed to yield the release of all U.S. hostages.    Even Gen. Secord's lawyer, Thomas Green, who had earlier battled the Pentagon over the general's career troubles, seemed to know more about the secret operation than many government officials. Last Nov. 24, the day before the White House disclosed that funds had been diverted to the Contras, Mr. Green -- representing both Gen. Secord and Col. North -- met with a top Justice Department official. He offered a detailed account of Gen. Secord's and Mr. Hakim's role in the affair, including the diversion of funds, according to the Senate report, while arguing that no laws had been broken.    It was Mr. Hakim who was to receive the secret U.S. intelligence information for Iran being prepared while the president was making his September 1986 speech at the National Security Agency. Mr. Gharbonifar had handled the previous intelligence transfers.    The White House decision to pass on U.S. intelligence to Tehran caused consistent clashes with CIA professionals. In January 1986 Adm. Poindexter overruled objections by Deputy CIA Director John McMahon, a career officer, and ordered the first intelligence package prepared for Mr. Gharbonifar. According to an unpublished draft of the Senate report, Mr. McMahon cabled Director Casey to complain that &quot;everyone at HQ is opposed to weapons support and intelligence transfer because the Principal (Gharbonifar) is a liar and we will be aiding and abetting the wrong people.&quot;    Mr. Gates, the president's current nominee to succeed Mr. Casey, also told the Senate committee that as the CIA's top intelligence analyst &quot;he objected to the release of some specific intelligence relating to Iraq but that he was overruled by the NSC.&quot;    The intelligence was given to Mr. Gharbonifar the same month he had failed his lie-detector exam on such questions as whether he was operating to deceive the U.S. on Iran's behalf. Like the other intelligence deliveries, and the arms sales arranged by Mr. Gharbonifar, it failed either to free the American hostages or to produce a strategic opening to Iran. </TEXT></DOC>