<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0037 </DOCNO><HL> Pat Robertson Is Heading a Mysterious ArmyWhose First Big Battle Looms in Iowa Precincts---By James M. PerryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> AMES, Iowa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;The country is facing a great moral crisis,&quot; says Norman Foerster, &quot;and Pat Robertson is confronting it more than any of the other presidential candidates.&quot;    Mr. Foerster, who sells huge grain-moving vacuum cleaners to farmers, worries about abortions, pornography, drugs, and secular humanism in the classrooms.    He is a soldier in a mysterious new army that is marching, trumpets sounding, on the walls of a modern-day Jericho. Inside the walls, trembling just a little, are George Bush, Robert Dole and Jack Kemp and the rest of the Republican field, and all their followers.    &quot;Who are these people?&quot; asks Rich Bond, a veteran of Iowa campaigns and the man in charge of the Bush operation here. &quot;We have no sightings on any of them. We don't know who they are or what they want.&quot;    The opening battle will be fought the night of next Feb. 8, when thousands of Iowans gather at 2,493 places -- homes, community halls, firehouses -- to begin choosing 37 delegates to the Republican national convention. (Democrats caucus the same night to begin choosing 58 delegates, but they have no mysterious army on the march.)    The biggest mystery here -- and perhaps the biggest mystery in American politics this year -- is the size and character of this army that is marching for Pat Robertson, the evangelical television preacher.    Supporters of Mr. Robertson -- a candidate dismissed out of hand by most political soothsayers six months ago -- boast they will put 70,000 in the field on the fateful night, more than twice the number that turned out for Mr. Bush in 1980, the record high. Mr. Robertson's opponents doubt he can come near so large a figure, but all of them recognize he is a serious threat. &quot;I would bet Robertson comes in second, and he could even win,&quot; says Beverly Hubble Tauke, a Dole supporter, an evangelical Christian and the wife of GOP Rep. Tom Tauke.    If Mr. Robertson comes in third (behind Mr. Dole and Mr. Bush, or Mr. Bush and Mr. Dole), he delivers a heavy blow to Mr. Kemp. If he comes in first or second, he scrambles the outlook for everyone.    The possibility of a strong Robertson showing deeply distresses party moderates, an endangered species hanging on stubbornly in Iowa. Mary Louise Smith, GOP national chairman a decade ago, argues that political parties are broad coalitions in which groups try to reach accommodation. But, she says, Mr. Robertson's supporters are members of the hard Christian right. &quot;They are rigid and doctrinaire and they mix religion and politics. I find that combination dangerous and frightening.&quot; She worries that these people will &quot;change the perception of the Republican Party, narrow it so much it won't be able to survive.&quot;    Face to face, the soldiers in the Robertson army look pretty much like everyone else. But they are different. These are not the old Jerry Falwell Moral Majority fundamentalists, although those people are equally worried about such political issues as abortion and school prayer, and some of them may vote for Mr. Robertson. These people -- the soldiers in Iowa's mystery army -- are deeply religious, highly motivated charismatics and Pentecostals.    They also share many of the religious tenets of other evangelical Christians -- they believe, for example, in the literal interpretation of the Bible, and many of them have been &quot;born again&quot; through a spiritual experience.    But, notes Mrs. Tauke, &quot;they believe in pursuing supernatural phenomena that other evangelicals think of as part of our religious history.&quot; These phenomena include glossolalia (speaking in tongues) and faith healing, usually accompanied by a high degree of religious emotionalism.    This helps to explain the mystery. Fundamentalists have been active in Iowa politics for years, supplying, for example, as much as a quarter of the vote for Republican Charles Grassley when he was elected to the Senate in 1980. Charismatics, along with their Pentecostal allies, tend to be outsiders, participating in politics for the first time.    Jerry Falwell symbolizes the fundamentalist side of the Christian right. Mr. Robertson, who has spoken in tongues, represents the charismatic faction. The two preachers don't much like each other, and their followers are just as wary.    What brings the charismatics into the system as Republican partisans this year (they have already made their mark in Robertson victories in Michigan) is, of course, Mr. Robertson himself.    &quot;The big question about these people,&quot; says former Alabama Rep. John Buchanan, chairman of People for the American Way, a liberal lobbying group that campaigns against the religious right, &quot;is, what happens if Pat Robertson loses? My guess is that then they become erstwhile Republicans.&quot;    Mr. Robertson stirs them deeply. &quot;I had heard about Pat Robertson and the '700 Club' (his TV show),&quot; says the Rev. Kerry Jech of Marshalltown, &quot;but when I heard him at a pastors' breakfast here, all I could say was, Wow!&quot; Mr. Jech, a former GOP county chairman, is pastor of the Hillside Church of Christ.    Paul Gassman, a mechanical engineer with Fisher Controls International Inc., in Marshalltown, says he was impressed first of all by Mr. Robertson's grasp of international economics. Pastor Jech asserts he was overwhelmed by Mr. Robertson's knowledge of Iowa's farm problem. Rob Miller, another Fisher Controls engineer, says he agrees with Mr. Robertson's emphasis on building up the nation's conventional arms.    Mr. Robertson's highly disciplined charismatics, in fact, all seem to be talking to journalists these days about nonreligious issues. A Robertson supporter who showed up for an interview carrying a large Bible was quietly chastised by a friend. And Mr. Gassman doesn't like to emphasize the fact he is a member of the Light of Life Christian Church, which he describes, when pressed, as nondenominational, evangelical -- and charismatic.    Rich Bond, Mr. Bush's strategist, says various documents that are circulating in Iowa purport to be Robertson memoranda to supporters. &quot;Keep your religious positions to yourself,&quot; one of them says. But there is no way to prove the authenticity of this document, or any of the others.    All anyone really knows is that there is a highly motivated, carefully disciplined force at work this year, and its candidate is Pat Robertson. The size of this force remains the big mystery, to be finally revealed in precinct caucuses all over Iowa the night of Feb. 8. </TEXT></DOC>