<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861204-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Powerful Bloc:Japanese Farmers UsePolitical Clout to WinProtection, Subsidies---Like Growers in Other Lands,They Constitute a HurdleTo World Trade Accords---Some Problems in the Paddies---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/04/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> NAKAJIMA, Japan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The small combine slices through the rice paddy, and over its whine 34-year-old Koichi Kato assesses this year's rice crop with the restraint typical of farmers everywhere.    &quot;It's not so bad,&quot; he says.    Actually, it is a bumper crop. Mr. Kato stands to make a good profit, perhaps enough to send his small family's total income for the year well above $35,000.    His costs were low this year, and that helps. But the Japanese government helps more: It is paying Mr. Kato $1 a pound -- almost 10 times the world price -- for his top-quality rice.    He gets that much because farmers are a major political force in Japan.    The situation is typical of that in most industrial democracies. Farmers' influence has increasingly led to policies that protect farmers at the expense of open markets.    In fact, farmers' determination to maintain their privileged positions in Asia, Western Europe and the U.S., coupled with a glut of farm commodities, has created such a clash among major powers over farm trade as to threaten the entire freeworld trading system: Efforts to negotiate a new international trade agreement have foundered on the shoals of strong farm lobbies in all the developed nations.    And few places have farmers as powerful as Japan. By dominating the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, which has governed Japan without serious opposition for more than 30 years, farmers have gained great benefits. Their average income is the equivalent of $40,000 at current exchange rates, 11% more than that of the &quot;salarymen,&quot; Japan's white-collar workers. They own more cars, live in bigger and better-furnished homes, and pay less in taxes than the salarymen.    But don't get the idea that the average Japanese farmer gets rich off his land. Farms are generally small and inefficient, and even with the generous subsidies it would be difficult for a family of four to live off the proceeds of three acres of rice.    As a result, few farm households, less than 15% of them, earn their income exclusively from farming. Most of that $40,000 average income -- about 84%, the government says -- comes from non-farm sources. The Kato family's income, for example, includes the money Mrs. Kato earns by working part time for a nearby farm cooperative.    So while the subsidies are a great help, most farmers could probably manage without them. Yet because farmers have so much influence, politicians continue to support what is, in effect, a welfare system for farmers. By keeping food costs high, the system hurts the more numerous but less powerful city dwellers.    But now, farmers' special privileges may be in jeopardy. The number of active farmers is dwindling. Furthermore, the salaryman is beginning to blame the farmer for Japan's meager living standards, the $30 muskmelons, the $19-a-pound hamburger meat and the small house in the far suburbs that costs $425,000.    &quot;We make three times as much as the Italians, but we don't live as well as they do,&quot; says Kenichi Ohmae, a managing director of Japanese operations of McKinsey andamp; Co., the U.S.-based consulting company. &quot;We could live like an Italian in Milan.&quot;    At the same time, other industrial nations are pressuring Japan to become more of a consumer society -- buying more, building more, importing more -- a strategy at odds with maintaining high farm prices and the farmers' lock on the land.    This village 125 miles north of Tokyo is a good place to witness firsthand some of the farmers who are at the root of these international trade clashes.    When World War II ended, rice here was planted by hand, with the aid of oxen or horses. In the fall, farmers spent days stooped over, cutting the rice with short-handled scythes. Toshi Kato, Mr. Kato's 60-year-old mother, remembers the deep ridges cut into her shoulders from the heavy bags of rice she had to carry. Her children had no toys. They played in the grass along the paddies until they were old enough to join their parents in the muddy fields.    Today life is radically different. As the rooster crows at dawn, Mr. Kato's four-year-old son, Shigeki, is already romping through the sprawling farmhouse. He and Chika, his 1 1/2-year-old sister, dig through a plastic wash basket full of toys. He pulls out several dump trucks, cranes and tractors and begins roaring around the carpeted living room. His sister tires of chasing after him. She watches her mother making breakfast in a kitchen filled with modern appliances.    Mr. Kato puts on blue overalls and a Yomiuri Giants baseball cap and heads off to his paddy, which has passed to eldest sons for generations.    His rice fields are about three times as large as the average Japanese farm -- but still aren't very big, about six acres. Because the farm is small, his operation is inefficient by U.S. standards, and Mr. Kato is trying to put together land from smaller farms to create some economy of scale.    So he rents an additional three acres or so and is always looking for more. He joined with two other farmers who are doing the same thing, and together they bought a $42,000 combine that cuts, threshes and pours the rice kernels into bags. &quot;Otherwise,&quot; he says, &quot;we couldn't make a profit.&quot;    The number of active farmers in Japan is shrinking every year. After getting good educations, many people prefer the easier life in the city, and that seems to be the case particularly among the younger Japanese. Still, it is hard for Mr. Kato to find people willing to give up their land.    Torakichi Nakane, for example, is a part-time farmer, earning most of his income from his job in a local farm-cooperative office. He could easily rent out his land but refuses because he thinks it might shame his family name. &quot;I don't want anyone to think I don't have the skill to farm it,&quot; Mr. Nakane says, &quot;or have them say that it was in my generation that I went bust and had to give it up.&quot;    Says Mr. Kato: &quot;That's what I face. If I only knew how to change that attitude, I would.&quot;    There would seem to be plenty of people who could rent or sell land to Mr. Kato. Many men, and even married women, work at small factories or have jobs nearby and farm only on the weekend.    Tsuneo Hirosawa is a cab driver in the nearest big city, Shirakawa. His wife sells fertilizers and chemicals, and together they make about $32,000. A little more than $10,000 of that comes from their 1 1/2-acre farm, including rental income. &quot;We couldn't live on just the income from our small farm,&quot; says Mrs. Hirosawa. &quot;We wouldn't be able to live on just that and educate our children.&quot;    Her children are both in college now and, like most farm children nowadays, show little inclination to return. The farm population is aging fast, and there aren't enough farmhands. Keiko Midorikawa, another farmer's wife, says her teen-age son recently said to her, &quot;Mom, when I watch you work hard, I don't want to be a farmer.&quot; Then her second son piped up, &quot;If he doesn't have to do it, then does that mean I'm going to do it?&quot;    But -- like Mr. Nakane -- the Hirosawas and Midorikawas are reluctant to part with any land. Still, enough people in the area are giving up farming that Mr. Kato, while unable to obtain nearly as much land as he would like, now has three times as much as he had several years ago. And his son? Little Shigeki, who has every toy truck and car doing farm work on the living-room floor, says, &quot;I want to be a farmer so I can eat lots of rice.&quot;    But urban Japanese are eating less rice every year. Since 1960, rice consumption has dropped 34% and is expected to fall an additional 12% by the end of the decade as the Japanese diet becomes more American -- heavy on meat, fats and dairy products.    Nevertheless, the government buys all the rice a farmer can produce. The farmer keeps producing as much rice as he can, and the government is saddled with costly surpluses. Consumers buy rice from privately owned stores -- after it has passed through Japan's intricate distribution system and the price has gone up even more.    Change is being advocated by some politicians and academics today because the farm policy is directly at odds with a new but increasingly important goal: raising Japan's standard of living. Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone has committed himself to the principles of last April's Maekawa report, which urged more consumption, more imports and more housing.    The report, named for the former governor of the Bank of Japan who headed the blue-ribbon panel that issued it, avoided any reference to agriculture. But the U.S. Rice Miller Association says that if Japanese consumers paid the same lower price for rice that American consumers do, $60 billion would be diverted for buying other things. Since rice tends to be the benchmark for other foodstuffs, their prices might drop, too.    What's more, the current system encourages farmers to cultivate small, grossly inefficient plots of land. If such land was converted to other uses such as residential development, some experts figure, land prices would fall 25% to 50%, stimulating a boom in housing.    More land could mean bigger houses, too. Right now, the size of the average Japanese urban home is a mere 925 square feet. If the Japanese had bigger houses, they might buy more things, perhaps more imports, to fill them. And a housing boom could also kick off transportation, sewer and waterworks improvements, says McKinsey andamp; Co.'s Mr. Ohmae, who has published a book in Japan making such proposals.    But to diminish the farmer's life style in favor of improving the salaryman's is a powerful challenge to the status quo. &quot;To back off from the promise of supporting farmers' income would destroy the Liberal Democratic Party,&quot; says a U.S.-government political analyst. &quot;I don't see the LDP wanting to do that any time soon.&quot;    So until the policy debate within Japan is resolved, the farmers are in the catbird seat. The Japanese continue to pay out about $8 billion a year to subsidize the rice farmers, who return the favor by returning the LDP to power.    &quot;Politicians that farmers have supported have never lost,&quot; says one farm leader. Although Japanese farmers make up only about 5% of the population, studies show that because of skewed legislative apportionment and farmers' heavy turnout at the polls, they exercise 25% of the voting power.    &quot;We choose the politicians who have the right contacts and the right pipeline to the committee that sets the rice prices. They talk on our behalf,&quot; says Yoshikazu Mitsuyama, the chief managing director of Shirakawa Nokyo, the farm cooperative in the Nakajima area.    Earlier this year, the government tried to roll back the rice price paid to farmers by 6.6%. After private talks, the bureaucrats consented to 3.3%. Then farm cooperatives across the country swung into action, reminding the LDP of who provided it with its landslide victory last summer. A few weeks later Prime Minister Nakasone said prices wouldn't be changed.    &quot;I believe the LDP cannot live without the farm cooperatives,&quot; says Mr. Mitsuyama, a rich agribusinessman who counts among his friends Noboru Takeshita and Shintaro Abe, top LDP leaders who are leading candidates to succeed Mr. Nakasone. &quot;If the cooperatives don't back up the LDP,&quot; Mr. Mitsuyama says, &quot;then the Socialist party or the Communists will become powerful. The cooperatives are the hidden power behind Japan's stability.&quot;    As rice growers in the U.S. are discovering, Japanese politicians aren't eager to make changes that affect a farmer's livelihood. American farmers demand that the U.S. government pressure Japan into opening the rice market to outsiders. That has set off a howl of protest here because of the cultural importance of rice. Japanese feel less vulnerable knowing there is one food they never have to import.    U.S. diplomats have backed off from the controversy, and that disappoints U.S. farmers. &quot;If we could get the Japanese to cross that white line,&quot; says J. Stephen Gabbert, executive vice president of the Rice Millers Association, &quot;it might restructure the political system and break a psychological barrier to imported goods.&quot;    Farmer Shigemasa Yoshida here in Nakajima believes that it is only a matter of time before the farmers' power and good life disappear. &quot;As our numbers decrease,&quot; he says, &quot;so will our political power.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>