<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0033 </DOCNO><HL> Petroleum Imports Soar, Adding to U.S. Trade Deficit---Efforts to Redress Imbalance May FalterAs Foreign Oil Bills Pile Up---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   A swelling tide of oil imports threatens to dilute efforts to balance the worsening U.S. trade deficit.    With oil prices and oil imports both rising at the same time, the nation's foreign-oil bill is growing at the astonishing rate of $1 billion a month. The increasing dependence on foreign oil has rekindled fears about national security and concerns over the plight of domestic oil producers. But suddenly, the sheer volume of imported oil has created additional alarm among oil analysts and policy makers, who fear that the trend could sorely undermine Reagan administration efforts to fix the severe U.S. trade imbalance.    Oil economists agree that if crude oil prices hold at the current level of around $18 a barrel, or rise further, the nation's petroleum import bill will increase this year by at least $12 billion. That, they suggest, could further delay a long-awaited turnaround for the record trade deficit.    &quot;I would expect it's going to exacerbate the trade problem,&quot; Donald Norman, senior economist at the American Petroleum Institute, says of the import quandary.    Over the long term, if all goes well, the problem may begin to correct itself, other analysts say. Increased U.S. oil purchases in Mexico and Venezuela, for instance, may, in turn, permit those countries to increase their purchases of U.S.-made goods.    &quot;Maybe it will be a wash,&quot; says Philip K. Verleger Jr., a visiting fellow at the Washington-based Institute of International Economics. &quot;If the oil exporting countries have $25 billion more to spend, and the U.S. is able to capture 40% of that in increased sales, it would offset the higher oil import bill,&quot; he says.    But even if oil prices weaken this year from the current level, says Charles K. Ebinger, energy programs director at Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies, the rising volume of imported oil holds &quot;strong negative implications for the balance of trade.&quot; After declining for several years, imports of petroleum by the U.S. began soaring again a year ago as the world-wide price collapse battered domestic production even as demand increased. Though final 1986 figures aren't yet available, industry analysts estimate that imports jumped 1.1 million barrels a day to six million barrels a day, the highest level since 1980.    But the price collapse that triggered the surge also restrained the effect of the imported oil on the overall U.S. trade deficit, which totaled more than $170 billion in 1986. In fact, the nation's bill for foreign oil fell nearly 25% last year to an estimated $42 billion as crude oil prices plunged nearly 50% to an average of only slightly more than $14 a barrel.    In recent weeks, however, oil prices have firmed substantially; imports, too, have soared.    If the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries succeeds in maintaining its recently imposed restraints on production and the new fixed-price base of $18 a barrel sticks, oil imported into the U.S. this year will cost $4 a barrel more than in 1986. That alone would add $24 million a day to U.S. costs of imported oil -- if only crude were brought in, and in the same amount as in 1986.    But the U.S. also imports plenty of refined products -- and in sharply increasing quantities lately. That is because U.S. refiners are operating near capacity, at least in the processing of lighter fuels such as gasoline. So an increasing proportion of the petroleum imported by the U.S. is in the form of gasoline and other refined products, which cost more than crude oil. In 1986, refined products accounted for about one-third of all oil imports.    Regardless of price, forces are already in motion for another sharp rise in the overall volume of imported petroleum this year and, some say, for most years into the mid-1990s. &quot;We've got a situation where imports have to go up -- even if the price of oil goes up,&quot; says a planning official for one major oil company.    By 1990, or before, as much as 50% of all the petroleum used in the U.S. will have to be imported, many oil analysts insist. That would compare with 36% at the time of the 1973-74 Arab oil embargo and with 47.7% in 1977, the previous peak.    The rate of increase this year may moderate slightly from last year, when there was considerable inventory-building by U.S. refiners. Even so, industry estimates of 1987 import volumes range between 6.5 million and seven million barrels a day, as demand increases and there is an accelerating decline in domestic production.    U.S. petroleum demand began increasing last year after falling for several years. According to industry estimates, petroleum demand averaged slightly under 16.2 million barrels a day in 1986, up nearly 3% from the 1985 level. Oil economists expect that, barring a recession, demand will rise again this year, perhaps at a lower rate of increase. A 2% gain in 1987, the generally anticipated increase, would add an additional 300,000 barrels a day to import requirements.    But even if demand were to remain flat this year, imports still would have to increase because of falling domestic production. After holding steady or rising for four years, domestic oil output began dropping shortly after prices collapsed in early 1986 as U.S. producers began closing marginal wells. Lately, the declines have begun to snowball as a result of severe cutbacks in exploration and development spending by the oil companies.    Last year, as oil prices plunged, the American Petroleum Institute estimated that $15 oil would wipe out domestic production of 900,000 barrels a day within a year's time. But in just nine months, a decline of 800,000 barrels a day already has occurred, says Edward H. Murphy, API's director of statistics.    For all of 1986, domestic crude-oil production averaged 8.7 million barrels a day, down 300,000 barrels a day from the 1985 average. Natural gas liquids, which can be processed much like crude oil, accounted for an additional 1.6 million barrels a day of domestic supply, about the same as in 1985. But as an indication of the acceleration of the declines, domestic crude oil output in December averaged about 8.3 million barrels a day, down about 700,000 barrels from the year-earlier month. The December drop in production was even more severe when measured against the 1986 peak month of February, when domestic output averaged nearly 9.2 million barrels a day before beginning to fall.    Most marginal wells already have been closed, and the chief factor in future declines will be the result of the lack of drilling over the past year. Oil producers say U.S. exploration may begin to recover if prices rise beyond $20 a barrel. But even then, they say, years might be required to reverse the decline.    The most optimistic projections are that domestic crude production will drop by an additional 300,000 barrels a day this year. Most estimates are much higher. &quot;Production will drop an another 500,000 barrels a day in 1987 if we don't get substantially more than $20 a barrel for oil,&quot; says C. Paul Hilliard, a Lafayette, La., producer and a member of a National Petroleum Council group studying the nation's oil problems.    Others, including Mr. Ebinger of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, estimate that domestic production this year will fall between 700,000 and 800,000 barrels a day. </TEXT></DOC>