<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0083 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Hypocrisy in Government</HL><DD> 08/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTCONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The other day House Speaker Jim Wright challenged President Reagan's offhand comment that he saw no evidence of lawbreaking in the Iran-Contra testimony. The speaker even offered a list of laws that were broken, including, for example, the National Security Act and the Arms Export Control Act.    About the same time, our Brooks Jackson took a close look at the speaker's own financial affairs. In addition to his salary of $100,000, the speaker reported outside income of $129,000 to $291,000 last year. This included income from his partnership with Fort Worth developer George Mallick in a company that makes investments and imports gems.    Mr. Mallick, as it happens, has also been one of the promoters of an effort to develop the Fort Worth stockyards as &quot;the Williamsburg of the West.&quot; (However his efforts to gain a major stake in the development have recently gone sour.) The project has received an $11.8 million federal grant from the Economic Development Administration, though the EDA reports it has yet to receive an application for the funds from any Fort Worth officials. Speaker Wright's office, however, boasted it had once again delivered for the folks back home.    With the speaker pushing his business partner's project, there clearly is an &quot;appearance of impropriety.&quot; So why don't we have a special prosecutor to pore over the Wright-Mallick relationship, investigating whether support for the stockyards project was a payoff for Mr. Mallick's help in building the speaker's personal wealth? We're sure that with his punctiliousness about ethics and the law, the speaker would be glad to turn over all his office records about his support for the stockyards project, all correspondence with Mr. Mallick and any memos of phone conversations with him. Maybe if the prosecutor searched the U.S. code, he might even find a law that might arguably have been broken -- &quot;conspiracy to defraud the United States&quot; perhaps.    We would like to make clear that we believe special prosecutors are unconstitutional. The Wright-Mallick dealings need to be investigated only if they meet the usual tests a prosecutor would apply to any two citizens in the routine course of enforcing the law. Anyway the problem in Congress is not illegal corruption but legal corruption, such as the very idea of giving $11.8 million to a stockyards boondoggle -- or for that matter having the EDA piggy bank to begin with.    We do, however, oppose double standards. And if the speaker were in the executive branch, a special prosecutor would surely be named and Mr. Wright would immediately be sentenced to spending a major share of his time dealing with the detailed investigation. That's what the Ethics in Government Act is all about. One of the special prosecutors investigating Attorney General Meese, for example, spent months trying to find some evidence that Mr. Meese's wife's purchase of 200 shares of stock violated the insider-trading laws. Why don't we apply the same standard to Speaker Wright and other members of Congress?    Because Congress has exempted itself from major provisions of the Ethics in Government Act, that's why. To put it bluntly, Congress doesn't give a whit about ethics in government. If it did, it would apply the same standards to itself. But here we have Michael Deaver indicted for perjury about his lobbying after leaving the White House, but any former member of Congress has a right to visit the congressional floor to press his lobbying. The Ethics in Government Act is not about ethics; it is about belaboring the executive branch to increase the power of the legislative branch. Let's rename it: The Hypocrisy in Government Act. It is coming up for renewal this fall. A president with some sense of protecting the presidency should demand that the same rules apply to all three branches of government, and veto any extension that singles out the executive.    ---   Congress is supposed to police itself, the theory being that an independent branch of government should keep its own house. But consider what it lets itself get away with:    --Mr. Mallick's involvement with Mr. Wright goes back to 1979 when the two men and their wives incorporated an investment company called Malightco. House rules require that members disclose underlying holdings in such closely held entities that do no public reporting of their own. Mr. Wright doesn't, and an aide says, &quot;He isn't much interested in doing that.&quot;    GOP Rep. Newt Gingrich points out that it was those kinds of disclosure omissions that led to a 1984 investigation of Rep. George Hansen, a maverick Republican. Rep. Hansen was convicted of failure to disclose some of his wife's financial dealings and is now in federal prison. Rep. Gingrich says one degree of congressional scrutiny seems to apply if the accused is a member in good standing of the Congressional Club and another if the person is -- like Mr. Hansen -- an outsider who wants to shake up Washington.    --Democratic Banking Committee Chairman Fernand St Germain is no congressional outsider. On Wednesday, the House voted 291-111 not to have the Ethics Committee reopen its investigation into charges of financial misconduct against him.    In April, the Ethics Committee had concluded that Rep. St Germain had violated a House rule by accepting transportation from a savings and loan. However, it ruled the violation did not suggest &quot;a pattern of improper acceptance.&quot; The committee also noted financial disclosure violations, including the undervaluing of Mr. St Germain's assets by more than $1 million. In neither case was disciplinary action taken.    Now there are disturbing signs that the committee may have given Mr. St Germain a gentleman's wink. Brooks Jackson also reported last month that the Justice Department has begun a criminal investigation of some entertainment bills of Mr. St Germain's that were allegedly paid for by a savings-and-loan industry lobbyist. Ethics Committee staffers are said to have tried to interview the lobbyist but &quot;backed off&quot; when the U.S. League of Savings Institutions protested.    --In 1985, Rep. Bill Boner of Tennessee became the focus of charges that he had accepted nearly $50,000 in bribes and had used $300,000 in campaign funds for his personal use. The House Ethics Committee suspended an investigation of Rep. Boner in April 1986 because the Justice Department was launching its own inquiry, even though many of the allegations were separate from the Justice investigation. Early this year, Justice ended its inquiry, but the Ethics Committee has since failed to move its own investigation forward.    Tennessee political observers point out that Mr. Boner is in a runoff election for mayor of Nashville, and they believe the Ethics Committee is stalling in hopes that he will soon leave the House and allow the committee to wash its hands of the matter. They also note that Speaker Wright, the man who appoints Ethics Committee members, is a friend and supporter of Mr. Boner. Last year Mr. Wright said Mr. Boner was a victim of a vendetta while he campaigned for him during a heated primary contest.    --Common Cause, a good-government lobby, notes that ethics panels rarely discipline members. The House Ethics Committee failed to recommend any punishment for Rep. Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio, Rep. Dan Daniel of Virginia and former Rep. James Weaver of Oregon, despite its findings that all had violated House rules. The committee noted that all three had taken steps to remedy the violations -- although only after they were publicized. Fred Wertheimer, the president of Common Cause, says, &quot;The message this sends to the public, and to the members of the House, is that ethics rules may be violated with impunity.&quot;    --A chance to take another step toward ending Hypocrisy in Government came in June when Rep. Gingrich and others proposed that a special commission suggest reforms in how congressional-corruption charges are investigated. The measure lost 297-77, with a majority of Republicans and all but one Democrat voting against it. There may no longer be a bipartisan foreign policy, but there is still a bipartisan approach to congressional ethics: See no evil, speak no evil, hear no evil.    ---   The Ethics in Government Act, born out of Watergate, has become a political weapon against whatever administration is in office, ensuring a permanent Watergate. Members of the executive branch are subjected to a degree of scrutiny rarely leveled at Congress or the judiciary, dignifying every allegation and ensuring constant investigations. Given human frailty, such scrutiny will produce enough real mistakes and misjudgments to fuel the process. But with only one branch constantly forced to bare its dirty linen, this creates yet another imbalance of power, and a further unconstitutional eroding of the power of the presidency.    If Congress expects to renew this act, it owes it to the nation to clean up its own act, starting by taking the power to appoint House Ethics Committee members away from Speaker Wright, whose reporting violations clearly do need scrutiny. If Congress isn't willing to apply to its own members the same level of oversight it demands of the executive, the office of special prosecutor and most of the rest of the Ethics in Government Act should be scrapped. And to protect his office, the president should use his veto to this end. </TEXT></DOC>