<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A SURROGATE MOTHER LOST her bid for custody of the child known as Baby M.    In the landmark battle over the year-old girl, a New Jersey family court judge ruled the surrogate contract was valid and awarded custody to the father, William Stern. The judge terminated all parental rights for the surrogate mother, Mary Beth Whitehead. Stern's wife, Elizabeth, immediately adopted the baby. Superior Court Judge Harvey Sorkow's decision is the first in the U.S. on the legality of a surrogate mother contract. Whitehead, who contested her $10,000 accord to bear the baby, filed for a stay of the decision pending an appeal.    Sorkow said he upheld the contract because, as men have the constitutional right to sell their sperm, so can women decide what to do with their wombs.    ---   A U.S. ADVISER was killed in a raid by Salvadoran rebels on a major army base.    The pre-dawn strike on a garrison at El Paraiso in Chalatenango province, about 40 miles north of San Salvador, killed at least 42 of the 250 soldiers there, the military said. Soldiers estimated their casualties at 65 dead and over 100 wounded, and rebel dead of at least seven. The Pentagon identified the adviser, one of about 50 in the country, as Staff Sgt. Gregory Fronius, 27, of Greensburg, Pa. He was killed by mortar fire.    The American adviser was the first to die in combat during the country's seven-year civil war.    ---   The House voted to override Reagan's veto of an $87.5 billion highway and mass transit bill. Reagan sought enough votes to sustain his veto in the Senate, which is likely to take up the measure today. GOP Senate leaders billed it a test of Reagan's prestige and ability to govern in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal.    ---   Thatcher praised Gorbachev's moves to open Soviet society but said their talks failed to find common ground on how to reduce nuclear missiles in Europe. The British prime minister, on the fourth day of a visit to Moscow, had lunch with dissident physicist and Nobel Peace laureate Andrei Sakharov and his wife, Yelena Bonner.    ---   The Marine Corps arrested a third ex-Moscow embassy guard, Staff Sgt. Robert Stanley Stufflebeam, 24, of Bloomington, Ill., for violating rules on reporting contacts with Soviet women. Ex-guard Cpl. Arnold Bracy was charged with spy-related activities. A Soviet official dismissed the claims of using sex to recruit spies but didn't deny it.    ---   Reagan and Chirac said the U.S. and France resolved their 16-month legal battle over who discovered the AIDS virus. The president and the French prime minister, who is visiting Washington, agreed the two nations will share royalties from sales of test kits for the virus.    ---   John Paul II described Chile's military government as &quot;dictatorial&quot; and urged the nation's Roman Catholics to help it return to democracy. His remarks came before his arrival in Uruguay, where he began a two-week tour that also includes Chile and Argentina, in his eighth Latin American trip.    ---   Public employers may search a government worker's office without a search warrant if they have reason to suspect wrongdoing, a divided Supreme Court ruled. The decision adopted a middle ground on the issue of public employees' rights to privacy in the workplace.    ---   The Senate passed the first omnibus housing legislation in six years. The bill would extend major federal programs for two years and essentially freeze funding at current levels.    ---   The Philippine military launched an assault against communist rebels in the jungles of northern Kalinga Apayao province, the government news agency said. The attack by 1,000 soldiers, backed by F-5 jets, began Sunday. Manila also said a kidnapped Japanese businessman was freed unharmed after over four months in captivity.    ---   A controversy is heating up over Blue Cross's proposed guidelines for medical-test reimbursements. The big insurer, to help reduce $10 billion a year of unneeded testing, wouldn't reimburse physicians or hospitals for widely used tests on patients who don't exhibit symptoms.    ---   Italy took custody of a neo-fascist suspect, Stefano Delle Chiaie, wanted in several terrorist attacks including a 1980 bombing that killed 85 people at the Bologna rail station. Delle Chiaie, 49, an explosives expert who was at large for 17 years, was arrested in Venezuela and moved to a Rome jail.    ---   Afghanistan said a plane downed by Pakistani jets Monday was a civilian airliner with 40 people aboard and was attacked inside Afghanistan. The claim couldn't be verified. Islamabad said it hasn't been able to identify the plane model, but said it was a military plane that intruded 10 miles into Pakistan on a reconnaissance mission.    ---   Bonn denied it is considering freeing a Lebanese man sought by the U.S. in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner. A U.S. official Monday cited signs West Germany could release Mohammed Ali Hamadi and his brother, Ali Abbas, in return for two West German businessmen kidnapped in Beirut.    ---   The European Community signed a pact with China to set up a mission in Beijing to handle economic relations. The EC said Chinese economic modernization moves would remain in place despite a campaign against some aspects of capitalism. The EC said it accounts for 16% of China's total external trade, after Japan and Hong Kong.    ---   Italy could stave off an early general election, Communist mediator Nilde Iotti said. The speaker of the lower house of parliament cited possible compromises by the moribund five-party coalition, after she met with Christian Democrat and Socialist leaders in a bid to resolve the monthlong political crisis by forming a new government.    ---   Peres said Moscow would move closer to renewing ties with Israel in the next few days, after a 20-year diplomatic embargo. The Israeli foreign minister wouldn't elaborate but Israeli TV quoted political sources as saying a Soviet consular delegation would visit Israel to inspect church sites.    ---   A U.S. report said the Medicare Hospital Insurance Trust Fund will remain solvent through the year 2002, though big benefit cuts or tax boosts will be needed to ensure long-term solvency. The Social Security and Medicare trustees' annual report last year said the trust fund would go broke in 1996.    ---   Zhao Ziyang said most Chinese have rejected radical leftism. Speaking to Hong Kong and Macao residents who are to attend the National People's Congress, the premier pledged that Beijing will honor its commitment to allow capitalism in the colonies for 50 years after they revert to Chinese rule.    ---   Died: Clinton W. Murchison, 63, businessman and former owner of the Dallas Cowboys, Monday, in Dallas. </TEXT></DOC>