<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Vietnam Legacy:Activists' Bids to FreeAny POWs Still in AsiaStir Hopes and Doubts---Some Tactics Are LambastedAs Hurting Their Efforts,But Victories Are Noted---The Strange Canadian Caper---By Bill PaulStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Late last year, John Cardinal O'Connor called for a new national effort to find and free Vietnam War servicemen who may still be prisoners in Southeast Asia. From the altar of St. Patrick's Cathedral, New York's Catholic archbishop questioned the Pentagon's dedication to their cause and urged President Reagan to &quot;remind the . . . world of his continuing commitment to set {them} free.&quot;    &quot;O'Connor Prods Prez on MIAs,&quot; read the New York Post headline.    Score one for the dozens of activists pushing the missing-in-action issue. By enlisting prominent Americans in their cause and provoking vehement official denials, they get a lot of publicity.    Some MIA activists are working in unusual ways. H. Ross Perot, the Texas data-processing billionaire, took his demand to &quot;get to the bottom&quot; of the issue directly to President Reagan in private conversation. Some relatives of missing servicemen caged themselves on the front lawn of White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan. Others try to convince the media that the White House and the Pentagon are covering up POW evidence lest a public outcry over &quot;abandoned&quot; soldiers undermine military morale and prove politically embarrassing.    Among the activists' recent exploits: They involved the Canadian government in a wild scheme to liberate supposed U.S. captives. They got Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey and House Republican leaders to publicly buck the administration's MIA policy. They got a federal judge, over Justice Department objections, to agree to make his own determination on whether POWs are still being held. They got former President Nixon, who once said all living POWs were home, to admit that he might have been wrong. They got the former Pentagon officer once in charge of resolving the issue to concede that he could have done a better job; then, they persuaded him to reexamine the evidence, and he concluded that POWs are still being held.    Last November, one activist, James G. &quot;Bo&quot; Gritz, persuaded CBS News to send a producer to Thailand with him, even though the Thais have banned Mr. Gritz for using Thailand to stage a Rambo-like foray -- an armed incursion -- deep into Laos in an unsuccessful attempt to release prisoners at a suspected POW camp there. (Mr. Gritz was kicked out; the producer was allowed to stay.) MIA activists also persuaded the British Broadcasting Corp. to co-produce a television documentary that, according to promotional literature, will tell the story of &quot;the men America left behind.&quot; The program is scheduled on many U.S. TV stations tonight.    What the activists haven't been able to do, however, is produce publicly any of the evidence that they accuse the administration of withholding. Officially, the government itself says it &quot;assumes&quot; that POWs are still being held despite the lack of &quot;hard&quot; evidence.    Nonetheless, that assumption is bolstered by considerable soft evidence. It includes dozens of live-sighting reports of American prisoners in Vietnam and Laos, reports that Pentagon investigators can't refute. (Hundreds more have turned out to be fabrications.) Some reports were volunteered directly by Vietnamese refugees; others were relayed to U.S. officials from foreign intelligence agencies. A dozen or so of the most credible sightings occurred between 1982 and 1985.    Moreover, Vietnamese officials, after years of denying that any Americans remain in Vietnam, last year conceded that some may still be there, albeit beyond Hanoi's direct control. And in December 1984, convicted Marine collaborator Robert Garwood, who returned to the U.S. from Vietnam in 1979, said he had seen at least 70 U.S. POWs after the war ended.    In arguing that Americans are still being held in Southeast Asia, the MIA activists contend that U.S. officials also covered up evidence of POWs after the Korean War. In 1955, two years after that conflict ended, another soldier, Steven Kiba, was negotiated out of China, along with others in his flight crew, by the United Nations. Upon his return, he said his radarman, Paul Van Voorhies, had been left behind. In 1985, Mr. Kiba said the U.S. officials ordered him never to publicly discuss Mr. Van Voorhies.    Though unable to prove that Americans are still being held in Southeast Asia, the activists seem to be gaining a following. James D. Carroll, who is studying the MIA issue for the Brookings Institution's Center for Public Policy Education, explains that many Americans believe that they were lied to about other aspects of the Vietnam War and that Americans have a natural mistrust of government.    Although the president has called the MIA issue a &quot;top national priority,&quot; the activists contend that the administration is stalling while it tries to get Vietnam to say it is secretly holding some of the more than 2,400 men still missing. But amid the confusion about the existence of any Vietnam POWs, some activists may have hurt the cause by making sensational promises that have backfired.    For instance, two former military-intelligence officers, who have sued the U.S. government on charges that it abandoned POWs, made headlines last year when they claimed to have access to a recently shot film depicting U.S. captives in Laos. The film supposedly belonged to one Robin Gregson, a mysterious British businessman operating out of Thailand. Although several people saw the film, only Mark Smith, one of the plaintiffs and himself a former POW, says he saw the section showing POWs.    When word of the film hit the press, Mr. Gregson started playing hard to get, traveling around the country and spending the plaintiffs' funds. By then, however, the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee had initiated hearings and ordered the former servicemen to produce the film. They turned to Mr. Perot for help, and he tried to bring Mr. Gregson back into the fold by offering $4.2 million for the film.    Mr. Gregson then left the country -- he is rumored to be on Cyprus or back in Thailand -- leaving Mr. Smith and co-plaintiff Melvin McIntyre to face the public wrath of Sen. Frank Murkowski, an Alaska Republican who then headed the committee, and then-Sen. Jeremiah Denton of Alabama, also a former POW.    The Canadian caper was even more outlandish. A letter on file in a federal district court in Great Falls, Mont., shows that the Canadian government agreed in 1985 to be a &quot;receiving station&quot; for the American POWs that two activists -- Robert Ketchesum and Richard Barker -- said they could rescue from Vietnam by way of China. The letter, signed by Canadian External Affairs Minister Joseph Clark, also offered use of Canada's diplomatic pouch to transport another purported POW film that the activists thought they could get from Peking to Ottawa. No film has turned up.    In the letter, however, Mr. Clark expresses skepticism about Messrs. Ketchesum and Barker, who together ran an outfit called Wildfire International, which they said was an oil-field-services concern. But believing that these alleged U.S. POWs included a Canadian civilian held captive since being rescued after an oil-drilling-platform accident in the South China Sea, Mr. Clark agreed to help. In addition, this reporter agreed to record the event -- even after Mr. Barker said it would be necessary to fly by helicopter to a ship on the high seas east of Vietnam, where the prisoners were to be turned over.    In the end, the prisoners never arrived, but Mr. Barker did -- in Great Falls, where he was arrested in the airport for drug possession. Despite his contention that he was set up, he was convicted of possession with intent to sell. He is appealing.    Such bizarre incidents as these private forays have convinced many U.S. officials, veterans' leaders and relatives of missing men that some activists are hindering the return of any POWs. U.S. officials say that by attacking the administration's handling of the MIA issue, the activists are creating a &quot;divisiveness&quot; that weakens Washington in its negotiations with Hanoi and Vientiane. U.S. officials explain that Hanoi equates public division with national weakness -- just as it did when public opinion was divided during the war itself -- and that only by presenting a united front can the U.S. persuade Vietnam and Laos to cooperate.    &quot;We reject divisive tactics, knowing that the Rambos of the 1980s serve the same purpose as the Jane Fondas of the 1970s,&quot; recently wrote Ann Mills Griffiths, the executive director of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia, who has represented the U.S. in Hanoi.    Divisive or not, some activists can be persuasive. One of them, recently defeated North Carolina Congressman William Hendon, last year persuaded several fellow conservative Republicans to join him in publicly criticizing the Reagan administration's MIA policy. These &quot;Rambo congressmen,&quot; as the press has labeled them, include Duncan Hunter, David Dreier and Robert Dornan, all of California; Robert Smith of New Hampshire; Christopher Smith of New Jersey, and John Rowland of Connecticut. They all believe that, as Robert Smith puts it, &quot;Either it's a cover-up or it's the biggest case of bureaucratic ineptitude in history.&quot;    Mr. Hendon says he became interested in 1983 when, as a Pentagon consultant, he saw classified POW information that he says hasn't ever been made available to Congress. Last year, he teamed up with Mr. Perot on a bill that, had it passed, would have made the Texan the head of an independent POW commission.    The White House opposed the bill lest it slow negotiations with Vietnam and embarrass the president. Nevertheless, after intense lobbying by the activist congressmen, the measure was co-sponsored by more than 270 representatives, including House Minority Leader Robert Michel, House Whip Trent Lott and presidential hopeful Jack Kemp. A spokeswoman for Mr. Michel says he rejected an appeal from the White House and signed on because of constituent pressure.    The bill died in committee. Still, Mr. Perot persuaded President Reagan and Vice President George Bush to deputize him as a private POW consultant on ground that sometimes &quot;private channels&quot; are more effective, a Bush spokesman says. Mr. Perot has been involved with POWs on and off since 1969, when he tried to deliver Christmas packages to them in Hanoi. He is famous for mounting a mission into Iran to rescue his own men after Washington said it couldn't help.    In New York, John LeBoutillier, a former congressman, has made the MIA issue a second career. A member of a socially prominent family, he works out of his family's Long Island mansion in a so-far-unsuccessful campaign to be named a special presidential assistant for those missing in action.    It was Mr. LeBoutillier who persuaded Cardinal O'Connor to speak out. His other supporters include CIA Director Casey, who has written that he personally lobbied the president on Mr. LeBoutillier's behalf, and Gen. William Westmoreland, the former commander in Vietnam, who grouses that when he called the president for an appointment concerning the MIA issue, he got a noncommittal reply from a staffer. Still another supporter is Richard Allen, a former Reagan national security adviser, who publicly called last fall for new people to run the MIA investigation.    Though the activists focus on Vietnam, more and more of them are looking at other wars, especially Korea. Holding discussions with the North Koreans at the United Nations in New York have been Robert Dumas, the brother of a serviceman missing in Korea; Steven Arkin, a former journalist, and others. &quot;When we bring up the subject of live POWs, they don't deny holding them,&quot; Mr. Arkin says. &quot;They just say they want to talk first about remains.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>