<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870504-0173 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Signs of Hope in Sri Lanka's Bloody War---By Ian Geldard</HL><DD> 05/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   The bloody events in Sri Lanka have in little more than a decade turned this legendary isle of serenity into an Asian Lebanon in which more than 5,000 people have been killed so far.    Only a few weeks ago, when a 10-day cease-fire was announced, it appeared that a fresh round of negotiations, with India as mediator, was about to produce results. The fear of this was what led the terrorists to launch their murderous attacks -- including a bombing at Colombo's main bus terminal that resulted in the deaths of more than 300 innocent civilians. The Sri Lankan government is now under fire from the opposition and amid the tension and bloodshed President Junius Jayewardene has warned that elections might be in jeopardy. That itself would be a spectacular terrorist victory. Facing an increasingly professional Sri Lankan army, and massive discontent within the Tamil community and its own ranks, the insurgents are badly in need of such a victory.    Indeed, the pattern of insurgent attacks seems to coincide with the hope of peaceful solutions. Last May, for example, an Air Lanka Tristar was blown apart on the runway at Sri Lanka's main airport just before takeoff. Twenty passengers -- tourists en route to a holiday in the Maldives -- were murdered. The bombing coincided with the arrival in Sri Lanka of an Indian government delegation for official talks in Colombo on the situation in the north.    In December the terrorists again tried to sabotage any chance of resolving the conflict peacefully when two bombs were found in Colombo shortly before the arrival of senior Indian ministers trying to mediate between the Tamil and Sinhalese communities. These were the first bombs to be found in the capital since the previous May. Both incidents are believed to have been the work of the Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students, something of a misnomer as few of its members have ever been students. In practice EROS is the overtly terrorist wing of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the largest Tamil separatist group. Actions performed and claimed by EROS allow the Tigers to issue plausible denials of terrorists outrages.    The real purpose of insurgent attacks is to provoke a backlash, the reporting of which fosters world-wide sympathy for the Tamil cause, and suggests that the two populations can never live side by side in one state. This is precisely what happened following the deaths of 14 soldiers in a land-mine explosion in 1983 when outraged Sinhalese took to the streets burning down Tamil property and killing more than a thousand Tamils. The Indian government, for example, felt compelled by the domestic pressure of some 60 million Indian Tamils to offer support in the guise of training and weapons for &quot;self-defense.&quot;    Fortunately, response to the terrorism has been restrained. Apart from the stoning of a few Tamil shops in Colombo in the immediate aftermath of the bus-station bombing, disciplined action by the armed forces and the immediate imposition of a curfew have prevented anything near the 1983 riots. The Sri Lankan armed forces have been left to deal with the problem.    The army itself is much more disciplined than in 1983, when it simply turned a blind eye to what was going on. At that time, the small volunteer armed forces of Sri Lanka were neither trained nor conditioned for counterterrorism. They were a ceremonial army inexperienced in battle, the only exception being the one week in 1971 when an attempted Marxist insurrection (instigated, it is believed, by North Korean agents) triggered fighting that killed an estimated 25,000 people.    Because of terrorist intimidation and government recruiting policy, less than 5% of the Sri Lankan army was of Tamil origin. Sinhalese troops saw themselves surrounded by a hostile population whose language they could not speak and whose customs they did not share -- and who, they were convinced, knew where the land mines were buried and when the ambushes were going to happen. Unable to close in on the terrorists, the army lashed out blindly, gunning down many innocent Tamil villagers suspected of terrorism.    Such an attitude was, of course, woefully mistaken. The average Tamil villager desired only to be left alone, to grow his crops and raise his family. As the army struck out in blind frustration against Tamil civilians, however, many turned to the only protection being offered: that provided by the insurgents.    By mid-1984, with terrorist acts making areas in the north and east &quot;no-go&quot; places for the government, Sri Lanka agreed to an Indian-sponsored round of peace talks. The rebels took advantage of the &quot;cessation of hostilities&quot; to relocate their forces, resupply them with more effective weapons and bring over more trained militants from India. Terrorist intimidation was used to gain control over a helpless population. For example, Tamils who refused to pay revolutionary taxes and otherwise displeased the Marxist rebels were hung with barbed wire from lampposts. When the truce finally broke down that December, the rebels effectively controlled Jaffna and were a menacing presence in Trincomalee and Batticaloa districts.    In the past two years, however, things have begun to change for the better. The army has more than doubled its strength to 23,000 men from under 10,000. Younger officers, many of them graduates of military academies in Pakistan and Britain, are better trained in the tactics of counterinsurgency operations. As a result, the army has expanded its area of control and is increasingly on the offensive.    Internecine fighting between Tamil groups has split the insurgent ranks. A year ago the Tigers decimated its chief rival in Jaffna, the Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization, killing its leader and more than 150 members. Last December a similar onslaught was launched by the Tigers against its rivals in the east, the Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front, killing at least as many again.    These massacres have resulted in most Tamil groups, with the exception of EROS, viewing the security forces as a lesser evil than the Tigers. Many rebels have begun defecting to the army, where they are retrained and used as intelligence assets or special-force commandos against the Tigers. This too has led to success in combating the Tigers, particularly in the eastern province, where even Tiger members are becoming disenchanted with the leadership. Coupled with a considerable popular disillusionment with the guerrillas' heavy-handed control -- arising from their concept of a one-party dictatorship in the so-called People's Republic of Tamil Eelam -- it has meant an increasing flow of information to the government forces.    Victory is still far off, but the situation is turning in favor of the government -- if it can retain support in its own area. By offering moderate Tamils limited local autonomy, Colombo hopes that the majority will turn away from the insurgents' Marxist schemes. Fearing the loss of public support for the establishment of their Lilliputian revolutionary statelet, the rebels have repeatedly denounced the negotiations. As horrible as the recent spate of bloodshed in Sri Lanka is, it could be a sign of the rebels' desperate fear that peaceful compromise might after all be possible.    ---   Mr. Geldard is a research analyst at the London-based Institute for the Study of Terrorism and co-author of the institute's recent paper, &quot;Tamil Terrorism: Nationalist or Marxist?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>