<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Battling Back:Visibly Aged and HurtBy Hearings, ReaganTries Hard to Rebound---As He Makes Speech Tonight,Some See His PresidencySlipping Into Impotence---The Bad News in Recent Polls---By Gerald F. Seib and Ellen HumeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As the Iran-Contra hearings dragged on through the sultry Washington summer, the man they were focused on, President Reagan, seemed strangely detached from the process. But when Mr. Reagan wrote a note to an old California friend, Margaret Brock, a few days ago, his feelings finally started to show through.    &quot;I think we're nearing the end of the bloodletting, and the mob has failed in its efforts,&quot; Mr. Reagan wrote to his longtime financial backer, thanking her for a letter of support.    That appears to be an accurate reflection of the president's mood as he prepares for tonight's speech to the nation about the controversy. Having endured periods of sadness, distraction and pain over the damage to his personal credibility, Mr. Reagan is emerging from the hearings feeling vindicated and determined, say a wide variety of friends and aides.    &quot;I think it's clear he feels deeply hurt by the information that he's receiving that such a large number of Americans don't believe he's telling the truth,&quot; says Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona, who has visited the White House several times recently. &quot;It has had two effects on him. One is to make him less upbeat than he was in the past, and at the same time it has reignited some of his more combative instincts.&quot;    Clearly, the trauma of the past nine months has taken its toll. The 76-year-old Mr. Reagan has aged visibly; he lacks the vigor and passion he once displayed; and he regularly lapses into long discourses about his days as governor of California. Friends say the scandal has been even more discouraging to Nancy Reagan, who is by nature nervous and protective of her husband's political image.    Thus, the central question is whether Mr. Reagan still possesses the personal and political strength to keep his administration from sliding into impotence.    Aides and acquaintances say they think that they detect a rebound in recent days. In private conversations, the president tells them he is eager to talk about the Iran-Contra mess and to reiterate his view that his basic instincts were right. Aides say that tonight's speech will discuss his reaction to the hearings in &quot;fairly personal terms&quot; but will avoid appearing angry or combative. He is likely to acknowledge again that mistakes were made and talk about changes in the functioning of the National Security Council staff and the conduct of covert operations to prevent a recurrence.    Then, the president will seek to shift attention to the top three priorities on his fall agenda: his push for changes in the leftist government of Nicaragua, symbolized for the moment by his new bipartisan peace proposal; the nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Supreme Court; and an arms agreement with the Soviet Union.    Beyond those items and a few others, Mr. Reagan seems to be falling back on the ideological positions with which he has traditionally been most comfortable. He lately has staked out tough positions against abortion and tax increases, and aides expect a renewed pitch for the &quot;Reagan doctrine,&quot; which calls for clear American backing of rebels resisting hard-line leftist governments in places such as Afghanistan, and Angola.    Mr. Reagan thinks that the hearings have &quot;been a tough deal but that the White House has performed well, and he's prepared now to move on and do things he wants to get done,&quot; says Howard Baker, the White House chief of staff.    Still, the president remains deeply troubled by the persistent finding in polls that most Americans don't think he is telling the whole truth about his role in the Iran-Contra scandal. He got another stark, painful reminder of his credibility problem just a few days ago, when Richard Wirthlin presented his latest findings at a White House meeting. The pollster told the president that a just-completed survey showed that nearly 60% of those questioned still don't believe that he has been completely truthful. Mr. Reagan's face fell, according to one account of the meeting, and he asked: &quot;Why won't people believe me?&quot;    And the Iran-Contra affair hasn't been the only setback for Mr. Reagan in the past nine months. He has endured minor surgery twice; the indictment of old friends and former aides Lyn Nofziger and Michael Deaver; and the recent death of Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige in a freak rodeo accident. The death of Mr. Baldrige, like the president a horse-lover and part-time cowboy, affected Mr. and Mrs. Reagan more deeply than was generally recognized, friends say.    Mr. Reagan's problems seem to have lapped over into his recent public appearances; he has occasionally seemed distracted and detached. In one recent speech in Indianapolis, for example, he misidentified Rep. John Myers as &quot;Gov. Myers&quot; before correcting himself, referred to 1941 when he meant 1981, and lost his place in his prepared text when lambasting Congress for approving pork-barrel projects.    In a recent meeting with journalists from outside Washington, the president answered the first two questions -- about spending struggles with Congress and the Iran-Contra affair -- with reminiscences about the status of the California state budget when he took over in 1966, how he handled budgetary issues there and how many times he vetoed items in state budget bills.    Moreover, after years of seeming to defy the ravages of time, Mr. Reagan is starting to show his age. After meeting with him recently, one longtime acquaintance reported that he was stunned to find that Mr. Reagan had physically &quot;shrunk.&quot; His hair is finally showing noticeable streaks of gray.    Even friends don't deny that Mr. Reagan seems to be slowing down. Asked whether President Reagan has his old zip, Wyoming's Alan Simpson, the No. 2 Republican in the Senate, responds: &quot;Who does?&quot; He adds: &quot;Do we expect that of others, especially a man who entered the presidency at 70? Why should there be the same degree of zip, zeal and vitality in him when nobody else gets that, either?&quot;    The shocks of recent months have apparently prompted the Reagans to begin looking forward to a return home to California after leaving the White House in January 1989. Mr. Reagan has begun talking about items that would belong in his presidential library. And some of the Reagans' old California friends have chipped in to buy a $2.5 million ranch-style home for the couple's possible use or purchase in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles. When the Reagans previously lived in California, Mrs. Reagan had liked the house, which is in a neighborhood where Elizabeth Taylor and other Hollywood stars live.    Aides say Mr. Reagan's anger has flared periodically as he has watched his administration sullied during the Iran-Contra hearings. They say he was particularly upset at Senate committee Chairman Daniel Inouye after the Hawaii Democrat publicly implied that a memo suggested that Mr. Reagan was briefed on the diversion of funds from the Iranian arms deal to the Contras.    He also was angry and frustrated when his own staff couldn't find a copy of a 1985 directive characterizing the Iranian arms sales as an arms-for-hostages agreement. And he was visibly upset at the press recently over stories suggesting that he had led an early effort to conceal the basic facts in the scandal.    Nevertheless, aides and acquaintances say that such episodes don't last long and that he retains the native optimism and good humor that have long been his trademark. He expressed sadness in talking to friends about Mr. Baldrige's death -- but also leavened his comments by telling a cowboy joke that he said the late commerce secretary would have enjoyed.    The president even seems capable of wry comments about his own problems. In a recent motorcade through West Bend, Wis., he spotted a theater marquee announcing one of his old movies, &quot;Tennessee's Partner.&quot; He turned to those riding with him and recalled with delight that the movie is the only one of his cowboy films in which he is shot and killed in the end -- and noted that the cinematic demise came when his character stood up for a friend.    But it isn't clear that any amount of optimism can change Mr. Reagan's basic problem: the appearance that he has become a lame duck with vastly reduced powers to shape events in the final 17 months of his presidency. &quot;He now has lost all clout with Congress,&quot; says Brent Scowcroft, a former national security adviser who served on the Tower Commission that investigated the Iran-Contra affair for the White House. &quot;They aren't afraid of him anymore.&quot;    While this concern has been growing, Mr. Reagan has chosen to stay above the budget and tax battles in Congress by focusing on broad, long-term ideas such as budget reform and balanced-budget amendments that don't have much chance of bearing fruit any time soon. But he also has tried to correct the impression that he is disengaged by negotiating a bipartisan peace plan for Central America with House Speaker James Wright, by committing the U.S. to protect Kuwaiti tankers in the Persian Gulf and by threatening to veto some costly bills involving domestic programs.    In the same vein, he wasn't deterred from nominating Judge Bork by the prospect of a bruising confirmation fight in the Senate. And when conservative aides proposed controversial regulatory changes to block federal financing for family-planning programs that provide abortion counseling, he immediately embraced the proposal and announced it the next day at a speech to a right-to-life group.    The president's critics and friends alike see him sticking to strongly ideological stances for the remainder of his presidency. &quot;They want him to go out singing the same songs,&quot; says House Democratic Leader Thomas Foley. And Chief of Staff Baker says his own skills as a legislative compromiser aren't called on as much as many had anticipated. The president &quot;expresses his views very clearly, and sometimes it is not so easy to express those views in legislative terms,&quot; he says.    Another aide says of the president: &quot;It's like he's a boxer and it's the 14th round. He knows there are only two rounds left, and he's trying to get in as many licks as he can before the last bell rings.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>