<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880119-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Selling Ailing Texas Sandamp;Ls Is Problematic --- Regulators Swamped by Varying Buyers, Plans </HL><AUTHOR> Leonard M. Apcar (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TCR CCI CAL GOVMT SM </CO><IN> BNK TNM </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   David E. Bradley is swamped with calls from people interested in buying what he's selling. Which is amazing, considering what he's selling.    Mr. Bradley, the assistant director of regulatory affairs for the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas, is helping to orchestrate the federal government's sale of 104 institutions, or more than a third of Texas thrifts, that are saddled with billions of dollars of bad real estate loans and a staggering amount of red ink.    So why are some of the business world's brightest lights lining up for a crack at these so-called brain-dead thrifts? That question is troubling federal regulators, who must make the right choices, and soon, or risk prolonging the region's economic slump, which could send aftershocks far beyond the Lone Star State's vast border.    The roster of potential suitors includes Robert Bass of the wealthy Bass brothers of Fort Worth; Trammell Crow Co., Dallas, the nation's largest real estate developer; Citicorp, New York, the giant bank holding company; CalFed Inc., a big California thrift holding company; several Wall Street investment bankers, as well as foreign investors; and a host of other big corporations both in and out of Texas.    But different investors have different motivations and different strategies. Some have proposed sweeping rescues that would attempt to restructure the entire Texas Sandamp;L industry; others just want to pick up a particular thrift cheaply. To protect them from future risks, most want generous government subsidies, which aren't likely to be granted.    The government must separate the long-term investors from the quick-buck artists who want to turn a fast profit with the government's aid. Regulators also must avoid investors interested primarily in a captive financing vehicle for their other investments, the kind of self-dealing that got many thrifts into this mess in the first place.    The pressure is on to act quickly, before further deterioration makes the cost of any bailout prohibitive and scares off coveted out-of-state investors whose capital isn't dependent on Texas' woebegone economy.    &quot;We're willing to consider just about anything, as long as it's legal,&quot; says B.J. Brookins, the mergers and acquisitions director of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., which insures thrift deposits and handles problem institutions.    Today, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the nation's top thrift regulatory agency, is expected to review a proposal that aims to restructure the Texas Sandamp;L industry by consolidating the weakest institutions with better-managed ones. The long-awaited Southwest plan, which Bank Board Chairman M. Danny Wall outlined in a speech here last Friday, envisions creating a range of small and large Texas thrifts recapitalized by private investors and government aid. &quot;When we resolve the troubled thrifts here,&quot; Mr. Wall told an overflow luncheon of more than 1,900 Southwest bankers and thrift executives, &quot;we will have gone a long way toward recovery of the industry nationwide.&quot;    Mr. Wall said the plan would, among other things, give investors FSLIC funds, preferably a note, that would erase an insolvent Sandamp;L's negative net worth -- or assets minus liabilities -- which would be calculated by using the more conservative generally accepted accounting principles. The tax-free reorganizations would probably receive FSLIC subsidies for unprofitable loans for a limited time. But he said the FSLIC would want to share in future thrift earnings. &quot;We will be there on the downside, but we're going to be on the upside as well, and that's something that hasn't been done very much in the past,&quot; Mr. Wall said Friday.    But those types of federal assistance aren't enough for some skittish investors who thought the troubles of some Texas thrifts were too severe. Already, several groups have considered buying Texas thrifts and passed, including Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods Inc., the New York investment banker and specialist in bank and thrift stocks; E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., New York investment banker, prior to its parent's pending merger with Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.; and one group advised by Secura Group, a Washington, D.C.-based consultant, though several other Secura clients remain interested.    Indeed, Texas thrift closings threatened to swamp the dwindling resources of the FSLIC, forcing Congress last summer to authorize a recapitalization of $10.83 billion over the next three years. But with that money, &quot;You can only take care of two or three intersections in far north Dallas,&quot; sniffs Bernard L. Weinstein, a Southern Methodist University economist.    If regulators commit too much rescue money to the black hole of Texas thrifts and this still doesn't solve the problem, where would that leave troubled thrifts elsewhere? Mr. Weinstein points out that Texas thrifts sold significant loan participations in their failed real estate deals to fellow institutions nationwide. &quot;If our thrifts go under, the whole stack of cards goes under and they could pull down thrifts in California, Florida and other states with them,&quot; he says.    Texas thrift leaders want the regulators to back off, giving them more time to cure their own ailments, and they are getting support in Congress from Rep. Jim Wright of Fort Worth, the powerful House speaker. They fear that a sweeping bailout plan will lead to a forced liquidation of foreclosed property that will further depress real estate values and deepen Texas' economic trough. But in his speech last Friday, Mr. Wall tried to ease the fears of Southwest bankers and real estate executives. &quot;Real estate dumping is the worst thing that our agency can do. We will not dump real estate&quot; as troubled thrifts are reorganized, he said.    There are some sound reasons for picking up a Texas thrift. With one of the nation's most liberal financial service charters, Texas thrift owners can do many things forbidden in some other states, such as issuing real estate loans that exceed a property's purchase price and making loans without any down payments.    And eventually, Texas' economy will rebound. CalFed sees the nation's third-most-populous state as the linchpin for its Sunbelt expansion plan. And Texas thrifts such as Houston's San Jacinto Savings Association, a Southmark Corp. unit, see an inexpensive opportunity to expand branch networks and market share.    Mr. Bradley and his seven-member staff at Dallas's Federal Home Loan Bank are studying applicants' past legal problems, current financial resources and business plans. Investors must &quot;truly want to own a financial institution,&quot; rather than have a thrift that merely provides financing for their investments, he says.    The biggest hang-up, however, is how much regulators are willing to insulate investors from past managements' bungling. They will offer the usual direct subsidies, but insist they will be somewhat stingier than in the past, forcing prospective thrift buyers to shoulder some of the risk if loan losses continue.    With political pressure mounting, the government must find ways to stretch its precious dollars. Substituting notes for cash as much as possible could enable the FSLIC to cover as much as $18 billion of bailout commitments with its $10.83 billion, Mr. Wall, the Bank Board chairman, estimates.    There isn't any shortage of approaches. One possible model, which Mr. Wall highlighted in his Dallas remarks: the merging last month of four troubled Louisiana thrifts into well-managed Pelican Homestead andamp; Savings Association, Metairie, La. Of the FSLIC's promised $294 million of aid, only about 10% of it is in cash and the rest is in long-term notes. In return, the FSLIC would get a 60% share of proceeds from collections on bad loans and foreclosed properties, a percentage of the thrift's future earnings and a minimum 25% equity stake if Pelican goes public.    A proposal by Bancpro Group, led by Houston and San Antonio thrift consultants, would merge several troubled thrifts into a $1 billion association and would pledge to repay any FSLIC subsidy in five to 25 years. Bancpro plans to handle its own troubled loans and raise needed capital if the FSLIC will raise the merged group's net worth to zero, grant forbearances on other capital requirements and provide a profit margin on nonperforming, or past-due, loans.    Regulators also are considering separating loans into separate &quot;good&quot; and &quot;bad&quot; thrifts to partly shield investors, with investors and the agency then sharing in any recoveries from the troubled assets. The risk, of course, is that the bad thrift's assets wouldn't generate much revenue and the FSLIC eventually would have to cough up cash to cover the note.    In return for accepting that risk, regulators again want a quid pro quo-warrants to buy stock in the good thrift or a profit-sharing arrangement similar to the Pelican Homestead deal.    Perhaps the most talked-about proposal comes from two prominent Texas dealmakers. Morton H. Meyerson, a longtime associate of the wealthy Texas entrepreneur H. Ross Perot, and Richard E. Rainwater, a onetime adviser to the Bass family, talk of shaping many sick thrifts into a &quot;megathrift&quot; several times larger than any existing Texas savings institution and recapitalizing it with at least $300 million from private investors. They reason that the institution could survive through aggressive cost-cutting, increased market share and a more orderly liquidation of foreclosed property.    A successful megathrift would reduce the number of institutions scrambling for limited funds -- a stated aim of regulators -- and thus lower the cost of money for the remaining Sandamp;Ls, Mr. Meyerson has said.    Last Friday, Mr. Wall appeared to scotch the Meyerson-Rainwater proposal. He said regulators wouldn't create any single, statewide thrift. And his remarks indicated that FSLIC's Texas plan would be a series of piecemeal mergers and acquisitions, though tailored to the Bank Board's overall Southwest plan. It is understood that Messrs. Meyerson and Rainwater are far less interested in participating in a piecemeal approach.    To some industry executives, few of the proposals make much sense. No matter how deftly the FSLIC marshals its limited resources, contends Anthony M. Frank, chairman and chief executive officer of Ford Motor Co.'s First Nationwide Bank, a San Francisco-based thrift, it won't be enough to recapitalize Texas thrifts. And a series of acquisitions by outsiders will just make matters worse by increasing competition and driving up the cost of money, he adds.    Eventually, he believes, Congress may have to create a &quot;thrift reconstruction agency&quot; to rehabilitate savings and loans here. &quot;The solution is important to the entire Sandamp;L industry,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't see how the business gets healthy without solving the Texas problem.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>