<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880613-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Icahn Identifies 2 Canadian Oil Firms With Which He Discussed a Texaco Bid </HL><AUTHOR> Allanna Sullivan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TX TWA TXC BSC CHV </CO><IN> PET TNM </IN><TEXT>   Carl C. Icahn identified two Canadian oil companies with which he has discussed a joint takeover of Texaco Inc. and asserted that Citibank has verbally agreed to finance such a transaction.    Texaco's largest shareholder said that in the last two weeks he has held separate discussions toward a possible takeover partnership with Gulf Canada Ltd. and Husky Oil Ltd., as well as with Gordon Securities, a Toronto-based investment banking concern representing other parties. The talks involved the sale of Texaco Canada Ltd. as part of a larger plan by which Mr. Icahn would acquire the nation's third-largest oil company.    The discussions with Gulf Canada reached the most advanced stage, Mr. Icahn said, but have been &quot;on hold&quot; since Friday, when Mr. Icahn developed reservations about some of the terms demanded by Gulf.    Mr. Icahn also said that a representative of Citicorp's Citibank N.A. unit had assured him that financing for a takeover was &quot;eminently doable&quot; under the scenarios offered by Mr. Icahn, in which he would have to borrow anywhere from $5.5 billion to $10 billion, depending on which Texaco assets he would sell. Citibank declined to comment.    Mr. Icahn made his disclosures during a deposition in Mount Kisco, N.Y., near the newly-constructed future offices of Trans World Airlines, of which Mr. Icahn is chairman. Texaco and Mr. Icahn agreed to the unusual step of admitting three reporters to the examination.    The all-day deposition occurred amid escalating litigation in a U.S. District Court in White Plains, N.Y. Texaco and Mr. Icahn accuse each other of various securities-law violations -- all as a climax approaches this Friday in Mr. Icahn's attempt to gain five Texaco board seats through a proxy fight.    Texaco lawyers are working through a mad-cap deposition schedule in advance of the proxy vote at Friday's annual meeting in Tulsa, Okla. The lawyers are intent on obtaining evidence that Mr. Icahn coordinated his Texaco stock purchases with other investors and that he improperly failed to disclose the extent of his takeover talk with third parties. At least five depositions and two court hearings are scheduled for today.    Outfitted in his weekend jeans and sneakers, David Boies, Texaco's chief outside lawyer, insisted during a break yesterday that Texaco had scored several points in its effort to prove securities-law violations. Mr. Boies said that in his view, Mr. Icahn contradicted the statements of other witnesses, and confirmed secretly attempting to find allies to buy a 4.9% block of Texaco common stock owned by the New York investment partnership of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. Mr. Icahn has denied breaking any securities laws.    Mr. Boies also pointed to trading records showing that Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. had purchased Texaco shares for Kohlberg between Dec. 14 and Jan. 12-and that Mr. Icahn didn't begin his open-market purchases until the same day that Bear Stearns had quit buying. Mr. Icahn said that the timing of the respective purchases was &quot;completely, totally coincidental,&quot; to which Mr. Boies said: &quot;Believe in any gods you want, but don't believe in coincidences.&quot;    Transcripts from other depositions in the case -- generated in recent days and unsealed Friday by a federal judge in White Plains -- are populated with a Who's Who of the takeover business. They include T. Boone Pickens Jr., the Texas oil man; the Belzberg family of Canada, and Larry Fisher, a New York real estate investor who has been involved in transactions with the raider Sir James Goldsmith.    Mr. Pickens testified that he had tried, unsuccessfully, to recruit a member of the dissident slate for Mr. Icahn. Mr. Pickens also confirmed earlier reports in this newspaper that Mr. Icahn had drafted a &quot;partnership agreement&quot; but that Mr. Pickens declined to participate.    The Belzberg family's involvement relates to the 4.9% interest in Texaco held by Bear Stearns for Kohlberg Kravis -- a block of stock that figures prominently in Texaco's efforts to discredit Mr. Icahn. In a deposition taken Friday, Alfred Kingsley, an associate of Mr. Icahn, testified that the Icahn group for some time was unaware who owned the Bear Stearns shares. With a proxy fight looming and every vote important, the Icahn group decided it would feel &quot;more comfortable having it sort of in our own camp,&quot; rather than in unknown hands, he said.    To that end, Mr. Icahn talked with Alan C. Greenberg, the chairman of Bear Stearns, about selling the stock, and, in February, with Mark Belzberg about buying it, Mr. Kingsley testified. &quot;The Belzbergs, through the discussions we had with them, indicated that they would vote with us,&quot; Mr. Kingsley explained. The sale never occurred, although Mr. Icahn said in an interview that the Belzbergs got within 62.5 cents a share of coming to terms on the purchase.    Mr. Icahn yesterday testified that he also had talked with Mr. Fisher, the New York real estate entrepreneur, about buying the Bear Stearns block, and that he suggested that Jeffrey Steiner and Zev Wolfson -- two real estate investors who are limited partners of Mr. Icahn -- might join in a group to buy the shares. At one point, Mr.Pickens also was approached about buying the block.    &quot;That block has driven me nuts,&quot; Mr. Icahn said.    Indeed, Mr. Icahn himself has tried to buy it twice in the last three weeks or so, he testified -- once by offering Mr. Greenberg of Bear Stearns $47 a share, and just last week, during a proxy-solicitation call to Henry Kravis, by offering the Kohlberg Kravis partnership the market price at the time, about $51 a share.    While Mr. Boies yesterday probed for evidence to use against Mr. Icahn, he also gave the investor a platform to boast about the extent of his readiness to acquire the oil giant -- something Texaco has expressed skepticism over his willingness or intent to do. And Mr. Icahn acknowledged that going public with some of his takeover plans would help him cultivate credibility as holders decide whether to cast their proxies with his slate or with management's.    Although he said &quot;it's not over yet,&quot; Mr. Icahn estimated that he needs commitments from only another 25 million of Texaco's 242 million shares outstanding to win. Of the total shares, he estimated, only about 200 million will vote. Of those he owns 36 million, fast-money arbitragers own about 10 million and a group of institutions he claims to have won over own about 30 million.    While describing his takeover plans, Mr. Icahn said he had held &quot;extensive conversations&quot; with Marshall Cohen, the chairman of Gulf Canada, including over a dinner on Memorial Day at Maurice, a swanky New York restaurant. As recently as last Thursday, Mr. Icahn said, Gulf Canada officials expressed a willingness to invest $4.1 billion to help him buy Texaco, in exchange for preferred stock in Texaco and the company's interest in Texaco Canada, which in this transaction would be valued at $2.3 billion.    This would require Mr. Icahn to raise $9 billion to $10 billion in financing -- or only $5.5 billion, he said, if he sold Texaco's interest in Caltex Inc., a Far Eastern refining and marketing venture jointly owned with Chevron Corp. Clearly, Mr. Icahn said, such a takeover could be accomplished. &quot;It's a no brainer,&quot; he said.    But Mr. Icahn said he awoke Friday morning concerned that Gulf was offering too little -- &quot;a real bargain&quot; -- for Texaco Canada. In addition, Gulf was insisting that if it committed to the transaction and it fell through, Mr. Icahn would have to pay Gulf a huge penalty.    Mr. Icahn said he also held discussions at his home until at least 2:00 a.m. last Monday with top officials of Husky Oil, which has long coveted Texaco Canada. As for Gordon Securities, he said, its representatives discussed &quot;a myriad of transaction possibilities&quot; on the terrace of his home Memorial Day weekend.    Finally, Mr. Icahn said, some time ago he held several meetings with a group saying it represented Arab interests about a variety of possible transactions, including a joint acquisition of Texaco. Mr. Icahn said he couldn't remember their names, although at one point he recalled them excusing themselves to fly off to a meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. &quot;I don't know how real it was,&quot; he said of the group's interest.    Texaco's attorney, Mr. Boies, also questioned Mr. Icahn about a news release in which the investor on Friday announced he would establish a new corporation to hold his Texaco stock and raise public funds if his current friendly takeover offer for Texaco turns hostile. Mr. Icahn said if such an offering goes forward, it would be underwritten by Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Securities Corp. and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.    Mr. Boies's questioning suggested that the announcement was intended to curry favor with -- and obtain more proxies from -- Texaco shareholders.    &quot;We made the determination,&quot; Mr. Icahn explained, &quot;that if we get board seats, we're just never going away.&quot;    ---   Thomas Petzinger Jr. contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>