<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0120 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Shedunit: The 'Queen of Crime' Strikes Again---By Pam Lambert</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Over a career spanning almost a quarter-century, P.D. James, a former British civil servant, has earned the title of &quot;Queen of Crime&quot; with a string of page-turners memorable more for their sense of people and place than ingenious plotting. In Ms. James's new best seller, &quot;A Taste for Death&quot; (Knopf, 459 pages, $18.95), whodunit proves to be one of the least satisfying aspects of the book. Such is her narrative skill, it doesn't terribly matter.    The story gets off to a gripping enough start -- there's nothing like corpses in the opening sentence to rivet a reader. Those in question, found with throats slashed in the shabby vestry of a church in Paddington, belong to Sir Paul Berowne, a minister of the crown, and Harry Mack, an alcoholic tramp. Is this, as it appears, a murder-suicide -- or were both men murdered? What possible link could there be between the pair? What brought Sir Paul in the first place to this sanctuary, so far from his sphere? Did it have something to do with the religious experience rumored to have prompted his resignation from Parliament? And does Sir Paul's fate have any connection with those of two young women who died while in his employ?    It's up to Cmdr. Adam Dalgliesh to find out. As James fans know -- he's sleuthed in six of her nine previous novels -- the Byronic Dalgliesh is a complex character, at once a published poet (though the muse has been fugitive in recent years) and a policeman's policeman. This time he has something of a personal stake in the case -- he knew Sir Paul. And the detective empathizes because of what he sees as parallels in their lives, particularly the way both achieved the shell of success without an underlying sense of satisfaction. Dalgliesh has come to regard himself as the &quot;poet who no longer writes poetry. The lover who substitutes technique for commitment. The policeman disillusioned with policing.&quot;    Dalgliesh and his colleagues swiftly discover no dearth of suspects. There's the estranged daughter of Sir Paul's first marriage, whose mother died in an auto accident while he was at the wheel. There's the Barbie doll of a second wife he wed with unseemly haste, her sponging brother -- and her lover. There's even Sir Paul's mother, a dowager despot who appears more distressed by the demise of pre-war manners than that of her son.    Ms. James's artistry is most evident in the vividness of her minor characters, who animate her broad canvas like the throngs in one of John Sloan's vibrant cityscapes. Even those who rate no more than a quick brush stroke are memorable, like this woman writer (the author herself in a Hitchcock-style cameo?): &quot;a buxom grandmother, noted for her detective stories, who gazed mournfully at the camera as if deploring either the bloodiness of her craft or the size of her advance.&quot;    The passing human parade combines with Ms. James's flair for architectural description to create a Dickensian sense of scope. But while the metropolis's glorious past can still be glimpsed in a soaring campanile or a span across the Thames, Ms. James's is very much a London of the problematic present. It's a universe of diminished possibility, where people soldier on long after they've forgotten why, where a kind of inoffensive domestic comfort is about the best to which one can aspire.    Despite an absence of physical evidence and an abundance of alibis, Dalgliesh and his team slog on, their investigation detailed with a punctiliousness that testifies to Ms. James's years in the Police and Criminal Law departments of the Home Office. Many of their inquiries are only superficially digressive; they may not solve Dalgliesh's case, but they help the author make hers.    In &quot;A Taste for Death,&quot; as in the best of her previous books, Ms. James has more than mystery on her mind. Here she explores a number of themes, among them the nature of familial responsibility and the effect that the &quot;contaminating crime&quot; of murder has on all those it touches -- including the police. Unfortunately, she's least successful with one of the issues most integral to this novel: religion, specifically the nature of Sir Paul's experience. It's a question Dalgliesh broods about repeatedly, then abandons, just as Ms. James herself fails to mine the intriguing possibilities she's opened up by presenting us with two such disparate companions in death.    The biggest disappointment, though, is the identity of the culprit. The arduous investigative process is grounded on a belief in rationality. When the killer proves to be a psychopath, the entire enterprise -- and the reader's effort in following it for more than 400 pages -- is mocked.    Some will see this disillusionment as part of the author's plan, of a piece with a world where priests preach and cops police long after their faith has fled. As a pastor in the novel advises his flock: &quot;If you find that you no longer believe, act as if you still do. If you feel that you can't pray, go on saying the words.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>