<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0075 </DOCNO><HL> The Revenue Act of 1987?---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 01/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   What this country needs is for the House Ways and Means Committee to take a year's holiday. That way we might escape the perils of another tax law this year.    I even think it might profit us to send the members on a nice world tour at taxpayers' expense. They could go to such vacation spots as Britain, France, Italy and Switzerland to study not only these countries' tax systems but also the effect of them on the natives' well-being. To put the rough with the smooth, we might send them also to visit Moscow this winter.    You may think that too generous to congressmen who are already getting a pay increase this year (without having to vote on it), but there could well be many benefits for all the rest of us.    I don't mean there couldn't be some improvements in the Revenue Act of 1986, which took effect this month. I have my list of changes I'd like to see. And I'm sure you have your own list.    My list would begin with the changes in taxes on capital gains. It's absurd to treat them as &quot;income.&quot; Let's say you bought something as an investment five or 10 years ago, a house or some stock in the XYZ company. Today you sell it for more dollars than you paid. Until last year's law, there was some recognition that those gains weren't just in the selling year but spread out over the whole period. Moreover a lot of that alleged gain was due to inflation; the dollars you receive on selling weren't the same as the dollars you originally invested. Worth a good bit less, in fact.    But next year, when the changes are fully implemented, all of that &quot;gain&quot; will be taxed just as if it were all 1988 income. That's both bad economics and also unfair, something recognized in the tax law before this. Some countries don't tax so-called capital gains at all, which is sensible.    Then there's the peculiar way this latest tax law treats other taxes you've paid to state and local governments. You can deduct state income taxes, for example. Also real estate taxes on your house. That's to avoid double taxation. Local sales tax, however, won't be deductible. For low-income people that's the biggest local tax they pay. In some states, like North Carolina, there are sales taxes even on food.    Here there is not only a ridiculous distinction between different kinds of local taxes but a distinction that discriminates against the least well-off among us.    Then what about the &quot;simplification&quot; that was promised in the 1986 law? If you are a salaried or wage earner, have you looked at the new form you have to fill out to determine how much gets withheld from your paycheck? Or, for that matter, what about the new 1040 tax form that will be coming for 1987? You had better go to Handamp;R Block or some other tax helper to figure it out, the cost of which, incidentally, is no longer deductible for many taxpayers.    To be sure, this new tax law promises lower rates, which is supposed to compensate. These lower rates, though, only start heading lower in 1987. The rest is just a promise about the future, which may or may not be a promise delivered if the Ways and Means Committee starts tinkering with the tax law again this year.    You no doubt have your own list of changes that should be made, such as removing the double standard on charitable contributions, deductible to rich folk who itemize expenses and such but not deductible to low-income Joe who doesn't itemize. As for the folks who want investment advice to help them get richer (and hence pay more income taxes), that too has become non-deductible for many taxpayers. It's not clear (to me, anyway) how that rule will benefit the IRS if without professional advice the rich get less richer.    So why not a little tinkering to correct these and other peculiarities in that 1986 law?    Well, what you ought to worry about is, if the tinkering starts how do you know where the tinkering will end? Once the Ways and Means Committee folk get to puttering around, with all the rest of Congress chiming in, you never know what the repair job will look like. Maybe something even more jerry-built.    Or maybe just more and/or higher taxes. Indeed, there's already talk about that. The new speaker of the House, Rep. Jim Wright of Texas, has been muttering that a tax increase should be considered to reduce the deficit. And just this month the whole House defeated a motion that would have banned raising income taxes, which may show how the wind is blowing.    There's another reason, too, for sequestering the tax tinkerers. That has to do with the principle noted by Aristotle long ago that imperfect laws are often better than constantly changing laws. When the law is constantly changing, no man knows where he is or what to do. He never knows when all may be altered tomorrow.    That applies especially to tax laws. Even with an imperfect law, which is what we have, a taxpayer can take some reasonable actions to conform to it. He knows in advance what he must pay to the tax gatherer; he knows what of his nominal income is real income he can spend as he chooses and what is illusory income. He can decide how much he can afford for charity and whether he must wrestle with form 1040 by himself or can pay someone to do it for him. In life there is a certain comfort in the knowable even when it's painful.    But if the tax law is to be constantly changing in directions no man knows whither, then everything is at sixes and sevens. He can't plan for tomorrow today. To all the other uncertainties of life there is now added the uncertainty of the tax collector.    So while you may number me among those with complaints about what Congress wrought in 1986, put me down also among those disquieted about the prospects of new rules made this year to throw next year into confusion.    And if to avoid that we have to let the members of the Ways and Means Committee loll about on a paid holiday in some far-off place, so be it.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>