<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880617-0059 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Alleges Defense Consultation 'Steered' Jobs Valued at Billions to McDonnell </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor and Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MD GD UTX </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Melvyn Paisley, a defense industry consultant, provided inside contracting information to McDonnell Douglas Corp. and helped &quot;steer&quot; contracts valued at billions of dollars to the St. Louis-based aerospace company, the government alleged in court papers.    The document, filed as part of a nationwide government investigation of military-contracting fraud, provided the clearest picture yet of the procurement bribery and corruption that have been the focus of a two-year inquiry.    The widening defense scandal has revived public focus on military fraud and dashed the Reagan administration's hopes of laying to rest the perception that weapons procurement is rife with corruption.    Mr. Paisley, formerly the Navy's research chief, also served as a high-paid consultant to Hartford-based United Technologies Corp., according to someone familiar with the investigation. Federal investigators this week searched offices of United Technologies and two subsidiaries, Norden Systems and Pratt andamp; Whitney Aircraft. The federal agents reportedly carried away all United Technologies records relating to Mr. Paisley as well as certain documents on Pratt andamp; Whitney aircraft engines. A United Technologies spokesman said the company never discusses consulting arrangements.    Among other things, the government affidavit filed in court this week alleges:   --That consultants hired by defense contractors used bribes and gratuities to induce Pentagon officials to share secret contract information, clues to competitors' bidding strategies and leads on the military's future weapons-buying plans.    --That the consultants exerted improper influence to win arms contracts for the companies that retained them.    --That the inside information, much of which was classified or confidential, provided &quot;an unfair advantage&quot; over competitors.    The documents, filed in federal district court in St. Louis to support search warrants served Tuesday, identified four McDonnell Douglas officials who had &quot;business relationships&quot; with Mr. Paisley. One official was Robert Little, vice chairman, who worked with Mr. Paisley after he left the Navy last year to establish a consulting firm.    The search warrants sought memos, payments records and other documents from the offices of Thomas Gunn, vice president, marketing, for McDonnell Aircraft; Robert Hood, vice president, aerospace development; and James Caldwell, vice president, international marketing.    As part of a grand jury investigation into the suspected bribery schemes, officials said, prosecutors plan to issue nearly 300 subpoenas, many of them due to be returned by July 19. Attorney General Edwin Meese, who apparently wasn't briefed on the investigation until the past several weeks, told reporters that he expects indictments in 30 to 90 days. But officials stressed it isn't clear who would be charged.    According to the court papers, prosecutors are seeking evidence of bribery, conspiracy, theft of government property and making false statements to the government, along with violations of fraud and conflict-of-interest laws.    Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa), a long-time critic of military procurement waste who is familiar with the current investigation, said he considered these cases to amount to the biggest contracting scandal to date. &quot;What will be exposed here will be beyond anyone's wildest imagination,&quot; he said.    Law-enforcement officials said several consultants named as subjects of the investigation in other court documents already are cooperating with the Justice Department. One law-enforcement official said he understood that James Gaines, a deputy assistant Navy secretary, may be cooperating. Prosecutors declined to comment, and Mr. Gaines couldn't be reached.    The Federal Bureau of Investigation, which placed wiretaps on the phones of several consultants and Defense Department procurement officials, now plans to approach other individuals implicated in tapes of wiretapped conversations and get them to cooperate with the government, according to one law-enforcement official. He also said that additional search warrants are expected to be issued as the investigation accelerates.    Officials familiar with the inquiry have said that several congressional staff members with access to sensitive contract information are also being investigated. But prosecutors said that this isn't a major aspect of the inquiry at this time.    Investigators said the surprise search warrants issued earlier this week were prompted by suggestions, overheard on some of the wiretaps, that several of the alleged schemers realized they were under federal scrutiny. &quot;There clearly were fears of evidence being displaced or destroyed,&quot; said one law-enforcement official.    The government probe creates a cloud around some of the largest programs at McDonnell Douglas, including the $35 billion job of building the Navy's advanced tactical aircraft, in conjunction with General Dynamics Corp. The so-called ATA project, awarded late last year, is one of the Navy's two or three largest procurements for the next decade and was sought by all the major aerospace companies. The federal search warrants were looking for information on the project and on &quot;Mr. Paisley's efforts to steer it towards McDonnell Douglas.&quot;    McDonnell Douglas issued a statement that it is &quot;assessing the the documents served on the company and producing the information requested by the government.&quot; The company also stated: &quot;We are not aware of any improper requests by the company to Mr. Paisley or any improper activities by Mr. Paisley on behalf of the company.&quot;    Mr. Paisley didn't return calls seeking comment.    The government investigation also focuses on the F/A-18 fighter plane and a new helicopter known as the &quot;Killer Egg.&quot; The law enforcement officials are specifically looking into whether McDonnell Douglas obtained inside information on General Dynamics' sales of F-16s, and proprietary information that might have helped McDonnell Douglas push the sale of F-18s to Switzerland and South Korea.    The federal search also sought information on McDonnell Douglas's consulting contract with another former Navy official, retired Adm. James Lyons, who was until last year the commander in chief of U.S. Pacific fleet. Like Mr. Paisley, Adm. Lyons was a close associate of former Navy Secretary John Lehman.    Mr. Lyons couldn't be reached for comment. Mr. Lehman didn't return calls seeking comment.    As early as 1985, criminal investigators from the Justice and Defense departments said they were pursuing allegations of widespread trafficking in privileged and classified information by defense consultants working for several major contractors. But the current investigation, begun two years ago after a former Navy official's tip, is the largest and most aggressive ever mounted to crack down on the problem.    The sweeping investigation has returned defense procurement to the forefront of congressional concerns. White House officials were stunned and some worried that Vice President George Bush's presidential campaign will be hurt if dozens of bribery indictments are handed down in the next several months.    President Reagan met yesterday with Mr. Meese, Mr. Bush, FBI Director William Sessions and National Security Adviser Colin Powell. According to White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater, the president stressed that &quot;we need a thorough investigation as rapidly as possible.&quot;    The picture emerging from the probe is a somewhat like an inside information network within the Pentagon -- one in which contractors retained consultants, who in turn bribed Defense Department employees for proprietary data on weapons programs. The consultants might have influenced contractor selections as well.    If the scheme is proven in court, the scandal would shatter the Reagan administration's frequent assertions that the military-procurement problems dramatized by overpriced toilet seats and coffee pots have been solved.    Moreover, Vice President Bush could be embarrassed by the association of Mr. Paisley, who was formerly the Navy's research chief, with former Navy Secretary Lehman. Mr. Lehman is an adviser to Vice President Bush and a contender for defense secretary in a Bush administration.    When Mr. Lehman was a Washington consultant in the 1970s, Mr. Paisley hired him to perform work for Boeing Co., where Mr. Paisley was then a senior executive. When Mr. Lehman became Navy secretary, he brought in Mr. Paisley as the head of Naval research.    Virginia Sen. John Warner, the ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee, wrote Wednesday to Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci to urge that &quot;a review of the procurement process must begin immediately.&quot; He added, &quot;I ask that you specifically focus on questions involving the safeguards in handling of competitive and technical data within the defense procurement process.&quot;    Secretary Carlucci has created a special task force to watch the investigation and say whether an overhaul of the procrement system is needed. Mr. Carlucci said he is determined to take quick action. &quot;We'll weed them out as fast as possible, and see if there are any defects in the system,&quot; he said.    Meanwhile, Mr. Carlucci and many senior Pentagon officials apparently weren't aware of the inquiry until this week. According to sources close the investigation, Attorney General Meese briefed Mr. Carlucci on the matter only Monday, a day before 31 sites were searched under federal warrants.    ---   Edward T. Pound contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>