<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Arabs Look Again to Old Unreliable---By Karen Elliott House</HL><DD> 10/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTCONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> AMMAN, Jordan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The world may still be facing a revolution of rising expectations, but here in the Middle East the trend is more an evolution of declining expectations.    As Western navies, led by the U.S., ply the Persian Gulf and great-power diplomats huddle over United Nations peace resolutions, there is at least a momentary mood of encouragement among the perennially pessimistic moderate regimes of the region. The usually well-meaning but unreliable old Uncle Sam is back for a brief visit and everyone is happy to see him.    But in an area where hopes almost inevitably wind up being dashed and where pessimism almost always pays, there's little faith in any quarter, Arab or Israeli, that uncle is going to stick around.    If the mood now is one of pleasant surprise that the U.S. Navy is actually in the region, that some Western allies have joined it, that the U.S. and Soviets are at least talking about common interests in ending the Iraq-Iran war and that the U.S. secretary of state is about to pay one of his rare visits to these parts, it's only relative to the nadir a year ago when the U.S. was arming Ayatollah Khomeini's Iran.    Mideast moderates are a bit like spectators at a football game cheering a two-yard gain in the mud when they know the team lost 10 yards on the previous play and suspect that it will be thrown for another loss on the next down.    &quot;Out here, the U.S. takes one step forward and two steps back,&quot; says a top Jordanian official.    Even Israel, which the Reagan administration calls its &quot;strategic ally&quot; in the region, dares to voice doubts about American reliability. In an interview, Prime Minister Yitzak Shamir, who is promoting Israel as the reliable protector for moderate Arabs, says, &quot;It's hard for them (Arabs) to rely on outside powers, even the U.S.&quot;    Despite all this, the U.S. is still seen as a superpower that can make a difference -- if it chooses. What is in doubt isn't America's ability but her credibility.    A two-week trip through Egypt, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia turns up much the same view: that if America actually stays the course in the Persian Gulf there is a good chance of standing down Iran. And, for the first time since the Iraq-Iran war began eight years ago, Jordan isn't alone in believing a continuation of the war is bad for the region. Both the Saudi royal family, the ayatollah's new target, and many officials in Israel, which has favored Iran because it fears Iraq more, now see advantages in ending the war.    There's also a fair degree of unanimity in the region that the Soviet Union, not the U.S., is the superpower positioned to play broker in Mideast quarrels, whether between Iraq and Iran or the Arabs and the Israelis. It's not that Moscow has achieved any big victories yet. But the Soviets have baited a number of new lines -- to Israel, to Egypt, to Iran -- and are actively tending them. A Soviet delegation has extended its stay in Israel with an eye toward discussing consular issues and improved relations. Moscow has rescheduled Egypt's debt at terms Cairo finds favorable, a shrewd move because the U.S. continues to haggle over a similar rescheduling. And the Soviets, while maintaining relations with Iraq, have expanded their influence with Iran, a hat trick no other major power comes close to duplicating.    So far, the gulf operation has been largely positive for the Reagan administration. European allies, who usually duck responsibility in the Mideast, have sent ships, providing the biggest show of Western unity in the alliance's recent history.    In short, the U.S. has regained a shred of respect and has at least the opportunity to reclothe itself with some credibility after having been caught with its pants down in the ayatollah's bed. All America has going against it is history and politics.    In most Mideast eyes, the Reagan administration's affair with the ayatollah was only the most recent example of U.S. infidelity. The Reagan administration came into power on a wave of high Arab expectations, following what many out here saw as the Carter administration's sellout of the shah and failure to protect Anwar Sadat from the consequences of a partial peace with Israel.    But the Reagan administration's heavily hyped 1982 Mideast peace initiative collapsed from American inattention, leaving Jordan's King Hussein twisting in the wind. Almost simultaneously, the U.S. unfurled its flag in Lebanon and within a matter of months cut and ran. Lebanon's President Amin Gemayel looks back on that interlude with the shock of an earthquake victim. His country has collapsed around him and America is nowhere in sight. &quot;I had my own bad experience with the Americans,&quot; he says, &quot;but I'm alive.&quot; This sentiment, that success amounts to being touched by America and living to tell of it, is shared in large measure by other Mideast moderates from Jordan's King Hussein to Egypt's Hosni Mubarak.    It's hard enough for Mideast leaders to overlook history but it's even harder to ignore present-day congressional and presidential politics. What American politicians say or don't say about the Mideast matters a lot more here than it does at home. King Hussein religiously tunes in Western broadcasts every night on his shortwave radio to listen for the latest surprises before he goes to bed. The Saudis spend millions on high-power computers to translate and instantaneously transmit U.S. newspaper articles to Riyadh. What's said in America may matter more than what is done out here. What Arabs are receiving on their shortwaves and computers doesn't accord with what they are seeing.    The Persian Gulf operation looks like a moderate success in Mideast eyes. But the talk from America is of how sharply the operation can be truncated and how quickly it can be terminated. Congress is trying to grab control of the operation and squeeze it into the constricting form of the War Powers Act.    As always out here, there are varying shades of optimism, pessimism and cynicism. The Iraqis, who have the most to gain or lose, are pleased to see any superpower involvement, believing that neither superpower will be willing to abdicate the region to the other and thus both may see a stake in ending a war that has virtually exhausted Iraq.    At the outer edge of the region is Egypt, largely consumed with its own economic problems. These days, Egypt is doing a bit better than doom sayers predicted because tourism and oil prices have rebounded somewhat. Egypt, the largest Arab nation, continues to quietly sell weapons to Iraq and to see itself as the only real counterweight to Iran. That view seems increasingly to be shared by vulnerable regimes in the region; Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, which have ostracized Egypt for its peace with Israel, suddenly are sending their citizens to spend time and money in Egypt.    Jordan's King Hussein, having given up for now on an international peace conference on the Arab-Israeli dispute, is again trying to orchestrate a display of Arab unity, which is almost as hopeless as getting a nursery school to march in step. His hectic schedule before he hosts an Arab summit Nov. 8 has at least taken his mind off deep disappointment with America. The king, who once received U.S. weapons, then lobbied for them, then hoped for them, has now given up entirely and is shopping in Paris, London and Moscow.    Israel, with its hopelessly deadlocked coalition government, seems largely engaged in dreamy debates about how to keep Israel a Jewish state despite long-range demographic trends. Labor Party leaders dream of lopping off chunks of territory with large Arab populations and returning those pieces to Jordan, a prospect that is anathema to their Likud coalition partner. Likud leaders, meanwhile, fantasize about massive waves of Soviet Jews arriving to offset soaring Arab birthrates. The basic problem, dreams aside, is that more Jews are leaving Israel than are arriving and that Arabs in Israel and on the occupied West Bank are staying and reproducing.    As for the Saudi Arabians, they are busier than ever trying to buy insurance policies from every peddler. The royal family is more directly threatened these days since the Ayatollah Khomeini, following on the August clash in Mecca, has pledged to topple the &quot;infidel&quot; House of Saud. The Saudis are putting up a brave front but there's little evidence they've stiffened their spines. For example, while talking of standing up to Iran, the Saudis secretly sent the Algerian foreign minister to plead for their safety in Tehran. Even though Saudi Arabia seeks to buy more U.S. jet fighters and air-to-ground missiles, the royal family hasn't permitted the U.S. fleet in the Persian Gulf to use any of its richly endowed naval or air facilities.    And while American newspapers describe Saudi largesse on behalf of William Casey's covert operations in the Middle East, that, too, is only part of a larger Saudi strategy of making payoffs to every piper in the region from Iraq's Saddam Hussein to his enemy, Hafez Assad of Syria, from Mr. Casey's CIA to Abu Nidal's international terrorists.    There's probably little America can do that would give the Saudis the courage to stand up for their own self-interests. But it doesn't take all that much to earn the gratitude, respect and cooperation of other moderate forces in the region. At least in Cairo, Amman and Jerusalem, leaders want to believe that this time around things will be different -- that America will keep a commitment, maintain a presence and demonstrate a constancy of purpose. For the Reagan administration, the Persian Gulf operation is clearly the last chance to redeem its credibility in the Middle East; the even higher stakes are that it may be America's last chance, too.    ---   Ms. House is the Journal's foreign editor. </TEXT></DOC>