<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0158 </DOCNO><HL> Altered Landscape --The Holiday Inns Trip:A Breeze for Decades,Bumpy Ride in the '80s---With Changing Public Tastes,Former Industry LeaderIs Now Industry Copycat---Running Scared of Takeovers---By John HelyarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> HIAREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CASINOS AND GAMBLING (CNO) </IN><DATELINE> MEMPHIS, Tenn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It was a perfectly miserable vacation that 1951 summer. Kemmons Wilson drove from here to Washington, D.C., with his wife and five children, checking into a succession of musty motels and paying an extra $2 for each of the children.    &quot;It made my Scotch blood boil,&quot; recalls Mr. Wilson, who, as a successful 38-year-old home builder, decided that he could build a better motel and the world would beat a path to its door. He ordered up plans, and they came back with the words &quot;Holiday Inn&quot; scrawled across the top. The draftsman had seen the Bing Crosby movie the night before. &quot;It's a great name,&quot; said Mr. Wilson. &quot;We'll use it.&quot;    By 1953, he had four Holiday Inns, one covering each approach to Memphis. By 1956, he had invented motel franchising, and Congress had authorized the interstate highways. By the 1960s, Americans were swarming over these marvelous roads, and Mr. Wilson was stomping on the growth accelerator, opening the 1,000th Holiday Inn in 1968.    In the 1970s, however, Holiday Inns' effort to become a conglomerate failed, and it lost its edge in the industry it created. A new generation of professional managers came in, less builders than preservers of the empire. Now in the 1980s, this American original looks like any number of other American companies: run by the numbers and running scared from takeovers.    The story of Holiday Corp., as the parent company now is called, is really a business parable. A seat-of-the-pants creation in the innocent '50s, it has turned coldly yield-driven in the sharky '80s. A company that once begged investors to put $500 into a franchise will now spend $2.6 billion to chase away investors like Ivan Boesky and Donald Trump. And it is speculated that this may pave the way for that ultimate '80s transaction, a leveraged buyout.    The tale shows how a company can fall victim to its own success, how a business that rode up on the demographics and developments of one time can be laid low by those of another. And it shows how a gleam in one man's eye can grow into a $2 billion corporation that, along the way, transmutes itself into something very different from his vision.    Mr. Wilson was a throwback entrepreneur who operated without aid from consultants and with a complete trust in his instincts. &quot;I put into Holiday Inns what I like,&quot; he would say, &quot;and I think the public will like what I like.&quot; From the start, those standard features included air conditioning and ice, television sets and swimming pools. And from the start, children cost no extra.    His style was also equal parts God-fearing and gaudy: Gideon Bibles open in the rooms, a 50-foot-high neon star-topped sign out in front. Mr. Wilson was a former theater owner with a showman's flair who firmly believed in the value of a marquee. The sign could be seen far down the road and salute guests or dispense cornball humor. Said one: &quot;Kilroy was here, why don't you stop too?&quot;    In that era of postwar optimism, Mr. Wilson was thinking big: 120 rooms in his first Holiday Inn, compared with the then-standard 20 or so units; visions of a 400-inn nationwide chain, compared with the then-usual mom-and-pop operations.    Not that there wasn't a great deal of mom-and-pop in the early Holiday Inns. The headquarters was a converted plumbing shed owned by Mr. Wilson's partner, Wallace Johnson. The desk of Executive Vice President William Walton was a door suspended on packing crates. Mr. Wilson's mother, &quot;Doll,&quot; was Holiday Inns' interior decorator, favoring splashy greens and yellows. Mr. Wilson would himself pilot a single-engine Bonanza to scout motel locations by air.    Mr. Wilson ordered up a franchising system, and Mr. Walton devised the details. A man could have himself a Holiday Inn by plunking down $500, bearing the $300,000 or so cost of construction and paying the company five cents per room per night. Still, the chain didn't immediately take off. The main franchise salesman was Mr. Johnson's brother-in-law, driving in a former farm station wagon and handicapped by the vehicle's pervasive manure odor on sultry days.    Yet by 1957, when the company went public, Mr. Wilson was up to 49 Holiday Inns, and interstate highways had begun to crisscross the country. With their wall-to-wall carpeting and Danish furniture, Holiday Inns were on the cutting edge of '50s modern. They were cookie-cutter standard for the masses. That played well in a nation that was, en masse, moving to Levittowns and watching &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; on TV.    The 100th Holiday Inn opened in 1959, and the company no longer had to woo franchisees so much as screen all the applications. (Franchisees would come to account for more than 80% of Holiday Inns, the rest being company-owned.) By the mid-1960s, these standard two-story U-shaped motels were being stamped out at a rate of one every 2 1/2 days, or one room every 30 minutes. Holiday Inns had an 80%-plus occupancy rate. It was bigger than its two nearest competitors, Hilton and Howard Johnson's, combined.    Messrs. Wilson, Walton and Johnson remained firmly in charge, and Holiday clung to its Bible Belt style. Executives had breakfast prayer meetings; motels had on-call chaplains; franchisee conventions had Billy Graham as a speaker. The company stayed close to its market, too, starting the first computerized reservations system in 1965. And through the 1960s it stayed fabulously successful, opening the 1,100th Holiday Inn in 1969, the year that the Sunday Times of London named Mr. Wilson one of the 1,000 &quot;makers of the century.&quot;    But this was the heyday of the conglomerate, and Mr. Wilson, having created and conquered the lodging industry, set out to make Holiday the poor man's Gulf andamp; Western. By the early 1970s, the company presided over a bus line, an ocean freighter, a dinette maker, a catering service, a campground chain, a meatpacking company, an industrial park and more.    The problem was that Mr. Wilson didn't have the managerial mind-set of a conglomerateur, but rather the restless urgings of an entrepreneur. He would buy businesses, then go off globe-trotting from Switzerland to Swaziland, scouting sites for a big international expansion by Holiday. &quot;I'm the world's worst administrator; I'm a promoter,&quot; Mr. Wilson says. &quot;I would start something and turn it over to the staff.&quot;    His staff wasn't up to it. &quot;We didn't know anything about the bus business. We didn't know anything about the steamship business,&quot; says Mr. Walton, then president. What's more, the diversifications distracted them from the problems of Holiday's maturing motel business.    The company was thus set up for a fall when the oil cartel turned off the spigot in 1973, driving motorists off the roads and the nation into a recession. Holiday's operating profit plunged 78% in 1974, its stock price 90%. Roy Winegardner, a major shareholder and former franchisee, became vice chairman to shore up operations. Mr. Wilson remained as chairman but was replaced as chief executive by Holiday's longtime investment banker, L. M. Clymer, a conservative financial man who had been on the board since 1957.    Thus began corporate middle age. Like the nation to which it called itself innkeeper, Holiday Inns in the '70s was coming to grips with its limits. Its very success now was being turned against it by a host of growing competitors. Mr. Wilson recalls the answer of Ramada Inns founder Marion Isbell when asked how he picked his hotel sites. &quot;It's easy,&quot; he said. &quot;All I do is find where Kemmons has a good Holiday Inn, then I build one on the other corner.&quot;    Holiday was also vulnerable because it hadn't much changed and consumers had. They were more sophisticated and widely traveled. They demanded more -- and instead of getting better, many Holiday Inns had gone downhill.    &quot;The first generation of management was behind in the shift of the marketplace,&quot; says Michael D. Rose, a Winegardner protege who came in to head the hotel division. &quot;They didn't see the need for a quality product.&quot;    Mr. Rose, a Harvard-educated lawyer-CPA, was part of a new professional-management cadre descending on Holiday from places like Procter andamp; Gamble and IBM. They probably never could have built this empire, but they would now try to protect and preserve it. They brought a new approach to business, with their return-on-investment and cash-flow analyses. And coming from outside the Bible Belt, they felt no compunction about taking Holiday Inns into the gambling business.    When the company decided to build a casino in Atlantic City in 1978, Mr. Clymer resigned as president. He said he couldn't reconcile his religion with gambling. Holiday bought Harrah's in 1979, and Vice Chairman Walton left soon after. &quot;I thought we were defying the fundamental principles of the founders,&quot; he says.    Kemmons Wilson realized that his own day had passed when, in 1979, in a hospital after suffering a heart attack, he implored directors by speakerphone not to buy the Perkins Cake andamp; Steak restaurant chain. They bought it anyway, and Mr. Wilson retired as chairman soon thereafter. (He is still an entrepreneur at age 74, among other things developing a minichain of hotels called Wilson World.)    Now Mr. Winegardner, who became the chairman, and Mr. Rose, who became the president, really began to move. They shed Mr. Wilson's less successful acquisitions. They demanded major property upgradings by innkeepers or forced them to check out as franchisees. They began to tear down the Great Sign, on advice of consultants who said it looked old-fashioned.    But the whole idea of Holiday Inns was beginning to look as old-fashioned as &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show.&quot; There were no more TV variety shows because there was no such thing anymore as something-for-everyone. The consumer market had thoroughly splintered, and in the lodging industry the new order was specialty niches. It was Days Inns for the budget-minded, Hyatt Regencys for the upscale -- and Holiday Inns squirming in the shrinking middle market.    Last year, standard hotels' average occupancy rate rose by 4.4 percentage points, all-suite hotels' by 6.1 points and budget motels' by 0.2 point, according to Smith Travel Research, a Lancaster, Pa., firm that tracks the industry. Only the motor-hotel segment, of which Holiday is kingpin, declined, by 1.1 percentage points, to 62.2% occupancy.    &quot;Everybody's attacking them,&quot; says an executive at another chain, &quot;including themselves.&quot; Since 1983, the company has launched the luxury Holiday Inn Crowne Plazas, the all-suite Embassy Suites, the budget Hampton Inns and the &quot;extended-stay&quot; Residence Inns.    Embassy Suites has been a star, Hampton Inns is coming on strong, and Holiday Inns, with more than 1,600 hotels, remains the world's largest lodging chain. But now it is just another player in the overcrowded industry that Kemmons Wilson created -- and it doesn't seem to have a trace of the sure instinct that guided him. Holiday now preoccupies itself with constant corporate-bureaucracy reorganizations and executive reshufflings. Its institutional memory seems confined to a corner of its Hotel Services Division building, where memorabilia like an early Holiday Inn room replica are displayed.    While some franchisees have been lopped off by Holiday, others have left on their own in disgust. About half of the 54 franchisees in the new Park Inns chain are former Holiday Inn operators. &quot;Twenty years ago, Holiday was one of the greatest people companies,&quot; says Robert L. Brock, Park Inns' founder, a former Holiday franchisee. &quot;Today it's like most other big companies, filled with M.B.A.s and just going by the numbers.&quot;    Holiday is much preoccupied with financial gymnastics. In the past two years, it has bought back nearly a third of its common stock to buoy share prices. It has also sold at least 50 properties, generating cash enough to bolster otherwise-anemic profits. These asset sales accounted for 22% of Holiday's pretax income for the first nine months of 1986. Still, the company's net earnings declined 20% during that period, to $93.3 million, or $3.69 a share, on a 9.3% drop in revenues, to $1.26 billion.    The sharks, smelling blood, moved in. In 1985, takeover arbitrager Boesky bought an 8.6% stake in the company. Last August, New York developer Trump began accumulating shares, making Holiday nervous because it had just emerged from a messy breakup of its Atlantic City casino partnership with him.    In November, a nervous Holiday brought out its anti-takeover artillery, a $2.63 billion recapitalization plan under which shareholders would be paid a special $65-a-share dividend. Though it still requires shareholder approval, the measure has apparently chased off the raiders. But it will require selling still more company-owned properties to service huge debt, and it ensures skinny earnings for years. Mr. Rose, now the chairman and chief executive, insists this is just business as usual. &quot;This is an acceleration of a strategy to be less asset- and capital-intensive and to be more operationally intensive,&quot; he says.    But it would also strengthen Holiday managers' hold on their jobs. Top executives would be awarded 10% of the company's stock, over a period of time.    That has fueled speculation that they may eventually take the company private through a leveraged buyout. Indeed, the proxy statement for the proposed recapitalization discloses that a leveraged buyout was previously considered last year. Through a spokesman Holiday says, &quot;There is no substance to the rumors.&quot;    The preoccupation with financial manuverings is a far cry from the early entrepeneurial days and a source of concern for many, who fear that the good times have forever gone the way of the Great Sign.    &quot;Back in the '60s, we felt like we were part of the greatest thing ever,&quot; says Earle Jones, a Jackson, Miss., franchisee. &quot;Now it's reached maturity, or maybe overaged.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>