<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0038 </DOCNO><HL> OPEC Calls Meetings on OverproductionAmid New Signs That Pact Is Weakening---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   The fragile year-old Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries accord showed new signs of weakness as the cartel took initial steps to contain a gusher of oil pouring from member countries.    OPEC President Rilwanu Lukman of Nigeria hurriedly called a flurry of meetings of major ministerial committees charged with monitoring output quotas. He also conceded, finally, that some countries were violating cartel production limits.    At the same time, Iraq launched a new price-discounting plan in an apparent effort to grab market share from Iran and other producers. And speculation grew that Saudia Arabia, Kuwait and other Arab producers were trying to engineer lower oil prices, perhaps in retaliation against Iran.    &quot;We're seeing a very discreet flooding of the market,&quot; said John P. Venners, president of Independent Term Supply, an oil-trading concern that negotiates supply arrangements between OPEC members and independent refiners.    Mr. Lukman estimated that production had reached as much as 1.2 million barrels a day over the 16.6 million-barrel ceiling, although industry sources estimate the excess to total at least three million barrels a day.    There was confusion yesterday over when the meetings Mr. Lukman called will be held. In Vienna, the OPEC secretariat said they would take place Sept. 7. But yesterday in Lagos, Nigeria, Mr. Lukman was quoted as saying he was going to Vienna Friday for one such meeting.    In any case, some sources close to OPEC expressed skepticism over whether OPEC would sustain any real, immediate effort to curb the overproduction. The monitoring committees can only make recommendations, which in the past haven't proved very effective in restraining excess production. And OPEC yesterday ruled out any full ministerial meeting prior to a scheduled Dec. 7 conference. &quot;A special meeting is out of the question,&quot; an OPEC spokesman said.    Some OPEC watchers view the rising volumes of Middle East oil exports as a convoluted but orchestrated movement by Arab producers -- Saudi Arabia and Kuwait among them -- to punish Iran with lower oil prices. In recent weeks, Iran -- OPEC's chief pricing &quot;hawk&quot; -- has gained much-needed revenue for its war against Iraq. Ironically, Iran has benefited from actions by the U.S. and others to protect Persian Gulf tanker traffic from attacks by Iran itself.    &quot;The Iranians are profiting more than anyone by the turmoil in the Persian Gulf, and now are taking advantage of the lull,&quot; said David Mizrahi, publisher of the MidEast Report, a New York-based newsletter specializing in Middle East affairs. Iran increased oil sales to capitalize on the runup of prices a few weeks ago caused by the Persian Gulf tension. Confined to using the Persian Gulf as its only export outlet, Iran has been able to move oil freely through the waterway since Iraq quit attacking its tankers.    &quot;Clearly, Iranian production -- 2.5 million barrels a day is a good number -- is above its OPEC quota, and Iran also has benefited because of the higher oil prices,&quot; said Paul B. Ting, an Oppenheimer andamp; Co. oil analyst. Iran's quota is slightly under 2.4 million barrels a day.    But now, the Iranian strategy may be backfiring.    Although Japan and major customers in Europe are taking more oil from Iran, the French have banned Iranian petroleum imports. And the U.S. is said to be studying a similar step. Although the U.S. doesn't import much Iranian oil -- estimates vary between 50,000 and 250,000 barrels a day -- Iran can ill afford to lose any markets at this time.    Its enemy Iraq, meanwhile, is increasing oil exports, all through relatively safe pipeline transportation, as well as moving to flexible pricing that offers discounts on some petroleum.    Iraq is alone among the 13 members of OPEC in refusing to accept its OPEC-assigned quota of two million barrels a day, much less abide by it. According to oil traders who do considerable business with the Iraqis, the country has increased production to 2.6 million barrels a day, all but 600,000 barrels of which is exported. In a few weeks, Iraq will be ready to deliver an additional 500,000 barrels a day through new pipelines in Turkey.    For some of that oil, Iraq is offering to discount at least $1 a barrel under the average monthly spot price of the North Sea Brent crude. Two contracts were signed yesterday. Largely because of OPEC overproduction, Brent crude spot prices have fallen to $17.50 a barrel from $18.75 only a week ago.    Thus, Iraq is selling crude not only below the $18 OPEC base price, but also below spot and futures prices. On the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, crude closed at $18.64 a barrel, up four cents. &quot;At the moment, it looks like Iraq is breaking the only link -- pricing -- it had to last June's OPEC agreement,&quot; said Mari Buglass, a Shearson Lehman Brothers oil analyst in London.    Iraq isn't the only Arab producer to push anew for market share -- and chiefly at the expense of Iran. Kuwait, viewed by Iran to be Iraq's chief ally, has been pumping more than 1.7 million barrels a day -- double its OPEC quota -- in recent weeks. Among the Arab countries, in fact, only Saudi Arabia, OPEC's leading producer, has been abiding by the quota system, and only until recently.    Evidence is increasing that the kingdom also is stepping up production beyond its quota of 4,350,000 barrels a day, with current output estimated at 4.6 million. This suggests that Saudi Arabia, which was the chief architect of last year's oil price collapse by sharply increasing its own production, is returning to its role of manipulating prices. Recently, the Saudis have issued new warnings about cheating on volume and have called on the OPEC president to activate the OPEC quota-violations committees. But until yesterday Mr. Lukman had insisted that most OPEC members were producing in line with their quotas.    Some see Iran as the target of the latest Saudi moves. &quot;The perception that warring Iran is probably the most financially vulnerable Gulf state is seen as a possible further reason for the Saudis to take the risk of precipitating a downward price spiral,&quot; reports Petroleum Intelligence Weekly. </TEXT></DOC>