<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Jesse Jackson's Campaign to Win the White HouseIs Taken Very Seriously the Second Time Around---By James M. PerryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street  Journal</HL><DD> 10/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   {This is the eighth in a series of personal profiles of the 1988 presidential candidates.}    DAVENPORT, Iowa -- Making political small talk with the Rev. Jesse Jackson isn't easy.    The other day, the Jackson motorcade swept past a road sign for Galesburg, Ill., the site 129 years ago of one of the great Lincoln-Douglas debates. Someone in the car wondered how those two politicians made themselves heard without the help of public-address systems in front of crowds of 40,000 people.    &quot;Jesus,&quot; replied Mr. Jackson, &quot;had no trouble making himself heard on the Mount.&quot;    Mr. Jackson, the liveliest of the surviving Democratic presidential candidates, is first of all a preacher. He is also a civil-rights leader and, in his own special way, a politician. His critics whisper, too -- for they are all a little afraid of the unpredictable Mr. Jackson -- that he has been and may still be something of an opportunist.    Surely he is the only candidate in the race, on either side, with the nerve to call himself a &quot;superstar&quot; and get away with it.    Whether it's realism or racism, hardly anyone really believes he will win the nomination next year or that he will win a spot on the ticket. But Rep. John Lewis (D., Ga.) believes &quot;Jesse could go into the convention with more delegates than anyone else. He would emerge as the broker in a brokered convention.&quot;    This time, politicians take Jesse Jackson very seriously.    And that is just what he seeks -- dignity and respect. He wants to be, and probably already is, what one black leader calls &quot;the leadingest black man in America.&quot; Ultimately, he seeks power of a kind one can only dimly comprehend.    Mr. Jackson, in a late-night interview in his hotel suite, says, &quot;I had to fight just for personal dignity. I was denied public accommodation. I could not have stayed in this hotel. Fighting for my personal dignity was the first phase. Now I fight for the dignity of others.&quot;    He's been an outsider all his life, bucking the system. Now, finally, he's inside, almost a part of the system. He is somebody. &quot;I'm running for president,&quot; he says. &quot;I've come from the back of the bus to the front of the polls. That's a long way.&quot;    Mr. Jackson, who celebrates his 46th birthday today, was nine or 10 years old when he learned the married man next door was his father and that the man he called &quot;daddy&quot; in his own home in Greenville, S.C., was his stepfather. Once he learned the truth, he would stand for hours in the backyard of his real father's home, looking up at the windows. It remains a poignant image.    He remembers his mother &quot;pulling me to the back of the bus, to where the colored seats were, so hard she hurt me.&quot; She was conditioning him to the facts of life -- &quot;be inferior or go to jail.&quot;    The young Mr. Jackson sold concessions at football games played by the local white high school. He caddied at the local all-white country club. He worked as a waiter at the all-white hotel. Barbara Reynolds, in her book, &quot;Jesse Jackson, America's David,&quot; says that sometimes he spit into the food, just to show how he felt.    He was a class leader in school and the best quarterback his high school football coach ever coached. His friends called him Bo-Diddley.    What changed his life was the civil-rights movement. He joined demonstrators sitting-in at luncheon counters in Greensboro, N.C., while he was a student there at North Carolina Agricultural andamp; Technical State University. He was arrested the first time on June 6, 1963.    Almost five years later, he was a mid-level staff assistant to Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. After Dr. King was assassinated on the balcony of his room at the Lorraine Motel in Memphis, Tenn., Mr. Jackson managed to convince journalists he was the last man to talk to Dr. King, and that Dr. King died cradled in his arms. Mr. Jackson rushed back to Chicago, his headquarters, still wearing a turtleneck sweater allegedly stained with Dr. King's blood.    It didn't happen that way. Mr. Jackson wasn't the last man to speak to Dr. King; he didn't cradle his dying leader in his arms. Many black leaders say Mr. Jackson's version isn't true but they won't be quoted.    Mr. Jackson refuses to be drawn into a discussion of what happened. &quot;It's old,&quot; he says, &quot;and nothing and nobody is going to change it.&quot;    But for many of those civil-rights veterans who marched with Dr. King, it still rankles. It is where Jesse Jackson's reputation as an opportunist and a self-promoter began. It explains why some black leaders still fear and distrust him.    Dr. King had named Mr. Jackson head of Operation Breadbasket, the economic arm of his Southern Christian Leadership Conference, in 1966. The aim of the organization was to use the power of black ministers to organize selective boycotts to force employers to hire and promote blacks. Mr. Jackson broke away from SCLC in 1971 and founded his own organization, Operation PUSH (People United to Save Humanity), which led highly publicized boycotts against targets such as Coca-Cola Co. and General Motors Corp.    Typically, Mr. Jackson's campaigns produced more headlines than jobs (though, almost certainly, they also served to change people's attitudes). From the beginning, Operation PUSH has been bedeviled by financial problems and continuing governmental investigations, although there haven't been any formal charges. Mr. Jackson gave up his presidency of the organization in 1983.    Through all this, Mr. Jackson has lived comfortably in his Chicago home. During this time, too, allegations were first made about his marital fidelity. He was linked with various entertainers. Mr. Jackson is married to his college sweetheart; they have five children. Asked by this newspaper if he is an adulterer, he replied through a spokeswoman:    &quot;Whether faithful or unfaithful as a husband -- unless a candidate's conduct or character impacts, or there is reasonable or probable cause to believe that it impacts on important public policy, national interest or national security questions -- such private moral questions have no part in a campaign. They are a matter between the candidate, his or her family, their conscience and their God.&quot;    He ran for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1984 as an outsider, attacking party rules and hinting if things didn't get better he'd run for president as an independent. His ramshackle, chaotic effort was marred by his close ties to the Rev. Louis Farrakhan, whose views are both militant and anti-Semitic. Press reports that he had talked about &quot;Hymies&quot; and New York as &quot;Hymietown&quot; inflicted more damage. His relations with the Jewish community, an important and traditional member of the Democratic coalition, remain sour.    But he did fly to Syria to secure the release of American Navy pilot Lt. Robert Goodman, bringing him home in triumph. He has also arranged the release of 48 American and Cuban prisoners through negotiations with Cuba's Fidel Castro. He can boast, truthfully, that he has traveled more widely and seen more world leaders than any of his rivals for the nomination.    People, he points out, come to him now. &quot;They know Jesse can deliver. The bottom line is becoming, if you want somebody to communicate with your children, get Jesse. If you want someone to stand with you at a farm auction, or stand with you at a closed factory gate, get Jesse. It's a reputation with a growing credibility to it.&quot;    &quot;He's finding his own voice,&quot; says Ann Lewis, a Washington political consultant who advises Mr. Jackson. &quot;He's adapting his style and his strategy.&quot; Mr. Jackson is trying to put together a coalition of people who have been victimized by the nation's economic system -- poor blacks, bankrupt farmers, laid-off factory workers. It's a populist pitch -- in what most people see as relatively good times.    The core of his domestic program is the establishment of an American Investment Bank that would be financed by about $60 billion in capital from public pension funds, which would be protected by a guarantee from the federal government. The funds would pay for low-cost housing, mass transit, new roads, bridges and sewer lines.    On foreign policy, he tends to look at the world north to south rather than east to west; he seldom criticizes the Soviet Union. Because he thinks his own childhood in South Carolina was essentially a Third World experience, he is more interested in Third World problems than in, say, European ones. He seeks accommodation with Cuba and Nicaragua and calls for a Palestinian &quot;homeland.&quot;    It's a better organized, more structured campaign this time. &quot;I have mellowed,&quot; Mr. Jackson says. &quot;I have more experience. I have a broader view. The big difference between me and the other guys is that they're running to see how they come out in Iowa. If they don't do well in Iowa, they'll be back doing what they've been doing. But this isn't just a campaign. It's a mission. My future doesn't depend upon what happens in one state, or two states, or even one election. In a real sense, I'm running every day, every year.&quot;    ---   IN BRIEF   JESSE JACKSON   -- 46 YEARS OLD   --MARRIED 25 YEARS, FIVE CHILDREN    --NORTH CAROLINA AGRICULTURAL andamp; TECHNICAL STATE UNIVERSITY    -- DEMOCRAT OF ILLINOIS   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR of Operation Breadbasket 1966 to 1971; president of Operation PUSH 1971 to 1983; Democratic presidential candidate 1984.    Greatest influence on his political thinking: Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., &quot;because he created a process for social change that caused a maximum amount of improvement within society with a minimum amount of bloodshed,&quot; and President Johnson &quot;because he was able to reconcile the emerging forces into a functioning coalition&quot; for significant social change.    His worst mistake in politics: His &quot;failure to study the internationalization of the economy and its damaging effects on all sectors of society, not only blacks.&quot;    American conservative he admires most: Sen. Ernest Hollings    His favorite TV program: The Bill Cosby Show, which, &quot;because of its emphasis on the family, has had an astounding effect on our entire society.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>