<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0019 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   THE STARK'S SKIPPER SAID the frigate didn't have time for defensive steps.    After the stricken ship was towed into Bahrain, Capt. Glenn Brindel said the electronic warfare equipment didn't alert him that an Iraqi warplane had launched a sea-skimming missile toward the vessel, which was on patrol in the Persian Gulf. Rather, he said he sighted the missile visually, and managed to switch on the Phalanx system only a second or so before the missile smashed into the hull, setting parts of the ship ablaze. Meanwhile, the Pentagon said an unexploded missile warhead was found aboard the frigate.    Navy officials said the Stark may have been vulnerable to air attack last Sunday because of shortcomings or malfunctions of certain weapons systems.    ---   CALERO SAID North helped Nicaragua's rebels obtain more than $33 million.    The senior Contra leader told the House and Senate panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair that the insurgents were almost completely dependent on funds directed to them by Lt. Col. North during the two-year period beginning in 1984 when Congress banned U.S. military aid to the insurgents. Calero said he often met with North, and regularly informed the former White House aide of arms purchases and military initiatives by the Nicaraguan rebels. He also said he had a close relationship with then CIA chief Casey.    Retired Army Maj. Gen. Singlaub, a middleman in some Contra arms deals, said he kept North and other Reagan aides informed of his activities.    ---   The House approved a Pentagon budget for fiscal 1988 that cuts $33 billion from Reagan's $312 billion request. The $289 billion budget, passed 239-177, also limits the Pentagon to military activities within the bounds of the certain House arms-control policies that the administration opposes. Reagan may veto the bill.    ---   A report recommended that the EPA adopt a &quot;negligible risk&quot; standard, which would allow approval of pesticide residues in food in cases where they would cause cancerous tumors in less than one out of every million people exposed. The recommendation was made by a National Academy of Sciences panel.    ---   Two car bombs exploded outside a courthouse in downtown Johannesburg, killing three white policemen and injuring five other officers and nine civilians. South African authorities blamed the outlawed African National Congress for the attack, considered the worst ever in Johannesburg.    ---   Austrian Chancellor Vranitzky told Shultz that Vienna is &quot;upset&quot; about a U.S. decision barring Waldheim for alleged involvement in World War II atrocities. The secretary of state, however, said after the meeting in Washington that the case against Austria's president was &quot;totally convincing,&quot; and that the decision would remain in force.    ---   A special health panel was convened by the federal Centers for Disease Control to review the cases of three hospital workers believed to have contracted the AIDS virus through blood spilled on their skin. Meanwhile, medical personnel began reassessing safety policy and practice in the wake of the disclosure.    ---   A former U.S. official said assistants to then White House aides Lyn Nofziger and Elizabeth Dole pressured the Small Business Administration to award a $32 million contract to Wedtech Corp., the Associated Press reported. The ex-SBA official said he was interviewed last week as part of a criminal probe of Reagan aides' ties to Wedtech.    ---   NASA announced that the space shuttle Discovery's launch has been rescheduled for June 1988, four months later than originally planned. The first post-Challenger blastoff was delayed for additional tests. The space agency also said that three shuttle flights would be attempted next year.    ---   Fijian troops patrolled Suva to prevent looting following clashes between Fijian youths and ethnic Indians. More than 50 people were reported injured. As New Zealand's prime minister ordered a second warship into the area, the governor-general of the South Pacific nation faced mounting opposition to his interim administration.    ---   Police in Tokyo said four Japanese men received more than $714,000 for providing U.S. military documents to the Soviet Union and China over several years. The four, including a current and a former employee of U.S. military bases, were arrested Tuesday on suspicion of espionage.    ---   The Marine Corps said that Sgt. John Weirick, a former embassy guard in Leningrad arrested on suspicion of spying, would be released from the brig at Camp Pendleton, Calif., and that espionage charges wouldn't be brought by the military because the statute of limitations expired. Weirick could be charged under civilian law.    ---   Gorbachev said an agreement with the U.S. was near on eliminating medium-range missiles in Europe, but the Soviet leader accused the West of stalling on the pact. He also denied that the Kremlin's arms-control proposals were aimed at dividing the U.S. from its allies in Western Europe.    ---   A Senate panel cleared legislation to restore protections against bias based on sex, age, race or disability. The Labor and Human Resources Committee approved the measure by a 12-4 vote. The protections were overturned in a 1984 Supreme Court ruling.    ---   VA hospitals have failed to report or investigate many serious patient injuries, including deaths and surgical accidents, the General Accounting Office reported. The congressional study said that in 86% of the cases it selected for review, injuries or deaths weren't reported by Veterans Administration officials for inquiry.    ---   Died: Colston E. Warne, 86, founder and former president of Consumers Union, in Bedford, Mass., of Parkinson's disease. </TEXT></DOC>