<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Lazard Freres Offers to Play a Brotherly Role </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR TNM BNK </IN><TEXT>   While Morgan Stanley and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts are putting together ambitious leveraged buy-out deals, Lazard Freres andamp; Co. is pursuing a different idea. Through its new $1.5 billion fund called Corporate Partners it wants to be a friend to managements facing risks of an LBO attack. Corporate Partners stands ready, in selected cases, to buy stock in such companies and help defend them against raiders.    The new partnership fund is prepared to buy anywhere from 10% to 40% of a company's stock, either independently or with a co-investor. It might team up with management or an Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP) to give management a good firm grip on control of the company.    &quot;The purchase will almost always be a direct placement with us,&quot; says Lester Pollack, who along with his fellow Lazard partner, Ali E. Wambold, manages the new fund. &quot;It may be common stock. It may be a different security. But the gist is Corporate Partners represents a pool of capital to invest in the company to allow the company to do something constructive and have the time to do it.&quot;    Right now, Corporate Partners is looking at a couple of prospects -- unnamed, of course. It told investors it might look at as few as six or as many as 10, and that it might take one or two years to find good candidates. &quot;We're going to be very deliberate and pick our spots,&quot; says Mr. Pollack.    No doubt it was inevitable that one of Wall Street's big investment houses would move into this gap. U.S. investment bankers have for many years provided advice and financial services to companies engaged in mergers and acquisitions (Mandamp;As). A house might nimbly represent an aggressor one day and a defender against some other aggressor the next.    A more recent development has been the direct entry of the likes of Morgan Stanley and First Boston into the takeover game, using their own capital -- either independently or with other investors -- to take positions in stocks, sometimes with a view toward becoming a controlling shareholder.    Direct ownership of industrial enterprises by banks is common in Europe and Japan but relatively rare in the U.S. Deutsche Bank's ownership grip on West German industry, for example, is legendary. Federal law in the U.S. prohibits commercial banks from owning shares in their own accounts, but not investment banks.    As the LBO frenzy began to grip Wall Street, the partners at Lazard started thinking about the European tradition of &quot;friendly&quot; ownership. Because of Lazard's European background it was a natural candidate to set up the first friendly fund. Says Mr. Pollack: &quot;Lazard in Paris has been operating as a principal, acting as a friendly shareholder, for a long time and has been very successful. Lazard here in New York also has acted as a principal from time to time and has done very well at it.    &quot;Because we do act as principals, as proprietors, we have longstanding relationships with corporations. We're on a lot of boards not only of clients but other companies where we provide an active director role. Other investment-banking firms are finding ways to buy market share {in the banking-services market} through use of their own capital. That's the phenomenon of bridge financing and the like. We're not in that business.&quot;    Corporate Partners will be operated as a separate entity from the Lazard partnership, although its five-man board will consist entirely of Lazard partners. Says Mr. Wambold: &quot;I think if you asked Michel {senior partner Michel David-Weill} whether he is an investment banker investing in companies, he would tell you the answer is no. He would say he is a senior partner of an investment-banking entity. He also is an investor. We are very suspicious of mixing the two mentalities, because there is always the danger of using capital on the investment side to generate fees on the current income side. You're making $20 million on the income side, while putting $300 million at risk on the investment side.&quot;    In the view of the rising number of LBO critics, an investment house setting about to match wits with the aggressors might seem to be on the side of the angels. As Corporate Partners' summary description puts it, &quot;In contrast to many European and Japanese companies, most major U.S. companies do not have a core group of involved, loyal shareholders. Combined with the short-term orientation of U.S. money managers and rigid fiduciary standards, this condition can create extreme stock-price volatility and instability in a company's ownership and governance. In this environment, a company can be inhibited from embarking on an important business plan which requires a business or financial restructuring or major new investments in acquisitions, facilities, research and development and/or marketing.    &quot;Similarly, many companies have been forced by market activity or raiders to incur excessive indebtedness through defensive LBOs or recapitalizations, increasing financial risk and forcing retrenchment, at the expense of real growth opportunities. Frustrated by Wall Street's short-term view and by a lack of adequate equity incentives, many managements have tried to initiate management buy-outs. In today's legal and competitive environment, however, such transactions expose management to considerable risks of being outbid, or overpaying or of having to burden their business with too much debt.&quot;    But while Corporate Partners is a friendly-looking animal in this era of leveraged buy-out funds, it has the same purpose, to make money for the investors. Mr. Pollack says that Lazard made it clear to its investors that &quot;we would be working with management who had an idea for doing something positive and constructive in bringing out values, through an acquisition or restructuring, or Randamp;D, or capital investments. So we would be investors in a business plan.    &quot;History has shown in the U.S., the role of the active, friendly shareholder has given companies a chance to do very positive things and has had the consequence of making a lot of money for the shareholders. The company avoids the trauma of having to consider other alternatives that may not be good for the long-term value of the business and may not be good for all the shareholders.    &quot;Outside directors are always in an awkward position when someone is offering a big premium over today's stock price. If you have guys sitting in the board room who own a big stake in the company and who are saying, 'we're not sellers at this price and we don't see why anyone else should be,' it makes it a lot easier.&quot;    Which, of course, raises the bottom-line question. How easy should it be to run a big corporation? Some critics of banking-industry links of the European type argue that those connections have made it too easy in many cases, giving corporations a hammerlock on capital and thereby freezing out potential upstart enterprises that bring competition and innovation into markets. But maybe it is too soon to start worrying about that in the U.S. until all investment banks decide they would rather be a corporate &quot;partner&quot; than a corporate raider. That day would seem to be some time away. </TEXT></DOC>