<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Federal Appliance Standards: Inefficient at Best---By Doug Bandow</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)UTILITIES (UTI)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   During the 1970s, hysteria over the energy crisis led to the worst federal meddling imaginable: price ceilings, allocation systems, synfuels subsidies, windfall profits taxes, and even thermostat controls. Most of these counterproductive forays into the energy business were abandoned long ago as politicians discovered that a free economy naturally adjusts to price and supply changes. But the Senate has now passed and the House is considering one of the worst energy-saving ideas ever proposed: appliance standards.    In 1978 Congress ordered the Department of Energy to set efficiency levels for 13 appliances. The Carter administration, always ready to spend $100 to save a dime or two in oil, was happy to oblige, but in 1981 newly elected Ronald Reagan blocked the proposal. Instead, in 1982 he issued a &quot;no standards&quot; standard, leaving buyers free to decide the efficiency of the products they purchased.    The National Resource Defense Council filed suit, and the courts eventually ordered DOE to reconsider its rule. The &quot;save energy&quot; lobby also pressed Congress to force the department to act.    These groups were, ironically, joined by the Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers. For after DOE issued its &quot;no standards&quot; regulation, a number of states acted to protect Americans from the danger of inexpensive, less-efficient refrigerators. So manufacturers decided to support a uniform national system, however unjustified the specific standard, to eliminate having to meet varied standards for different states.    As a result, Congress passed the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act last session. President Reagan pocket-vetoed the bill but now, facing a likely veto override, says he will sign a slightly amended version of this legislation. The legislation is a bad deal for everyone except DOE bureaucrats.    --Consumers. Federal law already requires manufacturers to affix energy-usage labels to their products, but regulation advocates argue that consumers would benefit even more from appliance standards. The American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, for instance, claims the bill would save people $28 billion through the year 2000. The organization's figures merely prove that if you torture statistics long enough they will confess to anything, however. The council, for instance, unrealistically assumes that higher efficiency wouldn't cause any increase in appliance usage.    Anyway, nothing stops people from buying highly energy-efficient appliances today. One out of five of the most common type of air conditioners and more than one quarter of all gas furnaces now on the market meet the bill's standards. Consumers can choose from some 300 kinds of heat pumps whose energy efficiency exceeds the proposed levels. Indeed, according to DOE, the energy efficiency of refrigerators has increased 48% since the onset of the &quot;energy crisis&quot;; central air conditioners are 27% more efficient. The &quot;save energy&quot; activists simply don't like the choices that people are making.    Restricting consumer choice in this way would naturally hit the poor and elderly hardest. For these groups -- the former because of lack of funds, the latter because of age -- generally prefer not to spend hundreds of dollars more for an extra-efficient furnace, for instance, when they can instead turn down the thermostat a bit and wear a sweater.    Similarly, high-efficiency appliances are of little value to consumers who use the products only sparingly, such as Floridians who purchase furnaces. Forcing them to spend a lot on more-efficient products to save a little on energy bills could make sense only to a congressman.    --Utilities. The power companies are supporting appliance controls to ease their future investment planning. Will they next lobby for a federal &quot;lights out&quot; law to save energy? Anyway, only about a quarter of energy demand is due to appliance consumption. Peak-load pricing is the logical means to reduce the need for new capacity. Some utilities are experimenting with other innovative means, such as paying consumers to shut off appliances during peak periods.    More important, appliance regulation may not actually lower energy consumption. First, pushing up product prices will cause consumers to hold onto their older, less-efficient models longer. Second, while the average consumer might not open the door of a more-efficient fridge more often, he probably would set his thermostat lower in the summer and higher in the winter if his air conditioner and furnace use less energy; he also might drop plans to purchase an insulation jacket for his water heater. Consumers have proved that prices matter -- whether they go down or up.    --The appliance industry. Manufacturers have a legitimate concern over conflicting state standards. But the solution is federal pre-emption to eliminate barriers to interstate commerce, not federal controls.    The House should say no to a refrigerator police. Energy efficiency isn't the same as cost efficiency. More important, individual consumers, rather than congressmen and DOE bureaucrats, are best able to assess the appropriateness of investing money in more-efficient refrigerators and furnaces. Indeed, that is what a free society and market economy are all about.    ---   Mr. Bandow is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute. </TEXT></DOC>