<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870226-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Radicals Keep Up Pressure Against Seoul Government---South Koreans Say Communist NorthFoments Student Demonstrations---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S.-supported Chun Doo Hwan government has been unable to suppress anti-government protests that have intensified since a 21-year-old student died while under police interrogation.    Student radicals have played a major role in keeping the protests alive as they gather more support among the general population. The government has admitted that the student, Park Chong Chul, died in an &quot;unfortunate and isolated&quot; incident in January when police choked him as they attempted to force information out of him by holding his head in a tub of water. Two police officers were indicted, and a cabinet minister and the national police chief resigned.    But that hasn't cooled the demonstrations, which have been building for months, fueled by the government's tough crackdown on dissent, the slow pace of democratic reform and U.S. support of the government. Some 6,000 riot police stopped an opposition rally yesterday, and four opposition leaders were placed under house arrest. And the government announced the arrest of 13 university students they described as an underground band of pro-North Korean radicals.    Student protests have taken on a fury that hasn't been seen for years. Students with rocks and gasoline firebombs regularly face off against police armed with tear gas and truncheons. In its harshest crackdown in six years, police arrested more than 3,400 dissidents last year. And according to the South Korean National Council of Churches, 17 Koreans, seven of them students, made the ultimate political protest of suicide, more than twice the number of the previous year. (The government says there were only two political-protest suicides last year.)    The demonstrators &quot;are more like people who are fighting a war,&quot; says senior government prosecutor Choi Yeon Hee.    The strife takes on added importance as South Korea prepares for its first democratic change of government. President Chun, who seized power with military backing, has promised to step down next February, so presidential elections must be held this year. But many Koreans fear the protests will provoke the military to resume a greater government role.    One aspect that disturbs U.S. officials is the demonstrations' decidedly anti-American thrust. The U.S. maintains a crucial strategic relationship with South Korea and has about 40,000 troops here. Anti-government South Koreans say the U.S. backs an oppressive Seoul government to safeguard Washington's interests, not Korea's. The most radical students demand the U.S. pull out, though most adults who support the students don't agree.    In past centuries, Korean students demonstrated against Chinese and Japanese occupiers of their country, and in 1960 protesting students helped bring down the Syngman Rhee government. But today's student protestors are better organized and more violent. They are also too young to have experienced the Korean War that ended 33 years ago and scoff at the government's rigid anti-Communism and the need for U.S. protection of their country against North Korea.    They are aligning themselves with labor, Buddhist and Christian church groups to create a broader and more middle-class base. &quot;Protest is no longer limited to campus life, but is spilling over to labor, teaching and the media,&quot; says Wonmo Dong, a political scientist at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.    Another major change: Marxism has become an alluring philosophy for the angry students. That may seem paradoxical in a country bordering an austere Communist regime in North Korea that suppresses dissent far more severely than Seoul, and whose economic growth pales in comparison to the South. South Korea's booming economy has quadrupled in 10 years and created a mood of self-confident nationalism; South Korean exports compete with Japanese goods in world markets.    But the growth of Marxism in a rapidly industrializing country &quot;isn't a paradox,&quot; says Selig S. Harrison, a Korea expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. &quot;Students aren't looking at North Korea as a model, but think they have found their own unique philosophy,&quot; he says, adding that the violent protests and the attraction to Marxism are &quot;a psychological expression of extreme frustrated nationalism.&quot;    Says an intense protest organizer at Seoul National University: &quot;If Marxism is fundamental change, then I embrace it.&quot;    Such frustration has helped make the majority of South Korea's one million university students sympathize with radicals who, according to campus surveys, account for fewer than 5% of the students. Miss Im, a senior at Ewha Women's University, the top women's school, says she became involved after seeing police club a friend senseless during a campus protest. Like most students interviewed, she asked that her full name not be used.    The leftist leanings of Mr. Kim, a 26-year-old avowed Marxist at the elite Seoul National University who admits throwing fire bombs at police, has deeper roots. The son of a Seoul real estate magnate and uncomfortable about his wealth, he says he began thinking about &quot;how the rich took advantage of the poor, first with the help of the Japanese and then with the help of the U.S.&quot; Books on imperialism and Marxism, legal only since 1983, followed.    But in common with most of the anti-American students, the Kwangju incident radicalized Mr. Kim. The incident, called the Kwangju Massacre by most students, occurred when government troops killed as many as 2,000 protestors in the southern Korean city, according to unofficial reports. The U.S., which theoretically commands South Korean troops, has denied any role. But &quot;even if the U.S. didn't order the troops in,&quot; says Mr. Kim, &quot;it is just as guilty because it didn't order the troops to stay out.&quot;    Many university students are introduced to Marxism at so-called study circles, informal groups where students socialize, sing and share ideas. For another student named Kim, a freshman at one of Seoul's elite universities, studying Marxism at the study circle was an introduction to ideas he had never heard in high school. &quot;It was a liberating experience,&quot; he says.    Many students don't seem to question the study-circle jargon. &quot;We will grow as a Third World revolutionary movement until a true democracy is established,&quot; the 19-year-old computer major proclaims. Because there is suffering in South Korea, he says, it follows that people wouldn't be worse off under North Korean rule.    South Koreans often have little idea about what life is really like in North Korea; the Seoul government supervises news so closely that most people don't trust official sources. And because of government suppression, moderate voices aren't heard on campus, while the radicals, who readily confront the police, have the students' ears.    The extent of Communist ties to student radical leaders is less clear. The South Korean government insists that North Korean agents are behind the protests. Anti-government groups counter that the government accuses anyone who disagrees with it of, at the least, Communist sympathies.    Many students listen clandestinely to North Korean radio broadcasts. But the older student Kim says they steer clear of any North Korean agents. &quot;A student would have to be nuts to make contact.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>