<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870309-0027 </DOCNO><HL> Firm Believed Controlled by PublicistFunneled Private Donations to Contras---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Cayman Islands corporation believed to be controlled by Richard Miller, the conservative publicist, funneled private money to Nicaraguan insurgents and to a Panamanian firm the National Security Council used in its secret Iran-Contra operations.    Bank records for the Contras' Nicaraguan Democratic Force (FDN) indicate that the corporation, Intel Co-Operation Inc., served as a conduit for private contributions to the insurgents. Separately, a report prepared on behalf of Mr. Miller last month shows that the company transferred $1.3 million to a Swiss account overseen by a fired NSC aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North.    The Swiss account was held in the name of Lake Resources Inc., a Panamanian-registered firm that private allies of Col. North set up in May 1985. Lake Resources later held funds used both in U.S. arms sales to Iran and in efforts to assist the Contras. Bank records show that Lake Resources deposited an estimated $200,000 directly into FDN accounts in October 1985. They also show it also served as a conduit of money to support a secret Contra arms-supply operation overseen by Col. North in 1985 and 1986.    The complex money transfers back and forth between the U.S., Europe, the Caribbean, and Central America shed new light on how the NSC staff helped funnel aid to the Contras during a period when Congress had prohibited any U.S. military assistance to the insurgents.    Mr. Miller, a former campaign aide for President Reagan, received several State Department contracts during the same period that he was active in supporting the insurgents. Questions have been raised in Congress about both these contracts and his role in directing money to the Contras.    Mr. Miller so far has declined comment, but an internal report prepared by his firm, International Business Communications, was made available last week to the Washington Post. The report was prepared to help Mr. Miller and his associate, Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell, a conservative fund-raiser, defend themselves against allegations that they helped fund arms transfers to the Contras. They have asserted that the money they channeled to the insurgents was intended for &quot;humanitarian&quot; purposes.    The report is being used by auditors for Mr. Channell to account for his expenditures.    Peter Hannaford, whose public relations firm was recently hired by Mr. Channell, said the fund-raiser directed that none of the money he raised for the Contras be used for arms, though it remains unclear what accounting, if any, the Contras or Col. North made for the money.    Apart from the $1.3 million funneled to Lake Resources through Intel Co-Operation in the Caymans, Mr. Miller's report indicates that International Business Communications transferred another $430,000 to Lake Resources, according to the Washington Post account.    &quot;At the present time, we are unable to obtain from (Col. North) any information concerning the application of those funds after deposit to the Lake Resources account,&quot; Mr. Miller said in a Feb. 16 memorandum to Mr. Channell that was included in the report. &quot;However, we were assured by him at the time that the funds were to be applied solely for humanitarian purposes.&quot;    Separately, FDN bank records show apparent references to Intel Co-Operation in notations -- such as &quot;Intel. Co-Op Inc.&quot; next to a recent deposit of nearly $80,000, and &quot;Inter&quot; and &quot;Intl&quot; next to other deposits that range from $15,000 to $500,000.    The new detail provided by these records reflects the difficulty facing investigators. The Tower Commission report last month indicated that Lake Resources had multiple accounts in Switzerland. One of the shell corporations the Contras set up in Panama had as many as three. Money was moved about in some cases in an apparent effort to confuse the trail. One of the Contra accounts held by a Chester Corp. in Panama is seen by investigators as a laundering operation.    In the aftermath of the Tower report, there has been increased pressure in the Senate to speed up the investigations by granting limited immunity from prosecution to Col. North and a former NSC adviser, Adm. John Poindexter. Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) and Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), the chairman and ranking member of the Senate Iran-Contra committee, last week both signaled their desire to make a decision on the immunity question soon.    But this is expected to meet resistance from Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel investigating the affair, and it could strain relations with the House panel. John Nields, chief counsel for the House panel, indicated yesterday that more records need to be acquired and investigative work done before a decision can be made regarding immunity for such senior officials.    &quot;The House's view is that immunity should not be granted now to North and Poindexter,&quot; said Mr. Nields. &quot;Our view is that it isn't a proper time to grant immunity.&quot;    The attention of the two committees has turned increasingly toward the NSC's role in assisting the Contras in the period after U.S. military aid ran out in June 1984. Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, a close ally of Col. North's, appeared on the Contra scene soon after. He was involved in this same period in separate clandestine activities as a private contractor to the government.    Contra bank records show that the rebels received three deposits totaling $19 million in a two-week period in March 1985. Weeks later, Udall Research Corp., which later built a Contra landing strip in Costa Rica, was established in Panama and a predecessor to Intel Co-Operation, I.C. Inc., was registered in the Caymans.    Lake Resources was created in May 1985, and in September 1985, a third Panamanian firm later used to finance the Contra resupply operation, Albon Values Corp., was established in Panama. A fourth, Dolmy Business Inc., was formed in November 1985. The same month, Southern Air Transport bought a fifth Panamanian shell corporation, Amalagamated Commercial Enterprises (ACE) to serve as a front for the Miami carrier's work on behalf of a secret airlift ferrying arms into Nicaragua.    Lawyers for Col. North filed a second lawsuit Friday challenging the validity of Mr. Walsh's investigation of the Iran-Contra affair.    In an earlier suit, Col. North asserted that independent counsels such as Mr. Walsh, who are appointed by the courts under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978, violate the constitutional separation of powers because they exercise prosecutorial power reserved for the executive branch.    To remove any question mark about the validity of Mr. Walsh's probe, Attorney General Edwin Meese last Thursday named Mr. Walsh to a new Justice Department post with the same independence and authority the special prosecutor currently holds. But in their second lawsuit, lawyers for Col. North said this alternative plan is illegal because it violates the independent-counsel law, which requires that such investigations be conducted outside the Justice Department.    This latest tactic by Col. North's lawyers increases the chances that litigation and appeals over the legality of independent counsels will drag on, possibly hampering Mr. Walsh's investigation. A federal court hearing is scheduled today on Col. North's first lawsuit, although no decision is expected for at least a few days.    ---   Andy Pasztor contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>