<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880310-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL REFUSED to vote on a U.S. peace initiative for the Mideast.    As violence continued in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Prime Minister Shamir successfully defeated attempts by the Labor Party to force a vote in the 10-member inner cabinet to endorse the plan offered by Secretary of State Shultz. Foreign Minister Peres, who has accepted the U.S. proposals, criticized the move by Shamir, who is expected to offer a counterproposal during a trip to Washington next week.    Israeli soldiers killed three Palestinians and wounded 13 others as Arabs paralyzed commerce with a general strike in the occupied territories.    ---   U.S. and Pakistani officials said it appears doubtful Afghanistan and Pakistan will meet a March 15 deadline for a peace accord, which could delay the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Deadlocks over an interim Afghan government and the continuation of Soviet military aid to Kabul were cited.    ---   Bush turned his attention to Illinois following his near-sweep of the GOP's 17 Super Tuesday contests. For Dole, who finished a distant second, next week's primary election appears to be a do-or-die showdown. On the Democratic side, a win in Illinois by Dukakis could give him a clear break from the pack.    Hart is expected to withdraw from the race for the Democratic presidential nomination following weak showings in primary elections. The former Colorado senator scheduled a news conference for tomorrow, and a Denver TV station reported that he told aides he would quit the campaign.    ---   Soviet authorities foiled an attempt by &quot;armed criminals&quot; to seize an Aeroflot jet in an effort to flee the country. Tass reported that three passengers, a stewardess and two of the would-be hijackers were killed in a shootout. It wasn't clear where the incident occurred. The plane was to have flown to Leningrad from Irkutsk.    ---   Gorbachev met with leaders of the Soviet republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan to discuss ways to resolve recent ethnic unrest, Tass reported. Violence erupted last month in a dispute over an area in Azerbaijan that Armenians want annexed to their republic. Gorbachev indicated that changes won't be made in the status of the region.    ---   The Reagan administration is reviving a plan to improve China's access to Western technology, including computers, telecommunications equipment and scientific gear. The initiative, announced after receiving assurances that Beijing wasn't selling missiles to Iran, promises to lift a chill from U.S.-China trade.    ---   A relative of Omar Torrijos disclosed that he has broken with Panama's military-dominated government, accusing Noriega's regime of plunging the country into a political crisis. Santiago Torrijos, nephew of the Panamanian hero, left his post as chief of the country's consulate in Los Angeles. Panama's envoy to Mexico also resigned.    Panama's government said the country's banks, closed for more than a week because of a lack of funds, could resume limited operations. Under the move, Panamanians still won't be able to cash checks or withdraw money. The banks didn't immediately reopen.    ---   Kim Dae Jung said a merger of South Korea's opposition parties to forge a united front against the government of Roh Tae Woo wasn't possible in time for parliamentary elections. The voting is expected some time next month. Kim accused the opposition faction formerly headed by Kim Young Sam of sacrificing unity for power.    ---   The AIDS epidemic is causing an upsurge of tuberculosis in many countries, including the U.S., a World Health Organization researcher told an AIDS forum in London. The epidemiologist said that in Africa, as many as 50% of patients with the lung disease tested positively for the AIDS virus.    ---   Missiles exploded in Baghdad and Tehran and artillery shells struck border cities in a continuing exchange of attacks on civilian targets by Iran and Iraq. Meanwhile, a Kremlin official acknowledged that Moscow had furnished short-range missiles to Iraq, but denied the weapons could reach Iranian cities without Iraqi modifications.    ---   Two military helicopters collided during a training mission and crashed about six miles from the Fort Campbell Army Air Field in Kentucky. Army officials said all 17 soldiers aboard the Blackhawk helicopters were killed in the Tuesday night incident.    ---   A U.S. grand jury in Miami indicted a Haitian army official on drug-related charges. Witnesses had said Col. Jean-Claude Paul allowed drug traffickers to use a private landing strip outside Port-au-Prince for U.S.-bound cocaine shipments.    ---   Sikh gunmen killed eight people in Punjab. The violence occurred after a militant high priest was proclaimed leader of India's 16 million Sikhs. He urged followers to continue the struggle for Sikh independence.    ---   Died: Kurt Georg Kiesinger, 83, former West German chancellor, in Frankfurt. </TEXT></DOC>