<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Japan's Economic Boom is Centering On Tokyo and on the Financial Sector </HL><AUTHOR> Kathryn Graven (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON SCR BNK EDP FIN INS REL CON RFD </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For more than 100 years, this city has been the political, cultural and psychological center of Japan. Now, it has also become the driving engine of Japan's economic growth.    This is where Japan's enormous trade surpluses are being stored, managed and redeployed and where foreign financiers are flocking. &quot;As Japan moves into the 21st century, finance will be a major industry,&quot; says Junjiro Takahashi, a professor of economics at Keio University.    But although the growth of Japanese and foreign banks and securities firms has been exceedingly rapid during the past three or four years, financial jobs aren't the only boom sector. More Japanese corporations are moving their headquarters to Tokyo; those recently setting up offices here include Fuji Film, Toshiba, Snow Milk Products and Nissan Motors. Services from research boutiques to restaurants are booming. University graduates overwhelmingly prefer the city because of the excitement and the job prospects.    And despite bureaucrats' plans of the 1970s to reduce Tokyo's population and importance, demographic trends all point toward Tokyo as a boom city of the future. Financial executives here say the October market crash won't force them to curtail their long-term expansion plans. Land prices are likely to keep soaring, and the city's problems with congestion, traffic snarls and noise aren't likely to be solved any time soon.    The city itself has about 12 million people. But the greater metropolitan area has almost 30 million, nearly one-quarter of Japan's population. About 30% of Japan's gross national product is turned out here, and more than half of its financial assets are managed here.    The boom in finance and related services, such as computers and software, has already transformed the cityscape. Deregulation brought to Tokyo a flood of foreign securities firms and banks eager to help manage Japan's wealth. Office rents in the central business district, called Marunouchi, skyrocketed to more than double New York prices, and many small businesses were forced out.    The only suitable place where many foreign companies could find room to grow was in Ark Hills, a $625 million office, hotel and apartment complex developed by Taikichiro Mori, the president of Mori Building Co. The complex is outside the main financial district and inconvenient for public transportation, but the demand for office space is so great that the 37-story building was fully rented even before its completion in the spring of 1986. Today, the directory reads like a mini Wall Street: Shearson Lehman Brothers, Salomon Brothers, Goldman Sachs, Deutsche Bank are all located here.    Ark Hills is inspiring other office developments. Gleaming new buildings being opened all over the city are changing the way people live. Inside the Yamanote train line, which forms a loop in the city's center, two-story wooden houses are being torn down and replaced by expensive condominiums. Many residents who fight to stay on find their sunlight blocked by towering offices. The intimacy of old neighborhoods is lost in the cold concrete.    Gone, too, are the public bathhouses where neighbors used to relax together. Shigeo Obara, who wrote the best seller &quot;A Surprising Picture of Tokyo 10 Years From Now,&quot; cites the disappearance of the bathhouses in the three central wards as a clear sign of what's to come. They are going down the drain partly because Japanese now can afford modern baths at home, but Mr. Obara says the main reason is &quot;the people are gone.&quot;    That exodus is being offset, however, by an influx of university graduates elsewhere in the city. A look at where the current crop of college students is heading is one indication where Japan is heading.    At Aoyama Gakuin University, a private college in western Tokyo, students turn to Eiji Kasai for advice on what to do after graduation. The director of job placement says he encourages students to look beyond companies prospering today to those likely to do well 10 or 20 years from now. Like previous generations, students still prefer the stability and the prestige of big-name companies, but he notices a shift in which industries are hot.    &quot;Banks, insurance and securities companies are the most popular these days,&quot; Mr. Kasai says. &quot;Students think the money is good, and they want the chance to do international work. It's important that the company have its headquarters in Tokyo.&quot; About 70% of Aoyama Gakuin students work here after graduation. Mr. Kasai says students complain that except for teaching and local-government positions, there are few job opportunities outside the major cities.    The high yen and trade frictions have made students think twice before joining manufacturing companies, Mr. Kasai says. On a national basis, the college graduates joining manufacturers declined to 26.8% in 1986 from 28.5% in 1985. Meanwhile, the students going into finance rose to 9.5% from 8.9%, and those going into services rose slightly to 29%.    Despite a deeply ingrained Japanese belief that it is better to make things than to churn money into more money and the somewhat rough image of brokerage firms, experts say the jobs of the future will be in finance and services. In a recent study, the Bank of Tokyo predicted that financial jobs will triple by 1997.    Contrary to expectations that advances in technology and communications would enable financial companies to spread out to less crowded areas, the Japanese say it is more important than ever to be close to the center of the action.    &quot;It's risky for businesses to move out,&quot; says Mitsuhide Shiraki, a professor of labor economics at Seisen Junior College. &quot;In the information age, people still want to meet face to face. That's the only way to differentiate yourself from the pack.&quot;    The influx of companies and people is good news for restaurants ranging from stand-and-slurp noodle shops all the way up to the finest eating places.    At Tamura, a high-class traditional Japanese restaurant situated in Tokyo's Tsukiji area, business could hardly be better. Never ones to skimp on corporate entertaining, Japanese executives pay an average of 45,000 yen ($360) per person to eat and drink here in elegant tatami mat rooms. Teruaki Tamura, the second-generation manager of the family-run establishment, says the big spenders have changed over the years. After World War II, foodrelated companies were the only ones able to wine and dine potential partners or customers. In the 1960s, it was the steel companies. Then, the auto makers and electronics companies. And in the 1980s?    &quot;The bankers and the brokers are the ones doing the inviting now. They have lots of money and are eager to lend,&quot; Mr. Tamura says. The stock-market crash, he adds, hasn't forced any noticeable cutbacks in expense accounts. Nor has the high yen.    However, some fear that unless the government acts to control surging land prices, Tokyo will choke off its future growth. &quot;If rents stay so high, it will be hard for foreigners to survive here,&quot; says Tatsumi Hanaya, the president of Ikoma Corp., which provides corporate real-estate services.    One prime lot will open up in 1991 when the Tokyo metropolitan government moves its headquarters from Marunouchi toward the west. And the city is planning to redevelop the waterfront along Tokyo Bay. </TEXT></DOC>