<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890821-0056 </DOCNO><DD> = 890821 </DD><AN> 890821-0056. </AN><HL> Commodities:@  Futures Probe Might Scrutinize Brokerage Firms@  ----@  By Scott McMurray and Jeff Bailey@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/21/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If federal prosecutors are able to prove widespread stealing in Chicago's futures pits, one issue that is likely to emerge is whether the big brokerage houses should share some of the blame.    So far, the federal investigation has put the most heat on the exchanges and on individual traders, but the brokerage houses eventually also may have to face questions about why they didn't do a better job safeguarding customer funds. As the middlemen between customers and the trading pits, they were certainly in a better position than was the trading public to know whether abuses were occurring.    The results of the federal investigation show that &quot;there's been a breakdown of the fiduciary responsibility of brokerage firms to mediate between customers and floor brokers,&quot; says Richard Dennis, a legendary trader who has made more than $200 million trading in Chicago's futures pits.    Critics say that too many of the big brokerage firms have taken a &quot;see no evil, hear no evil&quot; approach to the pits -- doing little to make sure that the floor brokers they deal with daily are honest and above-board in handling customer funds.    Among the more serious charges against the brokerage firms is that they have turned a blind eye to many cases of what may be stealing by the floor brokers who handle their trades. Many brokerage firms have also continued to do business with floor brokers who have been fined or suspended by the exchanges for serious rule violations, including stealing from customers.    Brokerage firms contacted for this article either declined to discuss the subject or insisted that they paid close attention to floor-broker performance. One said the specifics of its monitoring program were a closely kept secret.    But some brokerage-firm executives, after being assured of anonymity, conceded that the government inquiry was making them rethink their relationships with pit brokers. A senior official at one futures brokerage firm said, &quot;How should we have prevented ourselves from doing business with these guys? That's something I have to deal with.&quot;    Brokerage firms have traditionally kept at arm's length from the trading pits, says Thomas Russo, a futures-industry lawyer and former head of the trading and markets division of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. The firms send orders to the floors, but what happens then is largely up to the floor brokers in the pits. These brokers fall under the regulatory oversight of the exchanges, say brokerage firm officials.    Some speculate that the firms have deliberately yielded most of the policing activity to the exchanges because the brokerage houses don't want to have to take responsibility themselves for customer losses.    The firms do complain to the floor brokers or to the exchanges in the rare instances when a customer or the firm itself catches a floor broker in an obvious attempt to steal. But a certain amount of &quot;slippage,&quot; in which customer orders are executed away from what appears to be the best price available at the time, is considered a cost of doing business on the exchanges. Given the existing rules and trade-tracking systems at the exchanges, it's often difficult to prove that floor brokers didn't do their best to get a good price for the customer, Mr. Russo says.    Mr. Dennis asserts that many brokerage firms simply are unwilling to spend the money to train their staffs or otherwise adequately monitor the exchange floors. &quot;If brokerage firms were competent, fraud wouldn't be tolerated,&quot; he says.    When floor brokers are caught stealing, brokerage firms sometimes appear to look the other way. Last year the Merc charged Sam A. Cali with stealing a trade from a customer in connection with a Jan. 15, 1988, order he handled for a Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. customer.    The Merc found Mr. Cali guilty, fined him $5,000, suspended him for two days and duly posted a notice of the disciplinary action on its trading floor. Mention of the sanction also appeared in a weekly executive-summary newsletter sent to Merc members. But Mr. Cali, right up until he received a federal grand-jury subpoena this past January, continued to enjoy a big business filling orders in the Merc's Japanese-yen pit for major brokerage firms.    Mr. Cali, 38 years old, pleaded innocent earlier this month to charges of racketeering, 41 counts of mail fraud and 58 violations of commodities laws. The federal indictment alleges, among other things, that yen traders stole good trades from their customers.    According to the indictment, Mr. Cali did business with several firms. None of them, including Merrill Lynch, would comment about Mr. Cali or answer any questions about how they choose and monitor floor brokers. Other yen brokers who were indicted had continued to execute trades for brokerage firms after being disciplined by the Merc during the past two years.    Some brokerage firms discount the importance of exchange disciplinary actions. Brokerage officials argue that in some cases the sanctions are influenced by intra-exchange politics.    &quot;We'd be hard pressed to find a lot of brokers who haven't had {disciplinary} problems,&quot; says Jack H. Lehman III, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.'s director of commodities.    If floor brokers are convicted of fraud, some cheated investors will probably sue them for damages, although there may be little left to collect after the government is finished seizing assets under anti-racketeering statutes.    Winning such suits could be difficult. Most brokerage firms have mandatory arbitration clauses in customer agreements that could limit damage awards.    Looking ahead to commodity markets this week:    Copper    Futures prices encountered profit-taking Friday after rising for seven consecutive sessions, but the fundamental factors that spurred the rally are likely to continue influencing the market.    Throughout most of this year it was expected that copper, a basic industrial metal, would encounter slower demand and weakening prices as economies softened world-wide. Indeed, copper fell below $1 a pound in July from its record high of $1.6475 set last December.    Then came the surprise. During the usually slow summer, the price began to rise as available inventories of the metal fell. Where was the metal going at this time of the year and in the middle of an economic slowdown?    &quot;It's being consumed,&quot; says Fred D'Agostino, president of Metal Resources, Inc., a Riverside, Conn., metal-trading firm. &quot;Despite the economic statistics, which do show a world-wide slowdown, the demand is there for copper.&quot;    The past three summers have been unusual in this respect, with the result that supplies haven't built up, he said. In addition to demand remaining better than usual, Mr. D'Agostino said, production, which had been expected to pick up substantially, has run into disruptions.    &quot;Every week, it seems, there has been a new problem: Bougainville, Highland Valley, now Peru, Cyprus, and so on,&quot; he said. &quot;There have been massive exports of copper scrap and ingot to the Continent in the past two to three months, and there is only one reason for such business -- the copper is needed,&quot; Mr. D'Agostino said.    As to why copper appears to be running counter to the economic trend, Mr. D'Agostino said: &quot;Copper historically has been the last commodity to rise in periods of economic upturn and the last to fall when the economy goes down.&quot;    Energy    Oil markets likely will be afflicted with summer doldrums for another week or so. Still, there could be new volatility in prices, particularly in futures trading, as information becomes available on oil inventories. That's due to a question regarding petroleum demand.    Is the growth rate of world oil demand beginning to slow? There are some in the industry who think so. But many analysts and traders are looking to inventory levels for further evidence.    Crude oil production by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries appears to be leveling. But it remains at a relatively-high rate -- more than 21.5 million barrels a day. There can be a lag of several weeks before these barrels produced now show up in the market. But if petroleum demand is turning sluggish, the excess OPEC output should soon be reflected in a buildup of crude-oil and fuel inventories in the major oil-consuming regions.    &quot;If this does not materialize, then one would have to conclude that underlying demand is stronger and that any further damage to oil prices may therefore be limited,&quot; says Michael Rothman, Merrill Lynch Capital Markets vice president and senior energy analyst.    Among the closely watched weekly reports on levels of petroleum inventories are those of the American Petroleum Institute, which recently have been showing totals of U.S. oil stocks below those of a year ago. This week's API report, due to be released tomorrow after trading closes, is likely to get even more attention than usual.    Grains and Soybeans    Traders will continue to keep their eyes skyward to observe the amount of rains received this week. Today, the market is expected to focus on the amount of rainfall received over the past weekend in major portions of the Corn and Soybean belt. &quot;It's still a weather-related market,&quot; said Daniel Gonzelli, an analyst with GNP Commodities Inc., Chicago. &quot;Rains are needed to get soybeans over the hump,&quot; he added. Soybeans are at a crucial stage of development in which they need sustaining rains. Traders will also watch developments on the export business front. New business from Mexico and China late last week signaled that the U.S. may be getting some demand in what has been a &quot;dismal&quot; market for exports, analysts say. Mexico purchased 403,000 metric tons of U.S corn and China bought 150,000 metric tons of corn and 100,000 metric tons of wheat. The sale of U.S. grain to China was the first in two years and it is rumored that China might want to make additional corn purchases. </TEXT></DOC>