<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870602-0047 </DOCNO><HL> High Court Rules States May RequireCompanies to Pay Severence in Layoffs---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR GOVMT TAXESTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that states may require employers to provide severance pay to workers laid off by factory closings or relocations.    The high court said that Maine's law requiring one-time severance pay for plant closings doesn't conflict with federal labor law.    The ruling carves out a way in which states may regulate employee benefits, despite an increasing domination by federal legislation and rules. The high court said that although the 1974 federal law on employee benefits regulates the plans that administer benefits, it doesn't preclude the states from setting specific benefit requirements.    It's uncertain, however, whether the decision will have a significant impact. According to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Maine is the only state that requires severance pay for factory closings. Several other states have passed or are considering measures to cope with the labor problems created by factory closings. Such measures include a requirement that workers and state officials be given notice, and a requirement that employers continue paying for health insurance.    The justices upheld the ruling of the Maine Supreme Court making Fort Halifax Packing Co., a unit of Corbett Enterprises Inc., liable for severance pay for the former employees of a poultry-processing plant in Winslow, Maine. The company closed the plant in May 1981, leaving 93 employees eligible for severance pay totaling $256,600, and the employees filed suit.    The Maine law requires one week of severance pay for each year of employment with a company.    The high court ruling, written by Justice William Brennan, said the Maine law required severance pay, but didn't require employers to set up a plan to run it. Since no plan was involved, the Maine law wasn't preempted by federal law, the court said.    The decision rejected the view of the Justice and Labor departments, which filed a friend-of-the-court brief urging the court to invalidate the Maine law on the ground that it clashed with federal employee-benefits law.    Justice Byron White dissented, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Sandra O'Connor and Antonin Scalia. The dissent said the court had created a &quot;loophole . . . which will undermine Congress's decision to make employee-benefit plans a matter of exclusive federal regulation.&quot;    Union Dues   In another important labor action, the justices agreed to decide whether federal labor law prohibits private-sector unions from using mandatory dues to fund activities other than collective bargaining, such as lobbying, organizing and political events.    The case is important for many unions, representing millions of workers who either pay mandatory union dues or who choose not to join but must make a payment in place of dues.    The appeal has already sparked controversy. The Justice Department and National Labor Relations Board urged the Supreme Court to hear the appeal, filed by the Communications Workers of America, and to rule in the union's favor in the lawsuit that was filed against it in 1976 by 20 American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and Candamp;P Telephone Co. employees.    The friend-of-the-court brief by the department prompted criticism from the National Right to Work Legal Defense Foundation and from conservative organizations urging President Reagan to withdraw the brief.    The lawsuit charged that the payments in place of union dues may only be used for contract negotiations. Other uses violate the union's duty to represent all workers fairly and violate the workers' First Amendment rights, the suit charged.    A federal district court in Baltimore, in rulings in 1979 and 1983, found that the Communication Workers' practice violated federal law and the First Amendment and ordered the union to refund 79% of the money paid by the workers who sued.    A federal appeals court in Richmond affirmed the district court in 1985 by a 2-1 vote. In 1986, the full 10-judge appeals court reviewed the case and, while deeply split, also ruled that federal labor law prohibited use of compulsory dues for purposes other than collective bargaining, such as lobbying, organizing other companies and support of social and political activities.    The Supreme Court has previously ruled that the allowable uses for dues are restricted when the cases involve public employees or workers in the rail and airline industries. But those situations involved different laws than in the current dispute, which will be argued next winter.    Drug Testing   The justices refused to delay the start of a Customs Service drug-testing program intended primarily for employees chosen to work on drug-enforcement efforts. The testing was halted last November after a federal judge in Louisiana declared the program unconstitutional. A federal appeals court in New Orleans upheld the Customs Service testing plan in April, however, and Customs officials recently announced plans to resume testing.    Yesterday, the justices refused a request by the National Treasury Employees Union to temporarily block the testing. Only Justice Brennan voted for a delay.    Successor Companies   The justices by a 6-3 vote upheld the NLRB's rules for deciding when a company that takes over another is a &quot;successor&quot; as defined by federal labor law, and therefore must bargain with the union that operated under the first company.    In an opinion written by Justice Harry Blackmun, the high court agreed with the NLRB and with a federal appeals court in Boston that Fall River Dyeing andamp; Finishing Corp., Fall River, Mass., engaged in an unfair labor practice. The NLRB and courts found that in 1982 and 1983, Fall River improperly refused to bargain with a textile workers local that represented workers at the predecessor company, Sterlingwale Corp.    Justice Lewis Powell dissented, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justice O'Connor.    Tax Penalty   The justices ruled 7-2 that when a taxpayer underpays federal taxes due partly to negligence, the Internal Revenue Service may collect a 5% penalty on the entire amount of the underpayment.    The justices, in an unsigned opinion issued without oral argument, reversed the ruling of a federal appeals court in Cincinnati that the penalty is limited to the portion of the underpayment that resulted from negligence. The decision, a victory for the IRS, means an increased penalty for Tennessee-based Asphalt Products Co.    Justices Blackmun and Thurgood Marshall objected to the court's handling the case without argument.    World War II Detention   By an 8-0 vote, the justices said that the wrong federal appeals court had ruled on a lawsuit stemming from the detention of Japanese-Americans in prison camps in this country during World War II.    In a suit filed in 1983 by 19 Japanese-Americans, a federal appeals court for the District of Columbia ordered the government to face a trial of the case, which asks compensation for property losses suffered by people who were detained. But the Supreme Court said the question of a trial should be decided by a special appeals court that handles, among other matters, money claims against the federal government.    Justice Scalia didn't participate in the case. </TEXT></DOC>