<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880419-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. ATTACKED Iranian oil facilities and vessels in the Persian Gulf.    The Pentagon said U.S. forces destroyed two of Iran's oil platforms, sank or damaged three attack boats and a gunship, and disabled two frigates that fired missiles at American planes. Washington called the action a &quot;measured response&quot; to the explosion of a mine last week that crippled a U.S. warship. Iran retaliated for the assaults with attacks on Arab oil facilities, and on U.S., British and Cypriot commercial vessels. There weren't any American casualties reported, but a U.S. attack helicopter carrying two crew members was missing. A search was mounted.    Reagan said he had ordered the military strikes because of Iran's &quot;irresponsible behavior&quot; toward U.S. warships, and warned that Tehran will &quot;pay a price&quot; for aggression in the gulf.    ---   DEMJANJUK WAS CONVICTED of Nazi war crimes by an Israeli court.    The three-judge panel in Jerusalem said there wasn't any doubt that the 68-year-old retired U.S. auto worker was &quot;Ivan the Terrible,&quot; a Treblinka death camp guard who ran the gas chambers that killed 850,000 Jews. He was convicted of four counts: war crimes, crimes against the Jewish people, crimes against humanity and crimes against persecuted people. Demjanjuk, extradited by the U.S. in 1986, could face the death penalty when sentenced next week.    Demjanjuk was the second person to be convicted of war crimes by Israel. Adolf Eichmann, architect of Hitler's &quot;Final Solution,&quot; was hanged in 1962.    ---   Dukakis predicted he would post a &quot;great victory&quot; in today's Democratic presidential primary in New York, which would place him firmly in the lead for the nomination. Jackson, who won yesterday's Delaware caucuses, and Gore exhorted their supporters throughout New York, with 225 delegates, to deliver a poll-defying upset.    ---   A presidential panel called for an independent FAA, the appointment of a powerful &quot;safety czar,&quot; and stepped-up airline inspections. The seven-member commission, after a 10-month study of air safety, concluded that &quot;a major overhaul of the present safety regulatory structure is absolutely essential.&quot;    ---   The State Department condemned Saturday's assassination of PLO military chief Khalil al-Wazir, and said the U.S. hadn't any knowledge of involvement in the slaying. Officials in Tunisia said an inquiry into the killing concluded that the operation was conducted by Israeli agents. A funeral for al-Wazir is to be held tomorrow in Syria.    Israel's army restricted travel in the ocupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and imposed a curfew on about 20 refugee camps in an effort to quell violence sparked by al-Wazir's assassination. At least two Arabs were killed in fresh clashes in the territories.    ---   A member of Kuwait's royal family said he hoped his government would yield to the demands of Arab hijackers holding a Kuwaiti jetliner in Algeria. The gunmen, who commandeered the jet two weeks ago, want Kuwait to free 17 pro-Iranian prisoners.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to study the parental rights of unwed fathers whose children are put up for adoption by their mothers. In a separate case, the justices refused to let a Dallas blood bank withhold the names and medical records of its donors from a woman who says her husband contracted AIDS after a blood transfusion.    ---   The State Department said that Soviet acceptance of the Reagan administration view that the superpower INF treaty outlaws futuristic weapons doesn't limit development of a U.S. space-based anti-missile shield. The accord bans intermediate-range missiles. Shevardnadze accepted the U.S. position in a letter Friday.    ---   Banks in Panama reopened for the first time in six weeks, but only to receive deposits. Business was reported brisk. The banks were closed March 4 because of U.S. economic sanctions aimed at ousting Panamanian military leader Noriega.    ---   Contra leaders said they would press the Sandinista government for the release of thousands of political prisoners and an end to the military draft. The U.S.-backed rebels, who met with opposition figures at the La Prensa newspaper in Managua, also said they would continue fighting unless Nicaragua agreed to democratic reforms.    ---   A Beirut radio station reported that U.S. Marine Lt. Col. William R. Higgins was killed. Higgins was abducted Feb. 7 in southern Lebanon while serving with U.N. peacekeeping forces. U.N. officials said they couldn't confirm the report by the Voice of Lebanon radio, which has broadcast several inaccurate hostage reports.    ---   Afghan guerrilla leaders held the first &quot;cabinet meeting&quot; of a planned provisional government. Western diplomats described the talks as a bid to unify the seven-party rebel alliance. The leaders are seeking a location for their government, a move considered politically sensitive because of a patchwork of regional power bases.    ---   Kenya's Ibrahim Hussein won the 92nd Boston Marathon, finishing in 2:08:43. Rosa Mota of Portugal captured the women's title with a time of 2:24:30.    ---   Died: Louise Nevelson, 88, sculptor, Sunday, in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>