<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881004-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Quandary: Virginia Bank Buy-Out Raises New Questions On Attorney Conflicts --- Clark Clifford and a Partner Must Defend Dual Roles As Lawyers, Executives --- Did Rockette Get a Fair Shake? </HL><AUTHOR> Jill Abramson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN BNK TNM </IN><TEXT>   At 81 years old, the silver-haired, patrician Clark Clifford is one of Washington's enduring legal institutions. Once secretary of defense in Lyndon Johnson's administration, he has advised every Democratic president since Harry Truman. Now, as head of Clifford andamp; Warnke, Mr. Clifford is the consummate Washington superlawyer.    But last week, the distinguished Mr. Clifford was in a federal court in Alexandria, Va., as a witness, not an attorney. He sat at a table with lawyers from another firm representing one of the defendants, First American Bankshares Inc., of Washington, D.C. Then, he was on the stand explaining his own actions as a businessman. Mr. Clifford, as it happens, is not only First American's chief legal adviser. He is also its chairman.    Taking an active interest in the proceedings was Mr. Clifford's law partner and alter ego, Robert Altman, 41. Mr. Altman is a celebrity lawyer, too, by virtue of his marriage to Lynda Carter, the actress who played &quot;Wonder Woman&quot; in the TV series. Like Mr. Clifford, Mr. Altman is a business manager of First American.    Their involvement in this client's business has landed the two lawyers in the middle of lawsuits that could end up costing First American more than $3 million. And although no one has accused them of unethical conduct, it has raised nettlesome questions about conflict of interest.    In a suit that went to trial last week, an Alexandria jury upheld the claim of a retired Radio City Music Hall Rockette that she didn't get a fair price when First American bought all the stock it didn't already own from minority shareholders in a Virginia bank. More broadly, the suit exemplifies a growing and much debated problem within the legal profession: whether lawyers can properly wear two hats, serving simultaneously as lawyers and business executives for the same enterprise.    Outside lawyers have long served on corporate boards, and most big companies employ in-house counsel. But like Mr. Clifford, a good many lawyers are getting even more directly involved in the businesses of their clients. Defenders of the practice say that lawyers bring good judgment and sensitivity to ethical and legal problems in their roles as corporate executives. Some attorneys argue that hands-on experience in the business world also enhances their effectiveness as lawyers.    But the trend distresses some legal authorities. &quot;The hallmark of legal professionalism is independence,&quot; says Stephen Gillers, a professor at the New York University School of Law. &quot;By being part of your client, your judgment as a lawyer is potentially compromised.&quot;    Outside lawyers are supposed to function as dispassionate advisers, sometimes urging caution, pointing out potential legal problems, even saying &quot;no.&quot; Specialists in legal ethics worry that when a lawyer is involved in making management decisions as well as in policing them, his company can easily end up in legal trouble, ranging from civil suits to criminal prosecution. Also, they question whether lawyers can be truly objective when they have a financial stake in a client's transaction.    The dual roles often result when lawyers are asked to serve as directors of their clients' companies. A few prominent attorneys, such as securities specialist Harvey Pitt, have turned down seats on such boards because they don't want to risk hampering their independence.    Mr. Clifford's relationship with First American is a highly unusual one that may take the risks to new and potentially dangerous heights. &quot;An attorney-director is like someone who jumps on a trampoline,&quot; says Mr. Gillers. &quot;But what Clark Clifford is doing is walking on a tightrope with no net.&quot;    Both Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman say they don't see any conflicts in what they have done. &quot;We've never had any difficulty with that,&quot; says Mr. Clifford, who adds that his 60 years' experience as a corporate lawyer &quot;brings something valuable&quot; to the operation of the bank.    The minority-shareholder suit alleged that Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman pushed through the buy-out of the Virginia bank on First American's terms. Another point of contention has been whether Mr. Altman, while heavily involved in running First American, gave legal advice on the buy-out to the chairman of the Virginia bank First American was taking over and discouraged its board from getting an independent assessment of the deal.    In pretrial testimony, Mr. Altman, while denying he influenced the Virginia bank's decision not to hire its own investment adviser, refused to tell about his conversations with its chairman, asserting lawyer-client privilege. The result: A federal judge ruled that those talks were off limits in the trial.    The overlapping roles at First American &quot;create a built-in conflict of interest,&quot; in the view of Monroe Freedman, a professor at Hofstra University School of Law.    One concern is the issue of confidentiality. While the confidentiality of Mr. Altman's role as a lawyer was upheld in the recent case, Mr. Freedman worries that it could well be the client who gets hurt if a judge rules that communications with lawyer-executives aren't protected. &quot;The court can say this looks like a business communication rather than a lawyer-client communication,&quot; Mr. Freedman says. &quot;When those functions are merged and confused, you get all kinds of problems.&quot;    According to Mr. Gillers of New York University, a major ethical problem faced by law firms that have partners serving as directors and officers of their clients' concerns is that they &quot;may become too friendly with management and lose their objectivity.&quot; In the case of Clifford andamp; Warnke, this potential is all the more obvious because Mr. Clifford is such a dominant force at both First American and the law firm.    Clifford andamp; Warnke gets big fees as the company's general counsel. The firm handles most of the holding company's legal work and does some work for the nine First American banks. In 1987, according to First American's annual report, it spent nearly $2.7 million on legal and professional fees, and its banks' total bill for legal and professional services exceeded $9 million. Nearly a third of the 20 lawyers at Clifford andamp; Warnke handle business for First American.    The American Bar Association, which governs lawyers' ethics, doesn't prohibit lawyer-executive arrangements if all potential conflicts of interest are disclosed to the client and the client approves. (No one has suggested that Mr. Clifford or Mr. Altman concealed anything from First American.) But a special ABA Commission on Professionalism said two years ago that it was &quot;disturbed by . . . an increasing participation of lawyers in business activities.&quot; It urged the bar association to consider some controls or prohibitions, noting that in England and France attorneys aren't permitted to engage in business activities with clients.    One concern is that lawyer-executives are vulnerable to surging shareholders' actions and other lawsuits. In a &quot;wrongful discharge&quot; case brought by a whistleblower fired by Ashland Oil Co., Samuel Butler, a prominent corporate lawyer and an Ashland director, was accused of various improprieties, including participating in an alleged cover-up. Although he wasn't a defendant in the suit, Mr. Butler was called as a witness and strongly denied any wrongdoing.    Lawyers aren't permitted to participate in cases in which they are material witnesses. Mr. Butler's law firm, Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, which had served as Ashland's chief outside law firm, was disqualified from representing the company in the suit after putting in two years' work on it. (Ashland settled the case for $25 million in August after a federal jury awarded $69.5 million to the plaintiffs.)    It was Mr. Clifford's role as a banking executive rather than as a lawyer that had him in court last week. Like many lawyer-executives, he took the management job at his client's request. &quot;When you are very involved with a client, it can be a natural outgrowth of the relationship,&quot; says Robert Kaufman, a partner at New York's Proskauer Rose Goetz andamp; Mendelsohn who is chairman of two U.S. subsidiaries of his client, Pirelli, the Italian-Swiss conglomerate. He is also the immediate past president of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.    Mr. Clifford got involved with the banking business through another prominent Democrat (and one-time client), former Carter administration budget director Bert Lance. He says he helped introduce Mr. Clifford to the wealthy Middle Eastern investors who now control First American Bank. They include Sheik Kamal Adham, the brother-in-law of the late King Faisal of Saudi Arabia; Faisal Saud al Fulaij, the former head of Kuwait Airways; and members of the royal family of Abu Dhabi.    Mr. Lance was a financial adviser to the Arab businessmen when they began investing in what was then Financial General Bankshares Inc. The lawyers were called in when the bank sued the investors for failing to disclose substantial purchases of its stock.    Following a four-year legal battle, the Middle Eastern investors acquired Financial General in 1982 for more than $212 million. The Arabs promptly renamed it First American Bankshares and tapped Mr. Clifford to be chairman. The new owners promised him &quot;complete authority&quot; over their new property, Mr. Clifford said at last week's trial. The venerable lawyer has even made cameo appearances in the bank's TV ads.    The arrangement &quot;feels perfectly natural to us,&quot; Mr. Altman says. &quot;Mr. Clifford has encountered every corporate problem you can run into. He has no difficulty being objective or making hard decisions.&quot; Besides receiving payments (in his cut of law-firm profits), Mr. Clifford says he also receives &quot;rather modest compensation&quot; for serving as chairman. Mr. Altman gets no salary but does receive an $18,000 director's fee, which is turned over to Clifford andamp; Warnke.    Under Mr. Clifford, First American's assets have grown to more than $10 billion, and earnings have set records six years in a row, totaling $51.2 million last year. Its nine banks operate 279 branches in Washington, Maryland, Virginia, New York, Tennessee, Florida and Georgia. Last year, it bought the National Bank of Georgia for more than $200 million cash.    It was an acquisition in Virginia that got First American into the suit that went against it last week. First American Bankshares decided two years ago to buy out minority shareholders of an institution it already held an 85% stake in -- First American Bank of Virginia. To determine a price, the executive committee of Bankshares, which included Mr. Altman and Mr. Clifford, retained the investment firm Keefe Bruyette andamp; Woods, which suggested $42 a share.    The board of the Virginia bank approved the merger early in 1987, without taking several steps customary in such cases, such as hiring an investment adviser or naming outside lawyers or a committee of outside directors to negotiate terms.    This didn't sit well with Doris Sandberg, 67, the retired Rockette who owned 2,442 shares of stock in the Virginia bank, which now is entirely owned by Bankshares. She sued and won her claim that a fair price would have been closer to $60. Under the verdict, she would receive an additional $43,956 for her shares. The Virginia bank's directors say that they had come to an independent judgment of the deal's fairness and that they weren't obligated to obtain a second opinion.    Mrs. Sandberg contends that officers of the holding company, including Mr. Altman, pressured the Virginia board to approve the merger on Mr. Clifford's terms. She says the Virginia bank's chairman was &quot;forcefully&quot; told by Mr. Altman not to retain an independent financial adviser and to accept the $42 price as final. Mr. Altman denies the allegations, but his discussions remain secret because of lawyer-client privilege.    First American is likely to file an appeal, thus keeping busy the two Virginia law firms that are representing the company in the shareholder's litigation. Another lawsuit, this one filed by a group of former shareholders who among them owned 180,000 shares of the Virginia bank's stock, is also on the horizon. So Mr. Clifford will again face one of the unpleasant facts clients must contend with -- being on the receiving end of legal bills. </TEXT></DOC>