<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880718-0074 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Jimmy, We Hardly Knew Ye </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   If the 1988 Democratic National Convention accomplishes nothing else, it will mark the rehabilitation of James Earl Carter Jr. It convenes in President Carter's home state. On the outskirts of Atlanta, near where General Sherman watched the city burn, stands the Carter Presidential Center, with its impressive museum and library. The former President gave a gracious speech there at a reception for the press on Saturday, and tonight will appear before the nation on television to close the opening session.    The celebration of the former President this year contrasts with the last two Democratic conventions, where his status might have been described as not quite an embarrassment. Memories of his inflation and his humiliation in the hostage crisis have faded, especially since the Reagan administration has suffered its own embarrassments. His deep streak of moralism seems much more attractive out of office than it did in office. And most of all, Mr. Carter has clearly grown from bearing the responsibilities of the presidency. Indeed, the most successful policies of the Reagan administration go back to Mr. Carter's policy reversals: the appointment of Paul Volcker as chairman of the Federal Reserve and the start of a military buildup following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.    Still, a review of the Carter presidency casts important light on our times, and in particular on the impending national campaign. Jimmy Carter won the Democratic nomination and ultimately the presidency, remember, as a managerial governor. In the Georgia governorship, he instituted &quot;zero-based budgeting,&quot; reorganized the government to cut some 300 bureaucratic agencies to a slim 22, and instituted such policies as sending alcoholics and drug users for treatment instead of to jail. Under his administration, Georgia clocked remarkable economic growth, so that revenues grew without higher taxes, and he was able to leave office with a budget surplus of more than $50 million. The Carter promise was to bring this efficiency and frugality to a bloated Washington. It is instructive to ask, &quot;Whatever became of zero-based budgeting?&quot;    &quot;If, after the inauguration, you find Cy Vance as Secretary of State and Zbigniew Brzezinski as head of national security, then I would say we failed. And I'd quit,&quot; Carter Chief-of-Staff Hamilton Jordan said in a Playboy interview published in November 1976. It promptly all eventuated, though Mr. Jordan never resigned, even after Mr. Vance did. In staffing his administration, Mr. Carter found himself forced to fall back on the Democratic establishment and the Nader network. But he sought to keep control of policy by stationing Georgia loyalists in a few top places-Griffin Bell, for example, as attorney general.    Of these the most important was Thomas Bertram Lance as head of the Office of Management and Budget. Bert Lance, universally recognized as the strong man of the Carter administration, was to keep a heavy hand on government spending, and thus on all its priorities. But after only eight months in office, Mr. Lance was forced to resign, victim of what was then becoming established as a Beltway institution, the scandal of a thousand cuts.    Mr. Lance's Achilles' heel was the free-and-easy banking style unhappily not unknown in small Southern banks. His troubles with the bank regulators were known but overlooked when his nomination sailed through Senate confirmation. But by the middle of the year, when he asked to hold rather than sell his then-depressed bank stocks, congressional and media bloodhounds were on the scent. Did he trade his bank's business for personal loans? Did he use political muscle to get deposits for his bank? The Comptroller of the Currency issued two &quot;nothing criminal, but . . .&quot; reports on his banking practices. Was it proper of him to use bank airplanes for personal and political trips, asked Rep. Fernand J. St Germain, who has become rich investing in businesses under the jurisdiction of his committee. Senator Abraham Ribicoff turned from a defender to an attacker. Some bureaucrats testified they went easy on Mr. Lance's bank to boost their careers. Polls showed most of the public favored Mr. Lance's resignation.    &quot;Nothing that I have heard or read has shaken my belief in Bert's ability or his integrity,&quot; the President protested. Indeed, in Atlanta this week Mr. Lance is enjoying some rehabilitation of his own, as an adviser to Jesse Jackson. But the Lance furor alienated Congress, where important business had to be done. Bert Lance had to go; after eight months the Carter administration was effectively decapitated. The Beltway wasted no time in showing this efficient manager who was the boss.    The following year, incidentally, Congress passed the Ethics in Government Act; one of its ostensible purposes was to ensure a fair hearing for officials like Mr. Lance. Its first target became Mr. Jordan. During the course of plea bargaining over tax charges, a disco operator in New York charged Mr. Jordan of using cocaine on the premises. An ordinary prosecutor probably wouldn't have spent much time on such suspect testimony, but Congress has specified that a special prosecutor must be appointed unless the attorney general could enter a verdict of innocent. Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti said, &quot;I am unable to find that this matter is so unsubstantiated that no further investigation . . . is warranted.&quot; Mr. Jordan ultimately was cleared in a 53-page report but only after a six-month investigation kept another of the President's closest advisers operating under a cloud.    All this happened, of course, even though Mr. Carter's party controlled Congress. Weakened by these and other ploys, and untutored in the ways of Washington, he was unable to assert his own priorities, and indeed lost control of much of the government. In foreign affairs a President still has room to maneuver, and it is here that President Carter recorded his one historic accomplishment -- the Camp David agreement for peace between Israel and Egypt. By his last year in office, he could at least react to events: appointing Mr. Volcker when the dollar threatened to collapse, and responding when Soviet troops crossed borders.    This record has an eerie relevance in Atlanta, where the Democrats are reaching out to nominate another unknown governor. He is another self-professed efficient manager, though Mr. Carter really did have a state budget surplus while Governor Dukakis has a $450 million deficit in the operating budget and enormous borrowings in his capital budget. Again the national Democratic figures are either too liberal to win the election or not liberal enough to win the nomination. So the nomination process started with the &quot;seven dwarves,&quot; and by virtue of undeniable intelligence, stern self-discipline and tactical acumen, another outsider has conquered the system and is promising to make Washington both frugal and compassionate. We can only remember what we wrote November 4, 1976, on President Carter's election:   &quot;Mr. Carter suffers no shortage of personal ability. He has the kind of intelligence that might cast aside dogma that no longer corresponds to current reality. We only wish we were more certain that he understands the crux of the issues; an on-the-job education for the President can be very expensive for the nation.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>