<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870915-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Smuggling Aliens:A Shadowy OperationShows How Hard It IsTo Keep Out Illegals---Leader Camacho Is at Large,Some Aides Are Arrested;Guarantees to Dominicans---A Man Who Keeps His Word---By Eric MorgenthalerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In October 1983, the Immigration and Naturalization Service created a small anti-smuggling unit here to deal with the growing numbers of aliens, mainly from the Dominican Republic, who were entering this U.S. commonwealth illegally and in many cases proceeding to the mainland.    Its agents began by picking up illegal immigrants and asking them how they got here. As the immigrants talked of their journeys -- usually by boat across the treacherous Mona Passage that divides this island from the Dominican Republic -- the agents learned that most of the traffic was organized by smuggling rings. And in talk of the rings, one name kept recurring:    Camacho.   In time, agents came to identify Ramon Emilio Santana-Camacho, a Dominican citizen who is now 41 years old, as the head of perhaps the biggest alien-smuggling network in the Caribbean: a shadowy, sophisticated operation that the INS says has slipped more than 30,000 illegal immigrants into the U.S. this decade -- mainly via Puerto Rico but also through Miami, New York, Mexico and Canada.    Unlike most such operations, it has usually given guarantees: If its customers were caught on arrival and deported, the Camacho organization would smuggle them in again, without charge. Illegal immigrants typically paid from $800 to $1,600 for the trip across the Mona Passage, which usually takes about 26 hours.    The INS still hasn't caught up with Mr. Camacho (who goes by only the last of his surnames, even though that isn't conventional Spanish usage). However, the U.S. has won felony convictions against more than 20 of his associates -- smuggling is punishable by five years per alien -- and his organization seems to have gone into eclipse this year.    Investigators think Mr. Camacho himself is hiding out in the U.S. -- partly to escape a new Dominican government, which has been cracking down on smugglers and corruption generally since its election last year. But they figure he eventually will resurface.    At a time when the U.S. is starting to enforce a new law aimed at stemming illegal immigration, the Camacho case is a reminder of just how difficult that effort is likely to be. &quot;People see a boat in the water and think, well, this is one man,&quot; says Luis F. Monge, an INS supervisory special agent who heads the anti-smuggling unit here. &quot;But that isn't true. It's a complete organization from top to bottom.&quot;    A partial diagram of the Camacho ring that the INS pieced together shows 50 names and seven separate branches. &quot;Camacho had a lot of subsidiary organizations,&quot; says Edwin Rodriguez, a former INS investigator who now works for the Customs Service here. &quot;Originally, we thought they were different groups. Then gradually we realized it was one organization under Camacho.&quot;    Such big-time smugglers can outspend, outman and often outmaneuver the authorities. &quot;They have their own intelligence,&quot; Mr. Monge says. &quot;You patrol here, they move there. You are strong in one point, they move to the next point. That's their way of operating.&quot;    To such groups, the new immigration law is simply a new business challenge. The law, for instance, grants legal status to anyone who can prove he has been in the U.S. illegally since before 1982. So, says INS agent Jose Rivera, &quot;the word on the street&quot; is that there is now a new industry &quot;preparing fraudulent employment letters, fraudulent receipts, fraudulent checks to establish that people have been here since 1982.&quot; Mr. Rivera adds: &quot;We are now in the process of trying to get to these printing agencies.&quot;    Similarly, a new route seems to be opening up, perhaps in response to the Dominican navy's increased patrolling of the Mona Passage. Smugglers are flying Dominicans and Haitians to St. Martin, where they can enter without a visa, then sending them, usually by boat, to Puerto Rico.    It is difficult to estimate the size of the people-smuggling business. The INS says that in the fiscal year ended last Sept. 30, U.S. authorities apprehended about 1.8 million illegal immigrants, including repeats, of whom about 114,000 were smuggled in. However, Verne Jervis, an INS spokesman in Washington, says the number smuggled is probably &quot;considerably greater&quot; than the statistics suggest. Last year, the INS says, Dominicans accounted for &quot;by far&quot; the greatest number of people caught with fraudulent entry documents at New York's John F. Kennedy Airport.    (Airport smuggling rings, which often work with groups such as Mr. Camacho's, are a story themselves. In September 1985, for instance, a former Marriott Corp. airport employee here was sentenced in federal court to three years in prison for aiding and abetting smuggling. He would slip illegals into a Marriott food truck, then drive them directly to their planes, avoiding immigration and security checks.)    Many would-be immigrants don't make it here at all. The Mona Passage, about 75 miles across at its narrowest point, has some of the worst seas in the Caribbean, and the smugglers' small, overloaded boats often aren't a match for them. Last December, a wooden boat jammed with 48 people sank just off the Puerto Rican coast, and the bodies of 14 Dominicans were recovered. Some operators don't even attempt a crossing. They collect the passengers' money, sail to another side of the Dominican Republic -- and tell the people it's Puerto Rico.    Mr. Camacho is said to be above such tricks. &quot;He is one of the few guys who keeps his word,&quot; says Clifford Foy, an INS special agent here. &quot;He says he will take you to Puerto Rico, and he will take you.&quot;    A husky man of medium height, Mr. Camacho is a former Dominican navy frogman who long ran his smuggling operations out of Agua Santa del Yuna, a remote town on a river that runs to the sea. In addition to smuggling people, Mr. Monge and others allege, Mr. Camacho also has smuggled drugs and weapons. People he has smuggled depict him as literally a handson manager, who would collect the money himself and push off the boats as they left the Dominican shore -- because, the INS guesses, he didn't trust his subordinates with cash. A former associate describes him as &quot;a person of little intellectual capacity but much courage -- a man who knows how to deal with people.&quot;    An INS undercover agent who unexpectedly ran into Mr. Camacho last year in a bar in Santo Domingo, the Dominican capital, says the smuggler &quot;pretends to be very humble.&quot; Despite the humility, he adds, Mr. Camacho &quot;just snaps his fingers and three guys are there: You want a beer? What do you need?&quot; (Mr. Camacho, apparently unaware of who the agent was, posed for a picture with him, which the agent now proudly displays on his desk.)    Mr. Camacho couldn't be located for comment on this article. Authorities here, as well as Dominican contacts in Santo Domingo and New York, think he is in the U.S. -- Boston, New York or Miami -- hoping that the anti-corruption crusade in the Dominican Republic will blow over. Ironically, Mr. Camacho has legally been a permanent resident of the U.S. since 1973, but authorities assume he travels with phony documents, as his proper name could set off alarms at any U.S. passport check.    U.S. authorities say he has been arrested some 20 times in the Dominican Republic on minor charges related to smuggling but has never spent more than a few days in jail at a time. Dominican law prohibits the extradition of Dominican nationals -- meaning the U.S. must catch Mr. Camacho before it can prosecute him.    Mr. Monge says that in the late 1970s, U.S. authorities did arrest Mr. Camacho -- at the airport here, for trying to smuggle illegal immigrants to New York -- but the charges were dismissed, apparently because of problems with witnesses. At the time, the INS didn't realize Mr. Camacho was a major figure. That changed after the anti-smuggling unit was formed in 1983 and its agents began interrogating newly arrived illegals.    &quot;Most of the aliens we arrested on the west coast {of Puerto Rico} said Camacho was the one who brought them,&quot; says Mr. Rivera. &quot;We said, 'Who the hell is Camacho?'&quot;    Traveling to the Dominican Republic, the agents got Mr. Camacho's full name, plus photos and background information, from the police there. They then learned he already was in their files, as a minor character. And when they fed his name into the INS computer, they discovered that their New York office had an active investigation on him, involving smuggling there.    &quot;It was like a puzzle,&quot; Mr. Rivera says. &quot;We started putting the pieces together.&quot;    The agents began seeking informants inside the Camacho ring and among its clients. When fresh-off-the-boat people agree to cooperate, the INS often sends them home on the next plane, asking them to get themselves smuggled back in while keeping the INS informed.    The INS pays small rewards, but most informants prefer to be paid with time. &quot;Their main reason {for cooperating} is winning a few extra months to work here and send back money to their family,&quot; Mr. Rivera says. &quot;If we supply that, they will help us.&quot;    When an informant phones that a boat is due, agents head out to meet it. But the boats usually arrive when it is &quot;so dark you can't see your hand out there,&quot; Mr. Rivera says, and finding them is chancy.    It is also unpredictable. One night, some INS and Customs agents were lazily patrolling offshore, with only their boat's anchor lights on, when a low-flying aircraft made several swoops overhead. &quot;And then,&quot; Mr. Rivera says, &quot;it came back and began dropping bales of marijuana all around us.&quot; The agents alerted the Coast Guard, but it didn't catch up with the plane.    Compared with the smugglers, the INS agents operate on a shoestring. In the beginning, they didn't even have their own boat, though they recently refitted a high-powered 25-footer they had seized. At one point last year, they ran out of money for jailing and sending back illegal immigrants. &quot;We just had to turn them loose -- and give them 30 days to return voluntarily to their country,&quot; Mr. Monge says. The anti-smuggling unit has only six agents. They focus on big smuggling rings. Next month, they will get an assist when the Border Patrol opens its first station on the Puerto Rican coast.    Despite its size, Mr. Monge's unit has a formidable record. &quot;We are talking about a 99.9% conviction rate,&quot; says U.S. Attorney Daniel F. Lopez-Romo, who adds that the anti-smuggling people &quot;are super agents.&quot; Last year alone, Mr. Monge says, their work helped win felony convictions against 27 figures in major smuggling rings.    In 1984, their Camacho investigation took a significant turn when a Dominican walked into the INS office here, claiming to be a &quot;good friend&quot; of the ringleader and offering to trade information for help in staying here. He said a Camacho boat was to leave the next day with 42 people on board, adding that when it arrived in Puerto Rico it would be met by a white Chevrolet Monte Carlo and a brown van. The information all proved correct. &quot;And in the Monte Carlo,&quot; says Mr. Rivera, &quot;we found two of Camacho's biggest men.&quot;    The agents code-named their source Cristal, after a place in the Dominican Republic that Mr. Camacho often used as a staging area. For nearly three years, Cristal proved an extraordinary informant. He attended Camacho planning sessions, wired for sound. Other times, he showed up asking whether anyone had a van that could meet an arriving boat of illegals. &quot;So we'd get one of the vans we'd seized, dress up as drivers and go over and arrest them,&quot; Mr. Rivera says.    &quot;I would ask, 'How the hell do you know all this?'&quot; Mr. Rivera continues. &quot;He would say, 'Don't ask. Just listen.'&quot; The agent notes: &quot;He was risking his family, his status and his life. These guys must have done something very bad to him that he wanted to get back at them for.&quot;    Cristal's information led to the arrest of more than a dozen important Camacho figures -- plus the seizure of six boats, seven cars and three vans. He even testified in open court here. Late last year, Cristal started getting telephone threats. In March, the INS slipped him back to the Dominican Republic, and he is hiding there.    Reports vary on what Mr. Camacho is doing now, though virtually all put him in the U.S. A diplomat in Santo Domingo says he is &quot;basically out of business now&quot; and &quot;doesn't have a whole lot of money.&quot; However, a Dominican in New York, who used to be an informant for the INS, says Mr. Camacho's lieutenants now run the business for him. Meanwhile, he says, Mr. Camacho is getting heavily involved in the cocaine trade. Mr. Monge says the INS hasn't caught any illegals in several months who have dealt directly with Mr. Camacho, but it has picked up some who paid their money to people the INS knows as Camacho underlings.    &quot;We will get him some day -- persistence pays,&quot; Mr. Rivera says. &quot;Figure it this way: Five years ago, we didn't know anything about him. Now we have arrested most of his members. He knows we are close to him.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>