<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870527-0086 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Prosecutorial Indiscretion -- II</HL><DD> 05/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WDTCONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Ray Donovan finally got justice. So why is he so upset? After a Bronx jury acquitted the former labor secretary Monday, Mr. Donovan asked, &quot;Which office do I go to to get my reputation back?&quot; Good question.    The American political culture, by which we mean the people who one way or another make their living from politics, has in our time developed an unattractive fascination with the power to prosecute. We have state prosecutors, federal prosecutors, special prosecutors and the enforcement divisions of independent federal agencies. As we see in the Donovan case, and in a foreign-policy flap stirred up over the weekend by Special Prosecutor Lawrence Walsh, there is a big issue of accountability for this enormous power. Who polices the prosecutors?    The Donovan case was especially dramatic. A special prosecutor had studied the charges and said there was insufficient evidence for prosection but Bronx District Attorney Mario Merola constructed a convoluted legal theory alleging grand larceny. The notion was that while Mr. Donovan's construction company delivered the agreed-upon work for the agreed-upon price, it cheated on the minority-contracting clause in its contract by taking money for leasing equipment to the minority concern. The trial lasted eight months. At the end of the prosecution's case, the defense called no witnesses, saying that no crime had been shown. It took the jury about nine hours to acquit everyone of everything. The foreman said that the charges never should have been brought.    Why was the case brought? &quot;Cui bono?&quot; Five Democrats on the Senate Labor Committee didn't like the idea of a Reagan conservative running the Labor Department. But that battle was lost in the 1980 presidential election, so Mr. Donovan's critics raised a welter of legal and ethical charges that ultimately resulted in an indictment. The real battle ended when Mr. Donovan resigned in 1985. What happened after that had meaning only for him and his family. Except that &quot;the first cabinet official indicted while in office&quot; has been high on the exhibits of the ethical sins of the Reagan administration.    As it happens, Mr. Merola's office also is conducting one of the investigations of Wedtech Corp., another minority-contractor scandal. While the case is connected to his probes of corruption in the Bronx Democratic machine, it also overlaps with a special prosecutor's study of lobbying by former Reagan aide Lyn Nofziger. The special prosecutor's writ now has been expanded to include Attorney General Edwin Meese, who intervened on behalf of the minority firm in 1982 and some three years later invested in the company through a blind trust. We hope that this time the Bronx district attorney will show a little more discretion in pressing his charges.    In the Iran-Contra affair, Mr. Walsh stirred an international incident by slapping a subpoena on David Kimche, a former high Israeli intelligence official who happened to be visiting the United States. The prospect of Mr. Walsh stomping around in the details of Mr. Kimche's past made the State Department extremely nervous. The Israeli government was doubly upset because it already had negotiated with congressional investigators over access to its officials and secrets, and found the deal threatened by a prosecutor not responsible to Congress or the executive. While Mr. Kimche was allowed to leave the country, the incident is still not officially resolved. Presumably the sultan of Brunei will have to think twice about visiting the U.S.    The episode shows again why the prosecutorial power belongs in the executive branch. In the wake of the Pollard affair and with the U.S. already a party to the Israeli government's current troubles over a Middle East peace conference, precipitating yet another U.S.-Israeli crisis might be a call for someone accountable to the public rather than someone monomaniacally pursuing one investigation.    The special-prosecutor device can be a momentary convenience to executive-branch officials facing political accusations of misconduct. But the Donovan case certainly shows it is at best an incomplete protection, and the Kimche case starts to show the dangers of a lack of accountability. The problem is that legislators want to turn their problems over to prosecutors who somehow are expected to separate politics from the law. Or, in the case of the Boland amendment, to separate a politicized law from its politics. Or simply, to continue through the law a battle they've already lost in the political arena.    On Monday, Philadelphians began celebrations for the 200th anniversary of the U.S. Constitution. James Madison must be spinning in his grave. The Founding Fathers believed in the political process. The politics of their time was as rough and nasty as it is now, but you'd never catch members of Congress back then routinely trying to hide their politics behind the skirts of a special prosecutor or an Ethics in Government Act. </TEXT></DOC>