<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880418-0088 </DOCNO><HL> ANC: Apartheid's Foes -- The Long Struggle: Foes of Apartheid, Beset but Undefeated, Grow Stronger in Exile --- African National Congress Ponders Its Own Future And That of South Africa --- Bureaucracy and Bloodshed </HL><AUTHOR> Lee Lescaze (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>      {First of Two Parts}   LUSAKA, Zambia -- Ted Pekhane, 20 years old, propped a farewell letter on the radio where his mother would be sure to see it, rolled three shirts and two pairs of jeans into a bundle, and left South Africa for revolutionary work in exile with the African National Congress.    That was in 1964, and black South Africans were wildly optimistic. The world seemed to be waking to the injustices of apartheid. Liberation was on the horizon elsewhere in Africa as colonial powers prepared to pull up stakes. Surely, the African National Congress would win its fight to end apartheid, too. &quot;People were saying we would be back home soon,&quot; Mr. Pekhane remembers.    That optimism has been well tested. &quot;The hallmark of a revolutionary is patience,&quot; Mr. Pekhane says with a laugh. The ANC is the world's oldest liberation movement, which is a source of pride, but also an embarrassment. After all, the goal is liberation, not endurance. Weeks of conversa tions with ANC leaders and loyalists in exile and with sympathizers and critics inside South Africa leave one wondering whether the ANC will ever generate enough pressure to topple the apartheid government.    Yet, even if after 76 years it remains nothing more than a militarily weak, often-inefficient organization, it is also nothing less than the undisputed leader of the struggle. The harder the white government tries to silence the ANC message in South Africa, as it did Feb. 24 by banning the political activities of a wide range of opposition organizations, the more important it makes the ANC.    As if the overthrow of South Africa's white minority government were just around the corner, people are demanding to know what kind of post-apartheid nation the ANC will create.    &quot;Even the Russians ask us that and I tell them it's an unfair question,&quot; says Joe Slovo, an ANC leader and head of the South African Communist Party. Other revolutionaries -- Americans, Bolsheviks, French -- didn't have to field so many questions in the midst of their struggles.    Unfair or not, the questions are being asked about both the revolution's route and its goals: How much violence will there be? Will whites have political rights? How many whites will lose their jobs? How Communist is the ANC? How much will the government control the economy?    The outlawed liberation movement responds, trying to outline the legal, economic and social policies it envisions. But the ANC has no answer to the most difficult question: When and how will it take power?    Without a timetable, even answering the easiest questions is complicated. Outside South Africa, people generally assume that demographic realities eventually will force South Africa's five million whites to yield to the nation's 26 million nonwhites.    But, with thousands of opposition leaders imprisoned in South Africa and government forces using emergency powers to exercise iron-fisted control over black townships, not only isn't victory imminent, it isn't certain.    What's more, decisions can be tricky to reach in a liberation movement that mixes Christianity and communism, bureaucrats and bomb throwers. These are talented but, for the most part, easygoing revolutionaries. A Tanzanian critic once remarked that if ANC cadres were given a broken helicopter, they would figure out how to fix it and teach themselves to fly, but their first stop would be the nearest bar.    The ANC, however, is central to the lives of black South Africans. At a prayer service in the Regina Mundi Catholic Church in Soweto in February, a young man was wearing a gold track suit with green and black trim (the ANC colors) that had SLOVO written across the chest, MANDELA (for imprisoned leader Nelson Mandela) down the right leg and TAMBO (for exiled ANC President Oliver Tambo) down the left leg. And one of the congregation's most remarkable and fervent prayers came from worshipers toward the back of the church who began dancing and chanting: &quot;Come, Tambo, come.&quot;    That is an old hope, which burns brighter than ever because the ANC has been growing, after years of living dangerously close to extinction. In the early 1960s, the ANC had been virtually wiped out. South Africa caught and jailed its leaders, including the two most important -- Mr. Mandela and Walter Sisulu -- who were sentenced to life terms. In South Africa, ANC activity almost ceased.    In exile, the situation was equally bleak. Mr. Tambo, traveling without a passport and narrowly escaping arrest in British colonies to the north, had slipped out of the country illegally in 1960, hoping to win international support. But the exiles' life was discouraging. &quot;No one wanted to see them,&quot; says Anglican Archbishop Trevor Huddleston, a close friend of Mr. Tambo's. &quot;They had precious little money. Some of the exiles turned to drink or just died, of homesickness really.&quot; Even now, with a much larger exile community, drinking and mental problems, in certain cases associated with imprisonment and torture, plague the ANC.    &quot;Exile is a terrible thing. Some people just despair,&quot; says Adelaide Tambo, the president's wife, who worked as a nurse to support her family in London while her nonsalaried husband made his lonely rounds to the few places that would receive him -- Tanzania, Zambia, Algeria and back to London. He would sit up alone many nights drafting the speech he was to give the next day, seeming a forlorn, one-man revolution.    But Mrs. Tambo makes clear she isn't seeking pity. She translates from a hymn, &quot;The pride of our nation is in our cemeteries.&quot; Then she adds, &quot;So many have suffered more than I have.&quot;    Ruth Mompati, one of two women on the ANC's governing national executive committee, had to choose between prison and exile without her children. &quot;I left two boys, aged 2 1/2 and six,&quot; she says. In 10 years, she received one letter from them. &quot;I was becoming desperate,&quot; she says. &quot;I hadn't bargained on losing my babies, the childhood of my children, but my case is better than the many South African women who have been summoned by the police to view the corpses of their children.&quot; After a decade, Mrs. Mompati was finally able to bring her sons into exile with her.    In the early '60s, links to people still in South Africa were weak. Thabo Mbeki, the ANC's information director, remembers: &quot;All we were doing was broadcasting to South Africa and hoping someone was listening.&quot;    Dan Cindi was. Mr. Cindi, now a member of the ANC international department, tuned in the ANC's Radio Freedom one Saturday afternoon in Soweto. &quot;You are sitting there drinking beer while the country is on fire,&quot; the radio said in a call to action. &quot;That was exactly what we were doing. It was quite some time before anyone got up to get another beer,&quot; Mr. Cindi recalls.    The ANC established its first exile headquarters in Tanzania. Mary Benson, who has written admiring books about the organization and about Mr. Mandela, remembers the first Tanzania office: &quot;It was really desperate. Just a couple of tatty rooms. Maybe one typewriter.&quot; Mrs. Mompati calls that era &quot;the days when there were few of us. We had only one car, a Simca, and that was enough.&quot;    Now, the ANC headquarters is spread among several small buildings in Lusaka. It has about 30 foreign missions, including an information office about to open in Washington. A school complex in Tanzania has nearly 1,000 students. There are military training camps in Angola, and hundreds of students have scholarships to universities around the world.    The shabbiness isn't gone, however. The London office is out of Joseph Conrad: cluttered little rooms behind a grimy storefront next door to a Greek restaurant, and no name on the doorbell. Lusaka headquarters lacks space, phones, cars. Lusaka is going to seed as Zambia's economy crumbles; the ANC suffers as Zambia does.    These aren't rich revolutionaries living in splendid exile. Each ANC member gets free, but modest housing, a weekly carton of food, a monthly allowance of 260 kwacha (about $33) for lunches and to buy perishables in the market, and enough pocket money to buy a couple of beers a month.    If assigned a foreign trip, an ANC member is given $40 to spend. Almost all trips are financed by the hosts. And ANC offices abroad are, for the most part, subsidized by host nations.    Foreign friends tell of buying clothes for visiting ANC members who misjudged the climate. Once, a delegation arrived in New York in winter only to receive an unexpected invitation to a benefit organized by Harry Belafonte in Los Angeles. They huddled over whether to buy summer suits, but decided they couldn't afford them and sweated through Hollywood in worsted.    Security is a constant concern. In late March, Dulcie September, the ANC's representative to France, Switzerland and Luxembourg, was assassinated outside the door of her Paris office. In February, two gunmen burst into the Brussels office and wounded the representative to Belgium. In January, a bomb exploded outside a Lusaka office. Last year, Zambian police apprehended a man with a bomb a few doors from Mr. Mbeki's house at 4 a.m. And, in Swaziland, gunmen murdered Cassius Make, a member of the National Executive Committee.    South African troops and planes have attacked ANC targets (and, mistakenly, non-ANC targets) in Mozambique, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Lesotho, Swaziland, Angola and Zambia. Letter bombs are a continual problem. In 1982, Ruth First, a prominent ANC member and Mr. Slovo's wife, was killed when a parcel exploded.    &quot;When I got the call about my mother's death, it was a call I had long expected -- and still expect to receive about my father,&quot; says Shawn Slovo, who wrote a recently completed film about growing up in an ANC family.    Neighboring countries stress that they support the ANC, but not militarily because they want to avoid new South African raids. When Ms. Slovo's movie, &quot;A World Apart,&quot; was being filmed in Zimbabwe, the nervous government insisted that she dye her hair and adopt a pseudonym.    What revived the ANC after its lonely years was the unplanned black-student revolt in South Africa in 1976.    &quot;We don't organize uprisings in South Africa. We didn't organize 1960. We didn't organize 1976, and we didn't organize 1984,&quot; says Mr. Slovo, the only white member of the ANC national executive committee. The committee has 27 members and three vacant seats. &quot;The regime organizes them for us.&quot;    When students in the huge black township of Soweto demonstrated against being forced to study in Afrikaans and the police opened fire, an era of ANC growth began that continues today.    Yet growth has brought problems. Government leaders around the world are looking harder at the ANC, and blacks in South Africa are expecting it to produce more results. At the same time, since 1976 thousands have arrived in exile needing to be cared for and trained for the work of the ANC. New demands have almost overwhelmed the leadership. &quot;Education is our most important priority,&quot; says James Stuart of the national executive committee. &quot;We need more people trained in diplomacy, law and administration.&quot;    The ANC bureaucracy has bogged down. Its financial supporters say the ANC wastes less money than do many governments getting aid, but backers nevertheless complain that decisions are made too slowly. &quot;We are working on efficiency,&quot; replies Mr. Stuart.    One problem is time-consuming meetings, of which there are many. ANC officials say meetings are necessary because the movement is founded on democractic principles. The membership must be consulted and allowed to discuss decisions before they are made. Still, too much democracy can bring decision-making to a standstill and retard a revolution.    If you gave ANC members a pile of rocks and told them to stone a passing enemy, a critic has remarked, they would hold a meeting to discuss at what angle to throw the rocks. Seminars run back-to-back, with one on women's affairs giving way to one on political education, then another on constitutional guidelines. &quot;The volume and the variety of work have put lots of pressure on all structures of the organization,&quot; Mr. Mbeki says.    If the ANC is having trouble managing its relatively small exile movement, how will it be able to run South Africa?    &quot;How ready were the American people to run the United States when they kicked out the British?&quot; asks executive-committee member Mac Maharaj. &quot;We can never say we are completely ready.&quot;    The ANC keeps its membership figures secret, but the total probably is between 15,000 and 20,000. About half its members are in military training in Angola. The ANC won't disclose its annual budget, either, but it survives entirely on foreign aid. All military assistance comes from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. Sweden is by far the largest donor of nonmilitary aid, this year supplying $10.2 million in direct aid and much more indirectly. The Swedes provide an estimated one-third of the nonmilitary budget, with another third coming from Norway, Denmark and Finland. U.N. organizations and anti-apartheid groups in Europe send the rest.    The ANC conducts its insurgency along seemingly contradictory lines, attempting, on the one hand, to inspire revolutionary action while, on the other, seeking to allay fears among South Africa's whites. The ANC recognizes it is too weak to win a purely military victory, and until recently it was under heavy pressure from its supporters, including the Soviets, to negotiate rather than fight. Some ANC leaders even felt that they were too weak to talk with Pretoria and that they could be trapped into appearing to be the party opposed to a reasonable settlement. However, South Africa proved still more frightened of talks and shattered the last serious international attempt to bring the two sides together when its military attacked ANC targets in three nations while mediators were visiting South Africa in May 1986.    After those attacks -- and to an even greater extent after the Feb. 24 crackdown against leading nonviolent organizations inside South Africa -- the ANC expects the international community to understand that it has no option but violence.    International opinion is vital to the ANC game plan. The ANC expects that, eventually, greater pressure from the U.S., Britain and West Germany will combine with ANC guerrilla activity to force South Africa to abandon apartheid. Some ANC leaders profess amazement that such pressure has been so slow in coming. The world claims to deplore apartheid, but the white supremacist system is 40 years old.    Of course, some foreigners have long wondered why the ANC has not raised the level of violence. Both Mr. Maharaj and Mr. Mbeki say they have been told even by conservative Europeans that the ANC would advance its cause by killing more whites.    One reason it doesn't is that the ANC is militarily weak. ANC operations in South Africa, mostly grenade and mine explosions, reached an all-time high of 234 incidents in 1987, according to South African government statistics. Most caused little damage, however. Besides, the ANC has wanted to avoid killing civilians as far as possible.    For its first 50 years, the ANC didn't kill anyone. In 1961, the movement abandoned nonviolence because it wasn't working. The decision was controversial within the ANC. Today, Mr. Mbeki says there is no internal disagreement; the level of violence must be raised. &quot;We need to draw into the armed struggle as many people as possible,&quot; he says.    For that, the ANC needs to ship guns, grenades and explosives to South Africa.    As part of the contradictory effort to allay white South African fears and counter South African claims that the ANC is a communist movement dominated by Moscow, President Tambo and other leaders keep saying that they seek a multiparty state and that, despite the ANC Freedom Charter's call for nationalization of industry, the economy will remain mixed. ANC leaders speak of free education and health care for all, but many issues will probably remain vague until after liberation, when and if.    &quot;It is a bit pie-in-the-sky to try to work out too many details now,&quot; says Reginald September, director of political education. The movement doesn't want to confront disagreements in its ranks, but members do have their differences. The economy is one bone of contention. Mr. September says a white South African coal miner now is privileged beyond his counterpart in Britain or the U.S. and will have to accept a reduced standard of living as black miners attain equal status. On the other hand, Mr. Stuart, of the executive committee, envisions an expanding post-apartheid economy that will enable blacks to rise without penalizing whites. Because of the shortage of skilled blacks, Mr. Stuart goes so far as to say that some white government bureaucrats will be kept on. &quot;We will have to pay them for the ignorance they have imposed on us,&quot; he says. Mr. Slovo flatly disagrees.    Differences may be papered over, but some matters are, at least for now, beyond dispute. Guaranteeing the safety of whites after liberation, for example, is fundamental to the ANC program. Mr. Mbeki, who has played a leading role in contacts with white South Africans, says: &quot;They ask, 'Shouldn't we expect that black people will do to whites what whites have done to blacks?'&quot; The ANC reply is that it isn't fighting white racism just to replace it with black racism. The view has a moral basis, but it is also expedient: Continued racism would bring continuing conflict.    Mr. Mbeki adds, &quot;I don't know how many times we've had people break away on this issue.&quot; But the ANC has grown, and black supremacist breakaway groups have withered.    The South African government says anyone who takes the ANC protestations of moderation at face value is naive; the ANC is a communist-dominated organization controlled from Moscow. Communists like Mr. Slovo reply that the party takes its orders from the ANC. Every party member is required to join the ANC, but the party is still a small element in the movement, Soviet military assistance notwithstanding. As for domination from Moscow, Mr. Slovo scoffs: &quot;That's a comic-book image. It's ridiculous. I've never been on a delegation as a member of the ANC or the Communist Party where we've been told what to do, or threatened with a withdrawal of aid if we don't do something.&quot;    For its part, the U.S. State Department doesn't seem to be greatly alarmed about Marxism in the ANC, although its contacts with the ANC fall far short of supporting the movement. (Secretary of State George Shultz met with Mr. Tambo last year, and informal lower-level contacts continue.) U.S., British and Swedish government sources say the presence of Communists concerns them less than leftward pressure exerted by militant South African youths. Mr. Tambo also worries about radical pressure, but the ANC doesn't want to lose its younger constituency by appearing to be too moderate.    After liberation, the ANC would have to deal with the expectations of a freed people. &quot;Immediately post-freedom, there will have to be tangible benefits for the people or there's the danger of the people losing confidence in politics and seeing it as a game for elites,&quot; says Mr. Maharaj.    Yet the ANC knows there are limits. Says Mr. Mbeki:&quot;We can't build 500,000 houses the first year. We'll have to tell the people that.&quot;    The post-liberation mood would depend, in large part, on how bloody the struggle. The more chaotic the revolution, the more disorderly its aftermath. At the moment, ANC leaders seem remarkably moderate. However, the youths in South Africa's townships and coming into exile now are less educated and more militant than the ANC leadership. New exiles are given a choice of being sent to school or to the army. Either provides what is, in effect, a cooling-off period before one begins to work in the movement.    Nelson Mandela is perhaps the most striking example of present moderation. Mr. Mandela, who has been imprisoned since 1962 and is now 69 years old, told a visitor in Cape Town's Pollsmoor Prison not long ago that his first actions after he is released would be to reassure white Afrikaners and ask his supporters for patience. He is reported to be brushing up his Afrikaans so that he can better speak to whites in their language.    Reasons for ANC pessimism abound: the lack of support from the U.S. and Britain; the power of the state; the difficulties impeding ANC guerrillas.    Exiles here -- whether they have been away from home five years or 25 -- all say they never expected liberation to take so long. Mr. Slovo jokes: &quot;I said in 1960 it would take five years, and I haven't changed my position.&quot; Actually, he says, &quot;I'm not too pessimistic. You never know what will happen. If you had asked Lenin this question when he was drinking coffee in Zurich at the beginning of 1917, he probably would have said: 'Oh, it will be a protracted struggle.'&quot;    By mid-April that year, Lenin's exile had ended.    ---   Roger Thurow contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>