<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880518-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Specter of Socialism Stalking Martens's Belgium </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Belien </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> ANTWERP  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After seven years in opposition, Belgium's Socialists have forced their way back into the nation's governing coalition. The Socialist Party was thrown out of power in 1981 by Christian Democrat Wilfried Martens, who had headed four successive governments with the party from 1979. Today, after three coalitions with the center-right Liberals, Mr. Martens is joining the Socialists again as he forms his eighth government.    The record for this constellation isn't promising. On average, Prime Minister Martens's coalitions with Liberals last two years each, his coalitions with Socialists only six months. Martens VIII, as the new government is known, will probably be no exception. In the fall, Belgians hold communal elections, and many foresightful political analysts have already taken into consideration that new parliamentary elections may be held at the same time.    No matter what formation they take, though, Belgian governments are usually fragile ones. Apart from Italy, Belgium is politically the most unstable country in the Western world. Martens VIII is Belgium's 33rd government since World War II. Christian Democrats were excluded from only one coalition in the past 40 years, a Social-Liberal government from 1954 to 1958.    Belgium, however, has a device to camouflage this inconstancy: It constantly re-elects the same man, Mr. Martens. The problem in the Belgian method is one of continuity. Mr. Martens has already led Christian Democratic-Socialist-Liberal coalitions and Christian Democratic-Socialist coalitions. Now he is going to lead a Christian Democratic-Socialist-Flemish regionalist coalition. Mr. Martens's presence gives the electorate a sense of stability. Actually, however, one Martens government can undo the policies of its predecessor.    The current partnership isn't likely to be one for the business-minded. In 1981, Mr. Martens had good reason to drop the Socialists in favor of the Liberals. The Socialist welfare policy had saddled the country with a budget of 14% of gross national product. Some 900,000 citizens lined the state's payroll, one in 10 of Belgium's nine million nationals. The Belgian state could not afford this and had to tax its citizens dry with marginal rates of up to 72%. The Socialists weren't prepared to halt state expansion, and so Mr. Martens, after devastating election results, replaced them with the free-market Liberals.    Only with this partnership did things get better. The Christian Democratic-Liberal coalitions halved the budget deficit to 7.5% of GNP. Last summer the government proposed a tax reform bringing the top marginal rate down to 50% -- a modest but welcome idea -- and planned a small privatization program. These projects, however, indirectly but clearly led to the government's fall. Mr. Martens's party's powerful trade-union wing, unhappy with the Liberals and such projects, found an excuse through its French-speaking section to create trouble: It exploited a dispute over language in the small town of Voeren, or Fourons, to bring the government down.    The new government being set in place this season promises many difficulties. After last December's elections, the government retained a majority of 110 of the 212 seats in Parliament. In spite of this, and Mr. Martens's promise to the electorate that he would continue in partnership with the Liberals, no effort was made to restore the old coalition. The new coalition lately presented aims to slow down a much-needed austerity policy, to raise the proposed top marginal tax rate to 55% from 50%, and to transfer substantial decision-making power to the regional level from the national one. The last goal, many fear, will lead to more problems as regional governments exercise their new-found powers. Such boosting of regional egos is called federalism, but in this case is really the mere insertion of another level of bureaucracy.    The nation's largest ethnic group, the Flemish, who make up 60% of the Belgian population, find themselves confronted with a coalition they did not vote for and don't want. Capitalist-minded Flanders gave lots of support to the Liberals. But its votes were undermined by results in Francophone Wallonia, where the government lost its majority. In Britain, Mrs. Thatcher can ignore the fact that the Labor Party has a majority in Scotland. In dual Belgium, however, it is considered inappropriate to form a government when the coalition at hand can't draw a majority in both regions. Socialist interference, therefore, is the price Flanders has to pay for Belgium's existence.    Socialists, too, have to pay a price. For the moment, the dispute over Voeren seems to have been resolved. The Socialists, through whom French-speaking Mayor Jose Happart of Voeren originally mounted his nationally disruptive campaign, had to drop that mayor and his demands as part of the deal that brought them into the government. But the mayor's influence is still large enough to shake the Socialists, the biggest political family in the current government. This makes Martens VIII extremely vulnerable and will likely shorten its life span to not longer than the average six-month rate. In that short period, however, the Socialists can undo many of the achievements of the past six years.    ---   Mr. Belien is on the foreign desk of the Gazet van Antwerpen. </TEXT></DOC>