<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881020-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE FDA ADOPTED a policy to hasten treatments for diseases such as AIDS.    Under the policy, the agency will attempt to shorten significantly the human-testing stage for drugs to treat life-threatening or debilitating diseases. Such testing can last three to seven years, after months of laboratory testing. The FDA announcement came eight days after demonstrators temporarily closed the agency's headquarters in Maryland to demand earlier approval of AIDS drugs.    Homosexual-rights groups said the timing of the announcement raised questions about whether the move may be related to the presidential election.    ---   NORTH KOREA PROPOSED creating a new nation out of the two Koreas.    Pyongyang's deputy foreign minister, in an address to the U.N., called for a confederation of North and South Korea, with a shared military command and a national assembly comprised of an equal number of representatives from each side. He also reiterated North Korean calls for removal of U.S. troops and nuclear weapons in the South and the establishment of the peninsula as a nuclear-free zone.    South Korea's Roh Tae Woo expressed optimism that his own reunification effort, unveiled Tuesday, would produce results in only &quot;a few years.&quot;    ---   The Nobel Prize in physics was shared by three Americans for capturing subatomic particles in a high-energy beam to probe the structure of matter. And the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm awarded the prize for chemistry to three West Germans for determining the structure of proteins needed in photosynthesis.    ---   A U.S. appeals court in New York upheld a civil contempt finding against deposed Philippine President Marcos and his wife, Imelda, for failing to comply with grand jury subpoenas in a criminal inquiry started in June 1986. The contempt finding, which had been sealed, was issued last August.    ---   A car bomb exploded near Israel's border crossing in southern Lebanon, killing at least seven Israeli soldiers and the Moslem guerrilla driver. About 10 people were wounded in the blast. In the West Bank and Gaza Strip, six Palestinians were wounded in clashes during a general strike to protest Jewish settlements in occupied areas.    ---   Three anti-apartheid activists emerged from a 36-day stay at the U.S. consulate in Johannesburg, where they had sought refuge after escaping from police. The trio pledged to resume opposition to the South African government. The three left the consulate on the advice of jailed black nationalist Nelson Mandela.    ---   Yugoslavia's leadership adopted personnel changes in the ruling Politburo, but stopped short of a purge. The Communist Party Central Committee, concluding a three-day meeting in Belgrade, ousted one member and accepted the resignations of four others. The session was called to discuss recent ethnic and economic unrest.    ---   Dukakis complained that his record had been distorted by the Republicans and said &quot;that seems to be what the Bush campaign is all about.&quot; The GOP presidential candidate, meanwhile, accused the Democratic nominee of &quot;a rather unrealistic view of America's role&quot; in foreign affairs.    ---   The Energy Department was urged by a congressional group and environmental watchdogs to scrap its plan to restart three aging nuclear reactors at a weapons plant in South Carolina until safety and health concerns are allayed. The environmentalists said they would file suit to block the restarting of the reactors.    ---   Two air crashes in India killed at least 164 people, authorities said. An Indian Airlines jetliner attempting to land in heavy fog crashed in the western city of Ahmadabad, killing all but five of the 135 people aboard. About 1,200 miles away, a propeller plane slammed into a hill in eastern India, and all 34 people on board were feared dead.    ---   Britain banned broadcast interviews with members of the Irish Republican Army and other groups, both Catholic and Protestant, involved in the conflict in Northern Ireland. The London government said the prohibition was necessary to limit propaganda outlets for terrorists, but the move was immediately criticized as censorship.    ---   Afghanistan's leaders convened a meeting to discuss national reconciliation and security in Kabul after dissenters within the ruling party were arrested for opposition activities, sources said. Two Politburo members were dismissed. Rebels fired rockets into the capital, killing nine people.    ---   Burundi's president announced formation of a new government headed by a prime minister from the central African country's majority Hutu tribe, Bujumbura's envoy to Kenya said. The appointment of a Hutu premier follows pledges by President Buyoya, after tribal massacres in August, that he would work toward restoration of unity.    ---   Hurricane Joan headed toward Central America, where Costa Rica declared a state of emergency and Nicaragua prepared to evacuate tens of thousands of coastal residents. The storm, with winds of about 120 mph, has left at least 50 people dead, injured or missing in Colombia, and officials said thousands of homes were damaged. </TEXT></DOC>