<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880622-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Winning the Women's Vote --- Don't Overestimate the 'Gender Gap' </HL><AUTHOR> Karlyn Keene </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In recent polls George Bush is significantly less popular with women than he is with men, while Michael Dukakis is slightly less popular with men than with women. The weight of the new polling evidence seems to suggest that Mr. Bush has the bigger problem, in part because of changing electoral demographics, since about 10 million more women than men could vote on Election Day.    But if Ronald Reagan's experience is any guide, George Bush's gender gap may well narrow by Nov. 8, when the votes are cast. In a May 1980 Gallup Poll, 53% of women preferred Mr. Carter, 35% Mr. Reagan. But on Election Day, more women voted for Mr. Reagan than Mr. Carter, albeit by a razor-thin margin. Despite polls that showed the gender gap persisted more women voted for Mr. Reagan again in 1984.    Gender differences are real, but they need to be put into perspective. Briefly, differences between men and women appear in four areas:   First, women are less confident than men about the country's economic future. Second, women are less likely than men to approve of the use of force (sending troops abroad, for example). Third, they are more risk averse than men. Women are less likely to support space exploration or nuclear-power plants, for instance. And finally, women favor a somewhat stronger role for government than do men. Both men and women favor catastrophic health-insurance policies, for instance, but women favor them more strongly than men do.    Women and men do not differ on the so-called women's issues such as an Equal Rights Amendment or abortion. Nor are there differences on marital and family roles, or on women's status and desire for recognition. According to sociologist Rita Simon of American University, &quot;On none of these issues is there a clear division between men and women and a definable 'women's perspective' that is in conflict with that of a man's interests and beliefs.&quot;    The gender gap is by no means the largest voting gap. Herbert Weisberg, a political scientist at Ohio State University, analyzed national election data compiled by the University of Michigan and concluded, &quot;When one examines voting in the 1984 election, one finds the largest voting differences on the basis of race and income, followed by differences based on marital status, religion, gender, and region.&quot; Married people, for example were 10%-15% more Republican than single ones. Gender differences were smaller.    If a &quot;new women's agenda&quot; exists, it seems logical that women would be voting in greater numbers for female candidates. An examination of 52 Senate and gubernatorial contests in 1986 shows that in only one race, the gubernatorial election in Oregon, did significantly more women than men vote for the female candidate. Analysts also differ about whether women are becoming more Democratic over time, or whether the significant long-term movement is men's -- to the Republican Party. The gender gap is a two-sided coin, and Democratic weaknesses among men need additional attention.    Another argument that fuels the gender-gap commentary is the now familiar one that the &quot;women's vote made the difference in a number of key races in 1984 and 1986.&quot; We are told that women provided the &quot;margin of victory&quot; in 14 of 28 races where women and men voted differently.    No one denies that men and women voted differently in those races, but did they provide the &quot;margin of victory&quot;? In closely contested elections, any group can claim to have made the difference. This explains why blacks claim to have provided the margin of victory in many of the same races women cite. When the Moral Majority used a similar argument to claim to have defeated a number of senators, including George McGovern, years ago, journalists scoffed at the idea. A little skepticism is called for with the new claim, too.    Another way of explaining a victory is to look at the swing -- the movement of female voters, for example, from one election to the next. Yet looking at 1986, nearly all groups moved in the Democratic direction, diminishing any claim of a particular contribution of female voters.    Understanding women's multifaceted concerns will help both candidates this fall. Embracing the feminist label will not. It is losing its luster among American men and women, Democrats and Republicans. ABC News regularly asks voters whether any of a list of labels applies to them. Only 7% of voters in the 1984 election called themselves &quot;feminists who supported ERA.&quot; Seven percent is not something to scoff at in electoral terms, but when 20% of that 7% voted for Mr. Reagan, it is less dramatic. Only 10% said, in another question, that &quot;my candidate's stand on equal rights for women&quot; was important to them, and a quarter of them voted for Mr. Reagan.    In the primaries this year the label was not very appealing either. Among Democrats in 11 states (who might be expected to embrace the label more readily), the highest percentage of &quot;strong feminists&quot; was 21% in California. Among Republicans, the highest percentage was 5%. It is not a meaningful term for many Americans.    Finally, there is no evidence from the general public that the number of women in a campaign affects votes or perceptions of candidates. That this issue is passe can be illustrated by a simple question. Guess which campaign in 1988 had the most women in senior positions? Nearly everyone would answer (correctly) Mr. Dukakis's. But you wouldn't have been far off if you had answered Pat Robertson's campaign. In campaign '88, many accomplished women will campaign for Michael Dukakis and George Bush, just as they did for Pat Robertson, Jesse Jackson, Bob Dole, Dick Gephardt, and others. There will be no shortage of credible commentators. The numbers game is a non-issue.    Arguments about the gender gap may satisfy a partisan thirst, but they do little to sate a taste for careful analysis. The gender gap is real, it will have some effect in 1988, and both parties need to be aware of it. Hyping the issue does little to tell us how consequential the gap will be.    ---   Ms. Keene is managing editor of Public Opinion, a bimonthly magazine of the American Enterprise Institute.    (See related editorial: &quot;Target the Occasional Voter&quot; -- WSJ June 22, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>