<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870720-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Nothing Hurts More Than a Bogus Bonus---By Gordon White</HL><DD> 07/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   As head of the U.S. branch of Hanson Trust, a trans-Atlantic conglomerate with more than 100 business units, one of my jobs is to help our divisional managers perform on their own, in keeping with our insistence on decentralization. Key to our success at doing this has been the way we have &quot;incentivized&quot; our managements -- established a system of performance bonuses for our managers to maximize both profits and return on capital.    This incentive program is really rather simple, and is based on common sense. Still, I find that other companies routinely fail to use common sense when establishing bonus guidelines, and so I offer some pointers from our own experience.    --Base yearly bonuses upon the performance of each individual business unit. This is crucial. We do not expect our managers to be responsible for the profitability of the entire company, but for their particular profit centers. Today's environment increasingly recognizes that the value -- and potential value -- of a corporation may be seen by breaking it down into its individual assets. By fully appreciating the worth of each unit, and providing incentives based accordingly, we can most fully realize the potential of our entire company. Furthermore, this treats the individual manager more fairly, by neither penalizing nor rewarding him for the activities in areas outside his control.    --Determine bonuses in a simple and straight-forward manner. Divisional managers should know exactly what to expect, as far as what they can earn in bonuses and how they can go about earning them.    For us, the first step in this process is the budget, produced by the management of the operating companies. That budget will indicate expected profit levels and the returns to be achieved on the capital employed. After review, the budget is agreed upon and each manager's potential bonus is based upon it. At Hanson, we set a great deal of store by our budgets; quite frankly, we consider them sacred. They are the foundation for all our operations. In the area of bonuses, strict adherence to agreed-upon budgets makes sure that everyone understands exactly what he is expected to work with and what the levels of profitability are expected to be.    By our demanding, through the budget, a specific return on capital employed, our managers find it to their advantage to secure a budget that is very realistic. If a budget is too optimistic, the divisional manager will suffer by not earning his expected return on capital. And if it is too easily achieved, he will not be able to maximize his reward from his potential productivity. Although we revise our budgets in the middle of every year to accommodate market conditions, our bonuses are based upon the budget set at the beginning of the year. This way, we make sure that our managers always maintain a very keen sense of what the actual state of their business is.    Our formulas for determining bonuses are also kept to a simple equation. To receive 100% of their potential bonuses -- on top of their already competitive salaries -- our managers must produce profits above a certain return on capital employed. At the start of the year, we set out very clearly for all our managers exactly what levels of profitability will result in 25% bonuses, in 50% bonuses, etc., all the way to 100%. This way there are no surprises at the end of the year.    In fact, as our monthly results come in, each divisional manager can ascertain exactly what his bonus would be at the end of the year, based upon results to date.    --Allow no &quot;discretionary&quot; factors in the bonus equation. In other words, bonuses are based strictly on bottom-line performance. This means that absolutely no one will receive a bonus that has not been earned according to our established formulas. Simply put, we look at bonuses as if they were dividends. If the additional money is there, we will gladly pay a proportion of it out. But if it isn't there, we will not.    As a result, there are no bonuses for being a nice chap. To the same extent, if a manager just happened to have a great year -- if industry conditions turned out to be particularly favorable, due to old-fashioned dumb luck -- so be it. That lucky manager will be rewarded for his luck.    Strict adherence to this policy has gone a long way toward improving the morale of our divisional managers. We have taken over a great many companies, and we always try to keep the divisional managers that we inherit. Time and again, we have found that these managers have consistently been short-changed on their bonuses while working for the previous parent company. Because of poor performance in other parts of the corporation, or due to discretionary factors (although divisional managers may have achieved their expected earnings levels), they rarely received full bonuses. This resulted in poor relations with corporate headquarters.    One manager we inherited stated that although he always achieved his full quota of earnings, he had never received a full bonus. When he came over to Hanson, he could not believe that he would receive his full bonus until he actually had it in his hand. You can imagine what the previous system did to his morale.    --Don't allow bonuses to discourage a long-term relationship. Certainly, when our managers achieve their full bonuses, they tend to be happy. But what about managers in those industries that just experienced lousy luck? For example, the U.S. shoe business today is extremely hard hit by imports. Our Endicott Johnson subsidiary has been unable to achieve our expected levels of return on capital, and we cannot cast the blame on our own people. But until things do turn around, our managers will not receive any bonuses (unless they succeed in radically shrinking their capital employed, which may or may not be possible).    Yet we want our managers to stay with us, and not jump ship for more alluring packages that may be offered to them by other companies looking for top talent when times are hard. As a result, we also offer an options program for our managers. These options for corporate stock-- which are not cash awards on a yearly basis -- are not exercisable for at least three years. This encourages our managers to stay with us through thick and thin, so that they may reap rewards later on. It also helps them to make business decisions from the point of view of the shareholder.    As I stated earlier, our guidelines are really based on common sense. But they are fair and consistent, and help us realize the full potential of our individual assets.    ---   Sir Gordon is chairman of Hanson Industries. </TEXT></DOC>