<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871102-0024 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CHINA'S PARTY CONGRESS ENDED as a triumph for Deng and Zhao.    At the closing session of the Communist Party's eight-day congress in Beijing, the 2,000 delegates endorsed plans to continue Deng's economic changes, and approved proposals to limit the party's ability to interfere in government and business. They also selected a new Central Committee made up mainly of younger leaders. Deng gave up his seat on the policy-making body, a first step toward a transfer of power to Chinese Premier Zhao.    Some of China's conservative elders, including economist Chen Yun, President Li and hard-line ideologue Peng Zhen also left the Central Committee.    ---   DOMESTIC WOES COULD HAMPER additional superpower arms progress.    While Gorbachev is to visit Washington Dec. 7 to sign a treaty abolishing U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles, domestic problems for both the Soviet leader and Reagan could make it harder for a compromise on the issues of long-range weapons and space-based arms. In Moscow, Western experts said the threatened resignation by one of Gorbachev's closest allies signals a lack of support for Moscow's reform drive.    National Security Adviser Carlucci said on NBC-TV that a superpower INF accord is &quot;98% of the way there.&quot; He predicted Senate ratification.    ---   UNION CARBIDE APPEARED near a settlement in the Bhopal case.    Sources close to both sides indicated that a pact with India's government is likely to call for Carbide to pay the victims of the poison-gas leak between $500 million and $600 million. New Delhi had sued for $3 billion in compensation. Last year, Carbide offered to pay $350 million. The December 1984 incident at a Carbide pesticide plant in Bhopal killed about 2,500 people and injured thousands of others.    Neither Carbide nor the Indian government would comment on the case other than to say that they remain optimistic about reaching an agreement.    ---   Central American peace seemed distant following last week's announcement by Nicaragua that it won't hold talks with the Contras, grant amnesty to political prisoners or lift a state of emergency. The decision to reject provisions of a regional peace plan could lead to renewed U.S. military aid to the rebels.    ---   Chirac urged Israel to recognize Palestinian rights and said in Jerusalem that Paris was aligned with Europe in support for an international conference on Mideast peace. Chirac, France's first prime minister to visit Israel, also urged Israeli Premier Shamir to drop his opposition to such a forum.    ---   Lawyers for Palestinian prisoners said they would urge retrials following the release of an official inquiry that found that Israeli security agents routinely lied about prisoners' confessions. The five-month investigation concluded that agents in Israel's Shin Bet committed perjury to assure convictions of terrorism suspects.    ---   Swiss authorities are expected tomorrow to turn over to U.S. prosecutors bank records involving central figures in the Iran-Contra affair, law enforcement officials said. The move is likely to accelerate independent counsel Walsh's timetable for seeking fraud, conspiracy and other charges against North, Poindexter and others.    ---   Iran's Rafsanjani accused the U.N. of &quot;cheating&quot; Tehran and indicated that the country won't agree to a cease-fire in the war with Iraq. In Jordan, Britain's foreign secretary urged Arab states to press Moscow for help to enforce the truce. The call came as a Soviet envoy concluded talks with Iranian officials about the cease-fire plan.    ---   Opponents of Kim Dae Jung attacked a hotel in the South Korean city of Pusan where the opposition leader was making a campaign stop. The protesters, supporters of rival opposition candidate Kim Young Sam, demanded that Kim Dae Jung withdraw from the presidential race.    ---   Police in the Philippines raided a state-owned university in Manila and detained 39 people in an attempt to stop communist rebel assassins in the capital. The raid came after 14 people, including three Americans, were killed by suspected rebels.    ---   Japan's ruling party named Noboru Takeshita president of the Liberal Democratic Party. The move, at a convention Saturday in Tokyo, was expected. He is to succeed Nakasone as Japan's premier Friday.    ---   Surgeons in Pittsburgh transplanted a liver, pancreas and part of a stomach and intestine into a three-year-old girl with a defect in her digestive system. The doctors said the patient, who was in critical condition, would have died within weeks without the 15-hour experimental operation.    ---   Officials in Dhaka said more than 150 people were injured as anti-government protesters clashed with police during demonstrations across Bangladesh. The demonstrators had been demanding the ouster of President Ershad, who has mobilized the military to thwart any possible coup.    ---   Thousands of protesters marched through Madrid demanding the closure of U.S. military bases in Spain. The U.S. and Spanish governments are to begin talks Thursday on the renewal of a treaty allowing the four bases. The pact expires next year.    ---   Ibrahim Hussein of Kenya won the 18th New York City Marathon in 2:11:01. Britain's Priscilla Welch won the women's title, finishing in an unofficial time of 2:30:16. </TEXT></DOC>