<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880824-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   WARSAW CALLED for a special parliamentary session on the Polish economy.    Reacting to a wave of labor unrest, the Communist government announced the special Aug. 31 session would review economic policies and perhaps adjust national price and income policies. The interior minister said at least 20 strikes have broken out, and authorities extended a curfew and detained 49 people nationwide. Some workers ended strikes yesterday, but others prepared for assaults by troops and riot police.    Residents of Gdansk, Poland's largest port and the birthplace of Solidarity, appeared to be stocking up on food in preparation for protracted unrest.    ---   A retired National Guard general said he directed subordinates to hold an opening for Dan Quayle after he was recommended by Wendell Phillippi, a retired Guard officer who worked for Quayle's family. Quayle, the Republican vice presidential nominee, told the VFW Monday he used no influence to win the post during the Vietnam War.    ---   Thousands of people demonstrated in the Baltic republics to demand greater autonomy from Moscow on the 49th anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, which led to Soviet domination of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania. The Soviet news agency Tass said about 100,000 people turned out for a rally in Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital.    ---   The Navy charged the captain of the USS Dubuque with two counts of violating orders for failing to rescue a boatload of Vietnamese refugees who claim they later resorted to cannibalism to survive. Capt. Alexander Balian is scheduled to appear at an &quot;admiral's mast,&quot; or nonjudicial, hearing today. He was relieved of his command Aug. 13.    ---   Burmese troops made no moves to disperse a crowd of about 100,000 people who demonstrated peacefully in Rangoon for democracy. Diplomats in the capital said they wonder how long the 26-year-old one-party regime, now headed by newly appointed President Maung Maung, can last under the sustained public demands for change.    ---   Cease-fire violations were charged by both Iran and Iraq as both sides prepared for tomorrow's opening of talks in Geneva to hammer out a permanent truce in the eight-year war. Baghdad said its troops took unspecified steps to halt an Iranian advance, and Tehran said Iraq was massing troops along the central and southern fronts.    Iraq dropped mustard gas bombs during an air raid on an Iranian city earlier this month, violating provisions of the 1925 Geneva Convention, a U.N. report said. There were no reported deaths in the bombing, which came after Iranian acceptance of a cease-fire. Iraq denied the charge.    ---   A U.N. official in Rwanda said refugees from Burundi reported the military took part in ethnic clashes last week in which the Central African nation's government said more than 5,000 died. Burundi's military and government, which denied the charge, are controlled by the minority Tutsi tribe. That tribe clashed with the majority Hutu tribe.    ---   Arafat said the Palestine Liberation Organization will pay the salaries of laid-off and retired Jordanian employees in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. King Hussein earlier this month announced he would gradually cut Jordan's financial ties to the 21,200 employees and called on the PLO to assume those responsibilities.    The State Department expressed unhappiness with Israel's expulsion of Palestinians from the West Bank, but an Israeli spokesman defended the policy as &quot;a measure of last resort&quot; in dealing with agitation.    ---   A Mexican opposition leader sought criminal charges against the country's two top election officials, accusing them of failing to release results from almost half of the polling stations in the disputed July 6 presidential election. The court petition was filed by Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, who was defeated in the race according to official returns.    ---   A leftist coalition in El Salvador said it will participate in presidential elections in March for the first time since a nine-year-old guerrilla war began. Former guerrilla leader Ruben Zamora, who heads the three-party Democratic Convergence coalition, said the group would take part to press for a negotiated settlement of the conflict.    ---   Cypriot leaders called for peace within a year on the divided Mediterranean island. The announcement in Geneva came after separate meetings with U.N. Secretary General Perez de Cuellar by Cyprus President Vassiliou and Turkish-Cypriot leader Denktas. Cyprus's Greek and Turkish communities have been partitioned since 1974. </TEXT></DOC>