<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Pacification Plan:Salvador Death SquadsYield to Gentler WaysOf Winning the People---Army Woos El Barillo Co-OpAnd Employs SurveillanceTo Keep Guerrillas at Bay---A Palpable Mood of Distrust---By Clifford KraussStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> EL BARILLO, El Salvador  </DATELINE><TEXT>    The Salvadoran army came tothis farm cooperative on Feb. 11 to distribute boxes ofclothes, kitchen utensils, Bibles and tiny American flags tothe 400 peasants who live here.   The peasants appeared to be genuinely touched by the gesture. Adults cheered the Salvadoran army officer in charge, as their children tugged excitedly at the pants of his camouflage fatigues.    That same night, as a test, the army sent in seven members of its special forces dressed as guerrillas. Residents gave the fake rebels a hero's welcome and threw a party complete with a Mexican-style ranchera band and dancing that went on half the night.    In the past, the army destroyed entire villages for affronts less serious. But time has brought changes to El Salvador's once-hot, now-simmering seven-year-old civil war. Soldiers returned to El Barillo in March with more handouts in their continuing effort to win hearts and minds.    The story of El Barillo, which served as a guerrilla logistical base from 1981 through 1985, is in many ways the story of contemporary El Salvador. Constant surveillance of suspect population centers like this one has replaced most of the bombings and the death-squad killings common just a few years ago. A week's visit here indicated that the improvement in the army's human-rights approach is appreciated by some residents, but it will take years before peasants and soldiers learn to trust each other.    Lingering bad feeling prolongs the war and stymies the freedom and democracy that President Jose Napoleon Duarte promised in his 1984 presidential campaign. This cooperative is a murky little world containing three camps: clandestine guerrilla collaborators, clandestine army collaborators and those caught in the middle struggling to survive. The problems that triggered Central America's bloodiest conflict in the first place -- polarization, paranoia and poverty. -- still exist.    &quot;Why doesn't God make a miracle and civilize our country?&quot; pleads Maria Beltran, 52, an El Barillo resident who lost two children in bombing attacks and one in cross fire between the army and rebels. In the meantime, some shacks, set among banana trees and bougainvillea, fly grimy white flags just in case the air force reinitiates bombing runs suspended last year.    Under Washington's tutelage, El Salvador's armed forces have changed for the better and taken the initiative offensively, although the guerrillas won't surrender any time soon. Rebels once roamed freely here, as they did through half the country just a few years ago, but now the army is in control. Col. Oscar Armando Carranza, the commanding officer in the area, says that as the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or FMLN, guerrillas slip on the battlefield, the war in El Barillo &quot;is more of a political problem than a military problem.&quot; He adds: &quot;This is a very special war. We don't know who the people of El Barillo really are.&quot;    The armed forces once applied scorched-earth tactics here. They supervised death squads on the ground and bombed from the sky. They even shot up the cooperative's only tractor five years ago, and they forcibly evacuated El Barillo in early 1986. With the guerrillas gone, they can afford to be more lenient now; but as long as the left is a political threat, the army doesn't dare let go of the leash entirely.    &quot;The army doesn't kick us anymore,&quot; comments Santiago Acosta, 54, a slight jowly man with bloodshot eyes who is El Barillo's math teacher, though he himself has only a third-grade education. Mr. Acosta's compliments don't seem to soothe the authorities; he is included on an army list as a probable &quot;active terrorist,&quot; perhaps because most teachers in El Salvador are suspect.    Mr. Acosta says, &quot;I don't want anything to do with the FMLN.&quot; Maybe he is lying; camouflage remains the substance of survival in El Salvador. There is a palpable mood of distrust here. No one dares speak openly because, as 50-year-old Ramon Ventura puts it, &quot;There's a constant fear. We can't trust each other.&quot; Sometimes residents still slip into their old guerrilla lingo long enough to refer to the army as &quot;el enemigo.&quot;    For the most part, life mixes with war more easily now than in years past. Hand-dug bomb shelters have become waterholes. Every morning, as sooty smoke from fires roasting corn tortillas drifts from wood and zinc huts to envelop the valley, residents prepare to walk to nearby Suchitoto to go to market. Few can write, so they wait for a literate neighbor to scribble brief notes for them requesting the army's permission to leave the cooperative. As mothers fix their hair, the children play with captured armadillos they will sell, cooked in a soup, in the market.    No one pays attention to the cacophony of squawking roosters and rumbling mortar rounds falling a few miles away on Guazapa volcano, a traditional guerrilla stronghold cleared by the army along with El Barillo early last year. Now the rebels are returning to the strategic volcano 30 miles north of San Salvador in small groups, raising army concerns that El Barillo could eventually revert to the FMLN.    El Barillo's politics are rooted in Liberation Theology, the brand of Christian doctrine that mixes the Gospel with Marxist social teachings. Radical priests and catechists in the 1970s taught here and effectively built the bridge between the peasants and guerrillas. The cooperative later paid heavily for its holy alliance until soldiers forced residents to move out of the line of fire to a San Salvador refugee camp.    Following a six-month stay at the church-run facility, about 20 El Barillo families and other former guerrilla supporters, known here as &quot;masas,&quot; returned to the cooperative without government authorization last July. The land invasion was organized by a guerrilla front organization and assisted by 19 American church activists subsequently deported from El Salvador. According to Salvadoran army intelligence, the recolonization of El Barillo was a carefully planned FMLN effort to take advantage of President Duarte's liberal political opening and revitalize the Guazapa front.    Breaking tradition, Gen. Adolfo Blandon, the army chief of staff, decided to gamble and allow the peasants to stay. As long as the zone could be controlled, he figured, whatever crops the cooperative produced could only help to resurrect the war-shattered local economy.    There is a smattering of evidence that some of El Barillo's residents appreciate the army's more accommodating attitude. Juan Landaverde, 63, the chief of the cooperative's production, says: &quot;{Before}, nobody could talk to a soldier; you'd be killed or raped. They mutilated our animals. They rampaged through our houses, slaughtering old people, women and children. They don't do that anymore.&quot; Mr. Landaverde knows from personal experience: Three of his sons disappeared at the hands of death squads. Although there have been no overt army human-rights violations here since the repopulation, he adds: &quot;We pray to God that those days don't return. We don't know if the soldiers will change back.&quot;    U.S. officials who have visited here hope the peasants will cease to be masas and become supporters of the government. The peasants are now accepting government-donated tools and medical care that they once rejected. Still, it would take only a few collaborators in El Barillo to provide guerrillas with food and other supplies should the rebels return.    So the army's control over El Barillo remains tight, and the distrust of one side reinforces the distrust of the other. An army unit outfitted with automatic assault rifles guards a roadblock a hundred yards from the cooperative's entrance, and residents can't even fish in a nearby lake without permission.    One Sunday, army troops stop scores of El Barillo residents carrying the remains of a 15-month-old girl in a funeral procession to the nearby Suchitoto cemetery. Soldiers at the roadblock write down the names of all the men in the group, causing a 20-minute delay and much resentment. At the graveyard, the mourners grumble about how the cemetery is segregated: the upper level for the rich and retired army officers, the lower level for the poor.    The travel restrictions are technically unconstitutional since the country's state of siege was recently suspended. However, the army defends the roadblock as a necessary precaution. Daniel Sanchez, a Spanish Roman Catholic priest who comes here once a week, has a different explanation: &quot;El Barillo is a concentration camp. There's no democracy here because there's no liberty.&quot;    The Spanish priest and a British priest come here one Thursday to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the death of Rutilio Grande, a Salvadoran Jesuit who was assassinated by a death squad for organizing sugar workers. To the accompaniment of a guitar combo, Mila Orellana, a 59-year-old peasant whose five children and husband were killed by the army, sings a spirited ballad about &quot;men dying for justice and humanity.&quot;    Though blind in one eye and bent over, Mrs. Orellana hasn't lost her revolutionary fervor. &quot;Long live the spirit of Rutilio Grande,&quot; she cries. &quot;Viva&quot; is the reply of about 80 peasants. As the two priests recite Father Grande's last homily (according to which Jesus Christ would be arrested if resurrected in El Salvador), an army patrol arrives on the scene. The cooperative's vice president, Roman Rauda, takes a microphone and tells the people, &quot;We are content with our brothers in the army.&quot;    Between 1980 and 1984, such feints wouldn't have done any good. About 50 people died here from the repeated air-force bombings and in the onslaught of army &quot;invasions&quot; intended to rob the guerrillas of their supply base and to terrorize masas into submission. During night escapes, mothers would cup their hands over the mouths of their babies because soldiers would fire in the direction of crying. Once an air-force plane dropped a bomb on a mother and 13 children playing soccer in a mango grove, killing all of them.    The army now drops propaganda leaflets on the ground offering El Barillo residents the equivalent of $200 for an M-16 rifle, $300 for an M-60 machine gun and $600 for a 120mm mortar. &quot;Your life will change, and you'll have money,&quot; the pamphlets say.    El Barillo may go whichever way the wind blows, and many will continue to hide their true intentions. In late July, the cooperative's eight-man directorate placed an advertisement in a San Salvador newspaper scolding the army for shooting and capturing Ciriaco Joaquin Rodriguez, a refugee leader involved in repopulating El Barillo. Today, the directorate members deny they even heard of the activist, who was freed in February in a prisoner exchange with the guerrillas.    &quot;It's inconceivable that the directorate didn't know {about Mr. Rodriguez},&quot; comments one international human-rights worker who has studied the local refugee situation. &quot;The people of El Barillo are under the boot. They've been smart enough to survive. They've adapted.&quot;    Since there isn't any electricity here, I conducted a nighttime interview in my rented car with Felix Casco, a peasant whose wife and two daughters were killed in a 1982 bombing attack. Five minutes into the interview, the car was surrounded by five burly men demanding to speak to Mr. Casco. Mr. Casco trembled as we left the vehicle. One of the men, wearing his straw cowboy hat slanted down over his eyes, identified himself as a &quot;collaborator of {the army's} Ramon Belloso battalion&quot; and scolded me for interviewing people &quot;in private.&quot; Meanwhile, Mr. Casco slipped away.    Two days later, I tried to continue the interview. &quot;I'm afraid to talk,&quot; Mr. Casco said. &quot;That's all I have to say.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>