<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881017-0024 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SABOTAGE WAS BLAMED for the plane crash that killed Pakistan's President Zia.    According to a report released by a U.S.-Pakistan investigation team, sabotage or another &quot;criminal act&quot; caused the Aug. 17 crash that killed Zia, the U.S. ambassador to Islamabad and 28 others aboard the transport aircraft. The 365-page report ruled out mechanical failure. It didn't cite any person or group as responsible for the incident, but called for a separate criminal inquiry. The four-engine turboprop crashed after takeoff on a flight to the capital from an air base in the city of Bahawalpur.    A State Department spokeswoman in Washington said U.S. officials had received a copy of the 10-member team's report and were &quot;studying it.&quot;    ---   THE U.S. REACHED agreement with the Philippines over use of military bases.    Washington and Manila plan to sign today an interim agreement for continued U.S. use of the Clark Air Force base and Subic naval base until 1991. Under the agreement, arranged by State Department negotiators, the U.S. will pay the Philippines $481 million a year for 1990 and 1991. Of the total, $200 million a year is for military aid. The accord will strengthen Manila's ability to develop rural areas and fight a Communist-led insurgency.    The interim agreement is expected to lead to talks on the long-term future of the military bases, which many Filipinos want removed after 1991.    ---   Two Yugoslav officials resigned as the Communist Party leadership prepared for the start of a Central Committee meeting today in Belgrade. As many as 14 of the ruling Politburo's 23 members could be removed, a senior official said. The meeting comes amid mounting ethnic unrest and protests over government austerity measures.    ---   The Dukakis camp predicted a come-from-behind victory over GOP presidential candidate Bush. With about three weeks remaining before Election Day, Dukakis conceded that he is the underdog, but warned Republicans about early victory celebrations. Most national polls show Bush with a lead over the Democratic nominee.    ---   The Senate approved a sweeping, $2.6 billion anti-drug bill that includes the death penalty for major drug traffickers, and civil fines of as much as $10,000 for possession of small amounts of marijuana. The measure, however, contains a number of differences with the $2.1 billion package adopted by the House last month.    ---   Doctors in New York conducted tests of a new anti-clotting drug in a brain-dead patient, according to a report in the Annals of Internal Medicine. The report suggested that such tests could be used as a means to ensure the safety of new drugs. But the medical journal called the experiment &quot;ethically questionable.&quot;    ---   Israeli soldiers blocked Jewish settlers in the occupied territories from demonstrating against what residents described as the government's failure to protect them from Palestinian violence during a 10-month-old Arab uprising. The troops erected roadblocks in the West Bank to prevent the settlers from disrupting traffic during the protest.    ---   Former allies of Pinochet said they were willing to consider demands by Chile's 16-party opposition coalition for constitutional changes aimed at early elections. The move followed the general's loss Oct. 5 in a one-man presidential plebiscite. Under Chile's constitution, the 72-year-old Pinochet must call elections by December 1989.    ---   Afghanistan reported that two Americans assisting Afghan rebels were killed in fighting against the Kabul government's forces. Official Afghan radio said two U.S. and two Pakistani military advisers were killed Saturday near the city of Gardez, about 60 miles southeast of the capital. A Western diplomat cast doubt on the report.    ---   Relief supplies arrived in southern Sudan, where about 40,000 people are facing starvation as a result of a five-year civil war. But officials said the $1 million, 10-day mission came too late to save thousands of children. The airlift of food and medical goods is being financed by the U.S.    ---   Algeria's president ordered the release of about 500 minors arrested during a week of rioting over the country's worsening economy. More than 3,000 people were reported detained during the recent unrest. The government also freed those imprisoned who weren't directly involved in the revolt and those &quot;arrested for crimes of opinion.&quot;    ---   Solidarity supporters clashed with police in Gdansk during a demonstration to demand government recognition of the banned trade union. The issue is to be discussed during talks, expected this month, between Warsaw authorities and Solidarity aides.    ---   Burma's government has announced that general elections won't be held before next year. The military regime, which seized power in a Sept. 18 coup, said a date for the vote would be set after consultations with political parties. At least 18 parties have registered with the Rangoon government. </TEXT></DOC>