<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881109-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH WON the presidency, turning back a last-minute challenge by Dukakis.    The Republican nominee held on for a clear electoral victory against a late surge by Democratic candidate Dukakis, who conceded defeat. With returns still incomplete, it appeared as though Bush would capture about 53% to 54% of the popular vote in the presidential election and amass 350 or more electoral votes. He needed 270 for victory.    Democrats retained control of Congress and added to their strength in the nation's statehouses, as voters gave the party an edge even where Bush won handily. In New Jersey, Ohio and North Dakota, Democratic incumbents turned back GOP challenges.    The tighter-than-anticipated contest between Bush and Dukakis reflected a lack of a clear consensus among voters about the direction that the new president should take, according to Wall Street Journal/NBC News polls.    ---   POLISH WORKERS DEFIED Walesa and staged strikes at two shipyards.    Several hundred workers went on strike at two plants in Gdansk to protest the Warsaw government's planned closing of the big Lenin shipyard, birthplace of Solidarity. They defied an appeal by Walesa to return to work. The strikers at the two smaller shipyards, calling their action &quot;a warning,&quot; also said they had waited long enough for Polish authorities to begin promised talks to consider the banned trade union's future.    Walesa indicated he would meet with authorities before the Lenin shipyard question is resolved, and threatened to quit as union leader if strikes spread.    ---   The Soviet Union will release 11 detainees regarded by the West as political prisoners within three years, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said in Moscow. It was the first statement issued by the Kremlin about a prisoner release. West German Chancellor Kohl said last month that Moscow would free all political detainees by year end.    ---   Soviet dissident Sakharov entered a hospital in Boston for tests to determine whether he needs a pacemaker. A spokesman for the 67-year-old physicist said Sakharov will extend his two-week trip to the West if an operation is needed. He is believed to have had a stroke several years ago while in internal exile in Gorky.    ---   A B-1B bomber crashed near an Air Force base in Abilene, Texas. A Pentagon statement didn't give details, but the Air Force said all four crew members ejected safely. It was the second crash of a B-1B long-range bomber. Three crew members were killed in a September 1987 crash.    ---   Iran and Iraq agreed to an immediate exchange of sick and wounded prisoners of war. The pact was considered the first tangible progress in Persian Gulf peace talks in Geneva since a cease-fire took effect in August. Both sides said the exchange should be arranged by the international Red Cross.    ---   Cambodian peace talks ended inconclusively in France. While representatives of anti-government leaders and the Vietnam-backed regime agreed to establish a Paris-based working group and called for an international conference on ending the conflict in Cambodia, they also postponed by eight months a meeting planned for January.    ---   Army and medical rescue teams reached stricken Chinese villages in a remote area near Burma, where an earthquake Sunday killed more than 900 people. Beijing said more than 170 aftershocks had been recorded. The quake, which measured 7.6 on the Richter scale, was described as the worst in China in more than a decade.    ---   South Korea's Chun is prepared to surrender his assets to halt escalating demonstrations demanding his punishment for alleged corruption, ruling party sources in Seoul said. The officials said the former president would give up his wealth, estimated at more than $5 million, if President Roh ensures his predecessor's safety.    ---   The Supreme Court granted deposed Philippine leader Marcos and his wife, Imelda, a temporary stay of an order requiring them to produce bank records and other evidence for a federal grand jury. The couple had until today to comply with the order or be held in contempt of court.    ---   The father of a Lebanese hijacker said his son, Mohammed Ali Hammadi, wasn't 21 years old at the time of the June 1985 seizure of a TWA jetliner in which a U.S. serviceman was killed. The age of Hammadi, who has pleaded guilty to the air-piracy charge, is important in determining his sentence. An adult would face life in prison.    ---   An Israeli-backed militia killed three Palestinian guerrillas in southern Lebanon, and a pro-Syrian group said it expected Israeli retaliation for an attempt Monday to assassinate the militia's commander. In the occupied West Bank, hundreds of rock-throwing Palestinian youths battled police after Israel razed 15 Arab buildings.    ---   Czechoslovakia's new premier said the government is unable to enact substantial economic changes before 1990. In his first speech to parliament since assuming his post three weeks ago, Premier Ladislav Adamec also reiterated the Prague government's tough stance against dissent.    ---   Died: Kingman Brewster Jr., 69, a former U.S. ambassador to Britain and president of Yale University, in Oxford, England, of a brain hemorrhage. </TEXT></DOC>