<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0064 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Calling Margaret Chase Smith</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PUBLISHING (PUB)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   If Robert Bork's courageous and dignified perseverance accomplishes nothing else, it has already taken the starch out of efforts to rewrite history to provide an intellectual patina for the yahoo campaign against him. If in the end he is beaten, at least he will have his own say on why.    We must say we admire the audacity of the revisionist efforts. Before the 51st Senator declared his opposition, the Bork opponents had pictured the nominee as a right-wing kook, about to turn back history, unleash racism and sterilize the poor and weak. But after the needed votes had been rounded up, the Bork opponents started picturing him as the epitome of a mainstream conservative, and his apparent defeat as a plebiscite in which the American people had somehow decided to resurrect the Warren court, overturn two Reagan landslides and delegitimize the whole of American conservatism.    Consider, for example, columnist Anthony Lewis. His pre-majority Bork was &quot;a committed radical. He wants to tear up settled understandings of the Constitution, root and branch.&quot; Post-majority he writes, &quot;That Robert Bork became the instrument of the Reagan-Meese campaign is sad. He is a kind and intelligent person, understanding the difficulties of the judicial function . . .&quot; In Mr. Lewis's world anyone who disagrees with him is out to rape the Constitution, of course, but in this instance his was no isolated voice.    His colleague A.M. Rosenthal instructs us that Judge Bork &quot;simply did not sit well in the stomachs of a number of senators of both parties who wanted to vote for a real conservative for the court.&quot; The special-interest feeding frenzy had nothing to do with it.    Meanwhile the editors of the Washington Post, locked in combat with columnist George Will, agreed that the anti-Bork campaign &quot;was one of the ugliest campaigns on record to block a nomination, a campaign based in part on deliberate distortion and reeking of a kind of intellectual fear and intolerance that both mocked and stripped away its claims to virtue.&quot; They sided with the ugly, they explained, because &quot;we did need a sign . . . that on some of the great questions concerning race, free speech, fair representation and privacy, Judge Bork seemed to care.&quot;    Most wonderful of all, the Post's Haynes Johnson, purporting to cite our own writings in these columns, says the apparent Bork defeat represents &quot;the misjudgments of ideologues who have convinced themselves that the land not 'inside the Beltway,' as they sneeringly refer to the nation's capital, is awash with ideological fervor and inhabited by a people hungering for politically polarizing positions.&quot; He concludes, &quot;Far from being irrational, the forces producing Judge Robert H. Bork's defeat were both logical and inevitable. That doesn't mean that they fairly depicted Bork's views. It means that they represent the tide of history.&quot;    Five years ago Mr. Bork was confirmed for a seat on the nation's second most important court by a unanimous vote of the Senate; the Washington Post and the New York Times raised no objections. Incredible to recall, the Times editorialized within days of Mr. Bork's nomination to the appellate bench: &quot;Mr. Bork is a legal scholar of distinction and principle. For instance, he opposes the various court-stripping bills that have been introduced in Congress, a braver position than any so far taken by his Justice Department sponsors. One may differ heatedly with him on specific issues like abortion, but those are differences of philosophy, not principle. Differences of philosophy are what the 1980 election was about; Robert Bork is, given President Reagan's philosophy, a natural choice for an important judicial vacancy.&quot;    During Judge Bork's tenure on the appellate court he has never had a decision reversed by the full appeals court or the Supreme Court; and some of his dissents prevailed on appeal. While he said some provocative things as a professor, that is what professors are paid to do. The former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court testifed, &quot;If Judge Bork isn't in the mainstream, neither am I,&quot; and his nomination was supported by both the Attorney General and White House counsel from the last Democratic administration. If the Washington Post wants a &quot;sign,&quot; it might consult his famous debate with Justice Scalia in the Ollman case, with Scalia against and Bork for the press and free speech. If Judge Bork is not qualified for the Supreme Court, neither is, say, Justice White. Conservatives are angry not because they believe the country wants polarization, but precisely because, a la the late Senator Joe McCarthy, the Bork opponents have created a monumental miscarriage of justice. They have done this by totally misrepresenting Judge Bork in order to create a polarizing straw man as compensation for their own inability to win presidential elections.    This was, of course, a quintessential inside-the-Beltway operation. It has been lovingly described in the style section of The Washington Post: Lobbyist Ralph Neas is driving along in his &quot;'84 Renault&quot; on June 26 when he hears on the radio that Justice Powell has resigned. Immediately this &quot;ruddy-faced, shaggy-haired crusader&quot; began to plan the lobbying effort he would launch on arriving at the DuPont Circle offices of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. While, of course, &quot;no one had even mentioned Robert Bork,&quot; Mr. Neas and his allies shortly had matters sorted out, with specific lobbyists targeted to arouse specific special interests. In the end, during the hearings, it was all put together in the &quot;war room,&quot; Russell Senate Office Building, Room 115.    Perhaps the revisionists haven't read this history. Perhaps the revisionists would like us to believe that the opposition to Judge Bork arose spontaneously from the family picnics and bowling alleys outside the Beltway. They would have us believe that, having pondered Judge Bork, the American people now want an activist, experimental judiciary that eradicates any trace of religion from public life, explores the limits of racial quotas, assumes the right to raise taxes when legislative bodies cannot, takes over the administration of school districts and prison systems and steadfastly creates new rights for criminal defendants (whose victims rage against the legal system).    Anyone who believes any such thing has been breathing pungent fumes indeed. We may yet have an opportunity to test such notions at the ballot box. In New York, for example, Senator Moynihan may have to face a law-and-order campaign from Rudolph Giuliani. Pending that, the Beltway illusion is much harder to sustain now that Judge Bork has refused to withdraw.    For the cardinal principle of the Beltway mentality is that there is no reality except political reality. It is accustomed to the Gary Harts and Joe Bidens, who capitulate the moment they cannot win, or to a Mike Dukakis, who flops around and cashiers his point men at the first whiff of grapeshot. It has no experience with a man who says, win or lose, there are higher interests at stake, and who tells them, I refuse to legitimize the demagogic attack on me by withdrawing. Faced with this, the Beltway is dumbstruck.    It is perhaps not impossible that there are still Senators, a la Margaret Chase Smith in the McCarthy era, who will break with the demagogues. Failing that, Judge Bork's decision to stay until there is a bona fide vote stands as a sobering event. At the least, it may help the Beltway sort out the voice of the people from the echo of its own shouting. </TEXT></DOC>