<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870819-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. SAID Iran ordered the kidnapping of American journalist Charles Glass.    A Reagan administration official familiar with the case said Tehran ordered the Lebanon abduction of Glass, who was held for two months before fleeing from his captors late Monday. The official also said Iran, concerned about its growing isolation in the Arab world, may have been involved in the newsman's escape. Another senior administration official said that the U.S. plans to restore full diplomatic relations with Syria. The Damascus government, at the behest of the U.S., pressured Iran into working to release the hostage.    Glass, who was taken to Damascus before heading to London, insisted he had outwitted his captors, described as Shiite Moslems who held him in southern Beirut, a Hezbollah stronghold.    ---   Striking Hyundai workers called off a two-day confrontation with corporate officials and agreed to return to work after the South Korean government said it would intervene on their behalf. Seoul, stepping in for the first time in labor unrest that erupted last month, pledged it would mediate in their dispute.    ---   Two Iranian patrol boats fired rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns at a Liberian-registered vessel at the southern edge of the Strait of Hormuz, shipping sources said. Damage to the ship, operated by a Norwegian company, reportedly was minor. It was believed to be the first such attack outside the Persian Gulf.    ---   Federal investigators said the Northwest Airlines jet that crashed Sunday in Detroit had a longer-than-normal takeoff roll and apparently had difficulty lifting off the ground. Inspectors ruled out the possibility of a serious engine fire or explosion. All but one of the 155 people aboard the plane were killed.    ---   American envoys returned to their posts in Central America to dispel doubts about U.S. support for a five-nation peace plan, despite White House reservations about some of the initiative's provisions. In San Salvador, five Central American foreign ministers are to meet today to work out the details of the regional plan that was signed Aug. 7.    ---   Sri Lanka's president blamed Sinhalese terrorists for a grenade attack in a parliamentary meeting room in Colombo. President Jayewardene escaped harm, but one legislator was killed and 14 lawmakers were wounded. The assault followed last month's signing of an Indian-backed accord aimed at ending the island nation's ethnic turmoil.    ---   Talks collapsed between South African union leaders and mining company officials following a clash between police and strikers. The two-day-old talks were aimed at reducing violence in the black miners' strike. Anglo American Corp. blamed that breakdown on the union's &quot;unreasoned rejection&quot; of management proposals.    ---   Israel and the Soviet Union agreed to establish regular political contacts as a possible step toward renewing diplomatic ties severed 20 years ago, Israeli officials said. Foreign Minister Peres said he would meet next month in New York with his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze.    ---   The National Academy of Sciences said modern genetic engineering techniques are &quot;powerful and safe&quot; and aren't any more dangerous than traditional breeding. The academy said the properties of genetically engineered organisms, rather than how the engineering was done, should guide release of the organisms into the environment.    ---   A hospital orderly was sentenced by a county judge in Cincinnati to three consecutive life prison terms after confessing to the murder of 24 people, most of them terminally ill or comatose hospital patients under his care. Donald Harvey, 35, won't be eligible for parole for at least 60 years.    ---   The Pentagon confirmed that it has deferred doing new business with Norway's state-owned arms maker, Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk AS, until questions are settled about the illegal sale of technologically advanced machinery to the Soviet Union. Japan's Toshiba Corp. also was involved in the sales.    ---   Justice Marshall was released from Bethesda Naval Hospital, where he was treated for a blood clot in the right foot. He was described as &quot;in good condition.&quot; The 79-year-old Supreme Court justice was admitted to the Maryland hospital last week.    ---   Rudolf Hess apparently strangled himself with a length of electrical cord after 46 years in prison, British authorities at West Berlin's Spandau prison said. Hess, 93, the last of Hitler's Nazi inner circle, died Monday in a nearby British military hospital.    ---   Mugabe's government unveiled legislation to scrap Zimbabwe's parliamentary seats reserved for whites. The 20 seats in the 100-member lower house had been guaranteed for whites for a minimum seven-year period under an agreement reached when Zimbabwe gained its independence in 1980.    ---   Arsonists threw fire bombs at a U.S. military complex in Frankfurt, West Germany, damaging several vehicles, the Army said. The attackers eluded American soldiers who gave chase following the assault.    ---   Died: Clarence Brown, 97, film director, in Santa Monica, Calif., of kidney failure. </TEXT></DOC>