<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Argentina's DecisionTo Move Its CapitalRuffles Buenos Aires---Bureaucrats See the TransferTo Tiny Viedma in SouthAs a Pathway to Oblivion---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> VIEDMA, Argentina  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This very small town in southern South America, destined to be the new Argentine capital, has an image problem.    &quot;Viedma?&quot; scoffs former Finance Minister Adalberto Krieger Vasena, as if the name were painful to his vocal cords. &quot;Forget it. We're already far enough south in Buenos Aires. This is the end of the line. To develop Alaska, you didn't transfer Washington to Alaska.&quot;    Listening to Portenos, as the 10 million inhabitants of Buenos Aires are known, Alaska seems balmy compared with Viedma: The prospective new capital is portrayed as a windswept outpost on the edge of the polar regions, generally covered by snow and inhabited by a handful of backward creatures as yet ill-prepared for intelligent conversation. Although the perception is far from the reality, the idea of spending an estimated $4.6 billion to move the capital here by 1990 is roundly dismissed as preposterous.    But that is precisely what the government of President Raul Alfonsin has decided to do. With the idea of galvanizing a long-declining nation by opening up the cool, mineral-rich expanses of the southern region, known as Patagonia, the president recently signed a law transferring the capital from Buenos Aires to Viedma. This stands on the northern edge of Patagonia, an area about twice the size of France, that is currently occupied by just 4% of Argentina's 30 million inhabitants, along with tens of millions of sheep.    The plan is a radical one. Since Buenos Aires grew to wealth in the last century as the port for Argentina's beef exports, the capital has exerted a crushing domination over this country, which is the size of India. All railway lines lead there. One-third of the population lives there. The tango was born there, and so were several coups. The European elegance, macho bravura and world-weary skepticism of Argentines converged in the great port city.    Viedma, meantime, has been moribund by contrast.    Despite its glacial image, orange trees line the streets of the town, situated on a pretty, looping river 15 miles from the Atlantic Ocean and just an hour's flight from Buenos Aires. People take a two-hour siesta after lunch. On a similar parallel in the southern hemisphere to that of Madrid, Naples or New York in the north, Viedma has a mild climate. Snow, says engineer Edgardo Ribero, &quot;is so rare that when it comes, we have a party.&quot;    The town has a big &quot;industrial park,&quot; described on a big sign as an &quot;Advancing Reality&quot; but no industries other than a struggling textile company. The one phone at the airport has been broken for weeks. The line for the two phones at the Entel telephone center in town is long. Traffic heading south to the Patagonian province of Santa Cruz, which has half an inhabitant per square mile, is light.    Abounding in Viedma, however, are rumors, which swirl through the usually tranquil streets. People speak of eight glittering bridges across the Rio Negro. They whisper of huge fortunes awaiting those whose land is expropriated. And they sometimes fret about an Argentine propensity to talk but not act, suggesting the possibility that the capital may never be wrested from the Portenos into Patagonia.    One rumor concerns Enrique Dingebauer, a farmer who likes to make headcheese. It is whispered that on his deserted island in the Rio Negro, the residence of President Alfonsin will one day be built. &quot;I don't know if it's true,&quot; he says, as he stands in a vast, empty prairie stirring a bubbling slop of pigs' heads, ears and trotters in a blackened cauldron, &quot;but I tell you I'm not moving for less than $2,000 an acre.&quot;    Hector Vega, a Viedma real-estate dealer, is sick of such talk of high prices. Although the cost of renting a two-room apartment has doubled to about $400 a month and some land prices have gone above $5,000 an acre, the market now is paralyzed by uncertainty about whether the move will really happen.    &quot;Everything's stopped,&quot; he says, &quot;because in this country a law isn't worth a fig. So you pass a law that says one thing. Then you pass another that says the reverse.&quot;    This speculative climate has ruffled the calm of the 30,000 inhabitants of Viedma and the 20,000 of Carmen de Patagones, just across the Rio Negro. Victor Lopez, a taxi driver with land next to Mr. Dingebauer's, mutters tortured soliloquies about whether he will really strike it rich. The movements to and from Buenos Aires of a lawyer named Rebora, who is rumored to be coordinating expropriations, are closely watched. And a troubled incredulity seems to grip people like painter Carlos Porretti. Standing on a ridge with his dog Carbon and looking out over the small town to the huge expanse of flat, unoccupied land beyond, he mutters, &quot;There's nothing, nothing. It's all empty. All EMPTY.&quot;    President Alfonsin is determined to put something in this emptiness by 1989 as a symbol of the new, democratic Argentina he wants to build.    He links the country's stagnation to its lopsided development. Buenos Aires, he argues, is a monster of inefficiency, corruption and insularity marooned in an empty land -- the paradigm of the sophisticated South American capital, plundering the nations's wealth while turning its back on the unknown &quot;interior.&quot; He points to Brasilia, the Brazilian capital established in 1960. Although often criticized for its architecture and urban planning, it has succeeded in turning the focus of the neighboring country's development away from the former capital of Rio de Janeiro and the coast toward largely empty inland provinces.    Brian Thomson, a descendant of a Scot who helped build Argentina's railways (currently costing the government over $1 billion a year), is trying to forge a similarly radical change. As undersecretary for administrative reform, he is grappling with about two million state employees. Viedma, he reckons, will be the catalyst for changes producing a lean state, a more balanced economy and a new outlook stripped of &quot;our basic skepticism.&quot;    He envisions transferring just 15,000 highly trained civil servants to Viedma in an initial stage. &quot;We've been through the dark ages in Argentina,&quot; he says darkly, &quot;and we have to get out of our past.&quot; He adds, &quot;The new capital must be built for its trigger effects. I don't believe in it as a point in space.&quot;    As points in space go, the current ministry for public works, where plans for Viedma are being elaborated, is an unpleasant one. Like most Buenos Aires ministries, it is suffused with stale cigarette smoke. The occupants appear to be mainly bored but loquacious hangers-on, who must wait in line 20 minutes for the elevator to the top floor.    Here, architect Jose Bacigalupo is winding up his work as president of the Technical Commission for Viedma. A large blueprint on his wall helps distill fact from rumor.    The new capital will be built on both sides of the Rio Negro about four miles east of the current town of Viedma. Its focus will be a pedestrian area spanning the river and leading from the presidential palace to Congress. Four new bridges will be built by the end of 1989 for a population expected to total 126,000, growing to 315,000 in 1995 and 588,000 by 2025.    The president's residence is unmarked. Mr. Bacigalupo insists the rumor that it will be built on the island of Mr. Dingebauer, the headcheese maker, is baseless. However, the new capital clearly will embrace the island.    The next stage for the new capital will be the creation of a company called Entecap, which will organize the purchase of land and the construction of the town. Financial help will be sought from multilateral lending organizations like the World Bank.    &quot;We've been approached by U.S., Japanese and Italian companies,&quot; says Mr. Bacigalupo. But he adds that no contracts have been concluded and that the price to be paid for expropriations has still to be determined. The aim is to avoid making Entecap another Argentine bureaucratic nightmare by keeping it as a streamlined coordinator of projects.    Such ambitions are scoffed at by most Portenos, who think it is as unlikely that Entecap can be efficient as it is that the new capital will ever exist. Where, they ask, will Argentina, with its foreign debt of $54 billion, get the money? And who would leave Buenos Aires for the windswept south? Emilio Cardenas, who heads a major law firm, says a recent memo asking for a volunteer among the company's 26 lawyers to head a new office in Viedma next year got no replies. &quot;I may have to go myself,&quot; he says glumly.    In Viedma, meanwhile, deputy governor Oscar Machado exudes provincial confidence. He has put up a sign in the main square welcoming visitors to &quot;the new federal capital.&quot; He actually believes his corner of Patagonia will soon be adorned with new roads, telephones, embassies, and hotels. He says he expects President Alfonsin to start coming regularly next year.    But farmer Dingebauer is more circumspect. Sampling some home-made pate, he says that if the arrival of the new city and the presidential residence doesn't make him a millionaire, he plans to turn his empty island into a natural-foods center. </TEXT></DOC>