<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870327-0105 </DOCNO><HL> A Conservative Crack-Up?---By R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr.</HL><DD> 03/27/87</DD><SO>  </SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   In a hair-raising essay on Ronald Reagan, Prof. Garry Wills recently heaved off what has become the liberals' stock perception of the Reagan administration four months into its present trials. That the perception is widely accepted cannot be doubted: Time magazine commissioned it. According to Dr. Wills, &quot;Ronald Reagan did not build a structure; he cast a spell. There was no Reagan revolution, just a Reagan bedazzlement. The magic is going off almost as mysteriously as the spell was woven in the first place.&quot;    After this infantile prelude, Dr. Wills discoursed on the political phenomenon of Ronald Reagan for two pages, mentioning the Nuremburg rallies three times! Always, however, he returns to his belief that the 40th president beguiled us with magic. Yes, it has come to this -- the liberals attribute their arch enemy's political triumph to savorings of the marvelous. Well, I do not want to incur Dr. Wills's displeasure, but there is no such thing as magic.    Nonetheless, I am not surprised by his resort to superstition. Throughout the Reagan administration its opponents have steadfastly refused to acknowledge the forces that thrust them out into the cold. In ignoring the reality of a conservative political ascendancy they have also left the conservatives unexamined, their weaknesses unreported. For all the years of the Reagan presidency the liberals and those who resort to them for wisdom have been giving false testimony as to the failings of the left and the right. Consequently, the political future, which will be decided on election day 1988, is unnecessarily murky. For a hint into that future we must understand the recent past.    The real explanation for the political reign that began to falter so badly last November reposes in the fact that by 1980 the liberals had played out their hand. They had no plausible policies left to perpetrate on the American people. Anon, they radicalized themselves beyond the wildest dreams of Franklin Roosevelt or John F. Kennedy. The liberal coalition in the late-1970s had cracked up into a riot of enthusiasts thumping for feminism, income redistribution, neoisolationism, small-is-beautiful economics, minority preoccupations and other manias, all existing in very uneasy alliance. Historian Kenneth Lynn has pointed out that the liberal political model that in the early-1960s was expected to bring peace abroad, tranquility and justice at home, and pandemic compliments to its progressive statesmen came to ruin in an endless Southeast Asian war, proliferating grievances from students and minorities at home, and a sick economy. The liberal model had taken America as far as it could. Many liberals, unappeased by this progress, took up radical causes and dreamed of a New Age.    Jimmy Carter's presidency revealed the futility of New Age Liberalism. Mr. Carter adopted New Age foreign policy and many of its domestic bugaboos. The foreign policy of George McGovern and the domestic aspirations of Ralph Nader and Ms. magazine set his agenda. Consequently, Mr. Carter, who admittedly was a very bright fellow, probably will go down as the worst president of this century.    Those who speak of the Reagan magic ignore the Carter revels. They ignore that in 1980 Americans rejected New Age Liberalism. A standard rule of American politics is that elections are for the incumbent to lose, not for the challenger to win. The electorate rejected a liberal administration in 1980, accepting Ronald Reagan's conservatives warily. Nonetheless, the conservatives' hour was at hand. Had they arrived in the White House any earlier, bellicose minorities still holding to liberalism's old beliefs and bugaboos would have mired them in controversy, but by the late-1970s, New Age Liberals were in disarray. Some, like Arthur Schlesinger Jr., were fleeing from Jimmy. Others were dreaming up still wilder pipe dreams. The American voters washed their hands of all of them. Magic was not needed.    In came the conservatives with an agile political leader and a handful of timely ideas. America was ready for military rebuilding, tax cuts, deregulation, a slowdown in the government's growth rate, and the projection beyond our borders of power rather than mere pious bulls. Contrary to Dr. Wills, the Reagan administration did build a structure. With adequate staff work, a keen sense of timing, artful compromises and an ability to focus on most of the urgent problems of the hour, President Reagan implemented most of his prized policies by 1986.    Then came failure; not the failure of his magic but the failure of Ronald Reagan's conservatives. The liberals' failure was in their weakness for the wild thrills of radicalism. The conservatives, too, had a weakness that they did not overcome. It not only explains Mr. Reagan's present problems but portends ill for 1988.    The Democrats may lose that election if their New Age Liberals make the candidate carry all the weird ideological baggage they have piled up in recent years. But the Republicans may lose if their candidate is devoid of conservative ideas, and within the party the conservatives have become so impotent that it is likely the GOP candidate will get through his convention uncontaminated by their good ideas.    The conservatives' weakness is not radicalism or extremism but parochialism. The ordinary conservative looks within himself and purrs. The ordinary New Age Liberal lets out a roar, organizes ad hoc committees, marshals protests! He is political, outgoing and, by my lights, a public nuisance. The conservative rarely reaches out. He is only sporadically political. Often he is hardly social. Conservatives, alas, are narrow.    I have been among them for years. Each has one or two solutions to the republic's problems: Supply-side Economics! Traditional Family Values! The Eternal Verities! Economic Education! Beyond their one or two wonder cures they lose interest. Moreover, they can see only one or two ways to get these solutions across to their fellow Americans: Seminars! Position Papers! Political Action!    Owing to their parochialism they have never quite succeeded in creating a political community comparable to the liberals' community, and they have no idea of a cultural community. In America, New Age Liberalism is our culture. There is no alternative. From the fantasy of &quot;Hair&quot; to the fantasy of &quot;Platoon,&quot; New Age Liberalism has served up its sentimental pifflings and all Americans either savor them or take their leave.    Conservatives simply do not take much interest in the world around them. They do not even take an interest in one another's work; and so they rarely have acknowledged leaders in politics, journalism, the academy, or even business -- and they are supposed to reflect the ideology of business. Today, their political leader, based on the issues and his long service, should be Rep. Jack Kemp. Yet his candidacy flounders; conservatives are timid about reaching out to Mr. Kemp, and there is a curious guardedness about him. The conservatives' intellectuals have the most innovative suggestions for public policy, but for six years they have failed to engage liberals or even hold a significant place in public forums.    With a few exceptions such as the Heritage Foundation, the conservatives in their parochialism keep to themselves. Many conservatives in Washington take pride in existing apart. Since I brought the American Spectator to Washington a year ago, the most oft-repeated witticism directed at me by conservative friends has been a variation on the theme that in Washington I shall be &quot;corrupted.&quot; But New Age Liberalism is not immoral. It is infantile, and I have no yearning for a second childhood.    Conservatives are forever complaining about how they are barred from media and the universities. There is truth to their charge, but despite their wizardry at raising funds there is little evidence that the businessmen among them have ever attempted to purchase publications or broadcast media. Liberals gobble them up. When U.S. News andamp; World Report went on the block it was bought by a liberal. Liberal businessmen buy and support publications all the time. Not so conservatives. Most would rather retire from the fray and whine about Bias In The Media! The consequence of this piece of narrowness is far-reaching. It denies conservatives a place not only in the national debate on issues but also in shaping culture and in creating a political community.    Thus, after the political victory of Ronald Reagan has come the conservative failure. The conservatives were not resourceful enough to insulate their president against dissolving into sentimental appeasement toward his Iranian foes. Only a handful of Reaganites ever made it into the government, and few on the inside or outside were persevering enough to stay in touch with their president. In six years of presidential power the conservatives never significantly affected the climate of American ideas. They respond to liberal sallies; they never leave their name on a desirable issue. Proof that the conservatives have failed to establish a political community, which is to say a hierarchy of influential organizations and leaders, came in 1985 when in pursuit of public support of the White House's Central American policy Lt. Col. Oliver North could bypass conservative leaders and turn to charlatans such as Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell, a man who rose without a trace. More proof came in 1987 when a beleaguered president had to turn to Howard Baker, an admirable fellow but no self-conscious conservative.    Throughout the Reagan years the conservatives have been off pursuing their one way to save the republic: The Seminar! The Commemorative Banquet! Fund Raising! The narrowness of America's conservatives is a mystery. I have seen it retard fuddy-duddies like Russell Kirk and the libertarians, who can become violent at the first departure from orthodoxy. But it also overcomes conservatism's new recruits, the neoconservatives who gave up on liberalism when its utopianism became intolerable. The neoconservatives, too, have their own ways to save the world: The Quarterly Journal! The News Letter! Anti-Communism! Economic Growth!    The result is a conservatism composed of conservatives who do not integrate their narrow values into the broad range of human experience. Their views are sound enough but each is only one recipe on life's menu. Yet they must all be vegetarians.    The conservatives have not adapted to an era that is moving beyond the problems of the early-1980s. They have not even thought of maintaining enduring institutions comparable to those of the liberals. There is something decidedly shaky and ephemeral about all their think tanks, their magazines, their activist groups. The conservatives of Britain have institutions that have been around for decades. The British media have the diversity of a robust left and right. America has a one-party media, and conservatives have done little to change it.    We are now six years into the Reagan Revolution. They have been years of achievement, but only in terms of a few salutary policies. Otherwise the conservatives have lost their heft. They could not overcome their parochialism and coalesce into a political community. If they do not do so soon, I can see a book on the subject. Call it &quot;The Conservative Crack-Up.&quot;    ---   Mr. Tyrrell is the American Spectator's editor in chief, a syndicated columnist and author of &quot;The Liberal Crack-Up.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>