<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880803-0005 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Corporate Environmental Policies </HL><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> ENV </IN><TEXT>   Jo Ann Kwong's editorial-page article on corporate giving to environmental organizations (&quot;Corporate Donors Embrace Free-Market Environmentalism,&quot; June 23) grossly distorts industry's motivation in providing funding to groups that may, occasionally, differ with corporate environmental policies.    As the head of an environmental organization, I cannot speak for industry. But after working with industry for 15 years and receiving support, not only from corporate coffers, but also from the Rockefeller, Ford and Hewlett foundations, the Dutch government, the World Bank and the U.S. Agency for International Development, I am convinced that the private-sector contributes to such organizations as the Sierra Club, the Natural Resources Defense Council and the National Wildlife Federation in order to sustain a dialogue and to identify common goals and modes of cooperation.    Ms. Kwong asserts that &quot;these groups represent pro-regulatory interests that look to governmental bureaucracy for regulation and management of natural resources,&quot; which ipso facto are inimical to the interests of business. She fails to understand the dramatic changes that have occurred in corporate environmental policies in the past two decades. Most of U.S. industry accepts the reality that government has a critical role to play in the management of the environment and natural resources that impact on the lives and health of the American people and the economy. There may be differences over the degree of government intervention, but certainly minimal differences over the principle. The emphasis here is on reasonable intervention.    Looking at environmental issues parochially, Ms. Kwong ignores the international arena where industry and environmental organizations often cooperate to achieve common goals. For instance, the nonprofit World Environment Center serves as a bridge between industry and governments world-wide, sending expert volunteers to Third World countries to assist in solving industrial-pollution problems. More than 40 U.S. firms provide these experts without charge under a program funded by the U.S. Agency for International Development and the companies.    Working in the Near East region and Southeast Asia, these experts are welcomed by local industry, government environmental agencies, municipal authorities, because they bring with them technology, information, experience and science. These industry volunteers have executed environmental audits of steel mills, tanneries, textile plants, phosphate beneficiation plants, cement plants and refineries. After Bhopal, they conducted emergency response training in Tunisia and Turkey. They teach at seminars on hazardous waste, and risk management, and provide on-site training within U.S. plants for midlevel government officials.    This partnership between industry and an environmental organization -- mutually respectful and beneficial -- is &quot;free-market environmentalism&quot; at its finest.    Whitman Bassow   President, World Environment Center   New York   ---   In her article, Ms. Kwong used buckshot instead of bullets. As a result, &quot;friendly fire&quot; hit a few mistaken targets. She cites various corporate gifts to institutions such as the Environmental Law Institute, Conservation Foundation and Resources for the Future as indicative of corporate schizophrenia, as funding those who oppose the company's own business self-interest in the name of corporate social responsibility. Had she inquired further, she would have discovered these organizations were distinctly nonpartisan and non-advocacy, and have active programs aimed at positive corporate involvement in their organizational missions.    The Environmental Law Institute, for example, involves nearly 80 companies in its research and educational efforts through a corporate associates program. The institute seeks to balance its work products through use of input from all sectors including business. ELI's research staff includes economists, the research agenda includes work involving regulatory reform and replacing regulatory structures with market mechanisms as well as studies on the legal process. In a field frequently dominated by rhetoric and sharply adversarial positions, the institute has emerged as a forum for open, candid discussion of environmental issues and appropriate solutions. Business interests, like those from government and environmental organizations, will not always agree with what ELI concludes but will find it receptive to all serious points of view. Groups such as the institute are not pushing a particular point of view. We are convinced that better solutions emerge from a more open consensus-seeking process than one that selects in advance the only acceptable means or ends. ELI seeks balance, expertise and intellectual candor so that its studies can be relied upon by all parties in the &quot;marketplace of ideas.&quot;    At the Environmental Law Institute, we look forward to continuing our efforts with business professionals to improve environmental management and achieve cost-effective environmental protection. We have found that there are many more corporate managers who share our belief in an open dialogue about solutions than there are those who insist on some litmus test on economic theory.    Erik J. Meyers   Director, Associates Programs   Environmental Law Institute   Washington</TEXT></DOC>