<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880608-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis Clinches Democratic Nomination With Strong Showings in 4 Final Primaries --- Governor Gets Over 60% Of Vote in New Jersey, Wins Easily in California </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers and Rich Jaroslovsky (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis clinched the Democratic presidential nomination by piling up delegates in the final cross-country primaries and ensuring himself a comfortable majority at the party's convention in Atlanta next month.    The Massachusetts governor rolled up more than 60% of the vote in New Jersey against the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and NBC News projected Mr. Dukakis winning with a roughly 2-to-1 margin in California, where he led comfortably in early results. In two smaller Western states, Montana and New Mexico, Mr. Dukakis also won easily, and his strong finish was accompanied by a rush of delegates switching from other camps.    Before yesterday's votes were counted, the campaign was barely 150 short of the 2,081 delegates needed for nomination, and Mr. Dukakis seemed likely to top 2,200 delegates last night, or more than 1,000 above Mr. Jackson. Results from New Jersey and New Mexico indicated the governor would capture at least 90 to 100 delegates from the two states, and an additional 333 were at stake in California and Montana.    Pledges from more than 350 party leaders, or superdelegates, in recent months helped push Mr. Dukakis across the line, but his finish is the strongest of any Democratic nominee since 1972 and corresponds with a high favorability rating in national polls. By contrast, Vice President George Bush is afflicted by high negative ratings at the close of the primary season, even though he clinched the nomination six weeks ago and easily prevailed in the same four states yesterday.    The governor is helped by still being a relative unknown, to whom voters may turn because of their dissatisfaction with Mr. Bush. In the coming weeks, he must seek to solidify this support while revealing more of himself as he seeks an accommodation with Mr. Jackson and picks a running mate. Mr. Dukakis's advisers expect increased attacks in this period from Mr. Bush, who has already begun separating himself from President Reagan's policies and will turn to his new Democratic rival in a speech in Texas tomorrow.    &quot;His own negatives are so high he's going negative on Reagan policies,&quot; said Kirk O'Donnell, a Democratic strategist and adviser to the Dukakis campaign. &quot;We're only waiting for the next act, 'Return of the Voodoo.'&quot;    Mr. Dukakis's strong showings in both California and New Jersey were propelled by markedly different coalitions of voters, according to NBC News election-day polls.    In New Jersey, Mr. Dukakis fashioned his margin basically through overwhelming support from white voters. He did about as well among whites -- winning the support of about nine out of 10 -- as Mr. Jackson did among blacks.    In California, the picture was different. According to the NBC poll, Mr. Jackson made significant inroads with white voters, capturing the support of about three in 10 -- his best showing among whites in any primary. But Mr. Dukakis offset those results with a strong showing among the state's Hispanic voters, who equaled blacks at the polls and went for the governor by a margin of almost 2-to-1.    There was some evidence that as the Bush-Dukakis race takes shape, the Massachusetts governor, despite his lead in the polls, could encounter some problems. In both California and New Jersey, about one in seven Democratic voters told NBC they would rather have Mr. Bush in the White House in the event of a sudden crisis that required swift, decisive action. A similar proportion of each state's Democrats said the next president should &quot;continue along the path of Ronald Reagan's policies&quot; rather than &quot;change direction in dealing with our nation's policies.&quot;    Mr. Jackson's remarkable campaign has both helped and hindered Mr. Dukakis going into the fall. After months of competing with the civil rights leader, the governor enjoys a moderate image, but he has yet to establish a clear identity with the black voters he must strongly motivate in November. Among white blue-collar voters, Mr. Dukakis's ethnicity is a major asset, but there is concern that to the extent he has ceded populist themes to his rivals, he has also weakened his ability to turn out working-class support.    In the NBC poll, Mr. Dukakis also had high marks from voters as someone who is caring. About six in 10 Democratic voters in both California and New Jersey told NBC that Mr. Dukakis cares about people like them. White voters were more apt to see him as caring than were blacks. But just about as many California Hispanics as whites regarded him as compassionate -- another sign of his success in wooing that group.    The two Democratic contenders met at Mr. Jackson's hotel for about 90 minutes late Monday. While campaigning yesterday, Mr. Jackson said they focused on such issues as South Africa and insuring fairness in Democratic Party rules at the convention.    &quot;We did not discuss a role for me in the (Dukakis) administration or as vice president,&quot; said Mr. Jackson, who said his campaign &quot;will continue to make appeals to superdelegates.&quot; Between the two men &quot;there is no struggle based on any animosity at this point,&quot; Mr. Jackson said. &quot;It really is a struggle for direction.&quot;    In platform-drafting sessions this weekend, Mr. Jackson is expected to press his demands for a greater commitment to domestic programs as well as a strong plank condemning South Africa's apartheid policies. In selecting a running mate, there is some pressure to find a partner who can speak to populist themes, but this will be matched against Mr. Dukakis's evident weakness in foreign policy areas.    &quot;Dukakis has just been defining himself as the one person who is in the race who is not Jesse Jackson,&quot; said Edward Rogers, Mr. Bush's deputy campaign manager. &quot;George Bush and Michael Dukakis are about to be compared with one another. The campaign is about to become relevant.&quot;    Like Mr. Bush, Mr. Dukakis began with a third-place finish in the Iowa caucuses. But since winning Wisconsin two months ago, the governor has been unstoppable. Mr. Jackson never appeared to fully recover from his April loss in New York, and Mr. Dukakis ends the primary season having triumphed in 28 states, not counting what might be regarded as split decisions with Mr. Jackson in Texas and Vermont.    Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt and Illinois Sen. Paul Simon, who both fell out of the race despite early success in Iowa, are slated to endorse the governor today, and Mr. Dukakis's triumph contradicts past experience as well as those who predicted no single candidate in the early field would emerge with a majority. The field in fact worked to his advantage by making it more difficult for other rivals to establish themselves, and he is the first Democratic nominee to win the California primary since George McGovern in 1972.    As in most of the preceding primaries, Mr. Jackson won the support of about nine in 10 black voters. In New Jersey, he was unable to build significantly beyond that base. In California, by contrast, he made significant inroads among whites who are highly educated and who identified themselves as liberals.    Mr. Dukakis got few black votes in either state, and the NBC polls indicated that three in 10 New Jersey blacks and four in 10 California blacks haven't yet formed an opinion of him. But those who have an opinion tend to view him positively -- by margins of 2-to-1 in New Jersey and 3-to-2 in California.    Mr. Dukakis, who speaks Spanish, has made a major effort to court Hispanic voters, and the effort paid dividends yesterday. Besides his big win among California's Hispanic community, he garnered a similar margin of victory among New Mexico's Hispanic community, which made up an even larger proportion of voters, according to NBC's polls.    ---   Joe Davidson contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>