<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0112 </DOCNO><HL> A True Opening for U.S. in Iran </HL><AUTHOR> Patrick Clawson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   The momentum in the Iran-Iraq War has changed. Iran is no longer on the offensive. For the first time since 1982, neither side occupies much territory of the other and neither side is sure where the war will go. This change is at least in part related to the U.S. naval presence, greater U.S. pressure on Iran's arms suppliers, and close U.S. intelligence cooperation with Iraq.    But the U.S. is not getting what it could in return for its involvement. It is not demanding as much as it should from Iraq for its support, nor does it have a clear understanding of how to approach Iran to spell out what it would take to get the U.S. to be more neutral. Instead of acting to get more from the combatants, Washington seems to be smug about Iraq's recent gains. Unfortunately, the situation is unlikely to improve, because the standard wisdom in Washington about the Iran-Iraq War is wrong on almost every major point:   ---Iran is not being bled dry by the war.    A &quot;prostrate&quot; Iran is not about to sue for peace. Despite the talk about difficulties in finding soldiers, Iran has not yet mobilized particularly many men for the war. Iran's armed forces at their peak strength during an offensive do not exceed two million, which is equivalent to about 40 men per thousand population -- compared with 86 soldiers per thousand population in the U.S. in 1945. Furthermore, an army of two million is not that heavy a burden on a country that reports 1.5 million unemployed urban males, according to the 1986 census.    Iran's casualties are not very high by the shameful standards of modern warfare. It has lost between 200,000 and 400,000 people in the war, or 4 to 8 per thousand population. World War I, to which the Iran-Iraq War is sometimes compared, was vastly more bloody. The principal combatants lost several times as many dead as Iran has: France had 35 dead per thousand population; Britain, 24; Italy, 20; Germany, 28; and Austro-Hungary, 25. Nor is the Iran-Iraq War the bloodiest in the contemporary world: El Salvador has lost 13 per thousand since 1979, and Angola has lost 23 per thousand since 1975.    ---Iran's economic mess is not due primarily to the war.    The war is not a particularly heavy burden on the Iranian economy. Military spending is less than under the shah, who was enamored of expensive military toys that cost Iran $4 billion in 1977. Military spending is now low, partly because of arms embargoes but mainly because the Islamic Republic relies on poorly paid infantrymen equipped with simple equipment, much of which is produced at home.    Iran's military budget is difficult to measure, because the economy is distorted by artificial prices. As the debates over Soviet military spending have shown, measuring such spending in a distorted economy is tricky. The best figures for Iran's spending in dollar terms place the military budget at 20% of gross national product -- about half the level in the U.S. in World War II, or about the same level as the Soviet Union today.    The main reason for Iran's economic crisis is the collapse of the oil market since 1985. The combination of lower prices and limited volumes reduced Iran's oil income in 1986-87 to the 1972-73 level of $130 per person. In other words, Iran is back to where it was before the oil boom of 1973-85; in fact, due to inflation, Iran's per-capita oil income is worth only one-third the pre-1973 level.    ---Iran does have &quot;moderates,&quot; but they do not differ much with the &quot;radicals&quot; about the war.    The idea that Iran has moderates is not a creation of Oliver North. Iranian newspapers write every day about the open conflict in the Parliament between those they call &quot;moderates&quot; and &quot;radicals.&quot; The two groups are organized; each endorsed a slate of candidates in the parliamentary election this spring, when less than half the incumbents running for office were reelected. Some politicians vacillate between the two camps, which makes parliamentary debate lively.    Within the narrow confines of those who support clerical rule, Iran has a democracy as effective as any within the Moslem world except Turkey. Less than one-third of the bills proposed by the government became law in the last Parliament, and Parliament has rejected a higher percentage of nominees for the cabinet than has the U.S. Senate.    What separates the radicals and moderates is a deeply rooted dispute about the role of the government in society. Radicals are outraged that the moderates oppose price controls and state control over commerce, because radicals think price-gouging merchants cause inflation and shortages. Moderates have little use for the large-scale public investment projects favored by the radicals. When radicals propose raising taxes or reforming land ownership, the moderates are appalled, with some prominent clerics going so far as to preach sermons against the new measures as going beyond the strict limits on government action set in the Koran.    Foreign policy in Iran is largely bipartisan, and what disagreements do exist have little to do with the radical/moderate split. Everyone agrees that Islamic governments should be promoted throughout the Moslem world, but there are differences about the best mix of propaganda, weapons and aid to foreign groups, and Iran's own military might. Everyone agrees that Iran should remain free from the influence of foreign ideologies, but some (mostly radicals) see Western ideas as more seductive and therefore a more immediate threat than Soviet-style ideology. Everyone wishes the war could be brought to an end, but many fear that an unrepentant Iraq would rearm in order to attack at the next good opportunity.    The radicals emerged strengthened from this spring's parliamentary elections. That is unfortunate for the Iranian people, because the radicals champion economic policies that have rarely worked well. But the implications for relations with the U.S. are by no means clear.    ---The U.S. has reason to talk to Iran's leaders and possesses instruments to influence them.    Cooperation between the U.S. and Iran should not rest on some misguided U.S. effort to help Iran's moderates. The U.S. should make it clear it wants to talk to the government of Iran, no matter who controls that government. The U.S. cannot expect friendship in Tehran from either moderates or radicals, but it can expect respect from both groups if it stands up firmly for its interests, holding both a carrot and a stick. Iran has a long tradition of respecting superpowers.    Iran's leaders understand the need to accommodate powerful countries, but they will not compromise if they think they can achieve their goals by intimidation and skillful diplomacy. The U.S. display of naval force has given it leverage over Iran's leaders, and it should be prepared to use it to advance the twin goals of a sea and land cease-fire and an end to hostage-taking.    The U.S. and Iran share some interests opposed to Iraq's actions, and this could form the basis for an offer of cooperation. In particular, given the potential for Soviet use of chemical weapons, the U.S. has a strong interest in ensuring that the use of chemical weapons is utterly unacceptable to world opinion.    The U.S. missed a great opportunity when it reacted so mildly to Iraq's chemical attacks. The recent Iraqi chemical attack on civilians in the town of Halabja combined with the Iraqi missiles raining on Iranian cities have left Tehranis petrified about possible Iraqi chemical attacks on Tehran. The newspapers run detailed descriptions of what to do in case of chemical attacks and about new warning systems to alert the public. Tehranis want protection that their government cannot provide, and the government would gladly accept U.S. aid.    Within the Iranian political context, it was quite an event when Parliament Speaker Hashemi Rafsanjani was shown on television thanking the U.S. government for its treatment of some gas victims. In this situation, a U.S. offer of gas masks (to both sides) would have made a deep and long-lasting impact on ordinary people and on the government and would have had no strategic impact, since both armies already have protective gear. Instead, the U.S. vetoed a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning the use of chemical weapons -- an action widely commented on in Iran.    ---If we stick with Iraq we can make Iraq pay a higher price.    Make no mistake: The U.S. is supporting Iraq via intelligence cooperation, vetoes of U.N. efforts that would hamper Iraq, and a blind eye to allies who supply Iraq. That policy has been justified in part as a way to stop an Iranian victory. But the war situation is changing. The Iraqis are evidently preparing a large-scale invasion of Iran in the fall, in which case they may well let the Iranian opposition group they sponsor (the People's Mujahideen) set up a government on Iranian soil.    If the Iraqis go on the offensive inside Iran, U.S. policy makers will have to make a hard choice. Little would be gained by abandoning one side if no deal has been struck with the other. But if the U.S. chooses to stick with Iraq in the war, then it should make the Iraqis pay a price for its support. That means demanding Iraqi assistance in advancing an Arab-Israeli peace, something the U.S. has not yet asked the Iraqis to do. Iraq has much more credibility with radical Arabs than do the traditional U.S. allies in the region, such as Jordan and Saudi Arabia.    ---   Mr. Clawson, a research associate at the Foreign Policy Research Institute in Philadelphia, was an economist in the IMF's Mideast department, 1981-85. </TEXT></DOC>