<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880817-0100 </DOCNO><HL> So Who Will Cut Spending? </HL><AUTHOR> Tim W. Ferguson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When David Stockman failed in his final push to restrain federal spending in 1985, conservatives groused that the seeds of setback were sown in the 1984 campaign. Ronald Reagan won a landslide at the expense of a mandate, they said, by not telling Americans that budget choices needed to be made.    The Republicans are on the verge of another such exercise. The sharpest division George Bush's campaign has drawn with Michael Dukakis -- over military weaponry -- is one where Mr. Bush wants higher outlays.    Candidate Bush also favors ambitious national space exploration, a superconductor/supercollider push and ethanol subsidies. He wants to be &quot;the education president.&quot; The party's platform curses the Democrats for enlarging government but embraces the result. It does like the idea of contracting out public services, using block grants to enhance local control over how tax money is spent, and trying vouchers to bring that choice to the individual. But it's also fond of the Job Training and Partnership Act (four mentions), more beneficence for veterans, and help for the hinterlands (the Rural Electrification Administration is expressly safe).    Not one federal program is singled out for termination. Even Amtrak isn't suggested for privatization -- it only ought to have its subsidies reduced (a rarity even at that). Grover Norquist, a conservative political brawler who was one of Mr. Bush's whips in the platform drafting, is rather proud of the product, and points out some things that don't appear, such as an endorsement of the Small Business Administration that Sen. Lowell Weicker tried to work in. But a plug for a new presidential arm (a Science Advisory Council) is included, along with brags that Medicare spending has doubled and that the Strategic Petroleum Reserve has been enlarged to 550 million barrels from 79 million under Mr. Reagan.    It cannot be too surprising that Mr. Bush, a politician of indistinct philosophical heritage, isn't talking about pruning back the size of government. That idea is out of fashion. Mr. Reagan himself, after years of libertarian rhetoric that kept the faithful even as his record risked disillusioning them, was sounding a different note last week. Signing the &quot;drought-relief&quot; bill, he said it signified &quot;a distinctly American tradition, that of lending a helping hand when misfortune strikes.&quot; That used to be his brief for private or community aid, not for hitting up taxpayers.    In fact, the Reagan years have been ones of still-rapid government growth. Walter Fackler of the University of Chicago business school calculates that real expenditures rose at a 3.5% annual rate from 1980 to 1988, vs. 3.8% from 1972 to 1980. Budget Director Stockman got some social-spending limits early in the first term that have been felt by dependent Americans ever since. But a pre-emptive strike at Social Security came a cropper and, together with Caspar Weinberger's unyielding stance on the Carter-Reagan military buildup, closed the window.    In the past couple of years, a tailing off of Pentagon budgets, lower interest rates and effective nipping and tucking have slowed the growth clip to a crawl. Yet even now, even after the economy has enjoyed &quot;the longest peacetime expansion&quot; about which so much has been said this week, federal spending as a percentage of gross national product is higher than it was at the end of Jimmy Carter's presidency. At that, it should fall in the current fiscal year to about 22.3% from the 24.3% of the last recession. As the accompanying chart shows, this drop-off is respectable but not unique during comparable postwar stretches (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Aug. 17, 1988).The lingering level of spending, however, is without parallel in periods of U.S. peace and prosperity.    Now the nation seems poised for another budgetary breakout. The bailout of financial institutions that gambled and lost with federally insured deposits is likely to be the first big hit, $50 billion conservatively. Catastrophic health insurance, added this year to the Medicare monster at Mr. Reagan's request, is likely the forerunner of expanded state care, even without a Kennedy-Dukakis scheme for true socialized medicine. Employers are looking for a way to unload this burden from their expanding backpack of responsibilities. In any case, perhaps a million AIDS sufferers are going to need expensive attention by the early 1990s.    Interest payments on the federal debt are going to jump as rates drift back up. The rent, direct and indirect, for U.S. military outposts around the world is going up. Many people, including most Republicans, are intent on fighting a costly &quot;drug war,&quot; at home and abroad. Farming is now so distorted by state intervention that no lasting reduction in payments can be expected. Beyond the short-term burst, of course, lies the prospect of a retired baby-boom generation, a population bubble living its expanding nonproductive years with expectations of comfort and succor at an astounding tab.    The binge that American government has continued on during the Reagan years has been made possible in great measure by high taxes. Marginal-rate relief has been accompanied, according to some measures, by an increased actual tax burden for the middle class. And with big hikes to come in the Social Security payroll levy and Medicare &quot;premiums,&quot; the burden will grow.    Yet when the issue is framed in terms of specific programs or types of expenditures (the environment is another favorite due for a big infusion) Americans appear to want the public sector to spend more. This obviously is their prerogative in a democracy. However, when the demand is fostered by borrowed money, to be paid by taxes, or by shifting costs to third parties such as business through mandated benefits, the choice ceases to be clear. Only a candidacy that drives home the limits of the nation's resources and forces the electorate to assign priorities can hope to forge a sound fiscal framework.    This poses a problem for a party seeking to reaffirm its new-found claim to be a fount of opportunity. The growth camp disdains talk of limits; as it reminds us, a rising tide lifts all boats. Certainly it is right about the party's need to bring under its banner more of the mass of Americans who've long found the Democrats to be more benign company. But the tidal waters have been uneven, and the dockhouse is swamped. Someone has to engineer some flood control.    A line-item veto is a popular recourse among these convention goers, but would still require a president to tell Americans no, they couldn't have more cookies from the jar. Neither Ronald Reagan nor George Bush has been much for that. Gramm-Rudman is raising consciousness, but the squeeze comes next year when automatic cuts -- including some for the military-could be demanded instead of tax increases. After bashing Michael Dukakis on defense, Mr. Bush would be hard-pressed to choose that. A balanced-budget amendment with tax hurdles would force choices, but will not be won with mere passing mention in the midst of a 1988 celebratory campaign. It remains, as William Simon's surprising best seller put it nearly a decade ago, &quot;a time for truth.&quot;    The GOP platform, notwithstanding its broad sentiment for limited government, is no truth-teller. Despite the president's joining of the deficit issue in his valedictory Monday night, the party has its eyes on an even flusher tomorrow. Most delegates surveyed by the Los Angeles Times would cut spending only on the old Republican whipping boy, &quot;welfare.&quot; That is to say, welfare for the poor.    The choice of Dan Quayle for vice president is something of a strike for fiscal toughness. He scores higher on taxpayer rankings than others who were &quot;on the short list.&quot; He joined the GOP majority in a 50-to-49 approval of a 1985 move to curb middle-class &quot;entitlements,&quot; but backed away on a key amendment.    In a few ways, a Republican defeat could lead to inroads against spending. Although this convention likes to roast the Democrats for vagueness, it is Mr. Dukakis, to his credit, who spelled out budget items he would cut. Not surprisingly, they are strategic arms. (His preference for more-expensive conventional forces could undo the budget gains there.) It could also be the case, however, that a Democratic president could tackle the retirement transfer programs that are the biggest spending problem. Republicans find this political poison, in the same way Democrats cannot safely touch taxes. Moreover, a President Dukakis might be able to address the hidden costs of irrational pollution and hazard regulation, more forbidden territory for Republicans.    Yet it would be foolhardy to think a Dukakis administration, full of inveterate activists such as fellow Massachusetts mischief-maker Ed Markey, and subject to pressure from party interest groups, would be the lower-spending choice. That only makes it more discouraging that the GOP has accepted the existing federal behemoth as its own and will not issue a blueprint for downsizing.    Does good economics make good politics? This election is likely to be close, and the accepted wisdom is that no one ever won votes by promising to take away someone's rice bowl. Indeed, even among those who wear the conservative label proudly here, few want to risk being labeled a &quot;root-canal Republican.&quot; Pain and suffering are this party's unhappy past. But, of course, the dentist only goes to work to relieve long-term pain in the wake of easy indulgence. There are a lot of sweet tooths in town. Is anybody watching the pralines?    ---   Mr. Ferguson is features editor of the Journal's editorial page. </TEXT></DOC>