<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870727-0095 </DOCNO><HL> Public Investment, Not a Binge---By Alan Reynolds</HL><DD> 07/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Governments invest. They build highways, schools, hospitals, dams, post offices, sewage and water systems, subways and airports. They use capital equipment, such as fire engines and police cars, to improve public safety and health. They purchase computers to supply commercially valuable information on demographics, weather, agriculture and trade.    The U.S. is the only major nation that refuses to count government investment as investment. The IMF's latest World Economic Outlook thus reveals that real &quot;public investment&quot; in the major industrial countries rose by 1.2% in 1986. But a footnote adds that &quot;for the U.S., public investment is included in public consumption.&quot;    Because the U.S. alone counts public investment as consumption, both investment and savings look low when compared with other countries. Savings equals income minus consumption -- not income minus investment -- so that mislabeling government investment as consumption exaggerates consumption and thus understates savings, as well as investment.    Other countries are quite careful to distinguish between fixed capital formation by governments and actual government consumption, such as salaries of public officials or transfer payments. In South Korea, nearly half of government spending is classified as investment, and real government investment has grown by over 11% a year since 1981. In Japan, too, government fixed investment is nearly as large as government consumption, amounting to over 7% of gross national product. In the U.S., by contrast, GNP figures show only &quot;private domestic investment,&quot; which includes housing plus business purchases of plant and equipment. Similar government or household investments in, say, computers or vehicles are hidden within categories called &quot;government purchases&quot; or &quot;personal consumption&quot; of durable goods.    The reason this is so important is that it has become extremely fashionable to explain the U.S. trade deficit as a result of a &quot;gap&quot; between investment and savings. In this exercise, budget deficits are always assumed to subtract from savings. Because the U.S. government supposedly &quot;consumes&quot; too much, absorbing private savings, foreigners must invest more in the U.S. than Americans invest abroad -- in order to finance that excess government &quot;consumption.&quot; When that capital inflow exceeds the capital outflow (such as LDC loans), the U.S. then runs a compensating trade deficit.    This is perfectly good accounting, except that the key terms -- investment and savings -- are not properly defined. If they are not measured in the same way for all sectors of the economy, including government, then we cannot make the critical distinction between whether the U.S. is saving too little or instead investing &quot;too much.&quot; And unless we use the same definitions of gaps between savings and investment in other countries, we are unlikely to apply this same analysis to them.    A consistent measure shows the greater international problem to be a collapse of private and public investment in countries with trade surpluses. Even aside from government investment (or consumer durables), the U.S. is the only major country in which fixed investment was a larger percentage of GNP in 1986 than it was in 1980. This is important to realize when we hear it repeatedly said that large foreign purchases of U.S. debt in the 1980s have not gone toward productive investment that will help Americans repay this credit without a cut in living standards here in the years to come.    From 1980 to 1986, U.S. business fixed investment rose from 11.9% to 12.4% of GNP, residential investment from 4.3% to 5.3%, and government investment from 3.3% to 4%. In Japan, by contrast, the combination of those same categories of capital formation fell, since 1980, from 31.6% to 28.2% of GNP. Since Japan's saving rate remained about the same, the sharp decline in that country's investment rate left surplus savings to finance capital formation where the opportunities were brighter -- namely, in the U.S. (From 1981 to 1986, annual productivity gains in manufacturing slowed to only 2.5% a year in Japan, compared with 3.6% in the U.S.)    In Taiwan, the drop in the investment rate was even more dramatic -- from 34.7% of GNP to about 19%, suggesting Taiwan is having a &quot;going out of business&quot; sale. The same thing happened throughout Continental Europe. Rises in current-account surpluses were closely matched by reductions in domestic capital formation. The surplus nations have been decapitalizing themselves, running capital deficits by exporting their &quot;seed corn.&quot; This is not a situation to be envied. Among other unpleasant consequences of this disinvestment abroad, the U.S. is the only major country that reduced unemployment since 1981.    Countries with declining investment rates and rising unemployment rates might take a lesson from U.S. tax policies. Yet officials of these countries instead propose that the U.S. could somehow raise federal tax revenues even faster than it has. As The Wall Street Journal reported on June 17, &quot;During the recent economic summit in Venice, European and Japanese leaders pushed aside Mr. Baker's demands that they expand their economies and asked instead what he is doing to cut the budget deficit.&quot; The advice is ironic, since none of the overtaxed, capital-exporting countries has experienced nearly as rapid an increase in real tax revenues as the U.S. has since 1980. In the first seven months of the current fiscal year, federal tax revenues were 13% higher than last year, and the U.S. deficit is likely to fall by a fourth for the year as a whole.    Yet even higher U.S. taxes, it is claimed, would increase U.S. savings by reducing the budget deficit. That is, taxes are the same as savings. This paradoxical notion simply assumes that higher tax rates would not reduce investment, output, employment, profits, equity values, or related sources of private savings. Even worse, it rests entirely on a false accounting identity -- one that Japan and Europe would not accept for themselves.    Because governments in the U.S. are wrongly assumed to do no investing at all, it follows by definition that all government borrowing must be for consumption. U.S. budget deficits (unlike the larger deficits of many trade surplus countries) are therefore assumed to be &quot;absorbing&quot; savings to finance consumption, thus causing &quot;dissavings.&quot; Yet governments in the U.S., just like governments in Japan and Europe, do invest in structures and productive equipment. It is no more correct to treat all government borrowing -- budget deficits -- as &quot;negative savings&quot; than it would be to do the same with corporate bonds that are issued to expand plant and equipment, or mortgages used to build houses. It is primitive single-entry bookkeeping to count only government liabilities while ignoring government assets.    A recent study by Michael Boskin, Mark Robinson and Alan Huber, for the National Bureau of Economic Research, estimates that government nonresidential fixed investment in the U.S. exceeded $151 billion in 1985. That figure was already larger than combined federal, state and local deficits of $136 billion in 1985. Since 1985, government investment has grown even larger, and the OECD estimates that combined deficits in the U.S. will drop to $102 billion this year. The government sector is &quot;saving&quot; -- that is, government income exceeds government consumption. Since 1983, government has been investing out of current income, providing future generations with more tangible assets than financial liabilities.    Classical economists, like J.B. Say of &quot;Say's Law&quot; fame, never suggested that capital budgets had to be balanced. Nobody would suggest, for example, that a city should not build a toll bridge unless it can be financed out of this year's tax revenues -- future tolls could obviously finance any bonds used to build the bridge. Unfortunately, the future tax revenue from most public investments is not so obvious as in the case of toll roads or bridges. The yield from most government investment instead takes the form of a healthier, better-schooled labor force, or greater security of property rights, or a better transportation network, or reduced labor costs to taxpayers as a result of computerized government services. Such benefits do indeed raise an economy's output and income, and that increase in taxable income can finance the related increase in national debt (which has lately been smaller than the increase in government's capital stock).    Although states and localities do most of the investing, the federal government does most of the borrowing. State and local governments own almost 69% of a total government capital stock that, according to the Boskin study, is worth $2.6 trillion (excluding housing, land and minerals). Separating federal from state and local budgets is not sensible, since the OMB estimates that federal grants pay for nearly 40% of the state and local investment. It would certainly be difficult for states and localities to run budget surpluses of $60 billion were it not for federal grants of about $100 billion, so we have to look at investment and borrowing for the total government sector.    Less than a third of government investment is for defense, and some would argue that military hardware does not improve marketable output. By that logic, we would also have to exclude the weapons, computers and vehicles of local police departments, as well as court buildings and jails. Yet without those government investments, private property would surely be less secure and productive. It likewise seems hard to imagine world investors being so eager to build factories and offices in the U.S. if the country were not so militarily secure. There are also spillover benefits and scale economies from military and aerospace research and development: The single largest U.S. export industry is aircraft and spacecraft, amounting to $15.3 billion of exports in 1986.    It is perfectly reasonable to question whether the benefits of each government investment justify the costs, or whether services such as education and health could be provided more efficiently by private, competitive industries. What is not acceptable is to continue comparing investment and savings with other countries while pretending that governments in the U.S., unlike every other country, only borrow to finance consumption. Governments invest. And borrowing for investment is not inherently unwise or imprudent for business, homeowners or governments.    ---   Mr. Reynolds is vice president of Polyconomics Inc., Morristown, N.J. </TEXT></DOC>