<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0165 </DOCNO><HL> Leisure andamp; Arts:Theater: Classic Revivals---By Edwin Wilson</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> London  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Theater scholars insist that Luigi Pirandello's &quot;Six Characters in Search of an Author&quot; is one of the most important plays of the 20th century, but audiences often wonder why, because it rarely comes across that way in performance. There is no question that the play is highly original. Pirandello's conception involves six fictional characters abandoned by their author before he had attached them permanently to a play or a novel. Forced to wander endlessly through a sort of literary purgatory, the characters one day burst into the rehearsal of an Italian theatrical troupe demanding that the actors play out their story. Written in 1921, the play raises fundamental questions not only about the nature of theater but also about art and life and appearance and reality.    In production, however, the lengthy arguments between the characters and the actors are more like intellectual debates than drama. Also, key elements of the play are seriously dated. The play that the acting company is rehearsing, for instance, is a Pirandello comedy that audiences are no longer familiar with. Then there is the play within the play -- the story of the characters -- which in most productions is confusing as well as overly melodramatic. Given these obstacles Pirandello admirers feared that the play was destined to wander forever, like the six characters themselves, in a theatrical void.    In a miracle of resuscitation, however, a new production has just opened at the National Theater that brushes aside the cobwebs and brings the play vividly and electrifyingly to life. Nineteen eighty-six marked the 50th anniversary of Pirandello's death, which, among other things, meant that the copyright on his works has expired. Free to abandon approved translations and a strict adherence to the text, adapter Nicholas Wright has come up with a new version that adheres to the spirit of the original at the same time that it makes the play fully accessible to today's audiences.    The National Theater has a new organizational scheme in which individual directors work on a permanent basis with a company of actors. &quot;Six Characters&quot; represents the first production of the group headed by Michael Rudman, who could not have arranged a more auspicious debut.    The most obvious change made by Mr. Wright and Mr. Rudman is a substitution for the play the theater company is rehearsing; rather than a Pirandello comedy it is Shakespeare's &quot;Hamlet.&quot; Right away there is a play the audience can recognize, and a text that fits perfectly with Pirandello's ideas of role playing and appearance vs. reality.    There have been other changes. As suggested before, one of the stickiest problems with &quot;Six Characters&quot; has always been the story of the characters. Essentially, a man has sent his wife away to live with another man he thinks will make her happier. The new couple have three children and some years later, when the older daughter has grown up, the woman's first husband visits a hat shop that doubles as a brothel. When he is about to begin making love to a young &quot;milliner,&quot; his former wife bursts into the shop and announces that the woman in his arms is his stepdaughter. Later, to add to the family's tragedy, the woman's younger daughter drowns and her son shoots himself.    In the new Wright-Rudman version, not only are these events made clearer than I have ever seen them before, but also they are thoroughly absorbing. This is very important. When the six characters are not riveting figures the audience wonders why the actors do not get rid of them and get on with their rehearsal. It is even more important that the characters should be frighteningly real, so that they counterpoint the make-believe world of the actors.    Hiding in this remarkable realization of Pirandello's masterpiece are the actors, led by Richard Pasco as the troubled father, Lesley Sharp as the edgy, neurotic stepdaughter, and Robin Bailey who gives a superb performance as the director of the theatrical troupe. Mr. Bailey, with a white mustache and goatee, is dressed to look like Pirandello, which adds still another enjoyable dimension to this multilayered production.    &quot;Six Characters&quot; is an exception to the general rule that when adapters or directors begin fooling with a text, catastrophe follows. The National's current production of Moliere's &quot;School for Wives&quot; directed by Di Trevis is not an exception to the rule.    In Moliere's play a middle-aged bachelor is planning to marry a young girl he had sent away to be raised in a convent, assuming that she would grow up in ignorance of the ways of the world and would emerge as an obedient, faithful wife. Naturally she meets and falls in love with a young man her own age and the aging bachelor is foiled at every turn.    Though set in a provincial town, the play is decidedly an urban affair, but Ms. Trevis and her designer Pamela Howard have given it a rustic setting of open fields with bales of hay. They also have added a strong religious component with crude wooden crosses dotting the countryside and a diadem of stars sparkling overhead at the beginning and end of each segment. At the end, a goddess descends to give her blessing to the affair. Both the rural setting and the religious overlay call attention to themselves in a way that throws Moliere's play totally out of balance.    Moliere is not the only one to suffer. Robert David MacDonald has provided a felicitous new translation of the play that is also buried beneath directorial interpretation.    For that matter, Mr. MacDonald is having bad luck all around this year. He also supplied a fresh, lively translation of Federico Garcia Lorca's &quot;The House of Bernarda Alba,&quot; now at the Globe Theater. Both the production and its stars have received several awards, but it is difficult to understand why. The play deals with the strictures of religion in rural Spain in the early part of the century. A woman whose husband has just died plans to force her daughters to observe several years of mourning by never leaving the house. The youngest daughter, desperate for the love of a man, rebels and the play ends in tragedy.    The production is directed by Nuria Espert who is well known in Spain as the director of her own company. Perhaps a histrionic approach to the play is the norm in Spain, but unhappily it brings out the worst in Glenda Jackson, the star of the current production. Bernarda Alba is a single-minded matriarch who embodies the combined authority of the church, the family and society. She is tyrannical enough without underscoring her cruelty, which is what Ms. Jackson does, barking out commands in a hard-edged, loud voice that carries the play over the line from tragedy to melodrama. What is called for is an understated, modulated performance that can bring out the depth of feeling inherent in Garcia Lorca's poetic drama. </TEXT></DOC>