<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0059 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Bug-Eating Nematodes HoldPromise as Natural Pesticide---By James P. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CHV ECLCHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   BIOCONTROL, THE USE of naturally occurring organisms to combat agricultural pests, has been touted for years as an alternative to chemical pesticides. But to date, only a few of the products have been commercially feasible, and their uses are limited. As in many other areas of technology, the advances needed to commercialize innovations in biocontrol have come in grinding, small steps, rather than blinding breakthroughs.    So it is with the lowly nematode. Scientists have long known that while most varieties of this microscopic underground worm harm many major crops, a handful of nematode strains vigorously attack other underground pests and are innocuous to humans and plants. The helpful nematodes, however, aren't naturally plentiful enough to make much inroad against farm pests. And until the worms can be produced and applied in large quantities, they will be too expensive to compete with chemical pesticides.    Biosis, a Palo Alto, Calif., biotechnology company, is using both low and high technology in trying to hurdle these barriers. It has developed a stinking broth of enzymes and ground-up pig kidneys that fosters the nematodes in great abundance and at less expense than previous efforts to mass produce the worms. Biosis is propagating the worms by the billions in stoppered three-foot plastic tubes about six inches in diameter.    But the nematodes are voracious bug killers only during their juvenile life cycle. Biosis found a low-cost way to ensure that all the nematodes are at that stage: It runs them through detergent in a Whirlpool washing machine, and the detergent kills all forms of the bug except the durable juveniles.    Biosis also faced another major hurdle: how to package the worms in large quantities that can easily be transported, stored and applied. Although the worms can be kept in liquid, the containers have to be aerated. Instead, Biosis took an opposite tack that is simpler and less expensive -- it dries the worms and stores them in a state of suspended animation. To use the nematodes, farmers will only have to drop a pack of dried worms into a sprayer, add water to revive the organisms, and apply to fields or orchards. The nematodes then sift through the soil, seeking out and dining on subterranean bugs, including such farm pests as the root-weevil, termite and Colorado potato beetle. The worms feed on about 200 types of insects.    COMMERCIAL SUCCESS isn't assured, of course. One remaining giant step, fraught with problems, is to increase production to huge 40,000-liter tanks in a $15 million, high-volume plant that Biosis plans to build soon. Moreover, nematodes so far can only be used for underground pests or in a moist above-ground environment. Field tests, however, have shown enough promise to attract Chevron Corp.'s chemical unit and Chemlawn Corp., the lawn-care unit of St. Paul, Minn.-based Ecolab Inc., as research partners.    &quot;It's just a question of time and money&quot; before strains that work above-ground are developed, says Biosis president Albert J. Morris. Biosis already has committed $10 million to research and development. Field tests show that on certain crops the special nematodes work as well as chemical pesticides, Mr. Morris says. Biosis plans to begin commercial sales next year, initially focusing on high-value crops such as almonds and artichokes. As production costs drop, the company expects to expand its market to include control of termites, cockroaches, and a host of field and garden pests. &quot;We'll be cost-competitive (with chemical pesticides) within the next few years&quot; for a half-dozen types of crops, Mr. Morris says.    Laser May Aid Gene Altering in Grains    Scientists have long been stymied in their efforts to create superior new strains of commercial grains by artificially introducing foreign genetic material. But a laser-based gene-insertion technique developed at the University of California at Irvine may help solve the problem.    For years, scientists have tried in vain to manipulate the genetic makeup of grain plants such as corn and wheat. Such a DNA transfer, now fairly common in animal cells and in other plants, is a prerequisite to genetically engineering better-yielding grains.    To insert different DNA into an animal cell, scientists soften its outer membrane with solvents, then expose it to a specially engineered virus that penetrates the cell and carries the new genes in with it. For broadleaf plants such as tomatoes or tobacco, a similar procedure is applied, using bacteria instead of a virus. But scientists have been unable to find a similar &quot;vector&quot; to smuggle new genetic material into the cells of grain plants.    THE IRVINE RESEARCHERS have come up with a method they think could help. After suspending the target cells in a liquid that contains the DNA to be introduced, the researchers manipulate individual cells into the cross hairs of a microscope-mounted laser. When the cell comes into target, it is zapped with the tiny beam for a fraction of a second. Before the neat, self-sealing hole closes, the new DNA flows in, says Michael Berns, director of the university's Beckman Laser Institute and Medical Clinic. He says the process has been successfully tested on animal cells. Whether it can work with the thick cell walls of grain plants remains to be seen, although preliminary work has been promising, he says. </TEXT></DOC>