<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870519-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Argentine Chief's HaltTo Army Trials Is a RiskTaken to Curb Discord---He Seeks Role for a MilitaryAlienated by ProsecutionFor Killings of Leftists---A Society Profoundly Split---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   CHACABUCO, Argentina-Obdulio Cagnola, a retired banker, is a measured man whose manner reflects the gentle pace of this provincial town. But one night in late 1984, his calm evaporated. Listening to a Radio Uruguay news broadcast, he learned that a boat had capsized in the Rio de la Plata. There were three survivors. One was called Eduardo Cagnola.    The temptation to believe the impossible was overwhelming. Ten years ago, Mr. Cagnola's son Eduardo, a young law student, had disappeared-seized, along with his pregnant wife, by armed men who came to their hotel at the resort of Mar del Plata. Like at least 9,000 others during the Argentine military's &quot;dirty war&quot; against leftist subversion, they simply vanished.    &quot;Of course, it's 99% certain my son is dead,&quot; says Mr. Cagnola. &quot;But then there's that tiny 1% you can't quite abandon.&quot; That glimmer of hope was enough to lead him to frantic inquiries about the radio report. The accident survivor turned out to be named Edgardo, not Eduardo.    And so the anguish of this quiet Argentine continues, as does that of his nation. The mistrust dividing Argentine civilians and the armed forces has proved so deep that President Raul Alfonsin speaks of the country as being &quot;close to civil war.&quot; Now this has led him to his biggest gamble since democracy was restored in 1983: a proposal, expected to become law this week, that will virtually end his effort to prosecute military officers for human-rights crimes during the &quot;dirty war.&quot;    The so-called due-obedience law exonerates all lower-ranking officers of atrocities on the ground they were following orders. The legislation, precipitated by an army mutiny last month, is a reconciliation effort forced by the realization that the armed forces are simply outside government control. Yet it could end up merely insulting some sections of society, while failing to satisfy an aggrieved military.    The basic problem in Argentina may be summed up thus: On the one hand stands an angry and underpaid army, convinced it fought a successful war against Marxism during its 1976-83 rule and that the country's democratic government should honor it, not vilify it. On the other stand the likes of Mr. Cagnola, convinced that their innocent children were tortured and murdered and that the assassins must be brought to justice. In the middle, the bulk of Argentina's 30 million inhabitants hesitate, anxious for reconciliation but unsure how to achieve it, committed to democracy but uneducated in its functioning.    The president now has decided the only solution is to coax the military into the fold. Following a halving of the defense budget and a vacuum in military policy over the past three years, the armed forces-which for 50 years have seen themselves as integral players in the governing of Argentina-have reached what a retired general calls their breaking point. Says the congressional leader of Mr. Alfonsin's Radical Civic Union party, Cesar Jaroslavsky, &quot;We must quickly give the army a sense of mission, a sense of belonging to the nation and its democracy.&quot;    It won't be easy. The Alfonsin administration's prosecutors have convicted and sent to prison five former military junta leaders and five other officers. Another 360 officers are facing trial on human-rights charges, most of which, it is assumed, now will be dropped. To the military, even one more trial would be too many. &quot;This law is inadequate,&quot; argues Gen. Julio Alfredo Fernandez Torres, a former chief of staff. &quot;Nothing short of a complete amnesty will solve the problem.&quot;    The army mutiny in protest of human-rights trials involved only a small number of officers, but, says Carlos Floria, a military expert, it expressed &quot;the subjective rebellion of the entire armed forces. . . . The President had virtually no soldiers who would obey him.&quot;    The government denies it is bending to the will of rebellious officers in proposing the due-obedience law, along with a modernization of military equipment and a rethinking of military policy. But human-rights groups and opposition Peronist politicians denounce the moves as dangerous capitulation. They call the new legislation &quot;the Rico law,&quot; after the mutiny leader, Lt. Col. Aldo Rico.    Ultimately, the success or failure of Mr. Alfonsin's initiative may determine whether this country, which has had four military coups in the past 32 years, sees yet another. For now, though, most analysts rule out military action, for Argentinians appear united against such a course for the first time since a 1930 coup that installed a tradition of civilian-military collaboration.    What is more immediately at stake is whether the custom of military tutelage of civilian society can be ended. At a time when armies in Brazil, Peru and Ecuador have shown they are prepared to flex their muscles to get their way, this test could be important for the continent. Last month's rebellion made clear that in Latin America, merely avoiding coups doesn't solve the problem of the role of the military.    &quot;The lesson that President Alfonsin has to get across,&quot; says Robert Potash, of the University of Massachusetts, &quot;is that the military are servants of society.&quot; Otherwise, many believe, Argentina could see a steady undermining of its fragile democracy, with the army rebelling whenever it opposes government policies.    Notes Diego Guelar, an opposition Peronist congressman, &quot;A President who does not control his armed forces is called a puppet.&quot;    For the moment, President Alfonsin is far from that. Huge demonstrations against the army mutiny showed that he enjoys great popularity. The economy, while hardly booming, is stable enough to maintain this support. But it remains unclear whether this clout can be converted into the reconciliation that alone will consolidate democracy. With congressional and gubernatorial elections approaching on Sept. 6, the president is under pressure to show he can achieve this.    How difficult a task he faces is evident in Mr. Cagnola's home town of Chacabuco, about 150 miles from Buenos Aires in the heart of the fertile Pampas. The place, with its largely agrarian population of 25,000, seems peaceful enough. Bicyclists ride the straight avenues, lined with pollarded trees and solid homes. Huge flanks of meat hang in butcher shops. People sweep the sidewalks every morning outside their houses.    But things are not as harmonious as they seem. Seven people from Chacabuco, six of them students, disappeared between 1976 and 1978. Their families, all living within a mile of Mr. Cagnola's home, remain shocked and incredulous over what happened. They accuse the church, local authorities and the whole community of giving them scant support. Unanimously, they say their lost relatives were innocent-students with left-leaning ideas, perhaps, but neither Marxists nor terrorists.    &quot;The kids who disappeared were the most sensitive in the town, the ones with ideas,&quot; says Nolfredo Rossetti, whose pregnant daughter-in-law, Liliana, disappeared in December 1976. &quot;Maybe that's a coincidence. But I don't believe the military wanted people who could think.&quot;    Like the other families, Mr. Rossetti believes the trials of military men must continue, partly because he thinks impunity will only tempt them to return to power. And like the others, he still suffers the trauma of the disappearances. &quot;Why couldn't they give us the body?&quot; asks Teresa Cassino, whose brother, Jose, disappeared with his wife in 1977. &quot;Then we could at least put flowers on the grave.&quot;    Down the road from her house, in a main square dominated by a statue of Argentine military hero Jose de San Martin, local farmers are seated in a bustling cafe. They express regret for the town's &quot;desaparecidos,&quot; but they reckon that those who vanished were &quot;probably Communists.&quot; They seem in conflict in their attitude toward the military, believing that criminals should be judged but also that there has to be an amnesty. &quot;We have to finish with this somehow,&quot; says one man, DanielFiori.    The most outspoken is Ramon Dauria, a police officer who was based in Buenos Aires during the disappearances. He has no doubts the Chacabuco students got what they merited. &quot;Those kids were Communists,&quot; he says, &quot;and we had to rip out the evil in this country by its roots. The army made no mistakes. If we hadn't done what we did, this place would have become another Central America.&quot;    Mr. Dauria's views are shared at the highest levels of the military command. Capt. Oscar Calandia, a senior naval officer, argues that the &quot;dirty war&quot; was a major victory from which the military should have emerged as heroes. He categorically rejects further trials, warning that &quot;if this goes on, a rebellion could happen again.&quot; And he is deeply critical of the government, which he says has no ideas on defense and military policy.    From him and other military officials emerges a deeply conservative vision. It is one of intense nationalism and Catholicism, fanatical anti-Marxism and deep suspicion of civilian competence, particularly in military affairs. In the view of one official, &quot;human rights&quot; is a notion &quot;invented to be used against Moscow but perverted and used against us,&quot; and the use of drugs in the U.S. reflects &quot;a Marxist-Leninist plot to undermine U.S. society and the family.&quot;    To such sentiments have been added a sense of persecution. One retired officer says his son, who took part in the army mutiny last month, told him he was prepared to die. The reason, he said, was that he was determined the army should regain its dignity and shed its &quot;image of torturers and assassins.&quot;    Feelings also have been fanned by what is widely seen as the failure of government defense policy since 1983. In the words of Rosendo Fraga, a military expert, &quot;the administration knew what it didn't want -- a powerful army -- but had no constructive ideas.&quot;    As a result, the military budget has slumped, along with troop strength, salaries and morale. Bitterness over the lost 1982 war with Britain over the Falklands (here called the Malvinas) has been allowed to fester. Disputes -- among the army, air force and navy and between generals and lower ranking officers -- have worsened. The armed forces' mission remains undefined, with the government insisting the military has no role in internal security but declining to spell out foreign threats Argentina faces.    All this has left deep resentments. &quot;We're in favor of democracy,&quot; says Gen. Fernandez Torres, &quot;but one that works. We can't accept a government that just sits there with a guitar.&quot;    The challenge for President Alfonsin thus is immensely difficult. An end to the human-rights trials and even drastic changes in military policy won't change the mentality of the armed forces overnight, nor quickly heal society's deep rifts.    For some time yet, the armed forces seem set to prowl on the flanks of society. Following the rebellion, they know they can successfully apply pressure to a democracy not yet mature enough to resist them. &quot;It's been demonstrated,&quot; says one observer, &quot;that the gun in the president's hand isn't loaded.&quot; The risk of continuous arm-twisting by the military clearly exists. If there is more insubordination, Mr. Alfonsin may be overwhelmed.    However, he also appears to have a unique opportunity, for his own country as well as for a continent long racked by military coups. There is a feeling, both in civilian society and in the armed forces, that 50 years of continued zigzagging from civilian to military rule have gotten Argentina nowhere. &quot;Most of us have finally realized,&quot; says Jorge Bustamante, a financier, &quot;that we can't have change without consensus.&quot; This feeling could eventually provide the basis for civilian-military integration.    Even among some of the mourning families in Chacabuco, there is a sense that reconciliation must come. Ricardo Callone, who lost his sister-in-law, believes that &quot;this is our army, and we have to accept them. If we want to do complete justice to the past, we'll never build the future.&quot; And Mr. Cagnola, sifting through photographs of his son as a child on the beach, says, &quot;For him, we can't solve anything.&quot;    He turns to his wife Nilda, who is crying and has put her hand on his knee. &quot;It was a lottery,&quot; he says, &quot;and we lost.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>