<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0114 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:As Supercomputers Get Faster,It's Hard to Identify the Fastest---By William M. BulkeleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   SUPERCOMPUTERS, the superfast behemoths of the computer world costing as much as $25 million and used by scientists, mathematicians and designers, are getting even faster. And the claims about whose supercomputer is fastest are flying furiously.    During most of this decade, the speed race has been led by Cray Research Inc., Minneapolis, which has built about two-thirds of the world's estimated 250 supercomputers. But now the market is heating up. &quot;You see now, for the first time, Cray having challenges to its hegemony in the supercomputer market,&quot; says Marcia Brooks of market-research firm International Data Corp., Framingham, Mass.    Identifying the fastest computer is tricky, however. &quot;Measuring power is an imprecise art at best&quot; because different computers are faster on different programs, says Jack C. Dongarra, a scientist at Argonne National Laboratory. Still, the faster, the better; a speedier supercomputer can more accurately map an oil reservoir and more quickly simulate the design of a new car, for instance.    SO SPEED CLAIMS and promises are endemic. For example, HNSX Inc., a venture of Honeywell Inc. and NEC Corp., claims the NEC supercomputers it sells are the world's most powerful single-processor systems. ETA Systems Inc., a St. Paul, Minn., unit of Control Data Corp., says it will deliver next year &quot;the fastest, most powerful supercomputer in the world.&quot;    And then there's upstart Thinking Machines Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., which designed the Connection Machine, a completely different type of supercomputer costing $5 million. The Connection Machine is based on parallel processing, which uses a number of processors in concert to solve a problem faster than can be done with a single processor -- much as a group of kids can paint a fence more quickly than the fastest adult. Oliver McBryan, a New York University mathematics professor who has worked with many supercomputers, says, &quot;Clearly, at the moment, the fastest operating machine is the Connection Machine.&quot;    The speed of supercomputers is usually measured in megaflops -- millions of floating point operations per second -- or gigaflops, which are billions of such operations. Theoretically, the fastest supercomputers on the market can perform in gigaflops. But many speed estimates are suspect. &quot;Peak speed claims are really scary,&quot; says Danny Hillis, designer of the Connection Machine. &quot;It's like talking about the peak speed of a runner jumping off a cliff.&quot; Mr. McBryan says he has solved partial differential equations on the Connection Machine at a rate of three gigaflops, which is faster than even the theoretical peak speeds of other supercomputers.    THE MOST COMMONLY QUOTED tests of supercomputer speed are by Mr. Dongarra of the Argonne laboratory, which the University of Chicago operates for the Department of Energy. In June, he reported that a Cray X-MP parallel supercomputer with four processors executed a test routine called Linpack faster than any other computer tested. An NEC SX-2 was the second fastest, followed by another Cray and a Fujitsu Ltd. supercomputer marketed by Amdahl Corp. (The Connection Machine wasn't tested; Thinking Machines says it hasn't had time to convert software to run Linpack.)    Cray says that its fastest computer now is the Cray-2, which it says has a maximum speed of 2.2 gigaflops after a recent improvement in the speed of its memory chips.    Clearly, the speed race will continue, especially as programmers discover more about parallel processing. But programmers are just learning how to manage several processors at the same time without getting bogged down in communicating among them. Many researchers believe that although massively parallel supercomputers, using thousands of processors, may better handle problems involving huge amounts of data -- such as interpreting satellite photos or modeling the flow of fluids or air around objects -- they won't be as useful for more standard tasks.    THE CONNECTION MACHINE, Thinking Machines' massively parallel computer, has 65,000 small processors that work together to solve problems. Several other private groups in the U.S. are building massively parallel supercomputers, as is a German government-funded group whose Suprenum model is due next year.    ETA says a version of its ETA-10 with eight processors linked together will be the world's fastest machine when it is installed next year. The ETA-10, which runs so fast its circuits have to be cooled with liquid nitrogen, will be able to handle 10 gigaflops, the company says. But Cray, too, promises a new machine, the Y-MP, in the first quarter of next year, and some analysts think it may be faster than the ETA-10. An even faster Cray model is due in 1989.    Supercomputer designers are looking at other ways to make the machines work more quickly. An alternative approach that is being developed is to give the machines long instructions in a single burst rather than a series of short instructions. A new San Diego company called Chopp Computer Corp. is designing a computer that can handle nine instructions at a time, which Chopp expects will make the machine faster than the latest Cray model.    Meanwhile, what scientists really need, Mr. McBryan says, is a supercomputer capable of simulating a wind tunnel for a large airplane or the combustion process inside an engine. That would require 100 gigaflops, he estimates. </TEXT></DOC>