<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890803-0001 </DOCNO><DD> = 890803 </DD><AN> 890803-0001. </AN><HL> What's News --@  World-Wide </HL><DD> 08/03/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE ADOPTED a $305 billion defense measure for fiscal 1990.    By a 95-4 vote, the chamber endorsed Bush's proposals for new strategic weapons but rejected parts of his spending plan for conventional arms. The defense-authorization legislation supports the development of the B-2 Stealth bomber, a proposed space-based anti-missile system, and a pair of mobile nuclear missile systems. The Senate's spending blueprint differs markedly from the House version, which sharply cuts spending on the administration's strategic priorities.    House and Senate conferees are expected to face lengthy and difficult negotiations next month to resolve the disparities between the two measures.    ---   BUSH EXPRESSED frustration over a lack of data about Mideast hostages.    With a fundamentalist Moslem group in Lebanon threatening to kill American captive Joseph Cicippio today unless Israel releases a Shiite cleric, the president said a lack of precise information about the Americans being held or their captors was hampering his ability &quot;to make a decision&quot; in the crisis. The Navy, meanwhile, began moving warships in the direction of Lebanon and Iran, giving the president a ready military option as officials continued to press diplomatic efforts.    A U.N. official arrived in Lebanon to seek the body of hostage Lt. Col. Higgins amid a report that Shiite kidnappers might spare Cicippio at Iran's behest.    ---   Poland's Kiszczak was elected premier after the Parliament's Communist-led coalition overcame internal rifts. The move secured the party's control of the government. The ex-interior minister, an enforcer of the 1981 crackdown on Solidarity, said he would move to provide food to the nation, which is facing shortages and higher prices.    ---   Apartheid foes in South Africa launched a nationwide campaign of civil disobedience to protest next month's segregated parliamentary elections. Several hundred black and mixed-race activists sought treatment at whites-only hospitals, mainly in Durban and Johannesburg. All those appearing in need of medical care reportedly were admitted.    ---The Navy conducted the first successful test firing of a Trident-2 nuclear missile from a submerged submarine. A Soviet trawler was warned away from the area as the unarmed missile was fired off Cape Canaveral at an undisclosed target in the Atlantic. A flotilla of anti-nuclear protesters last week caused a delay of the test.    ---   A HUD report indicates that profiteering in programs meant for low- and moderate-income residents by well-connected consultants is more widespread than previously reported. According to the agency's inspector general, 20 different consultants were paid more than $5.7 million to help channel projects to developers.    ---   The Senate Labor Committee approveda bill that would substantially restrict discrimination against handicapped persons by employers and concerns that serve the public. The measure was cleared after a final round of negotiations between senators and the White House.    ---   A federal jury in Washington awarded $50 million to the families of 137 passengers killed when a Korean Air Lines jetliner strayed into Soviet airspace and was downed by a missile-firing fighter jet in 1983. All 269 people aboard the aircraft were killed. The six-member jury found the KAL crew guilty of willful misconduct.    ---   The House approved a $138 billion labor, health and education bill that provides for continued growth in AIDS research and a more than 20% increase in aid for low-income public school children in elementary grades. The chamber also upheld a bid to roll back current abortion restrictions in Washington.    ---   A Siberian miners' leader called for the creation of independent trade unions to replace official bodies. Miners in the region staged a weeklong strike last month. Meanwhile, the head of the Soviet Union's government-controlled unions presented a draft law to Moscow's legislature to allow workers to strike if binding arbitration fails.    ---   Rafsanjani is scheduled to be sworn in today as Iran's fourth president, Tehran's official radio said. Rafsanjani, who served as parliamentary speaker for nine years, succeeds Ali Khamenei, whose second four-year term was to expire in October. Khamenei became Iran's spiritual leader following Ayatollah Khomeini's June 3 death.    ---   South Korean police detained opposition leader Kim Dae Jung and questioned him about an unauthorized trip to North Korea by a colleague. Clashes erupted between riot police and Kim's supporters near the Seoul police station where he was held.    ---   Cambodia's Hun Sen said he wants free elections to be held within three months after Vietnam completes its troop withdrawal in September. The Hanoi-backed premier made his remarks in Paris following Tuesday's close of a three-day peace conference. Ministers at the forum agreed to a mechanism for monitoring the pullout.    ---   A leading Chinese intellectual has fled to the West, an activist in Hong Kong said. Chen Yizi, the former director of an influential Beijing think tank, is suspected of acting as a link between deposed Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang and the crushed studentled pro-democracy movement. </TEXT></DOC>