<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0045 </DOCNO><HL> Heard on the Street:Greenmail Is Infuriating Many Stockholders,But Fighting It Still Offers Little Satisfaction---By Linda Sandler</HL><DD> 12/11/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> USG GT GM GME GS CPC TX DIS P VIAHEARD ON THE STREET (HRD)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Fury is rising against all the companies paying off raiders or bothersome stockholders. But it isn't easy to get satisfaction from company managers who pay greenmail, lawyers say.    In recent weeks, shares of USG Corp., Goodyear, General Motors Class E and others have dived sharply following premium payments to big holders who represented a takeover threat or a nuisance. Greenmail, some portfolio managers say, is costing them more in the short term than abuses like insider trading.    Some big institutional investors are calling for regulators to ban greenmail payments. &quot;I think you need a rule to hold companies accountable,&quot; says Dean LeBaron of Batterymarch Financial Management. Some ordinarily quiescent traders and investors are suing Gillette, CPC International, Goodyear and General Motors. They say, among other things, that managers who pay greenmail aren't doing their duty to shareholders.    But angry investors may not get satisfaction anytime soon. While Congress is looking at ways to stop greenmail, it isn't yet illegal. Securities regulators are too stretched by fighting insider trading to worry about greenmail abuses, lawyers say. Shareholders seeking redress in the courts may have a hard, protracted battle, they add.    &quot;Greenmail cases are in the early stages of their judicial evolution,&quot; says Melvyn Weiss of Milberg Weiss, a stockholders' attorney.    Mr. Weiss is currently handling a greenmail suit filed this week in New York state court against Ross Perot, General Motors and GM directors. Milledge Hart, a former Electronic Data Systems president, alleges that GM wasted corporate assets and failed in its fiduciary duties when it bought out Mr. Perot's GME stake for $743 million. It's the second suit filed against GM.    The big problem, lawyers say: Judges and juries tend to give managers the benefit of the doubt in complex cases involving fiduciary duties. Thus GM might prevail if it shows it had a valid business purpose in buying out Mr. Perot, such as getting on with its job without distractions.    Similarly, companies threatened by raiders can argue that they have a valid business goal in fending off predators. Particularly in Delaware and New York, where many companies are incorporated, such cases are often settled without much profit to plaintiffs. Some companies that buy out raiders do offer benefits to other shareholders as well.    Earlier this year, the Delaware Supreme Court approved a settlement of a shareholder suit against Texaco. In 1984, the company bought out the Bass family in what may have been the biggest greenmail payment ever. The plaintiffs basically got money to pay their legal fees plus a modest settlement.    Even in California, which is generally more favorable to shareholder interests, greenmail suits can be frustrating and protracted. In 1984, shareholders sued Walt Disney Productions and greenmailer Saul Steinberg. They still haven't managed to rescind the payment, although the court did agree to freeze Mr. Steinberg's spoils in an escrow account.    William Lerach of Milberg Weiss, who's representing some Disney stockholders, says such favorable decisions are rare. Mr. Steinberg, he says, assumed a kind of fiduciary role because he earlier sued Disney for hurting shareholders by blocking his takeover attempt. Because of that, &quot;we could say he shouldn't profit&quot; at other shareholders' expense.    The suit against Goodyear may have a better chance, lawyers say, because it isn't a pure greenmail case. Earlier this week, Smith Barney sued Goodyear and Sir James Goldsmith in federal court to recover money its traders lost when the British raider was bought out.    Smith Barney alleges the defendants deceived investors, which would be a violation of federal securities law. The defendants said publicly there wouldn't be any greenmail while privately negotiating the buyout, says George Saks, Smith Barney's general counsel.    But even misrepresentation cases aren't easy to win, lawyers say. A raider who says he won't take greenmail may be telling the truth, even if he later changes his mind. Mr. Weiss is still fighting a stockholders' suit launched in early 1985 against Mesa and T. Boone Pickens Jr. after he accepted greenmail from Phillips Petroleum.    The free market, to be sure, has ways of holding managers accountable. Successive raids in recent years on Disney, Phillips, Viacom and others forced managers to pay attention to their stock price. Disney stock has done so well that Mr. Steinberg is trying to retrieve the stock he sold to the company in 1984. But the mechanism isn't working perfectly anymore. Raiders &quot;have been hurt in their ability to get financing&quot; because of the SEC's scrutiny of junk bond financings, says John LeFrere of Delta Capital Management.    Big stockholders can sell shares of companies that pay greenmail or force out directors. But that may not be enough to ensure that all shareholders are treated equally, says Mr. LeBaron.    Lawmakers see a good chance that greenmail will be outlawed by the 100th Congress. Currently, the SEC only says companies shouldn't deceive investors and should disclose &quot;material&quot; information. SEC tender rules say buybacks should be open to all shareholders, but they don't stop companies from paying greenmail &quot;before or after&quot; a buyback, says an SEC attorney. The SEC mulled an anti-greenmail rule last January but concluded that it fell within the states' jurisdiction.    But nationwide securities markets need uniform rules, Mr. Weiss says. &quot;The SEC should be empowered to go beyond deception in securities cases to prevent greenmail payments that injure shareholders.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>