<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): Financiers---Plugging the Regulatory Gaps---By Peter Truell</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION (CFT)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   POLICING the global financial markets these days is a tough beat.    The big U.S. crackdown on insider trading, for example, swept through Bahamas bank accounts, London trading by arbitrager Ivan Boesky and other links from Venezuela to Switzerland. And in Britain, authorities have pursued a series of U.S. connections as they study acquisitions by Guinness PLC.    At the same time, though, regulators are questioning the capital adequacy of global banks -- those mega-players in the international equity and bond markets -- that do much of their business thousands of miles from regulators in their home country. Financial hazards have grown bigger and more complex in recent years, underlining the need for greater international cooperation among regulators.    Says John G. Heimann, a former U.S. comptroller of the currency: &quot;The new global financial-service marketplace, while full of opportunities, brings new types of risks and greater damage potential from old types of risk.&quot;    To address such worries, financial regulators in London, New York and other world centers are moving to cooperate more closely. They are trying to agree on common standards of regulation and have begun to exchange more information.    There is &quot;a combination of concern about risks and concern about unfair competition,&quot; says Martin Feldstein, president of the National Bureau of Economic Research.    But the gaps in cooperation remain wide, and regulators clearly are worried.    While securities regulators aim primarily to protect investors, bank regulators mostly try to assure the smooth working of the banking system. Many practitioners say this traditional division leaves holes in regulation, especially when banks are increasingly involved in securities markets and securities firms are assuming more credit risks.    In particular, much of the capital markets business by securities houses &quot;slips through the regulatory cracks,&quot; says Mr. Heimann, currently a vice chairman of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    Mr. Feldstein concurs, voicing concern about large hedging positions at major securities firms. He and many financiers say it is important to remember that many of these new hedging techniques have been created in a uniquely favorable environment: booming financial markets, falling interest rates and smooth economic growth.    What especially worries Mr. Feldstein are risks associated with billions of dollars of currency and interest rate swaps arranged in recent years.    In a swap agreement, two or more borrowers exchange debt-service obligations. &quot;As long as all of the parties (to such agreements) stay solvent, that's fine,&quot; Mr. Feldstein says. &quot;But often for savings of as little as (0.1 or 0.15 percentage points), people are engaging in agreements not knowing who their counterparty is.&quot;    International cooperation among securities markets regulators is at a much earlier stage than that among banking regulators. And the policing steps that have been taken have been haphazard.    Mr. Boesky's insider trading came to light only because Dennis Levine -- another admitted insider trader -- gave evidence to U.S. authorities about Mr. Boesky's abuses. And Mr. Levine's illegal trading only came to the attention of the Securities and Exchange Commission because of an anonymous tip from Merrill Lynch's office in Caracas, Venezuela. That postcard from Venezuela helped prompt exchanges of information between the SEC and Britain's Department of Trade and Industry.    The SEC, aware of some of these gaps, signed memorandums of understanding for the exchange of information on insider trading with Switzerland in 1982, the Canadian provinces of Ontario and Quebec in 1985 and Britain in 1986, and also has arranged to share stock trading information with Japanese regulators. The U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission has signed similar agreements with regulatory authorities in Singapore, Canada, Australia and Britain.    While the agreements are primarily aimed at stopping insider trading, their scope soon could be widened. British securities authorities also hope soon to tie up similar agreements with French and Swiss authorities.    Banking regulators, on the other hand, have a longer history of international coordination. For decades central bankers have been discussing -- and sometimes coordinating -- monetary policies through meetings at the Bank for International Settlements.    Some of these banking regulators have to monitor securities markets, too. That is because in most major countries -- except the U.S. and Japan -- banks are permitted to underwrite and trade securities, and they also own their nations' biggest securities firms.    U.S. and Japanese banks are also active in the investment banking and securities businesses, particularly in London, Frankfurt and Zurich. Meanwhile, they are breaking down the barriers in their own markets and becoming more involved in New York and Tokyo investment banking.    Because of this shift, central bankers are eager to assume more responsibility for overseeing securities markets, and in European countries they already share responsibility for monitoring commercial banks' securities businesses. Some analysts say that it is likely that any major reform of the U.S. financial system would move in that direction.    Recently, the New York Federal Reserve Bank and Britain's central bank, the Bank of England, agreed to require greater capital backing for many newer financial instruments. E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the New York Fed, and senior officials at the Bank of England hope to bring Japan into this agreement, as well other leading industrialized countries.    While the Bank for International Settlements provides a forum for bank cooperation on regulation and supervision, there is no similar institution for regulators of the world's booming securities markets. Yet credit increasingly flows through the securities markets -- much of it beyond the view of central banks, the traditional monitors of most forms of lending.    This makes banking regulators fret. Many of them would like to establish central supervision of securities and banking markets to close such regulatory gaps. But securities markets regulators aren't all convinced this would be easy. &quot;It would be extremely difficult to organize a joint regulation of securities and banking,&quot; says a senior official at Britain's Securities and Investments Board Ltd., London's version of the SEC.    Still, securities and banking regulators worry whether they are acting fast enough to safeguard against growing risks in the world's financial markets. Many agree there is little time to waste in the scramble to create better international regulation. As Mr. Feldstein says: &quot;You can't just look at the building and say it hasn't fallen down yet, so we should be safe.&quot;    ---   Mr. Truell reports on international banking from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>