<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880617-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A FEDERAL JUDGE CLEARED the way for the Iran-Contra trials.    Rejecting defense motions to dismiss the charges against North, Poindexter and two others, Judge Gerhard Gesell ruled that prosecutors didn't violate the defendants' constitutional rights. The defendants, charged with conspiring to defraud the government by diverting to Nicaragua's rebels the proceeds of U.S. arms sales to Iran, contended that the prosecutors made improper use of testimony given under limited immunity. The judge said he wanted to proceed as quickly as possible with the case.    Independent counsel Walsh is barred from using any of the immunized testimony, and Gesell said the issue could be pursued after the trials are over.    ---   DUKAKIS HOLDS a sizable lead over Bush, according to a new nationwide poll.    The Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey found the Massachusetts governor ahead by 49% to 36% among those considered most likely to vote, and by a slightly larger margin among all registered voters. But the survey also points up some potential Dukakis weaknesses that the vice president could exploit. While the Democrat is perceived as more compassionate and as the stronger leader, his advantage is much less pronounced when voters are asked about specific issues.    Jackson told Congress that the government should use caution in involving the military to combat drugs, saying the option should be used as a backup.    ---   The Senate approved an overhaul of the welfare system designed to move recipients into the work force. The bill was passed after the chamber adopted an amendment backed by Reagan requiring at least one parent in a two-parent family receiving welfare to take a community-service job for 16 hours a week.    ---   A jury in Arizona acquitted former Gov. Mecham of charges that he concealed a $350,000 loan to his 1986 campaign. Mecham's brother, a co-defendant, also was found innocent. The verdict was viewed as a partial vindication of Mecham, a Republican, who was removed from office April 4 on an impeachment conviction.    ---   Blacks in South Africa defied the government's emergency rules and observed a self-declared national holiday to mark the anniversary of the 1976 Soweto riots. Shops and schools were closed, and church services were held. In Cape Town, police reported the deaths of 11 suspected African National Congress guerrillas in the past week.    ---   A U.S. judge in San Francisco prohibited the Reagan administration from beginning random drug testing of all 13,000 federal prison employees. The ruling found that justification hadn't been shown for &quot;innocent, law-abiding and wholly competent&quot; workers to be subjected to such testing. The government plans to appeal the decision.    ---   The FAA ordered the expanded use of altitude-reporting equipment by small-plane pilots. The rule, less stringent than an earlier proposal by the agency, requires use of the devices within a 30-mile radius of 27 of the busiest airports and a 10-mile radius of 111 others.    ---   An international AIDS forum concluded in Stockholm with a plea by Sweden's health minister for rich countries to help underdeveloped nations fight the disease. Many of the 7,000 experts attending the five-day conference said AIDS prevention must be emphasized since there isn't an immediate prospect of a cure.    ---   The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility for Wednesday's bomb attack in the Northern Ireland garrison town of Lisburn, and it vowed &quot;unceasing war&quot; against British forces in Ulster. Officials admitted that a security lapse allowed an IRA guerrilla squad to plant the explosives. Six British soldiers were killed in the blast.    ---   Israel's army clamped a curfew on the West Bank city of Nablus after an assailant shot and wounded an Israeli soldier. Troops rounded up dozens of Arabs for questioning. It was the second shooting of a soldier in the six-month Palestinian uprising. The army also demolished seven houses of Arabs suspected of recent firebombings.    ---   House Speaker Wright said he would welcome the appointment of an independent investigator by the House ethics panel if the move would accelerate the committee's inquiry into his financial dealings. The Texas Democrat was reacting to a call Wednesday by Reagan for a special prosecutor.    ---   Wedtech Corp.'s former president said company officials met with Bush in an effort to eliminate competitors for government contracts. A spokesman said the vice president doesn't recall the meeting. The disclosure came during testimony at New York Rep. Biaggi's racketeering trial.    ---   Estonia's Communist Party removed leader Karl Vaino following two months of nationalist sentiment that included calls for economic and political independence from Moscow. Vaino, the third party leader of a non-Russian republic to be removed in a month, was succeeded by Vajno Vaeles, a former Soviet envoy to Venezuela.    ---   Judges in South Korea called for a judicial system that would protect basic rights and be independent of the executive branch. At least 279 judges urged the changes, considered the first such collective action in South Korea's history. Separately, aides said the country's chief justice would offer his resignation to President Roh today.    ---   The Justice Department acknowledged that the U.S. employed a convicted Nazi war criminal as an intelligence agent for 10 years after World War II to help fight communism in Austria. A department report showed that the Army's Counter-Intelligence Corps had hired Nazi war criminals and aided them in escaping punishment.    ---   Poland's Communist leaders urged formation of a national coalition to support their program of economic and political restructuring. The Central Committee resolution, however, appeared to exclude leaders of the outlawed Solidarity trade union.    ---   Rival Palestinian groups battled at two refugee camps in Beirut, leaving at least 12 people dead and about 30 others injured. In southern Lebanon, Israeli soldiers killed two Lebanese guerrillas, police said. </TEXT></DOC>