<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870319-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Flood Watch:Dams' Safety WorriesOfficials Who BelieveRepairs Are Lagging---Earthquakes and Other RisksGive Nightmares to SomeDespite a Recent Respite---Stitching Up a TVA Crack---By Bruce IngersollStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTDEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> MONCKS CORNER, S.C. </DATELINE><TEXT>   The 1983 dam scare here is remembered as &quot;the peril at Pinopolis.&quot;    On a languid summer morning, the West Pinopolis Dam suddenly sprang an enormous leak, setting off alarms in the powerhouse. While the police rapped on doors to evacuate downstream residents, emergency workers struggled to keep the huge dam from collapsing. They tried plugging the leak with weighted bales of hay. They tried steel plates. Increasingly desperate, they bought a furniture store's entire stock of mattresses, only to find them too buoyant. Finally, they slapped together a makeshift dam with pile-driven utility poles.    A disaster was averted -- for the time being. But federal dam regulators worry that West Pinopolis is one of many dams around the country that would collapse if a severe earthquake hit. Hundreds of dams couldn't withstand a major flood. Thousands more have fallen into disrepair, some leaking or slumping so badly that they are in danger of collapse.    &quot;One of these times, Mother Luck isn't going to hold,&quot; warns William Bivins, the dam safety coordinator for the Federal Emergency Management Agency. &quot;One of these high-hazard dams is going to pop at night when everybody is asleep in bed. It will wipe out hundreds of people.&quot;    But to some top officials, warnings about dam disasters are overblown, and in most states public interest in dam safety is low. In the 1970s, nearly 500 people died in six major U.S. dam breaks, but in the 1980s the fatalities have been few in this country, though a 1985 dam break in Italy killed more than 220 people.    Meanwhile, dam-safety initiatives have been slowed by tight budgets, bureaucratic inertia and the lack of a political constituency. &quot;All of our constituents are dead people,&quot; says safety advocate Bruce Tschantz, a professor of civil engineering at the University of Tennessee.    Of the 80,000 or so dams in the U.S., about 8,000 are owned or regulated by federal agencies. The rest are owned by farmers, ranchers, developers, utilities or states and municipalities. Most major dams are owned and maintained by big agencies such as the Pentagon's Army Corps of Engineers and the Interior Department's Bureau of Reclamation.    The bureau is still haunted by the 1976 collapse of the Teton Dam in Idaho as it was being filled for the first time, killing 11 people. One-fifth of the bureau's 300 dams, all in the West, are classified as unsafe. Critics say the bureau doesn't treat dam safety as a priority. Bureau officials disagree, but since 1980 the agency has spent only 11% of $750 million authorized by Congress for safety &quot;modifications.&quot;    Internal documents obtained from the Corps of Engineers, meanwhile, show that a superflood would overwhelm at least 20 of that agency's 600 dams, engulfing such communities as Houston and Valley City, N.D. The corps is also studying how well several structures, including two dikes on the Clemson University campus in South Carolina, would hold up in a major earthquake. If the dikes failed, the football stadium, dubbed &quot;Death Valley&quot; by Clemson's foes, would be swamped. Overall, &quot;We are concerned about 36 dams,&quot; says Lloyd Duscha, the corps' deputy director of engineering and construction.    Remedial efforts have been limited, however. Some cost-conscious Reagan administration appointees haven't shared agency engineers' sense of urgency. &quot;Bureaucratic engineers always try to figure out a way to perpetuate themselves and build up their budgets,&quot; asserts William Gianelli, who in recent years oversaw the corps as assistant Army secretary for civil works.    On the state level, the number of unsafe dams has been reduced to 1,948 from about 2,900 in 1981, according to a survey for the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Many dam owners simply dismantled their aging structures rather than make repairs. But the survey says that only 21 states have adequate regulatory programs and that the rest are underfunded and undermanned.    For Joseph Ellam, Pennsylvania's director of dam safety, the situation is unsettling. &quot;Catastrophic failures have occurred before, and they will occur again,&quot; he warns. &quot;With the exception of nuclear power plants, no man-made structure has a greater potential for killing a large number of people than a dam.&quot;    The West Pinopolis Dam, 30 miles from Charleston, S.C., is one such dam.    Although the dam now is in good repair, earthquake experts believe it would fail in the event of an earthquake as powerful as the devastating Charleston earthquake of 1886, which killed 86 persons and caused panic as far away as Cleveland.    If the dam failed, some 2,000 residents along the Cooper River &quot;wouldn't have any time to run for their lives,&quot; says Ronald Corso, the director of hydropower licensing for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. The flood would engulf the Charleston Naval Yard and the Atlantic Fleet's nuclear-weapons arsenal as well as a major industrial corridor, causing $1 billion in damage. It would also clog Charleston's harbor with silt, closing a key port for the Navy.    The dam is vulnerable to an extraordinary phenomenon known as &quot;liquefaction,&quot; Mr. Corso says. Seismic shock waves could &quot;liquefy&quot; the sand in the dam's foundation, turning it into quicksand or &quot;mush.&quot; The shuddering dam would quickly slump, spilling the waters of Lake Moultrie in a thunderous rush.    The dam's owner, South Carolina Public Service Authority, also known as Santee Cooper, calls the chance of such a disaster remote, but the state-owned utility, under federal pressure, has agreed to strengthen the dam. &quot;We don't care where they get the money so long as they fix it,&quot; Mr. Corso says.    The energy regulatory commission has worries about more than 100 of the 2,000 dams it regulates and has ordered several utilities to make repairs. Montana Power Co., for one, is rehabilitating an ice-battered dam near Missoula to protect the Clark Fork River. It holds back tons of toxic smelting waste in the bottom silt, Mr. Corso says. &quot;If you dump that waste down the river, it will be the biggest mess known to mankind.&quot;    The Tennessee Valley Authority has pared its list of unsafe dams to 14 from 21. Fixing Fontana Dam in western North Carolina is a high priority. At 480 feet, Fontana is the tallest dam east of the Rocky Mountains. The upper part of the dam needs reinforcing against a major earthquake. And an alarming 100-foot-long crack in the concrete has reopened and requires restitching with cables.    In Wyoming, Reclamation Bureau officials are keeping close watch on the badly leaking Fontenelle Dam on the Green River. The same sort of seepage that caused a near-failure in 1965 is underminining the dam. The officials are keeping the reservoir level as low as possible, rather than risk deluging Green River, Wyo., (population: 13,000), but they admit to being at &quot;Mother Nature's mercy.&quot;    Last summer, so much melted snow came down from the mountains that officials couldn't discharge water fast enough to keep the reservoir from refilling. &quot;We baby-sat that dam night and day,&quot; says one Reclamation Bureau official. &quot;We had two bulldozer operators there 24 hours a day.&quot;    For years, federal officials in the field have been warning their superiors about Fontanelle and other deteriorating dams. But cumbersome cost-sharing arrangements and resistance from the White House budget office have limited the Reclamation Bureau's efforts to a few projects. While the agency has begun budgeting more money for dam safety, many other projects will have to wait.    &quot;It takes a long time to get momentum building behind a program, especially when it doesn't have high administration support,&quot; says Neil Parrett, the bureau's chief of dam design. &quot;We all could do better. But I celebrate the progress we've made to reduce the threat out there.&quot;    The Reclamation Bureau, like most of its regulatory brethren, has been slow to bring its substandard dams into compliance with the latest safety guidelines, as ordered by President Jimmy Carter in 1979. Federal dams should be stable enough to withstand the &quot;maximum credible earthquake,&quot; usually defined as the quake from a known source like California's San Andreas Fault that could cause the most severe &quot;vibratory ground motion&quot; at a dam site.    Under the guidelines, federal dams should also have enough spillway capacity to discharge the &quot;probable maximum flood.&quot; Hydrologists calculate such a flood on the basis of the worst combination of meteorological and hydrological events likely to occur in watershed. In the Rockies, for example, it could be heavy rains mixed with a record snowmelt.    Several Reclamation Bureau dams, including four on the Salt River and two on the Verde River in Arizona, are vulnerable to &quot;overtopping&quot; by a superflood. The crucial dam is a national historic monument, Theodore Roosevelt Dam. If it were overtopped by the probable maximum flood on the Salt, the top of the dam would crumble, triggering a &quot;domino effect,&quot; says the bureau's Mr. Parrett.    The flood would heavily damage two downriver dams, knock out a third and surge on toward Phoenix. &quot;Phoenix gets drowned,&quot; Mr. Parrett says. An estimated 250,000 people would be flooded; property damages would hit $9.5 billion.    The Corps of Engineers has made even less headway than the Reclamation Bureau, largely because of budget ceilings and high-level skepticism at the Pentagon about probable maximum floods. The corps under Mr. Gianelli undertook only two dam modifications between 1981 and 1984. In contrast, the much smaller TVA started five. Mr. Gianelli, now a engineering consultant in California, says that the corps could never explain to his satisfaction how it calculated the probable maximum flood.    Prado Dam, perched in a canyon above suburban Los Angeles, is one project that Mr. Gianelli held up. If the dam failed, the probable maximum flood on the Santa Ana River would inundate 1.3 million residents in Anaheim and other suburbs and cause as much as $40 billion in damages, mostly in Orange County, according to the corps's risk assessment.    Mr. Gianelli, who served as California's water resources director under Gov. Ronald Reagan, remains unpersuaded. &quot;That dam has been there 50 years,&quot; he says. &quot;It has never filled to the point where the spillway is even used. You fix a dam if it's leaking.&quot;    In the private sector, meanwhile, dam safety continues to lag. Some farmers scoff at warnings that the dams they built with the Soil Conservation Service's assistance are about to flood out their neighbors. And many corporate dam owners put off costly repairs.    &quot;It's the last place anybody wants to spend money,&quot; says Gerald W. Farquhar, a Washington attorney. &quot;Everybody says it'll be the other fellow's dam that goes.&quot;    Among state governments, money for regulating dams remains tight. While California leads the nation with a $3.8 million budget and a 60-person staff, most states make do with much less -- on average, $265,000 a year. Some states, including Delaware, Alabama and Hawaii, don't yet have a semblance of a dam-safety program.    Pennsylvania, however, has accomplished more than most federal agencies, whittling its backlog of 208 unsafe dams to 72 in five years. More than $50 million, including low-interest state loans, has gone into dam repairs, usually under consent agreements with the state. The Pennsylvania Gas andamp; Water Co. has agreed to fix 16 water-supply dams, while the Greater Johnstown Water Authority has promised to fix or dismantle the Salt Lick Dam near the site of a famous dam-break nearly a century ago.    &quot;If Salt Lick were to fail,&quot; says the state's Mr. Ellam, &quot;it would be as bad as the great Johnstown Flood of 1889, the greatest catastrophe in U.S. history,&quot; that swept 2,200 persons to their deaths. </TEXT></DOC>