<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0078 </DOCNO><HL> South Korea: Troubled Transition --Korean Government Foe Faces Dilemma---A Kim Dae Jung PresidentialBid Would Be Divisive---By Joseph P. MangunoStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   MOKPO, South Korea -- South Korea's most famous opposition leader received a tumultuous reception this week on his first trip back home in 15 years. If that decides whether he will run for the presidency, the answer will have to be yes. But if widespread fears for his safety and for the country's stability prevail, then his answer will be no.    Kim Dae Jung's whirlwind tour of his native South Cholla province certainly had all the trappings of an election campaign. He knelt and prayed at the graves of his ancestors and drank fiery rice wine with farmers at his family homestead in the island village of Kohyang. He paid a tearful graveside tribute to victims of the 1980 Kwangju uprising. And he treated wildly cheering crowds numbering in the hundreds of thousands to fire-and-brimstone speeches savaging the record of President Chun Doo Hwan's government.    But most analysts say that unless the normally wily Mr. Kim lets his heart overrule his head, he will sit out the presidential election. For, they say, a bid for power could inflame regional animosities or rekindle the hostility of the military. Even if he won, they add, he would confront a nation deeply divided over his leadership.    Mr. Kim's return to South Cholla for the first time since 1972, when he fled into exile to Japan, marked another critical stage in the political convulsions that have been wracking South Korea in recent weeks. The homecoming was watched by the whole nation, but was of particular interest to the military, the business elite and the three other probable candidates in the presidential election slated for December. (The poll is expected to be held before Dec. 20; President Chun's term doesn't officially end until Feb. 25.)    President Chun's choice for his successor is Roh Tae Woo, president of the ruling Democratic Justice Party. If Kim Dae Jung decides not to run, Kim Young Sam, president of the Reunification and Democracy Party, would be the opposition's standard bearer. Kim Jong Pil, a former prime minister, has also said he will run.    Kim Dae Jung, considered Korea's most charismatic and most controversial politician, said yesterday he hasn't made up his mind about running. He said his decision will come &quot;after further travels&quot; around the country and the passage of Korea's revised constitution by the National Assembly this month or next.    Speaking to reporters during his return trip by train to Seoul, the opposition leader said his homecoming tour had made him more confident than ever that nothing can stop Korea's march to democracy. &quot;Once again, it shows the strong attitude of the people of this area for democratization,&quot; he said.    Political analysts have little doubt Mr. Kim would make a strong candidate. &quot;{He} is the only guy who can salve the wounds of the Kwangju incident,&quot; says one Westerner, referring to the 1980 civil insurrection in which the Korean army killed more than 190 people -- some say as many as 3,500. &quot;He is the only one who can deal with the legacy of Kwangju to clear the honor of Kwangju people.&quot;    Yet, in the view of many people, Mr. Kim's handicaps outweigh his qualifications. Members of the military hierarchy are suspicious of his liberal leanings and worry about their own future under a man who insists he would rid the armed forces of political influences and unethical business dealings.    Two months ago, Gen. Park Hee Do, the Korean army chief of staff, was widely reported to have told a group of domestic journalists that if Mr. Kim were elected, &quot;something unfortunate might happen to him.&quot; The Ministry of National Defense later disclaimed Gen. Park's alleged comments and insisted that the military would accept whomever the people choose in a fair election. But most Koreans remain skeptical of that assurance.    Mr. Kim is also despised by many people from neighboring North Kyongsang and South Kyongsang provinces, who are disdainful of his roots in Cholla, an area long considered by them to be the unsavory &quot;gypsy&quot; region of Korea.    Other Koreans say he is too controversial for his own good. A perennial and uncompromising gadfly to the ruling establishment, he was described by a government official recently as &quot;a man who has been arrested by five of the governments of postwar Korea because he can't harmonize.&quot; In a Confucian society, the official noted, being able to &quot;harmonize&quot; is an indispensable trait.    Some observers question Mr. Kim's ability to control the country, especially all the aggrieved groups already emerging with demands that have built up over 26 years of authoritarian rule. These observers point to the Philippines as an example of how a newly elected government that was formerly the opposition can be threatened by chaos.    There are other considerations as well. Stephen Cardinal Kim Sou Hwan, Roman Catholic prelate of South Korea and a man with considerable influence on the thinking of the Catholic Kim Dae Jung, is known to favor the dissident's stepping aside to ensure national unity.    Many people in the middle class, fed for years on a steady government diet of anti-Kim propaganda, are afraid of him. They feel that Kim Young Sam, his ally of convenience and longtime factional foe, is safer and overdue for a chance to lead the opposition.    It would be &quot;very bad news&quot; for Korea if Kim Dae Jung runs, says a Western diplomat. &quot;I think it is going to raise more regional animosity. I think there are some people in the military, too, who would stop at nothing to prevent him from becoming president. If he runs for president and doesn't win, people in South Cholla will insist that the election was fixed. If he does win, there's a good chance someone from the military will bump him off. If that happens, people down here will go wild.&quot;    Mr. Kim is aware of all those arguments. Still, he says he sees no reason to rush his decision. Indeed, delay has the advantage of confusing the ruling party about the opposition's strategy, he contends.    He denies reports that Cardinal Kim and the National Coalition for a Democratic Constitution, the umbrella group that coordinated mass demonstrations in June, have asked him to withdraw. But he admits the cardinal wants him to pull out &quot;because I'm a Catholic, he loves me and is afraid the military will harm me.&quot;    In his comments to reporters yesterday, he claimed to have a secret plan to counteract any attempt by Korean military leaders to intervene in the current move toward democracy. If they try, he asserted, &quot;the people won't keep silent. Our people are strong enough to prevent that sort of injustice.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>