<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880129-0133 </DOCNO><HL> West Bank's Potential Peacemakers </HL><AUTHOR> Edgar C. Harrell </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Most discussions of today's turbulence in the West Bank and Gaza overlook the one real potential force for stability and growth in those Israeli-occupied territories. This is the areas' business people and farmers, who run several thousand mainly small and family-owned enterprises.    Businessmen and businesswomen in the West Bank and Gaza have aspirations similar to ours: to make a decent living, own a house, educate their children and accumulate sufficient savings to retire with dignity. Yet their potential to make a full contribution to future prosperity and political moderation in the territories is thwarted daily by rules and restrictions imposed from without. While many of the restrictions come from Israel, Jordan is also part of the problem. Both countries want to insulate domestic businesses from competition.    An American businessman or farmer would not tolerate operating in an environment in which permission from the government is required to start a new business, expand a product line, diversify crops, export a consumer good or import standard equipment to manufacture a product. But West Bank and Gaza businessmen and farmers have operated under such restrictions for 20 years. This restrictive business environment explains some of the unrelenting frustration in the occupied territories that we read about every day.    The annual trade deficit between Israel and the occupied territories is about $400 million, or $300 per person. Per-capita income in the West Bank and Gaza is about $1,100, compared with $6,000 in Israel. As long as Israel administers Palestinian businesses on the West Bank and Gaza to minimize competition with Israeli firms in domestic and foreign markets (unlike, it should be noted, the free trade arrangement and preferential tariff system Israel enjoys with the U.S.), this deficit will grow. With it will grow the frustrations of the largest and most politically moderating force in the West Bank and Gaza.    The West Bank and Gaza markets are small and not expanding. Israeli businessmen can market and sell any product they wish in the occupied territories (except weapons and those embodying new technology). In contrast, if a West Bank or Gaza businessman or farmer wants to market and sell something in Israel, he must surmount onerous licensing obstacles, bureaucratic harassment and, in some cases, outright prohibitions.    Fresh produce from the West Bank and Gaza, for example, is banned in Israel. Large Israeli wholesalers and cooperatives do not buy products from West Bank and Gaza businesses, either as a matter of policy or out of fear their customers will refuse to buy West Bank and Gaza goods. West Bank and Gaza firms aren't allowed to bid for government contracts. Pharmaceutical companies, for instance, can't sell to the Israeli health system.    To start a new business on the West Bank or Gaza, the approval of the occupation authorities is needed. If the business or product line is competitive with an Israeli firm, approval is seldom forthcoming. If imported equipment is required, an Israeli customs agent must be used, adding between 7% and 10% to the price. Unless the West Bank or Gaza businessman has assets abroad or cash equivalent to the value of the imported equipment to deposit as collateral in a branch of an Israeli bank in the West Bank or Gaza, he cannot finance the purchase of the imported equipment. This may change slightly with the recent opening of branch offices of the Cairo-Amman Bank in the West Bank.    West Bank and Gaza businesses pay higher taxes than do their Israeli competition because of differences in regulations and how Israel applies them. Moreover, businesses are subjected to frequent plant inspections and tax audits.    Assuming the West Bank or Gaza businessman obtains the equipment, the building permit, additional electricity and water supplies as required from the Israeli authorities, where can he sell his product?    If he attempts to sell in Israel, he must identify by code or label that his goods are manufactured in the West Bank or Gaza. This immediately restricts his market, since his potential Israeli customers may refuse to buy West Bank and Gaza goods.    If he can find a buyer in the U.S., he theoretically can sell his goods there, though that may prove problematic since as of last year U.S. Customs requires all such goods to carry the label &quot;Made in Israeli-Occupied West Bank&quot; (or &quot;Gaza&quot;). It's not clear whether Israel will permit exports to carry what it considers an inaccurate label.    Why not sell to Jordan and other Arab countries? If a West Bank or Gaza business wants to export to the Arab world, it must register in Jordan. But Jordan hasn't registered a new company on the West Bank or Gaza since 1979.    If a firm already is registered in Jordan, because of the Arab boycott on Israeli products it cannot export products that contain raw materials imported through or purchased in Israel. That means it must import raw materials through Jordan, paying 15% to 30% more than it would cost to import through Israel. Jordanian law allows the firm to re-export to -- or through -- Jordan only 65% of the raw material in the final product. That means the West Bank or Gaza importer must be able to sell the remaining 35% in the West Bank, Gaza or Israel. Because of added fees, taxes and transportation costs -- and considering that he receives no rebate on the Israeli value-added tax for the 35% of raw materials barred from re-export to Jordan -- the businessman simply cannot compete with the Israeli firms in the West Bank, Gaza and Israeli markets.    Moreover, the supply of raw materials is severely limited. For security reasons, Israel allows the import of only a few raw materials through Jordan. The Jordanians restrict exports of raw materials in order to limit the competition between West Bank and Gaza re-exports and Jordanian products.    What about agriculture? A West Bank or Gaza farmer is not allowed to market fresh produce in East Jerusalem or Israel and can export to Western markets only through the Israeli agricultural marketing monopolies, Agrexco and the Citrus Marketing Board (the same monopolies apply to Israeli exporters). Moreover, the Israeli authorities tell him what and how much he can plant.    As for exporting to Jordan and other Arab countries, the Jordanians apply quotas based on 1967 yields, which are no longer realistic, and on Jordan's domestic supply and demand. Exports to other Arab countries are counted against the quotas on exports to Jordan.    In such an environment, entrepreneurs in business and agriculture cannot emerge and grow, let alone prosper. West Bank and Gaza businessmen and farmers putter along, no longer role models for their children, who in turn look for alternative, more radical means to express creativity and expend energy.    This business environment -- and the influence of the business community on the political situation in the West Bank and Gaza -- could change with a few adjustments in administration and attitude by Israel and Jordan. The economic costs to both governments are small; the potential long-term political gains are substantial. The changes are, after all, consistent with how Israel and Jordan want to be treated in their trade and business relations with the Western world.    West Bank and Gaza farmers and businesssmen, for the most part, are trying to improve their lives in a manner Americans respect -- doing it themselves. A more free-market approach will benefit all -- and cost very little.    ---   Mr. Harrell, a Washington business consultant, was director of the Jordan mission of the U.S. Agency for International Development from 1978 to 1981. </TEXT></DOC>