<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0150 </DOCNO><HL> Supreme Court, in 6-3 Vote, BacksHiring Goals to Correct Sex Bias---Ruling May Pressure FirmsTo Boost EmploymentOf Women, Minorities---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ALK LABORAIRLINES (AIR)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court strongly reaffirmed its support for voluntary affirmative action by employers, upholding for the first time hiring goals designed to correct discrimination based on sex, rather than race.    The high court ruled 6-3 that federal law permits an employer to decide voluntarily to correct a &quot;manifest imbalance&quot; in the work force through an affirmative-action plan, as long as the rights of other workers aren't &quot;unnecessarily trammeled.&quot;    The decision is likely to remove some of the uncertainty that continues to surround affirmative action, and may put pressure on private and public employers to hire and promote more women and minorities.    The high court ruled in 1979 that private employers may initiate voluntary affirmative-action plans to bring more blacks into the work force. The high court yesterday said, in a decision written by Justice William Brennan, that public employers, as well as private, may voluntarily institute affirmative action to correct sex discrimination, not just racial bias.    The ruling was an interpretation of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, which prohibits discrimination in employment because of race or sex, and didn't involve the constitutionality of affirmative action. Justice Brennan concluded: &quot;Voluntary employer action can play a crucial role in furthering Title VII's purpose of eliminating the effects of discrimination in the workplace.&quot;    Beyond its business impact, the ruling is legally significant because by extending the scope of voluntary affirmative action, it strongly reaffirms the 1979 ruling, which has been widely criticized by conservatives and the Reagan administration.    Indeed, the three dissenters yesterday, Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Byron White and Antonin Scalia, showed how strong feelings still run on this issue, urging that the time has come to overrule the 1979 decision, known as Steelworkers vs. Weber.    Although the high court remains sharply divided on the legality of affirmative action, a majority once again rebuffed the Reagan administration, which has steadfastly opposed affirmative action in several Supreme Court cases. The administration has argued that race shouldn't be considered in hiring and promotion, except to help specific individuals who can prove they were personally discriminated against.    Women's and civil-rights groups hailed the decision. Suzanne Meeker, a lawyer for the National Women's Law Center, said it is &quot;extremely important for women. . . . This kind of plan is essential if women are to move into nontraditional jobs. Moving women into nontraditional employment is critical to improving women's economic well-being.&quot;    In the case decided yesterday, the high court upheld an affirmative-action plan adopted voluntarily in 1978 by the Santa Clara County, Calif., transportation agency. A principal goal of the plan was to correct the imbalance of women in the work force, particularly in skilled and managerial jobs. Among skilled craft workers, the agency found, none of the 238 jobs had ever been held by a woman.    When the job of road dispatcher opened up in 1979, the agency interviewed nine people and found seven qualified, including Diane Joyce, who was a road maintenance worker. She received the promotion with an interview score of 73, and another road worker, Paul Johnson, who scored 75 on the interview, sued the county.    A federal district court in San Francisco declared the plan illegal. But in 1985, a federal appeals court, also in San Francisco, upheld the plan. Mr. Johnson appealed to the Supreme Court, backed by the Reagan administration in a friend-of-the-court brief.    The Supreme Court concluded that the plan didn't establish a specific quota and merely set up flexible goals that didn't put male workers at a disadvantage. &quot;The agency has sought to take a moderate, gradual approach to eliminating imbalance in its work force,&quot; Justice Brennan said, &quot;one which establishes realistic guidance for employment decisions, and which visits minimal intrusion on the legitimate expectations of other employees.&quot;    As in most of its affirmative-action rulings, the Supreme Court was divided yesterday. Justice Brennan's opinion was joined without any expressed reservation by Justices Thurgood Marshall, Harry Blackmun and Lewis Powell.    Justice John Stevens also joined the opinion, but in a separate statement explained his ambivalence. He said the foundation of the court's affirmative-action rulings, namely its 1979 decision, &quot;is at odds with my understanding of the actual intent of the authors of the legislation.&quot; But he said the court's interpretation is &quot;now an important part of the fabric of our law&quot; and must be obeyed.    Justice Sandra O'Connor provided the sixth vote to uphold the Santa Clara plan, but didn't join Justice Brennan's opinion. She preferred a much stricter standard for voluntary affirmative action -- a standard expressly rejected by Justice Brennan. She said voluntary affirmative action is valid only if an employer's lack of women or minority workers would be sufficient to prove in court a case of illegal discrimination.    The dissenters accused the majority of easing the voluntary affirmative-action standards established in the 1979 ruling. Justice Scalia said, &quot;We effectively replace the goal of a discrimination-free society with the quite incompatible goal of proportionate representation by race and by sex in the workplace.&quot;    While the ruling affects both public and private employers, public employers must also comply with the &quot;equal protection&quot; guarantee of the Fourteenth Amendment, which the court has read as putting more limits on affirmative action.    Women's groups said the ruling will bolster their efforts to make women equal on the job. Marsha Levick, executive director of the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund, said the ruling is important &quot;because it deals with getting women more fully integrated into nontraditional occupations and because it absolutely confirms what we always knew to be true -- that sex and race are on an equal footing under Title VII.&quot;    Civil-rights groups said the ruling also will help cases involving race. The ruling &quot;is the Supreme Court's most expansive interpretation of affirmative-action law to date,&quot; said Penda Hair, a lawyer with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. It &quot;will prove to be an important justification of affirmative-action programs for all minority groups as well.&quot;    Legislative Veto   In a unanimous decision, the justices said that a section of the 1978 airline deregulation law is valid despite an unconstitutional provision, called a legislative veto. In an opinion written by Justice Blackmun, the court said that Congress intended the law to remain in effect even if the veto provision were struck.    The law in question, challenged by Alaska Airlines, an Alaska Air Group Inc. unit, requires carriers to give first preference in hiring to employees whom other airlines laid off because of deregulation.    Included in the section was a legislative veto, a device through which Congress delegates authority to the executive branch but reserves the right to disapprove specific actions by a simple majority of one or both houses of Congress.    In another case, the use of a legislative veto was declared unconstitutional by the high court in 1983. But Congress and the courts have been wrestling with the question of when, in hundreds of laws, the legislative veto can simply be eliminated, and when the law itself is called into question.    In the airline law, the high court said, affirming the 1985 ruling of a federal appeals court for the District of Columbia, Congress intended to have the law remain in effect.    ---   High Court's Affirmative-Action Milestones    1978--University of California Regents vs. Bakke -- Court strikes down, 5-4, medical school admissions plan that favored minorities, but upholds, 5-4, race as one factor in admissions.    1979--Steelworkers vs. Weber -- Court upholds, 5-2, a voluntary affirmative-action plan for crafts training at Kaiser Aluminum andamp; Chemical Corp. plants.    1980--Fullilove vs. Klutznick -- Court upholds, 6-3, Congress's decision to set aside a portion of public works funds for minority businesses.    1984--Memphis Firefighters vs. Stotts -- Court, 6-3, limits judges' power to approve layoffs that disregard seniority and permit employees with less tenure to remain on the job.    1986--Wygant vs. Jackson Board of Education -- Court rules, 5-4, that the Constitution bars Jackson, Mich., from laying off white teachers with more seniority than blacks who remain at work.    Local 93 vs. City of Cleveland -- Court approves, 6-3, a plan of promotions for firefighters using a 1-to-1 ratio to increase the number of minorities in upper-level jobs.    Local 28 vs. EEOC -- Court rules, 5-4, that a federal court properly set a goal of 29% minority membership in a Sheet Metal Workers local and made the union pay for training.    1987--U.S. vs. Paradise -- By a 5-4 vote, the court upholds a 1-to-1 ratio for promoting black state troopers in Alabama, saying the Constitution doesn't prohibit this corrective action.    Johnson vs. Transportation Agency -- Court rules, 6-3, that public employers, as well as private, may voluntarily implement affirmative action to correct sex discrimination. </TEXT></DOC>