<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870929-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Big Board Fines Two Firms, Disciplines18 Individuals for Alleged Violations---By Steve SwartzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EFHSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The New York Stock Exchange fined Wall Street Clearing Co. and E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. for alleged supervisory failures, and disciplined 18 individuals at other brokerage firms for alleged violations of securities laws and exchange rules.    Wall Street Clearing consented without admitting or denying guilt to a $50,000 fine for, among other things, allegedly using customers' fully paid-for securities to obtain bank loans for the firm. The firm also failed to maintain a special reserve bank account at required levels, the Big Board said.    Hutton, the principal unit of E.F. Hutton Group Inc., consented without admitting or denying guilt to a fine of $15,000 for failing to report firings of brokers to the exchange in a timely fashion, the exchange said. The Big Board said Hutton has taken &quot;several steps&quot; to remedy the problem.    Hutton officials didn't return phone calls seeking comment.    Richard Lee, president of Wall Street Clearing, said the incidents in the Big Board complaint happened about three years ago and involved &quot;highly complex and technical&quot; aspects of the securities business. &quot;At no time were our clients' securities impaired in any way,&quot; he said.    In unrelated cases, nine persons were permanently barred from employment at member firms.    John G. Simek, Interlaken, N.J., a former exchange member, allegedly made material misstatements to the exchange during an investigation, issued bad checks to the exchange and to a member firm, failed to file proper reports and caused a loss from a trade he had executed to be put into the account of another broker.    Mr. Simek was found guilty by an exchange panel and his appeal was denied by the exchange board.    Mr. Simek is appealing the exchange's findings to the Securities and Exchange Commission. &quot;We think that besides the merits being decided unfairly, the punishment is excessive,&quot; his attorney, Robert A. Cohen, said. &quot;This is not a case where anyone has accused Mr. Simek of self-dealing or dealing for profit, unlike most of the people who receive permanent bars.&quot;    Michael Q. Brown, Brooklyn, N.Y., a former Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. broker, allegedly misappropriated a customer's funds, mixed a customer's funds with his own and kept an account at another member firm without his employer's knowledge. Mr. Brown was found guilty by an exchange panel and his appeal was denied by the exchange board.    Randy R. Read, Darien, Conn., a former Weber, Hall, Sale andamp; Associates Inc. broker, was found guilty by an exchange panel of misappropriating funds by causing checks to be drawn against the accounts of customers and the firm's chairman without their knowledge.    Stephen C. Brown, Maitland, Fla., a former Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. broker, without admitting or denying guilt, consented to the exchange's finding that he misappropriated customers' funds by endorsing their names on checks without their knowledge.    Roland F. Alexander, Princeton, N.J., a former employee of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., was found guilty by an exchange panel of misappropriating $8,480 from his firm.    David A. Scholar, Staten Island, N.Y., a former Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. broker, was found guilty by an exchange panel of misappropriating customers' funds.    Brian A. Clement, Sicklerville, N.J., a former branch office operations manager for Prudential-Bache, was found guilty by an exchange panel of misappropriating funds belonging to his employer and of misappropriating a customer's securities.    Vernon R. Farnsworth Jr., Monte Carlo, Monaco, a former Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. branch office manager, was found guilty of misappropriating the funds of a prospective customer and of causing unsuitable trading in customers' accounts.    Bobby Gene Traylor, Austin, Texas, a former Rotan Mosle Inc. broker, was found guilty by an exchange panel of misappropriating funds of another firm's customer.    A 10th person, Joseph A. Basile, New York, a former broker with Baird, Patrick andamp; Co., was barred from employment at a member firm until he complies with an exchange request for information.    Besides Mr. Simek, the individuals involved either declined comment or couldn't be reached for comment.    Eight other individuals received fines or suspensions from the exchange.    Roger M. Franklin, New York, a Reich andamp; Co. broker, consented to a fine of $25,000 and a one-year suspension -- 10 months of which was deemed served -- after a federal court sentenced him to three years' probation, a $30,000 fine and 200 hours of community service for income tax evasion.    Frederick F. Horn, New York, a former senior vice president of Prudential-Bache, consented to a $25,000 fine and a one-year suspension -- 10 months of which were deemed served -- after a federal court fined him $100,000 for tax evasion. Mr. Horn was also suspended for six months by the National Futures Association, the Big Board said.    Both men had attended in 1983 a charity organization's &quot;casino night&quot; in which close to 90% of the attendees' contributions were refunded in cash or chips with which they could gamble, the exchange said. Both men deducted from their income tax the full amount of their contributions, and later pleaded guilty to income tax evasion, the exchange added.    Ralph A. Guerra, New York, a market maker on the exchange floor and general partner of M.J. Meehan andamp; Co., consented without admitting or denying guilt to a fine of $28,000 for excessive buying of shares -- for which his firm was the market maker -- without obtaining permission of an exchange official. Mr. Guerra also allegedly failed to prevent a clerk from erasing trading information. The Big Board didn't identify the shares.    Dean R. Loppnow, Inverness, Ill., a former L.F. Rothschild andamp; Co. broker, consented without admitting or denying guilt to a four-year ban from working at a member firm for allegedly selling securities that hadn't been filed with the SEC.    Thomas L. Arrington, Chicago, a former Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc. broker, consented without admitting or denying guilt to a four-year ban from employment at a member firm retroactive to Feb. 24, 1986, for writing a bad check to his firm, failing to pay in a timely fashion for trades in his personal account and violating his firm's restrictions on personal trading.    Richard A. Hasloecher, Long Beach, N.Y., a former Butcher andamp; Co. broker, now a broker with Josephthal andamp; Co., was found guilty by the exchange of engaging in another business without the knowledge of his employer. He also allegedly hid from his firm facts about customers' transactions. He was suspended from employment at a member firm for four months, two of which were deemed served.    John R. Lawlar, Houston, a former Merrill Lynch broker, was found guilty by a hearing panel of excessive and unsuitable trading in a customer's account. He was suspended for four months, three of which were deemed served.    Salvatore Santangelo, Oceanside, N.Y., a former floor trader, was found guilty by an exchange panel of issuing bad checks to member firms, failing to maintain adequate capital and filing reports late to the exchange. He was barred from exchange membership for five years. For the five years thereafter, should he wish to operate as an independent floor broker or as a floor broker for a member firm he controls, he must engage in accounting and bookkeeping practices acceptable to the exchange, the exchange said.    These eight individuals either had no comment or couldn't be reached for comment. </TEXT></DOC>