<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870429-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Supreme Court Says Railroads May TakeProperty Tax Disputes to Federal Courts---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES BNI LABORTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled that railroads have the right to go to federal court to complain that state and local officials have overvalued railroad property for tax purposes.    The high court, by a 9-0 vote, rejected arguments by Oklahoma officials that the states should be free from federal-court review in deciding the value of a railroad system for property taxes.    The high court also rejected an approach by a federal appeals court in Denver that railroads may challenge state property taxes in federal court only if they prove that a state is intentionally discriminating against them.    The state's and the appeals court's views are &quot;untenable,&quot; said Justice Thurgood Marshall for the unanimous court, which ruled in favor of Burlington Northern Railroad Co., a Burlington Northern Inc. unit.    The ruling is an important step in a continuing battle between large, interstate railroads, complaining of overtaxation, and the states, looking for ways to support various programs and local governments with property-tax revenues.    In 1975, the high court said yesterday, Congress concluded that through discriminatory state practices, railroads were overtaxed by $50 million a year. In 1976, Congress passed a railroad regulatory law that prohibited discriminatory state property taxes involving railroads. But it wasn't until 1983 that Burlington Northern took Oklahoma to court, objecting to the state's method of calculating the railroad's taxes.    In determining the portion of the railroad's property that could be fairly taxed in Oklahoma, state officials first had to determine the overall market value of the company's property nationwide. Burlington Northern complained that the state based its 1982 assessment on a nationwide value of $3.6 billion, when the actual market value should have been $1.5 billion.    A federal district court in Oklahoma City and the appeals court both dismissed Burlington Northern's lawsuit, but the Supreme Court reinstated the dispute. The case is likely to return to the district court.    Seven states and 50 California counties supported Oklahoma in friend-of-the-court briefs, but the Reagan administration weighed in on the side of the railroad in interpreting the 1976 federal law.    The American Bus Association, an industry group for passenger bus companies, said an almost identical provision of a 1982 federal law prohibits discrimination in state property taxation of buses. The high court's ruling will affect the bus industry as well, the group said.    Railroad Picketing   In another Burlington Northern appeal, the high court ruled unanimously that federal courts can't issue injunctions to stop a union engaged in a labor dispute with one railroad from extending its picketing to railroads that aren't involved in the dispute.    The high court, in an opinion written by Justice William Brennan, said Congress hasn't specifically barred this activity, known as secondary picketing, in the rail industry. As a result, the court said, the activity is covered by a federal law that generally prohibits courts from issuing injunctions to stop labor activity.    The ruling means railroad unions may continue, for now, to use the potent weapon of secondary picketing. But the ruling also will increase pressure on Congress from the railroad industry and possibly the Reagan administration to pass legislation prohibiting secondary picketing of railroads. Congress took no action on a similar proposal last year.    The railroad industry says such picketing is disruptive of business because workers in other unions at freight yards and train depots often refuse to cross a picket line. The unions say such picketing is peaceful and gives them important leverage in bargaining with big interstate railroads.    The Supreme Court ruling involved a labor dispute last year between the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees and Maine Central Railroad, a Guilford Transportation Industries Inc. unit. After a month on strike, the union began picketing other railroads.    Burlington Northern and other major carriers won a temporary order in federal court in Illinois blocking the picketing. A federal appeals court in Chicago last June threw out the court order and said the picketing couldn't be stopped. The Supreme Court upheld the appeals court.    Regulatory Trials   The justices ruled unanimously that persons or companies sued by the federal government in civil cases for fines or damages have a constitutional right to a jury trial to decide whether they are at fault. But the court ruled 7-2 that there is no right to have a jury, instead of a judge, decide the amount of the fine.    The decision, written by Justice Brennan, may increase the use of jury trials in cases in which federal regulatory agencies enforce laws by going to court, rather than through administrative action. This is the case with several environmental laws, including the Clean Water Act, which was the focus of the ruling.    But it may also apply to such laws as the Securities and Exchange Commission's authority to sue for recovery of three times the amount of a person's profits from insider trading. SEC officials said they will have to study the high court's ruling.    The Seventh Amendment to the Constitution guarantees a jury trial in some, but not all, civil lawsuits.    Yesterday, Justice Brennan said the question of whether a person is liable for a penalty in a government civil lawsuit for violating federal clean-water standards must be decided by a jury. But with Justices Antonin Scalia and John Stevens dissenting, the court said a federal judge should determine the penalty.    The case involved a civil action against Edward Tull, a real estate developer accused by the federal government of dumping fill on wetlands on the island of Chincoteague, Va. A federal district court in Norfolk, Va., after refusing a request for a jury trial, fined Mr. Tull $75,000 and gave him an alternative of restoring a waterway or paying another fine of $250,000. A federal appeals court in Richmond upheld the fines. The Supreme Court ruling presumably requires a new trial for Mr. Tull.    Propaganda on Film   The justices, by a 5-3 vote, upheld part of a federal law that permits the Justice Department to label various forms of expression, including some films, as &quot;political propaganda.&quot;    The law, nearly 50 years old, allows the department to require registration of, and disclosures by, persons engaging in political propaganda for foreign governments.    The dispute arose when a California state senator, who wanted to exhibit three Canadian films on acid rain and nuclear war, challenged part of the law. In federal district court in Sacramento, he objected to being labeled a disseminator of political propaganda and said the law's definition of the covered material violates the First Amendment guarantee of freedom of speech. A federal judge issued an order barring enforcement of the law against the films, and the Justice Department appealed to the Supreme Court.    In an opinion by Justice Stevens, the high court upheld the law, saying the term propaganda &quot;has no pejorative connotation.&quot; Justice Harry Blackmun dissented, joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall. Justice Scalia didn't participate in the case. </TEXT></DOC>