<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870615-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Brazilian Anti-Inflation Plan IncludesSerious Attempt to Curb Federal Deficit---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><DATELINE> RIO DE JANEIRO, Brazil  </DATELINE><TEXT>    President Jose Sarney's NewCruzado Plan, aimed at slashing an annual inflation rate ofmore than 1,000%, may have a better fate than its predecessorbecause it includes what seems to be Brazil's first seriousattempt to control its federal deficit.   The plan, announced Friday, seems certain to gain the support of major foreign creditor banks. However, it will have to overcome widespread skepticism and hostility within Brazil.    Unlike last year's failed Cruzado Plan, the 90-day wage and price freeze that is the centerpiece of the new program will be accompanied by massive cuts in government spending, steep rises in state utility tariffs and an end to a wheat subsidy that costs close to $2 billion a year. In what is widely regarded as a crucial measure, it also forbids the central bank from bowing to Treasury demands for more financing through the printing of new money or the issuance of additional public debt.    &quot;The whole fiscal side is interesting and very hopeful, particularly the separation of the central bank and the Treasury,&quot; said Edmar Bacha, an architect of the first Cruzado Plan, which collapsed late last year, and one of Brazil's leading economists. &quot;The plan has a chance.&quot;    Besides the cuts in government spending, the country's major creditor banks are likely to be pleased by a 10.56% devaluation of the Brazilian currency, the cruzado, against the dollar, which is aimed at spurring exports and ensuring a trade surplus of at least $8 billion this year. The dismantling of the current wage-price indexation system also is likely to be well received by the banks.    &quot;It should help a debt agreement with banks. I don't think the International Monetary Fund would have asked for much more at this point,&quot; said a senior U.S. official in Brazil. After a long vacuum in economic policy, the plan is expected to provide the basis for negotiations within the next few weeks on Brazil's four-month-old moratorium on $67 billion of commercial-bank debt.    According to U.S. sources, it also should provide Brazil with breathing space in its negotiations with the Paris Club, a group of Western creditor governments. A six-month respite on payments of $975 million in principal and interest -- negotiated as part of an agreement with the Paris Club last January -- is about to expire, and Brazil is seeking a further delay. With the IMF now expected to produce a favorable report on Brazil following a visit by a mission last month, this concession could be granted, the sources said. The January Paris Club accord is contingent on a positive IMF assessment.    Finance Ministry sources said the IMF has been fully briefed by Finance Minister Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira, who took office six weeks ago and is far more conciliatory to the organization and to international banks than his predecessor, Dilson Funaro. &quot;In this plan,&quot; Mr. Bresser Pereira said, &quot;we have tried to avoid all the errors of the first Cruzado Plan, and incorporate everything that worked well.&quot;    But the plan faces skepticism and opposition in Brazil. Although President Sarney appealed for a &quot;truce to save the country,&quot; six months of spiraling inflation and the abrupt dashing of hopes raised by the first Cruzado Plan have left a climate of disillusioned suspicion. There was no hint of the enthusiasm that greeted last year's plan, when cheering crowds took to the streets.    &quot;People are alienated,&quot; said a Brasilia University political scientist, David Fleischer.    Labor leaders expressed anger and threatened strikes over the dismantling of the &quot;gatilho,&quot; the mechanism linking pay increases to inflation. And Maria de Carmo Pavao, president of the Association of Sao Paulo Housewives, appeared to sum up popular sentiment when she said, &quot;We were used by President Sarney, and now he's just launching new measures to try to save himself.&quot;    Most analysts believe the new plan has a better chance for success than its predecessor. But they warned that inflation, already high in the first part of this month and certain to be boosted by the steep tariff increases, won't come down quickly. Prices in May rose a record 23.1% from April.    With wage-price indexation severely diluted, this is certain to lead to severe social pressure on the government. Moreover, there is widespread skepticism as to whether the price freeze can be enforced.    Economists also warned that delays in promulgating a plan have weakened the economy, creating a background of widespread bankruptcies, high prices and general disillusionment.    Finally, the cuts in federal spending programs are sure to anger state governors and so increase pressure on the president.    The differences between the new program and last year's plan are conspicuous. They include the following points:    --While the first plan gave workers a real wage increase of as much as 15% as it was launched, thus detonating an uncontrollable consumer boom, the new program will delay compensation for inflation by at least three months. Moreover, the new plan comes as the economy is slowing markedly; its predecessor coincided with a period of fast expansion. Thus, it's believed the shortages, supply bottlenecks and other distortions that plagued the economy last year will be avoided.    --The procedure, and timing, of the lifting of the new wage-price freeze has been defined. This was left open last year and was ultimately manipulated for political ends, with disastrous economic consequences. The freeze will be maintained for a maximum of 90 days, after which certain critical prices will be administered and the rest determined by the market. A complete liberation of prices is expected next year.    --While prices were frozen last year at a time when several important sectors hadn't adjusted prices to a viable level, an attempt has been made this time to align all prices, with sharp increases in several areas. The architects of the plan hope this, too, will help avoid distortions.    --The policy of daily mini-devaluations of the country's currency, in force since November, will be continued, whereas the first plan froze the exchange rate. This is intended to ensure that exports remain competitive and to avoid a repeat of the trade slump that marked the end of 1986 and led to the country's debt moratorium. Moreover, interest rates are to remain higher than the inflation rate, to help guard against the stockpiling and consumer-spending spree that marked last year's plan.    --Planned state spending of more than $10 billion on major projects, including a controversial north-south railway, has been postponed for at least six months. No such attempt to control state spending was made in the first plan.    --The first Cruzado Plan gave workers index-linked pay increases every time prices rose 20%. Now, pay increases will be based on the average inflation rate over the previous three months, and will be paid over the following three months. Moreover, inflation in the first half of June won't be reflected in wages. The effect of these measures, according to economists, will be to give workers less compensation for inflation. </TEXT></DOC>