<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0138 </DOCNO><HL> China's Leaders Are Split Over AmountOf Free Speech to Be Tolerated in Nation---By Adi IgnatiusStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> BEIJING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Seven months after China cracked down on several outspoken intellectuals, the country's leaders remain divided about how much freedom of speech to tolerate.    The lack of unity at the top was illustrated this month when rigid Marxist ideologues, led by a Politburo member, Hu Qiaomu, forced a new round of purges of intellectuals from the Communist Party.    This second round confirms that, despite the success of senior leader Deng Xiaoping in pushing economic and even political reforms, conservative hardliners still wield considerable power, particularly in areas of ideology and the arts.    Analysts here believe that reformist leaders may have been forced to &quot;sacrifice&quot; several intellectuals in order to gain concessions from conservatives on other major issues as party leaders prepare for their crucial congress in October.    The crackdown also illustrates how difficult it will be for China to pursue its stated goal of legal reform. For example, as part of this month's purge, the Communist Party's discipline commission forced Su Shaozhi, a political theorist, to give up his job as director of a think tank that has no affiliation with the party.    &quot;The concept of the rule of law goes out the window when the party wants to do something,&quot; says an American lawyer who traveled to Beijing for a U.S.-China conference on law last week.    At least five intellectuals have come under fire in the latest round of attacks: Mr. Su, the think tank's director; Zhang Xianyang, a member of the same institute; Sun Changjiang, a newspaper editor; Wang Ruoshui, a humanist writer; and Wu Zuguang, a playwright.    Mr. Wu, who also is vice chairman of the Chinese dramatists' association, agreed to resign from the party shortly after a personal appeal Aug. 1 from Mr. Hu, the Politburo conservative. In an interview in his comfortable Beijing apartment, the soft-spoken 70-year-old playwright says he believes he was asked to step down primarily because of a speech he gave late last year protesting state censorship of literature and the arts.    Mr. Wu's career illustrates the pitfalls of being an intellectual in China. When thinkers were encouraged to comment frankly on society and the government during the Hundred Flowers Movement of 1957, Mr. Wu boldly spoke up. When the government cracked down on such dissident voices the following year, he was sent to the northeastern tip of the country -- China's Siberia -- to do strenuous farm work for two years.    Mr. Wu was persecuted again during the Cultural Revolution, the period of radical leftism from 1966-76. For seven years he languished in the countryside, performing hard labor and studying the works of Mao Tse-tung. His wife, a well-known actress, was severely beaten and paralyzed.    Then in 1980, Mr. Wu was invited to join the Communist Party. It was part of Mr. Deng's attempt to invigorate China's economic and social development by encouraging freer artistic and intellectual expression. Mr. Wu spoke his mind, and this month paid the price.    Mr. Wu remains loyal to the party that disowned him. &quot;But the party should allow people to air different opinions,&quot; he says. His greatest fear is that his example will force other intellectuals to keep their heads down.    Unlike Mr. Wu, Mr. Wang, the humanist writer, defiantly refused the party's advice this month to quit. Mr. Wang, who lost his post as deputy editor of the newspaper People's Daily during an earlier crackdown in 1983, has been criticized for controversial writings about the alienation of individuals in socialist society. He now faces possible expulsion from the party.    In the case of Mr. Su, the think-tank director, the party's discipline commission ordered him to give up his job but allowed him to remain in the party. Mr. Su had held the post of director of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism and Mao Tse-tung Thought, a branch of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences.    Mr. Su has been one of China's most outspoken social critics and a leading proponent of political reform. His most controversial articles have urged China to reassess Marxism and not treat it as absolute dogma.    The party's discipline commission also has decided to remove two intellectuals from its ranks, according to reports in two Hong Kong newspapers that are controlled by Beijing. They are Mr. Zhang, director of the Marxism research office under Mr. Su, and Mr. Sun, deputy editor of Science and Technology daily.    The apparent expulsions of the two men came despite a pledge by Mr. Hu, the Politburo conservative, to writers and artists on July 16 that no more intellectuals would be thrown out of the party this year.    In the first round of attacks, three outspoken intellectuals lost their party membership. That crackdown took place in January following a nationwide outbreak of student protests that unsettled China's leaders.    According to the pro-Beijing Hong Kong dailies, no other intellectuals are targeted for criticism. But many analysts are skeptical. Sighs a weary Mr. Wu, the playwright: &quot;This may just be the second round of a series of attacks.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>