<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0138 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   New York insurers are prohibited from investing more than 20% of their assets in junk bonds -- the high-yield, non-investment grade securities that were the cornerstone of Fred Carr's First Executive Corp.'s rapid climb to the ranks of the top 20 life insurers. This restriction was recently pushed through by state insurance superintendent James Corcoran, who likens such investments in junk bonds to the property-and-casualty industry's so-called cash-flow underwriting in the early 1980s. He can be expected to express these views in testimony today before the House subcommittee on commerce, consumer protection and competitiveness.    Minnesota's insurance commissioner, Michael A. Hatch, is even more heated on the subject of junk bonds. He told Congress earlier this month that life-insurance companies' investments in junk bonds are creating a crisis in the industry that will exceed that of the property-and-casualty industry. He calls for action by the federal government to avoid a situation in which &quot;the barn has already burnt down by the time we get there.&quot;    The evidence, however, suggests just the opposite. Rather than leading to a repeat of the record number of insolvencies that have stricken the insurance industry in recent years, the investment strategy that lies behind investments by Mr. Carr and other insurance executives in junk bonds is more likely exactly what the industry needs. Certainly something new is necessary if the industry is to avoid, without governmental price-fixing, the discrepancy between insurer investments and underwriting requirements that has brought about the erratic insurance price swings of recent years.    The evidence against junk bonds is not strong. According to Drexel Burnham Lambert, the leading seller of such securities, more than 95% of all U.S. corporations with assets of more than $25 million, if they applied for a bond rating, would not be rated at investment grade. Credit quality risk is only one of a number of analytical tools that should be used in an intelligent investment strategy. Many companies issuing junk bonds are among the fastest-growing and most productive in their fields, with high liquidities and aggressive managements.    These non-credit-related risk factors have been responsible for some outstanding results. A 1985 study by Morgan Stanley came up with a default rate of 1.6% a year for junk bonds, the same as the default rate for all corporate debt over long periods. According to William J. Carney, director of the law and economics program at Emory University Law School, even that overstates actual losses to investors because such bonds usually trade at about 40% of par even after default. The default rate rose to 3% in 1986, but, Mr. Carney points out, even a default as high as 6% produces a loss of only 3.6%, close to the risk premium on such bonds since they are currently paying 4% to 5% premiums over the yield of higher-grade bonds.    Mr. Corcoran's case against First Executive Corp. seems particularly weak. His broadsides ignore First Executive's favorable assets-to-capital ratio, diversified portfolio, conservative accounting practices and very low expense ratio. Such attributes have led Standard andamp; Poor's to give the company a triple-A claims-paying-ability rating.    Mr. Corcoran's policies also fly in the face of a study conducted by the New York Graduate School of Business Administration, ordered by his own department and funded by the Life Insurance Council of New York. That study determined that &quot;based on the relatively high default rate in 1986 -- the return-risk trade-off for investors in high-yield bonds has been highly favorable.&quot; The report concluded that &quot;it is difficult to support an outright restriction on life-insurance company investment in low-quality corporate debt.&quot;    Similarly, a study done for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board found that &quot;the best statistical evidence says that non-takeover junk bonds, when broadly diversified and actively managed, significantly outperform comparable portfolios of Treasury issues even after taking defaults into consideration.&quot;    It is this kind of research that leads former California Insurance Commissioner Bruce Bunner, now a partner in the accounting firm of Peat Marwick Main andamp; Co., to say: &quot;It is unfortunate that the regulatory response is arbitrary rather than directed toward an analysis of the nature of the risk we're actually funding.&quot; That comment underscores a second flaw in Mr. Corcoran's approach. Not only do flat limits on a single category of investment deprive insurance-company policyholders of potential economic gains, but they also run directly counter to the best new thinking on controlling insurance price swings and protecting against insurance-company insolvencies.    Support for this is found in the NYU Business School report ignored by Mr. Corcoran. In the report, the authors contend that insurance-portfolio managers must learn to apply basic lessons of modern portfolio theory. To avoid imprudent risk, they emphasize the need for insurance companies to have a &quot;neutral&quot; portfolio of assets diversified across many industries. They advise companies to develop scenarios of expected success or failure directly related to their particular obligations.    Examined in this light, junk bonds are probably an important element in any balanced investment policy. A recent report by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board said &quot;junk bonds remain inherently more liquid than unsecured commercial loans.&quot;    They are certainly more liquid than many insurance-company real-estate investments. Yet the Mandatory Securities Valuation Reserve requirements of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners compel insurers to put up additional reserves on junk bonds with no equivalent requirement for what may be less viable mortgage loans.    Rolf F. Hueppi, chief operating officer of the Zurich Insurance Group, recently called for &quot;a completely new system of regulatory accounting.&quot; He says &quot;the system should provide the regulator with enough information to determine whether the company can survive, rather than what its liquidated value would be.&quot; He sharply criticizes regulators' reliance on annual statements and calls for computerized reporting of quarterly figures instead.    John J. Byrne, chairman of Fireman's Fund, contends that if insurers could correct a few &quot;accounting matters&quot; they could &quot;drive the (price) cycles out of the insurance business.&quot; He says companies are writing business on the basis of perceived capital rather than real capital.    &quot;We should mark bonds to market at all times,&quot; Mr. Byrne argues. &quot;And the commissioners should make us do it. . . . If you mark bonds to market, it doesn't allow you to kid yourself about how much real capital you've got.&quot;    When he was insurance commissioner in California, Mr. Bunner overlaid a strong bias toward generally accepted accounting principles augmented by supplemental reporting requirements on top of the statutory accounting system he inherited. He insisted on taking a hard look at insurance-company reserves, growth rates, reinsurance, quality of investments and business classifications.    Many forward-thinking insurance-company executives recognize that they need to develop parallel tools. In light of these trends, Mr. Corcoran's actions are especially disappointing. Even more discouraging was the support he got from the Life Insurance Council of New York -- despite its own study. And other states unfortunately may be following Mr. Corcoran's lead. Texas already restricts insurers' investments in junk bonds. Legislation has been beaten back in the California legislature to do the same, but it could be revived. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners is also thinking of getting into the act.    State insurance-company investment laws are already too restrictive. New blanket barriers to entrepreneurial investment strategies are nothing more than protectionist efforts to avoid competition that help deprive our domestic industry of much-needed new capacity. Officials in rival markets such as Britain generally give much more latitude to insurers. British regulators make up for it by being more sophisticated financial analysts than many of their U.S. peers.    Certainly the insured public deserves solvency protection as well as maximum investment returns. But junk bond investments, far from being a barrier to that goal, may now actually be a prerequisite to an intelligent investment strategy aimed at achieving it. Mr. Corcoran's wrongheaded regulation should not start a trend.    ---   Mr. Hallett is a partner in the Los Angeles office of Coudert Brothers specializing in insurance. </TEXT></DOC>