<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0057 </DOCNO><HL> Commodities: Coffee Futures Prices Decline on News That U.S. Might Not Participate in New International Pact </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD MIN PCS PET LNG </IN><TEXT>   Coffee futures prices fell in response to news that the U.S. might not participate in a new International Coffee Agreement.    December delivery coffee declined 1.52 cents a pound to $1.2727.    Consuming and producing members of the International Coffee Organization began a week of talks in London yesterday to shape a new pact to replace the current five-year-old agreement, which will expire next September.    Allan Wallis, undersecretary of state for economic affairs, told the meeting that U.S. participation in a new agreement was &quot;in jeopardy&quot; because of sales of coffee to countries that aren't members of the agreement at below-market prices, and because certain types of coffees aren't available to consuming countries, according to a news report from London.    The U.S. official said a new agreement must operate in a more market-orientated manner. But even if that problem is solved, he added, &quot;I must make it clear . . . that the remaining problems are so serious that our participation in a new ICO is in jeopardy.&quot;    The global export quota established for the current coffee year that began Oct. 1 was 58 million bags, which was immediately reduced to 56 million bags. A bag weighs 132 pounds.    Sales to non-ICO member countries may amount to as much as 10 million bags, according to Arthur Stevenson, an analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities, New York.    Such sales subvert the market two ways, Mr. Stevenson said. &quot;These sales are made at prices estimated at 40% or more below current market levels, and violate the spirit and purpose of the agreement. It is legitimate to assume that member nations of the ICO have to wonder why they should allow themselves to be at such a disadvantage.&quot;    Also, Mr. Stevenson said, some of the coffee has tended to appear in consuming-member countries at a discount, displacing demand for coffee that is imported through legitimate channels at higher prices.    Consuming countries for months have been complaining about the inability to obtain greater supplies of more flavorful Arabica coffees because of the rigidity of quotas. In the new quotas established in September, some accommodation was made to these protests through more-flexible quotas during the October-December quarter.    However, no relief has as yet been achieved and quotas for the rest of the ICO coffee year revert to the formula for the year before, continuing the problem, dealers said. The consumer position is that they want permanent relief from this problem to be part of a new agreement.    Consuming and producing nations appear to be poles apart in their positions.    &quot;Consuming nations want a radically new agreement, while producing nations would be happy with an extension of the current one, with some cosmetic surgery,&quot; said Mr. Stevenson.    Producing countries proposed a quota that would incorporate the sales of coffee to nonmember countries but were turned down by consumers, Mr. Stevenson said.    Secretary Wallis emphasized that &quot;large and influential groups,&quot; both in the U.S. government and the U.S. private sector strongly prefer a free market, according to the news report.    Such groups &quot;oppose our participation in this negotiation&quot; and &quot;every solution proposed for a new agreement is adamantly opposed by some group in our government, in our industry or in other countries,&quot; he said.    Despite that, he expressed hope that the current talks can produce a new agreement that will benefit both producers and consumers, the news report said.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   COPPER: Futures prices firmed in reaction to a continued unsettled labor situation in Peru and a decline in London copper stocks. The December contract ended 0.90 cent a pound higher at $1.36. According to one analyst, the growing optimism last week that a settlement might be developing for the Peruvian national strike, which includes miners, didn't carry over into this week. &quot;There is no evidence today that the strike is headed for an imminent settlement,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director for Elders Futures Inc., New York. A protest march on Lima is expected within a day or so, he said, and he noted that a union leader was quoted in news reports as saying that meetings with government officials hadn't elicited a response to union demands. The unsettled situation is making speculators cautious about adding to the volatility of the market, he said. London warehouse supplies of copper last week declined by 4,875 tons to 66,050 tons as these inventories resumed their downtrend after a small rise last week, Mr. O'Neill said. While some traders had expected a larger decline, the result was in line with most expectations, he said.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices were mixed. Gold for December delivery rose $2.10 an ounce to $425.20, while December silver was up 2.7 cents an ounce to $6.4450. January platinum declined $5.10 an ounce to $576.50. Gold was the focal point of attention, analysts said. After easing early in the day in reaction to intervention by foreign central banks to support the dollar, which was firmer throughout the day as a result, gold turned around and settled higher. The recovery was helped by strong buying of bullion by dealers and a higher crude oil market, an analyst said. Gold has been trading in a range of $425 to $427 for the past two weeks and is showing indications of moving up to test the $430 level, according to another analyst. The fact that gold ignored the stronger dollar was one sign of this tendency, he said, but he conceded he didn't know if it was a &quot;one-day phenomenon.&quot;    GRAINS andamp; SOYBEANS: Soybean futures prices settled mixed after plunging early in the session to their lowest levels since late July, when prices broke amid signs that the summer drought was easing. Traders attributed the recovery to bargain buying. The plunge early in the day was sparked by reports of beneficial rains in Brazil, a soybean rival of the U.S., as well as a continuing lack of demand for U.S. soybean exports. The drop frustrated traders because soybean prices have climbed painstakingly since hitting their late summer lows. &quot;We went through 11 weeks of hell for nothing,&quot; said John Kleist, a trader for Geldermann Inc., Chicago. &quot;It's been a huge down market with a few thrills and chills in between.&quot; Corn futures prices pulled out of an early nosedive to settle higher. The rebound was fanned by speculation that the Soviet Union is interested in buying as much as two million metric tons of U.S. corn, said Steve Freed, senior grain analyst for Dean Witter Reynolds, Chicago. Wheat futures prices closed mixed amid disappointment that U.S. and Soviet negotiators haven't yet set a date to conclude talks on renewing the five-year grain pact that expired Sept. 30. After talks stalled in October, negotiations were expected to resume after the U.S. elections. Some analysts have been speculating that a new pact might be agreed to as early as next week. The expired grain pact required the Soviet Union to buy nine million metric tons of U.S. crops annually.    ENERGY: Futures prices on petroleum products, led by gasoline, shot up on reports that a strike continued to paralyze Brazil's oil refining operations. Eight of that country's 10 refineries were closed, as most of Brazil's 60,000 oil workers walked out, demanding higher wages. The Brazil strike and Venezuela's difficulties with refinery maintenance and shutdowns served to boost already strong gasoline prices. Gasoline for December delivery settled at 48.16 cents a gallon, up 1.51 cents from Friday. Meanwhile, trading in crude oil futures was extremely light as many traders attended the American Petroleum Institute's annual meeting in New York and continued to wait for news out of a series of Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries meetings beginning late this week. West Texas Intermediate crude for December delivery settled at $14.27 a barrel, up 32 cents. </TEXT></DOC>