<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870804-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CONGRESSIONAL PANELS ENDED public hearings into the Iran-Contra affair.    As Defense Secretary Weinberger, the final public witness, told House and Senate investigators that the &quot;interests of the U.S. were damaged&quot; by arms sales to Iran, the three months of hearings ended with bipartisan warnings that any future foreign policy that seeks to circumvent Congress also would fail. The panels are to question three CIA officials behind closed doors and will draft a report on the affair by fall. Independent counsel Walsh is expected to continue his separate inquiry.    None of the 29 witnesses at the congressional hearings tied Reagan directly to the diversion of Iranian arms-sales proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels.    ---   THE U.S. MOVED to bolster its mine-sweeping ability in the Persian Gulf.    As the Kuwaiti tanker Gas Prince cleared the Strait of Hormuz under U.S. escort, the Navy dispatched four mine-sweeping boats to the gulf and will send 13 specialists to augment a search for underwater explosives. Meanwhile, a U.S. cargo plane carrying mine-sweeping helicopters arrived in the region. In Tehran, Khomeini pledged to seek revenge against the U.S. and Saudi Arabia for the deaths of more than 400 people, mostly Iranians, in violent clashes Friday in Mecca.    Bombs exploded at Saudi Arabia's cultural center and its airline office in mainly Moslem West Beirut, injuring at least 10 people, Lebanese police said.    ---   South Korea proposed what was described as an open-agenda meeting between foreign ministers from Seoul and Pyongyang to discuss humanitarian, economic and political issues. Such talks were suspended last January. The Seoul government, however, dismissed as propaganda a North Korean proposal for arms cuts by both nations.    Seoul's ruling party clashed with opposition lawmakers during negotiations on revising South Korea's constitution. Difficulties arose over the military's participation in politics and the right of citizens to stage anti-government demonstrations.    ---   Tamil guerrillas failed to meet a deadline for relinquishing their arms to Indian peacekeeping troops, but the Sri Lankan government agreed to a request from New Delhi to extend the surrender until later this week. The leader of the main Tamil separatist group was expected today to formally announce acceptance of the cease-fire.    ---   Hanoi agreed to resume efforts to account for U.S. servicemen still missing from the Vietnam War, ending a deadlock over the issue that began last year. The accord came during talks in Vietnam with U.S. envoy John Vessey. Hanoi had refused any new action on MIAs, possibly to pressure the U.S. into renewing diplomatic ties.    ---   Pakistan's foreign minister rejected U.S. demands that Islamabad open its nuclear program to international inspection and agree to certain restraints. Dismissing a possible suspension of U.S. aid, the foreign minister said any limits on the program would be harmful to Pakistan.    ---   Bombs exploded at four coastal hotels in Tunis, injuring at least 13 people, most of them British and Italian vacationers. The attack, on the eve of today's celebrations for President Habib Bourguiba's 84th birthday, was blamed on Islamic fundamentalists.    ---   South Africa's mineworkers union said about 200,000 gold and coal miners would begin a strike Sunday for higher wages and better working conditions. The National Union of Mineworkers said the job action by the black workers would be the largest walkout ever to affect the nation's mining industry.    Gorbachev said the collapse of Pretoria's apartheid system is inevitable, and the Soviet leader called for a political settlement that would benefit all races. Gorbachev's remarks came at a dinner in Moscow for Mozambique's president, who is in the Soviet Union for a four-day visit.    ---   Philippine President Aquino held talks with her cabinet crisis committee over the assassination Sunday of Jaime Ferrer, the local governments secretary, as police and soldiers searched Manila for at least three gunmen. A spokesman said several measures were reviewed at the meeting, but he refused to elaborate, citing security.    ---   The Israeli army sealed off the Gaza Strip to search for the killers of a high-ranking military police officer. Some inhabitants of the territory were confined to their homes during searches. A PLO faction claimed responsibility for the Sunday attack.    ---   Haitian troops battled with a group of armed men led by a former guerrilla leader who had once attempted to depose exiled leader Duvalier, police said. Casualties weren't reported. Near Port-au-Prince, an opposition leader considered a possible presidential candidate was slain by right-wing extremists, according to radio reports.    ---   NASA engineers reactivated electrical power aboard the space shuttle Discovery as the space agency began preparing the spacecraft for the first post-Challenger flight next June. Discovery's power had been switched off more than a year ago. </TEXT></DOC>