<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Interpreting the Bill of Rights </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In attempting to defend the American Civil Liberties Union against an unflattering description painted by L. Gordon Crovitz in his Oct. 3 editorial-page article &quot;A Primer on the ACLU,&quot; Ira Glasser, executive director of the ACLU, claims in his Oct. 13 letter to the editor that Mr. Crovitz's description was one-sided. Mr. Glasser boasts that the ACLU &quot;has only one agenda: ensuring that everyone in America . . . enjoys the equal protection of the Bill of Rights.&quot;    As someone who has worked with an organization fighting the ACLU in court over the past 10 years, I believe Mr. Glasser's self-description is way off the mark. If anything, Mr. Crovitz's description of the ACLU was much too charitable. As an initial matter, let us dispel the myth that the ACLU is the great protector of the Bill of Rights. The ACLU perceives the Bill of Rights -- the first 10 amendments to the Constitution -- as something resembling swiss cheese.    For example, the ACLU ignores, and indeed is hostile to, the citizen's right to keep and bear arms provided for in the Second Amendment. The ACLU was conspicuously absent in the Supreme Court last term when the Supreme Court ruled in a landmark case on the application of the Seventh Amendment right to a jury trial in a civil case (perhaps because the person claiming the right in U.S. v. Tull was a businessman facing stiff fines imposed by the Environmental Protection Agency). The 10th Amendment, reserving all powers to the states not delegated to the federal government, is hardly one that is championed by the ACLU. If you omit the Third Amendment prohibiting quartering of troops in homes during peacetime, the ACLU's version of the Bill of Rights consists of only the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth and Ninth Amendments. Look who's being selective.    I am still trying to figure out exactly what provision of the Bill of Rights justified the ACLU's representation of the Soviet parents who wanted to take their son Walter Polovchak back to the Soviet Union. Despite the ACLU's best efforts to prevent it, Walter is now a U.S. citizen enjoying his freedom. How American can the American Civil Liberties Union be when it refused last Fourth of July to accept the American flag as a gift to be placed in its headquarters in New York?    Where was the ACLU when the Supreme Court last term ruled in Beck v. Communications Workers of America that labor unions could not use compulsory union dues or agency fees for political purposes objected to by the worker? Our file cabinets are full of cases where the ACLU goes around the country engaging in legal terrorism against every hamlet and town that dares display a nativity scene at Christmas time or where schoolchildren might be singing subversive songs such as &quot;Silent Night.&quot;    The ACLU's support of Col. Oliver North appears to be nothing more than tokenism to add a patina of impartiality to its radical agenda. The amicus brief in the North case was prepared by non-ACLU lawyers with the ACLU name simply slapped on the cover; was not necessary since Col. North's lawyers filed a much better brief themselves; and the issue involved was fairly technical and narrow, viz., what use can a prosecutor make of a person's immunized testimony before Congress that is widely publicized. I doubt that many Americans will find themselves faced with this kind of problem, except, perhaps, for organized-crime figures and drug dealers who are more likely to come before congressional scrutiny.    I believe most Americans agree with our and Mr. Crovitz's assessment of the ACLU. The ACLU is not only out the mainstream, it represents those interests and clients who make a living polluting that stream.    Paul D. Kamenar   Executive Legal Director   Washington Legal Foundation   Washington   ---   Regarding your stimulating editorial &quot;The Moral Relativism Issue&quot; (Oct.3), while one can appreciate your comments, it must be remembered that so much of the &quot;social malaise&quot; is the consequence of our national emphasis on unbounded individualism, almost limitless freedoms, and hedonistic pursuit of self-interest. The early proponents of free societies did not quite have that in mind; they generally assumed a social framework with certain behaviorial absolutes and automatic checks through socially induced moral and ethical boundaries.    Of course, the ACLU simply does what it must -- insist on the protection of individual rights and interests, behind the cover of its own constitutional interpretations, even when the larger social interests must suffer. Soon, the group will again be intimidating communities throughout the land concerning Christmas rites and rituals.    Rugged, unbounded individualism is a double-edged sword. It has given America the economic strength which is the world's envy; yet it has also robbed the nation of its basic decency and social cohesiveness by defining all conduct in &quot;relativistic&quot; and &quot;situational&quot; terms. So anything goes -- nothing is sacred, nor profane for that matter -- it all &quot;depends.&quot; Then, the society at large must suffer the consequences, and also pay for them. It is not difficult to understand why voters feel helpless and only a small minority chooses to participate.    S.M. Ghazanfar   Professor of Economics   University of Idaho   Moscow, Idaho</TEXT></DOC>