<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881011-0087 </DOCNO><HL> International: Yugoslav Turmoil Feeds Ambition Of Serbia's Communist Party Chief </HL><AUTHOR> Barry Newman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Ethnic hatred and economic hardship, neither of them new to Yugoslavia, have begun to blend over the past few weeks into a political poison the country's leaders may be about to drink.    Workers are pestering the politicians with strikes and marches against the intensifying austerity that comes with communist economic reform. Their anger has been surpassed lately in huge demonstrations over an old Balkan rivalry that pits the Serbians, the country's biggest ethnic camp, against almost everybody else.    Now these two currents have joined. Pro-Serbian demonstrators last weekend also aimed their invective at an inflation rate of 200% and a collapsing standard of living. Police used clubs and tear gas, inviting more protests and a warning from the Yugoslav president that &quot;the actions which are imperiling the constitutional order could continue and spread.&quot;    So a self-contained ethnic feud and a spate of isolated industrial actions have turned into a political crisis. In terms of international implications, this Balkan wrangle won't foment another world war. But behind it, in an age of delicate communist reform, is nevertheless something disturbing: The crisis in Yugoslavia could set the stage for the rise of a new demagogue in Europe.    His name is Slobodan Milosevic, the 48-year old Communist Party chief in Serbia. Although he doesn't say it openly, Mr. Milosevic very likely has had a hand in organizing the Serbian demonstrators; some of them have taken to carrying his picture instead of that of Marshal Tito, founder of Communist Yugoslavia and its ruler until his death in 1980. And the demonstrations have played perfectly into his undisguised drive to extend Serbia's power. They have laid low his more democratically-minded rivals. Some already have keeled over.    Like most Yugoslav politicians, Mr. Milosevic thinks the economy suffers from the country's division into six autonomous republics. That awkward arrangement was devised by Tito, who put ethnic peace above economic logic, and created a calm country, free of Soviet domination, that didn't work. Eight years after Tito's death, Yugoslavia works worse than ever and has amassed a debt of $21 billion that it can't pay back.    The accepted wisdom now is that the country needs a freer and more unified market. A new constitution, to that effect, ought to be ready by November. But Mr. Milosevic has a broader agenda.    To keep Serbia from dominating his federation, Tito split it in three. Mr. Milosevic has championed the cause of reuniting Serbia, giving it the potential to become the controlling force in a more centralized state. He has the passionate support of the Serbian masses. The Montenegrins, who also have Slavic roots, support him, too. Both groups feel they have been persecuted in Serbia's autonomous southern province of Kosovo, populated mainly by ethnic Albanians.    The Serbian juggernaut began taking victims in late September when Franc Setinc resigned; he had been the member of the federal Communist Party Presidium responsible for Kosovo. His decision was taken as a protest against the tactics of Mr. Milosevic. On Oct. 1, Bosko Krunic resigned; he is a former head of the federal Communist Party and a proponent of autonomy in the other Serbian province, Vojvodina.    One day before that, on Sept. 30, the federal Communist Party's Presidium gave in to demands by Mr. Milosevic for a rewrite of the Serbian constitution. The new document would make appeals possible from the provinces to central Serbian courts, and allow the Serbian central authorities to send their police into the provinces. It means Mr. Milosevic stands to get most of what he wants.    But the Serbs weren't finished. Last Thursday, 100,000 demonstrators converged on Vojvodina's little capital of Novi Sad and surrounded the local party's headquarters. At the sight of them, the whole leadership quit. The consequences in Kosovo, where Serbs form a small minority, are yet to come.    A power play against the rest of the country may be next on the Serbian agenda, again attended by a gigantic demonstration.    The federal party's Central Committee meets on Oct. 17. A party official already has said that a third of the committee and a good part of the 23-member Presidium will be replaced. The victims could include representatives from the more-liberal republics of Slovenia and Croatia. And that victory could give Mr. Milosevic an eventual shot at the national leadership. </TEXT></DOC>