<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   AN EXPLOSION AND FIRE KILLED at least 160 aboard a North Sea oil platform.    The destruction of the 12-year-old Piper Alpha platform, situated about 120 miles northeast of Aberdeen, Scotland, was history's worst oil field accident and resulted in the closing of six North Sea fields for safety reasons. There were about 230 people, many apparently asleep, aboard the platform when the explosion occurred Wednesday night. Only 68 are known to have survived. Many were killed when they leapt from the burning platform into the icy North Sea waters 100 feet below.    Most of the workers were British, but police said four other Europeans, two Americans, two Canadians and a South African were also on the platform.    ---   MEXICO'S RULING PARTY CLAIMED victory in a hotly contested election.    In a victory speech made amid charges of fraud and in the absence of an official vote count, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the Institutional Revolutionary Party's presidential candidate, conceded his opponents had carried several regions of the country. He also said the opposition won a historic number of victories in the Senate, where an opposition member has never served, and the lower chamber. The three opposition leaders issued a joint statement saying that unless the government rectified &quot;violations&quot; their parties wouldn't accept the results.    ---   THE PENTAGON FAULTED air traffic controllers in the Iran Air tragedy.    A spokesman, while acknowledging that the jetliner was within a commercial air corridor when the USS Vincennes fired its missiles, said Iranian air traffic controllers bore responsibility for sending it into a combat zone with 290 aboard. The Pentagon also sought to play down speculation that a second plane was in the area at the time.    Senate Majority Leader Byrd said the administration should reconsider its expanded Persian Gulf policy allowing the Navy to aid any neutral ship.    ---   A department store roof collapsed in a heavy rainstorm in Brownsville, Texas, killing at least eight people, injuring 60 and trapping others. Rescuers were cutting through rubble to reach possible survivors. Many people had sought refuge in the store, located near the Mexican border, as more than two inches of rain fell in the area.    ---   A Soviet government newspaper said a general strike in support of demands for annexation of a predominantly Armenian region of Azerbaijan has spread throughout Soviet Armenia. Separately, the Armenian press agency said troops killed one person during a protest that shut the airport at Yerevan, the republic's capital, Tuesday.    ---   Syrian-backed Palestinians overran most of the last Beirut stronghold of militiamen loyal to PLO leader Yasser Arafat. Police said at least 14 people were killed and 36 wounded in the five-hour assault on the Bourj el-Barajneh refugee camp, which Arafat's forces had taken from Fatah-Uprising rivals in heavy fighting in May.    ---   A federal judge denied a government request for a court-appointed officer who could discipline corrupt Teamsters union officers and appoint trustees for locals deemed corrupt. A preliminary injunction that was also denied would have prevented union board members from associating with organized crime figures.    ---   The Soviet Union launched an unmanned probe on a six-month trip to Phobos, one of the two moons of Mars. A companion probe is to be launched Tuesday. The 12-nation effort, the most ambitious of 18 planned U.S. and Soviet unmanned missions leading to a manned flight to Mars, will include landings on Phobos and samplings of its soil.    ---   The Senate gave final congressional approval to a $17.8 billion energy and water projects appropriations measure, the first fiscal 1989 spending bill to clear Congress. Reagan is expected to sign the bill, the first individual spending measure he has signed since December 1985.    ---   Canada's government pushed through the House of Commons a bill strengthening French speakers' rights. Prime Minister Mulroney faced opposition from his own Conservatives, and fired one dissident from a parliamentary post. It was the most serious Conservative rebellion since Mulroney took office.    ---   The White House formally asked Congress to sell 40 advanced F-18 warplanes to Kuwait to give it a &quot;first line of defense&quot; in the Persian Gulf region. The Senate later voted to strip a missile system from the $1.9 billion package. The administration also notified Congress of a missile sale to Egypt.    ---   Burmese authorities called for an emergency ruling party congress in two weeks to agree on economic reforms and a reorganization of the party, Rangoon radio said. The report also said 390 political detainees were being released. Western diplomats said 200 people have died in rioting over declining living standards and official repression.    ---   Shultz demanded that the Khmer Rouge be barred from resuming power in Cambodia. The secretary of state, attending a meeting of the Association of South East Asian Nations in Bangkok, said the U.S. had an open mind on the composition of an international peacekeeping force but was &quot;unalterably opposed&quot; to the Khmer Rouge.    ---   The U.S. welcomed a new South Korean effort toward easing tensions with North Korea. President Roh, in announcing a sixpoint plan aimed at eventual reunification, called for duty-free trade and cultural exchanges between the two countries, and offered to help the Pyongyang government improve relations with Seoul's allies.    ---   France's health minister resigned in a dispute with the Socialist government over his plan to give narcotics to addicts. Leon Schwarzenberg, in office only 10 days, was one of the government's few independents.    ---   Died: Frank Wille, 57, former chairman of the FDIC, Wednesday, in Greenwich, Conn., of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>