<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870129-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Ethical Dilemma:Asking AIDS VictimsTo Name Past PartnersStirs Debate on Privacy---But Failure to Trace LiaisonsCould Expand EpidemicIn Heterosexual Circles---Is San Francisco Plan Fascist?---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Most future AIDS victims will catch the virus from people who today have no idea they are infected. Little is being done to warn them.    There may be more than 1.5 million Americans who had sexual relations unwittingly with AIDS carriers and now carry the virus themselves. Doctors say these people need to be identified, tested and warned to change their sexual habits before they spread the epidemic further. But civil-rights and homosexual groups fear that tracking them down could threaten the privacy, job security and insurance claims of those already dying of acquired immune deficiency syndrome. And as this opposition stymies &quot;contact tracing&quot; efforts, the disease continues to spread, claiming many more heterosexual victims than doctors had earlier predicted.    The ethical debate over AIDS tracing is wasting precious time, says Robert Redfield, a top federal AIDS researcher. AIDS is &quot;the public-health threat of the century,&quot; adds Jerome Groopman of New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston. &quot;We can't allow political sensitivities to prevent public-health policy.&quot;    But many AIDS victims can't shake their fears about tracing. Some don't want employers or relatives to know they have the fatal disease. Others simply want to keep their homosexuality secret.    Dr. Groopman tells of an AIDS patient, very religious and now divorced, who has been secretly bisexual. &quot;During his marriage, he had regular intercourse with his wife,&quot; the doctor says. &quot;She is now remarried and contemplating pregnancy, but doesn't know she was potentially exposed. I say he's got a responsibility to {warn} her. He says it's too devastating because it will compromise his secret.&quot;    Another bisexual patient refuses to use a condom with his girlfriend, Dr. Groopman says, &quot;because it will tip her off that something has changed about him.&quot; (The doctor says he doesn't know the identities of the first patient's ex-wife or the second's girlfriend, so he is powerless to help them.)    Ronald Bayer of the Hastings Center, an institute concerned with medical ethics, charges that AIDS patients' self-interests have wrongly eclipsed &quot;the moral duty&quot; to warn former partners. Dean Echenberg, a health official who started a tracing program in San Francisco, has been denounced as &quot;fascist&quot; and &quot;Orwellian.&quot; He argues: &quot;Any individual, gay or straight, who is infected should think in terms of the community. They should think: 'How? Where? Who else?' The alternative is unending rivulets of this disease.&quot;    Officials' reluctance to consider tracing is symptomatic of the &quot;less-than-vigorous public-health response to AIDS,&quot; says Mr. Bayer. &quot;I consider it an abdication.&quot;    Because AIDS struck homosexuals first, the fact that it is basically a venereal disease is obscured, doctors say. And worse, the persistent notion of risk groups -- homosexuals, intravenous drug-users and blood recipients -- has wrapped the general population in a blanket of ignorance and denial. Doctors estimate that 20% to 30% of those now carrying the virus will become ill with the disease within the next five years. Perhaps when they do, doctors say, and the number of heterosexual AIDS cases multiplies, political pressure will demand tracing of contacts.    Such tracing -- asking victims to voluntarily name partners -- is now routinely done for curable venereal diseases. But, except for fledgling programs in such areas as Minnesota, Colorado, Wisconsin and San Francisco, most public agencies avoid tracing AIDS. One reason is concern that AIDS tracing would sap scarce funds for classic VD control, says Wendy Wertheimer of the American Social Health Association. &quot;With syphilis and gonorrhea, it works because you're able to bring people in and treat them.&quot; Pending a cure, AIDS tracing offers little solace for those already infected.    More important, opponents of AIDS tracing say, any effort to identify AIDS victims could bring repressive measures against them. Recently, civil-rights advocates even protested against a new program by the federal Centers for Disease Control to test hospital blood samples, even though the CDC went to great lengths to ensure anonymity. In a strange twist that shows how explosive the issue is, the CDC concluded that the program passed ethical muster precisely because donors who unknowingly have the disease couldn't be contacted and warned. (While sidestepping the controversy over tracing, the CDC has urged AIDS victims to voluntarily offer the names of their partners.)    The American Civil Liberties Union has adopted a national policy against tracing. &quot;We think it's important for people to be tested if they want to be tested,&quot; says Nan Hunter of the ACLU. But, she adds, more serious efforts to educate people about the hazards of AIDS and the need for safe sex could limit the spread of the disease without violating civil liberties.    In Illinois, the ACLU helped kill a bill that would require AIDS testing prior to issuance of a marriage license, Ms. Hunter says. Similar bills died in other states. New York health agencies don't do AIDS contact tracing because, an official says, it is &quot;antithetical to confidentiality.&quot;    Meredith, a San Francisco AIDS patient who got the disease from a former boyfriend, says public-health departments have no business meddling in her past affairs. If her previous lovers need to be informed, &quot;I'd rather take that responsibility myself,&quot; she says.    Jeffrey Levi, spokesman for the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, worries that &quot;once the state starts gathering names, there's a tremendous danger&quot; of quarantines or other Draconian measures. Other tracing opponents doubt that the process would locate most victims, or, in many cases, would persuade those identified to change their sexual behavior.    Some homosexual AIDS victims have had so many anonymous partners, that AIDS tracing is nearly impossible, officials say. So the few tracing programs that exist focus on heterosexual AIDS cases. Though heterosexual AIDS is now thought to account for just 4% of the 29,000 cases of the disease in the U.S., the caseload in heterosexuals doubles every six months, while the doubling time for the total AIDS caseload in the U.S. has slowed to 13 months.    Despite initial skepticism, few doctors now question that the virus can spread between women and men -- possibly with just a single sexual encounter. Of the 270,000 cases of AIDS forecast by health officials by 1991, about 10% are expected to involve heterosexuals -- a number nearly equal to the total current AIDS caseload.    AIDS is a global phenomenon -- with heterosexual clusters in Sweden, Belgium and among the drug-users of Edinburgh, Scotland. Health officials look with most alarm to Africa, probable cradle of AIDS, where the disease is widespread, and shared equally by men and women. Though it isn't clear what role primitive hygiene, dirty medical needles, and customs that call for the mutilation of women's genitals may play in Africa, AIDS is also thought to be spread by regular heterosexual intercourse.    &quot;It's too easy to label AIDS a gay plague,&quot; says Meredith, the patient in San Francisco. She seethes at the stereotypes that pursue her: &quot;Dumb broad! Street girl!&quot; she says. &quot;We've all had our encounters, and I wasn't Miss Prude USA, but I resent it when people say, 'What did you do to get this disease?'&quot;    Such heterosexual AIDS carriers would be the easiest to trace. Of the infected women tracked in a study by the University of California at Berkeley, many appeared far from promiscuous. &quot;Some have only had one or two partners in their entire lives,&quot; says Linda Marquis, one of the study's authors. &quot;These women are housewives, physicians, lawyers, high-powered Silicon Valley executives. They're not flower children.&quot;    Carol, a 41-year-old professional, says she contracted the virus from her fiance in what had seemed an idyllic middle-aged love affair. &quot;We planned to get married and buy a two-story house to accommodate all our children,&quot; she recalls. But her fiance got AIDS, probably through drug abuse, and died in 1985. Though she remains healthy, Carol says she is abstinent these days and favors contact tracing.    San Francisco's tracing program is housed discreetly in a building apart from the Public Health Department. There, Christine Geoghegan asks AIDS patients to recall whom they might have exposed to the virus. Then she calls contacts and offers testing. If they accept, she assigns them a secret number ensuring anonymity. Her call is often a traumatic intrusion into their lives, she says. &quot;They hear the word AIDS, and sometimes that's all they hear. You have to follow their lead. Some are in a state of shock. Some cry.&quot;    Ms. Geoghegan suggests safer sexual practices, including the use of condoms, and warns against shared needles. Even if they don't have the virus, she says, &quot;we give them the same counseling, because you're only as negative as your next sexual encounter.&quot;    Her program's results so far indicate the difficulties of AIDS tracing. Many of the 110 AIDS patients interviewed refused to cooperate or didn't know the whereabouts of past lovers, and many of those named couldn't be located. Ms. Geoghegan's group found and tested 27 contacts, of whom seven are infected with the AIDS virus.    Beth Dillon, manager of Colorado's AIDS program, says tracing is inherently voluntary. &quot;There's no way I can force anyone to share {the names of} sexual contacts, though I try to be convincing.&quot;    Some states protect privacy with legislation. In Wisconsin, which plans to begin tracing by next summer, anyone leaking test results faces a $10,000 fine and nine months in prison. Minnesota passed a law protecting medical records from court subpoena.    Perhaps due to such protections, and the fact that tracing programs hinge on voluntary disclosure, the ACLU and other groups have yet to report any breaches of confidentiality involving tracing. And some doctors say that tracing programs might actually preserve confidentiality for AIDS patients by sparing them the task of informing their own partners. (Most health officials tell contacts that they were exposed to the virus, but don't reveal by whom.)    If tracing begins in earnest, doctors expect to find that the virus is spreading unchecked into regions remote from the hot spots in New York and California. Keith Henry, director of the AIDS unit of the St. Paul, Minn., Division of Public Health, tested two local &quot;swingers' clubs,&quot; and found two women had AIDS antibodies but were not yet sick. After their initial disbelief, Dr. Henry says, &quot;Their attitude changed from 'it can't happen to us,' to 'are we part of the problem?'&quot;    The clubs disbanded, and Dr. Henry has since taken his warnings to swingers' conventions nationwide. Still, denial dies hard. Half the conventioneers, he says, pass him by and move on to the sexual aids booth.    Minnesota also saw the &quot;duty to warn&quot; move from a moral debate to a legal one. Last July, in a case in Ramsey County District Court identified only as C.A.U. vs. R.L., a woman sued her fiance for allegedly failing to warn her that he had AIDS. Now infected with the virus, she has claimed unspecified damages in excess of $50,000. </TEXT></DOC>