<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871208-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Court to Hear Catholic Groups' AppealIn Pro-Choice Groups' Suit Against IRS---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES LABOR GDSUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court stepped into an emotional dispute between pro-choice groups and the Internal Revenue Service over the tax-exempt status of several Catholic Church organizations.    The high court agreed to hear an appeal in which two major Catholic organizations argue that they have a right to challenge the validity of a lawsuit to which they aren't parties but in which their records were subpoenaed. The U.S. Catholic Conference and the National Conference of Catholic Bishops refused to comply with the subpoenas and were fined $100,000 a day by a federal judge in New York, but the fine has been stayed pending appeal.    The Catholic groups asked the high court to rule that they may challenge the lawsuit's validity, and then go on to rule that the lawsuit is invalid and should be dismissed. The court didn't indicate whether it will decide both issues, or only the first.    The high court's ruling, expected next spring, involves procedural issues that may significantly affect a variety of civil lawsuits that raise questions about the jurisdiction of federal courts. Moreover, the ruling may shed light on the right of individuals and groups to challenge IRS policies and actions involving others. The ruling won't have an impact on questions involving the right to abortion.    The dispute began in 1980, when a number of pro-choice groups and clinics sued the IRS and the Catholic groups over the tax-exempt status of the Catholic groups. Although the suit against the groups was later dismissed, the lawsuit against the IRS continues. The suit alleged that the Catholic groups and their members aren't entitled to tax-exempt status because they participate in political activities supporting anti-abortion candidates and opposing others who favor the Supreme Court's 1973 decision that women have a right to choose whether to have an abortion.    The IRS and the Catholic groups moved to have the lawsuit thrown out, citing the requirement in federal courts that those filing a lawsuit must be able to prove that they were injured by the action they are challenging. The IRS and Catholic groups argued that the pro-choice organizations can't prove any injury caused by the tax-exempt status of the Catholic groups.    In 1982, federal Judge Robert Carter dismissed the case against the Catholic groups, but said the pro-choice organizations alleged sufficient injury to go ahead with the lawsuit against the IRS. The judge said that tax-exempt status gives the Catholic groups an advantage in obtaining contributions for their allegedly political activities. Judge Carter refused to let the IRS, at that point, appeal the decision to let the lawsuit proceed.    Beginning in March 1983, the pro-choice groups subpoenaed a variety of internal records from the Catholic Conference and Catholic Bishops groups. The groups refused to comply, arguing that the pro-choice organizations weren't injured parties and that Judge Carter was wrong to allow the lawsuit to proceed.    Through several years of hearings, the two Catholic groups maintained their position that the lawsuit was invalid and that they wouldn't comply with the subpoena, until Judge Carter declared them in contempt of court in May 1986.    In June, a federal appeals court in New York ruled that because the two Catholic groups are witnesses, not parties to the lawsuit, they can't attack the district court's authority to issue the contempt-of-court order unless there is no conceivable basis for the court's jurisdiction over the case. The appeals court let the contempt order stand. It said that, although it wasn't passing final judgment on the validity of the lawsuit, the pro-choice groups had asserted at least an arguable basis for the district court's authority.    The Justice Department joined in urging the high court to hear the appeal by the two Catholic groups. The department said the lawsuit against the IRS is invalid and should have been dismissed by the district court. The department said that a district court trial of the lawsuit &quot;will intrude into the sensitive internal workings of both the government and the Roman Catholic Church.&quot;    Workplace Safety   The high court let stand a federal appeals court decision that companies that comply with specific federal job safety standards still have a broader, general duty under federal law to maintain a safe workplace.    The justices refused to hear an appeal by General Dynamics Land Systems Inc., a unit of General Dynamics Corp. The case involved exposure of workers in 1982 and 1983 to vapors from such solvents as Freon at a Michigan plant used to manufacture M-1 tanks. Several employees experienced dizziness or loss of consciousness.    The Occupational Safety and Health Administration has set standards for exposure to toxic gases, such as Freon, during an eight-hour work period. But an appeals court in the District of Columbia ruled in April that General Dynamics must also protect workers from the ill effects of shorter-term exposure because the federal job safety law imposes a general duty on employers to maintain a safe workplace. </TEXT></DOC>