<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0143 </DOCNO><HL> Building Ethics From the Classroom Up </HL><AUTHOR> Frank G. Goble </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   People today don't seem to know the difference between right and wrong.    Financiers, presidential candidates, corporate executives, even ministers, are criticized severely for their &quot;unethical&quot; behavior. Journalists, who seem to relish exposing the frailties of social leaders, are themselves accused of moral laxity. Drug addiction, alcoholism, suicide, illegitimate births, and homicides and other crimes are at or near records. A good place to begin to turn things around is in the public schools. They can and should teach character development.    Several studies document a precipitous decline in school-textbook emphasis on character and ethics. As long ago as 1966, John Neitz, professor of education at the University of Pittsburgh, found that before 1776 religion and morals accounted for more than 90% of the content of school readers. By 1926 this figure had declined to 6%, and in more recent times had become too small to be measured. Mr. Neitz said that to understand the decline in ethics and the rise in vandalism and crime, we need only contrast the content of the McGuffey Readers with the &quot;literature inflicted on our schoolchildren today.&quot; Those schoolchildren are now adults, and the general picture has not improved.    A 1985 study by George Washington University Prof. Amitai Etzioni states, &quot;Despite all the attention and debate, one critical aspect of education has remained in the shadows: the need for our educational system to develop self-discipline and other work-related character traits, and its apparent failure to do so.&quot;    In 1985 a 60-member panel selected by the Committee for Economic Development -- an independent research and educational organization of 200 leading business people and educators -- concluded that our schools can do more to help young people build character. It said the schools failed to foster such traits as honesty, teamwork, reliability, self-discipline and learning how to learn.    Practical character-building programs now exist and some schools are beginning to use them. Studies show that when properly implemented, character education does work. Teacher training is an important ingredient for program success.    One program, the Character Education Curriculum, developed by educators in San Antonio, is used in thousands of classrooms in the country. Major school districts using this program include Baltimore, Chicago, St. Louis, Miami, and Pasadena, Glendale and San Bernardino in California.    Based on a world-wide study of values shared by various cultures and major religions, this program stresses honesty, kindness, courage, justice, tolerance, freedom and sound use of talents. The approach is Socratic, using stories, questions and open discussion to allow students to examine these ethical concepts. Typical of many positive reports by educators is the following by Jim Casey, principal of Benjamin Franklin Elementary School in Champaign, Ill.: &quot;We are spending less time counseling individual students, discipline referrals have been drastically decreased, attendance vastly improved, vandalism is virtually nonexistent and students demonstrate real school spirit.    Systematic character education has proved successful in high- and low-income neighborhoods. Fifty-Ninth Street Elementary School, for example, is a low-income school in Los Angeles. Lawrence James, the principal, says: &quot;The Character Education Curriculum has been substantially successful in our school in the development of student values, in positively influencing pupil attitudes and in improving pupil social relationships in general.&quot;    San Marcos, a middle- to upper-income community in California, started using my firm's Ten Minutes a Day program after a counselor estimated that 20% of a high school's girls became pregnant during the 1983-84 year. Community leaders concluded that teaching personal responsibility would reduce teen-age pregnancies and other problems. Los Angeles Times staff writer Tom Gorman, who has been following the program, said that by the end of the first year of use, it &quot;had won virtually unanimous approval of teachers.&quot;    One of the major objections to the idea that public schools should place a greater emphasis on character development is the conviction that ethical principles cannot, or at least should not, be taught separately from religion. A second objection is, &quot;Whose values should be taught?&quot;    Seeking an answer to this and other questions, Maryland Gov. Harry Hughes created a Values Commission in 1978. Its 24 members represented a wide political spectrum but managed to agree on 18 character and citizenship values that should be taught in the public schools.    The commission asked the state attorney general whether there were any legal impediments to teaching ethical values in public schools. In a seven-page opinion, the attorney general stated: &quot;We have concluded that the fact that ethical values are taught in the public school system does not, standing alone, violate the Establishment and Free Exercise Clauses of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or any privacy rights arising under the First Amendment.&quot;    Business leaders in many communities have urged schools to put more emphasis on character development and have helped raise funds to pay for the programs. Sanford McDonnell, chairman and chief executive officer of McDonnell Douglas Corp., for example, has taken the lead in bringing systematic character education into St. Louis schools. He often cites Benjamin Franklin's warning that &quot;only a virtuous people are capable of freedom.&quot;    ---   Mr. Goble, a former manufacturing executive, is founder and chairman of the Pasadena-based Thomas Jefferson Research Center, which develops and distributes character education programs. </TEXT></DOC>