<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880421-0160 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Short List of Migraines for the Next President </HL><AUTHOR> Hodding Carter III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The New York primary has eliminated the suspense about the Democratic nominee. The terrorists have released their hostages from the Kuwaiti airliner. And the Persian Gulf seems to have gone from Condition Red to Condition Yellow. That means citizenry and government can concentrate on the half-dozen or so other issues that seem to defy solution or promise new headaches.    What we're talking about here are not headaches caused by embarrassment. In that category are the continuing scandal of Edwin Meese's hemorrhaging Justice Department and the temporary scandal of Larry Speakes's admission of practices different only in degree from those routinely followed by his counterparts past and present. (Washington journalists ought to be embarrassed by their hypocritical mewling about Mr. Speakes, since most of them have long been willing co-conspirators in the daily frauds perpetrated on the public by the government's $2 billion-a-year &quot;public-information&quot; industry. Journalists' capacity for moral outrage is remarkably limited when it comes to their own defects.)    What we are talking about is best summarized by reference to April's headlines. There have been so many that most of us have simply taken vows to quit thinking about public affairs altogether and, in the best tradition of the 1950s, cultivate our own gardens.    As with the 1950s, ignoring the mounting difficulties will not solve them. To its credit, the Reagan administration has proved on a number of fronts it has learned that lesson, whatever the president's ideological preferences might be. Thus Secretary of State Shultz engaged Israel and its neighbors in a game, if futile, effort to resurrect the Mideast peace process. The assassination of the PLO leader and the mounting outrages in the name of law and order on the West Bank and in Gaza underscore a deadly reality: Until there is an agreement satisfactory to all parties, there will be peace for none.    It has not been for lack of administration attention that another war has failed to produce adequate results: the war for stability in the international economy. Debt is still the doomsday bomb: debt owed by Third World nations to the West and by Americans to everyone at every level of economic engagement. Washington's efforts have been severely hampered by self-imposed political restraints on so much as discussion of possible options. The result has been half-way measures that reassure no one and fix little. The dollar's continued fall and the market's extreme volatility are but thermometer readings of a raging fever.    No one can argue that Americans from top to bottom are ignoring the drug problem. Politicians are as one in their commitment to attacking the menace of crack and other &quot;hard&quot; drugs. Polls show the public believes hard drugs are the leading menace to the nation. There will be immense pressure on the next president to &quot;do something.&quot; What should be argued is that the focus is all wrong, that hard-drug addiction is far less the problem than the crime and corruption that hard-drug prohibition has produced. Until that message sinks in, we will continue to lose the &quot;war on drugs,&quot; just as we lost the war on alcohol in the 1920s.    If drugs are the problem of choice, the widening gap between the very poor and the rest of us is the problem virtually everyone prefers to ignore. It is not a racial issue, though blacks and Hispanics are disproportionately represented in the poverty class. It is not simply a law-and-order issue, though the gang wars in Los Angeles remind us every day of the reality that Americans live in incredibly different worlds shaped in large measure by economic opportunity.    It is entirely a moral and political issue, however, calling into question our faithfulness to our democratic heritage and its future. This has long been a society divided between the &quot;haves&quot; and the &quot;will haves,&quot; to steal a phrase. When the day arrives that class lines grow rigid, when we are a nation of permanent haves and have-nots, we will have become something other than America.    Finally, as stories from Panama, Honduras and Nicaragua make apparent, the U.S. has not come to grips with the limitations on the use of national power in the world. The Soviets' retreat from Afghanistan underscores the point. It is far easier to impede imposition of external power on a country than to impose it. The Brezhnev and Reagan doctrines are as one with the Colossus of Rhodes, reminders of a fast-receding age. But America's power nonetheless carries leadership responsibilities if the world is to remain at least minimally hospitable to our interests and security. The trick, yet to be mastered, is to devise a foreign policy embracing both realities.    This short list illustrates the kinds of issues the parties' presidential nominees should debate in the fall campaign. The temptation to pander on the one hand or ignore on the other will be almost overwhelming. But the person elected will have to confront them all. It will be far easier to enlist the people in proposed solutions if they have already been engaged in a meaningful debate on those solutions. Sliding through to victory on platitudes makes sense right up until the day after the inauguration.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>