<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0103 </DOCNO><HL> NATO OfficialsPlan to DiscussEurope's Safety---Meeting is Meant to FrameThe Alliance's ResponseTo Soviets' Arms Offer---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Senior North Atlantic Treaty Organization officials meet here today to debate a draft document prepared by the U.S. that prescribes how best to ensure that European security isn't endangered by an approaching U.S.-Soviet arms agreement.    The meeting of NATO's High Level Group, chaired by U.S. Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Perle, is aimed at &quot;doing some creative thinking about the options possible to the alliance to ensure target coverage and deterrence&quot; if all medium-range nuclear missiles, and perhaps short-range missiles as well, are removed from Europe, a Reagan administration official said.    The meeting is the first in a series of NATO discussions in the next three weeks dedicated to framing an allied response to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's latest arms proposals. The Soviet leader has proposed to start separate, new negotiations to abolish all short-range missiles in Europe over a period of one year, alongside the current talks to dismantle all medium-range missiles.    One West German official analyst complained that the NATO group's work &quot;shows how little military thinking has been done thus far&quot; ahead of an arms-control agreement that many West Europeans fear could leave them more exposed to the Soviets' superior conventional armed forces. NATO officials increasingly consider such an agreement all but inevitable, because of the expanding Soviet concessions and the domestic political difficulties of rejecting such an offer.    One West German official also said the draft document prepared by Mr. Perle, which grew out of an earlier British-German draft, makes &quot;unconvincing proposals&quot; that after an agreement on medium-range missiles, the alliance could rely more on aircraft, which would be far less likely to penetrate Soviet airspace than the medium-range missiles, and new battlefield nuclear systems that aren't certain to be approved by Congress.    The German analyst says the draft document for this week's meeting, which if approved will be passed to NATO defense ministers for their approval, includes a call for increased deployment of air-launched cruise missiles. The document says that strategic bombers and fighter planes that can carry nuclear weapons would take over many of the targets currently covered by the 308 medium-range cruise and Pershing II missiles in Europe.    Despite the urgings of some West Europeans, the paper doesn't call for the less vulnerable and increasingly accurate sea-launched cruise missiles to be used as the NATO substitute for the medium-range missiles to be dismantled. Instead, these would be used only as a general U.S. response should war escalate into a U.S.-Soviet exchange.    West Europeans hence argue that Washington is withholding the most convincing substitute system. Reagan administration officials declined to comment on these details, but would only say the document had been worked out with the British and Germans.    In the past, U.S. officials have resisted dedicating the sea-launched cruise missiles to NATO. They reason that such an arrangement would restrict their mobility if war broke out elsewhere in the world and would lessen the U.S. say in their targeting.    The Reagan administration itself still needs to sort out its approach to what would be a new military situation after an arms agreement. Some Pentagon officials want to deploy more cruise missiles armed with conventional warheads in Europe.    They say that so-called dual-capable missiles would keep the Soviet Union off balance because they could be easily converted into nuclear weapons in case of war. These missiles also have highly accurate guidance systems that would enable military planners to target specific sights with great confidence. Arms-control supporters would oppose this approach because they feel it could erode the disarmament process.    Some Pentagon officials also would like to create a new type of fighter plane that would carry battlefield nuclear weapons, the F-15E, but they say Congress would resist funding such a plan. They are also interested in creating new battlefield nuclear missiles by putting a nuclear warhead on missiles called ATACMs, which are being developed by LTV Corp. This also would require congressional approval.    West German parliamentarian Karsten Voigt, an arms-control specialist in the Social Democratic Party, says the alliance also will have to wrestle with problems concerning conventional arms, which will grow in importance after a nuclear arms-control agreement. He says NATO hasn't studied closely enough the Warsaw Pact's strategic planning, which increasingly focuses on scenarios that involve rapid attacks with conventional weapons.    He also says the alliance will face difficulties in the 1990s, when the low German birth rate will result in a shortage of soldiers, a case for which he says NATO hasn't started planning. </TEXT></DOC>