<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870416-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID a superpower accord on European missiles is &quot;close at hand.&quot;    Soviet leader Gorbachev's latest arms proposals seemed to push the U.S. closer to a pact to eliminate nuclear missiles from the Continent, which European leaders don't like but will find difficult to reject. Shultz flew to Belgium to discuss with allied officials the proposals to eliminate three entire classes of rockets -- their most difficult political decision since they agreed in 1981 to deploy medium-range missiles in Europe. Reagan said the proposals &quot;hold promise&quot; for an accord soon.    Foreign Minister Shevardnadze agreed with Shultz that a pact on medium-range missiles is near and said prospects are &quot;fairly good&quot; for a U.S.-Soviet summit later this year.    ---   Paris researchers have analyzed a second virus causing AIDS in West African and European patients, and urged improved blood testing to catch the new microbe. This second immunodeficiency virus, called HIV-2, isn't a new strain but a distinct new member of the virus family, the Pasteur Institute researchers said.    ---   The House Ethics panel cleared Rep. St Germain (D., R.I.), the Banking panel head, of abusing his office by investing with help from friends in the real estate and banking industries. But it said he wrongly understated his assets by more than $1 million, and ordered him to file corrected disclosure reports.    ---   Congressional investigators believe fired NSC aide Lt. Col. North used an FBI agent as his link to a network of free-lance intelligence operatives who worked outside of normal government channels. Data indicate the agent was a liaison for citizen groups backing Nicaraguan rebels and anti-communist causes elsewhere.    ---   Rep. Richard Gephardt said he has the votes for House passage of his proposal to force Reagan to retaliate against countries that run huge trade surpluses with the U.S. The Missouri Democrat, a presidential candidate, said he expects 20 to 30 Republicans to vote for the amendment as part of pending trade legislation.    ---   Donald Regan defended himself and Reagan in the Iran-Contra affair, in his first public remarks since the scandal cost him his White House staff chief job Feb. 27. Regan said neither he nor the president knew of any illegal activity.    ---   The U.S. said a study found serious structural flaws in its new Moscow embassy. Secretary of State Shultz called it &quot;a honeycomb of listening devices&quot; but said he and the Soviets didn't agree on this issue. Separately, a pre-trial hearing on whether to court-martial Clayton Lonetree, a Marine ex-guard accused of espionage, recessed.    ---   Nicaraguan rebel leaders are preparing to revamp again the main Contra political arm, amid squabbling over whether their military leaders will accept meaningful civilian control. Alfonso Robelo, a moderate, says he won't serve in a new directorate if Adolfo Calero, a conservative rebel army leader, gets a seat.    ---   Firebombing of trains spread to white areas around Johannesburg for the first time, officials said. The attacks disrupted commuter service on the Soweto line for the third consecutive day, despite heavy police guard and tear-gassing. Pretoria blamed the black rail workers union, on strike for five weeks, which denied responsibility.    ---   Panama said it suspended a grant of asylum to Karl Linnas, an Estonia native accused of Nazi war crimes. The World Jewish Congress said Attorney General Meese decided to deport him to Panama instead of the Soviet Union. U.S. officials wouldn't comment. The U.S.S.R. has sentenced Linnas, jailed in New York, to death.    ---   Italy's Senate president agreed to form a minority government, which may clear the way for President Cossiga to dissolve Parliament and call an early election. Amintore Fanfani, appointed after failed bids to replace the coalition that collapsed, is expected to form an institutional government to rule during an election campaign.    ---   Strikes crippled Spain's air, rail and ferry services, leaving hundreds of thousands of tourists struggling to reach resorts on the eve of the four-day Easter holiday period. Unions issued the 24-hour strike call to challenge the Socialist government's wage moderation policies to fight inflation.    ---   Government researchers said coronary bypass operations apparently aren't any more effective than drugs for preventing heart attacks or increasing overall survival for severe chest-pain patients except in the worst cases. The doctors published the study in the New England Journal of Medicine.    ---   Iran accused Iraq of using chemical weapons &quot;on a very large scale&quot; from April 7-11, injuring at least 100 civilians. In a letter to the U.N. secretary-general, Iran also requested an investigation. A U.N. team last year confirmed Iraq's use of mustard gas and nerve gas in the Persian Gulf war.    ---   South Korean President Chun urged the ruling party to back more aggressively his delay of electoral system overhaul until after his successor is installed next year. Prosecutors said a National Assembly member, who joined the new opposition party, was indicted for slandering the government by distributing leaflets in January. </TEXT></DOC>