<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID the U.S. may end Afghan military aid before all Soviet troops leave.    The secretary of state said that Moscow would have to provide a firm withdrawal timetable before U.S. military aid would end, and that the U.S. would have to be assured of independence and freedom for Afghanistan. Shultz also said that Moscow would have to end all military assistance to Kabul and that Afghan refugees, who now number about four million, must be part of the process of forming a new government.    The White House said that it saw reason for optimism that peace could be achieved, but that progress depended on Moscow setting a withdrawal date.    ---   ARAB DIPLOMATS SAID Syria has persuaded Iran to postpone an offensive.    The diplomatic sources also said Tehran has agreed to halt attacks against Kuwait. While there was no immediate confirmation from Tehran or Arab capitals of a postponement of the long-awaited winter offensive by Iran, which has massed troops along the Iraqi border near Basra, the Syrian initiative could mark a breakthrough in attempts to end the seven-year-old Iran-Iraq war if the reports prove to be accurate.    Khomeini said President Khamenei is trying to limit Islamic government. The attack comes amid a fight over who will rule post-Khomeini Iran.    ---   Meese is being investigated by an independent counsel for a possible conflict of interest involving his holdings in regional Bell telephone companies, the attorney general's lawyer confirmed. Meese owned stock, valued at about $10,000, when he participated in Justice Department litigation over restrictions on the regional telephone companies.    ---   Israeli troops killed a Palestinian youth and wounded seven other protesters during violent demonstrations at two Gaza Strip refugee camps, a U.N. official said. Separately, Prime Minister Shamir said he would refuse to meet with a U.N. aide scheduled to arrive in Israel today to investigate unrest in the occupied territories.    ---   The White House will seek more Contra aid because Nicaragua hasn't complied with a regional peace accord, Shultz said. The secretary of state didn't specify how much or what type of aid would be sought. Separately, Managua said a revolutionary tribunal will formally charge today a U.S. pilot shot down last month over Nicaragua.    ---   Mexican and U.S. officials agreed that no attempt would be made to extradite drug kingpin Rafael Caro-Quintero, indicted by a federal grand jury in Los Angeles Wednesday in the 1985 torture-murder of U.S. drug agent Enrique Camarena. Caro-Quintero is currently in prison awaiting trial in Mexico on charges related to the murder.    ---   Reagan named James Stephens chairman of the National Labor Relations Board. He succeeds Donald Dotson, whose board term expired Dec. 16.    ---   NASA accepted the three modified main engines for the first post-Challenger space shuttle flight. The engines aren't the redesigned booster rockets that have shown problems in testing. Separately, delays are causing scheduling conflicts between military payloads and interplanetary probes, which are tied to planetary alignments.    ---   Reagan nominated Army Maj. Gen. William Burns to head the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. He would succeed Kenneth Adelman, who left Dec. 12.    ---   The Reagan administration wants to reorganize federal programs to help the homeless in fiscal 1989, eliminating some programs and restructuring others. In its proposed budget, the administration also plans to expand its program to sell low-income housing to tenants and to increase the use of housing vouchers.    ---   A heavy snowstorm struck the South, snarling travel and closing schools as a record cold wave continued in the Midwest and East. The weather has been blamed for 33 deaths since Saturday. Many airlines canceled or delayed flights in Atlanta, Dallas, Nashville, Tenn., Memphis, Tenn., North Carolina and Wichita, Kan.    ---   Honecker arrived in Paris for the first visit by an East German leader to any of the three Western allies that have occupied West Berlin since World War II. French officials said there were no plans for signing accords, but the talks are seen as a step toward ending what President Mitterrand called an &quot;artificial&quot; East-West split.    ---   Mitterrand met with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and urged continued efforts for the return of 14 Iranian dissidents and three Turkish Kurds expelled to Gabon by Prime Minister Chirac's government last month. The president's wife, Danielle, also visited refugees' relatives, who have been on a hunger strike since the expulsions.    ---   A Kremlin official said multicandidate elections may be extended to the Soviet Communist Party leadership and that there should be no lifetime party jobs. Nikolai Shishlin, deputy head of the Central Committee propaganda unit, told a Czech newspaper that multicandidate local elections last year were &quot;unequivocally positive.&quot;    ---   The National Cancer Institute said it has developed a new AIDS test that is faster and more accurate than current tests. The institute said the test can detect the presence of 10 AIDS-infected cells in a sample of more than a million unaffected cells.    ---   Haitian opposition leaders expressed disappointment that seven Caribbean leaders, meeting in Barbados, failed to impose sanctions and diplomatic isolation on Haiti's military-led government. Separately, Secretary of State Shultz said the U.S. was disappointed with the failure of the Haitian junta to move faster toward democracy.    ---   Philippine Cardinal Sin appealed for calm after three more candidates in Jan. 18 local elections were killed, raising the death toll in pre-election violence to 62. Separately, Manila said six communist rebels and six soldiers were killed in a guerrilla attack on a town in northern Luzon.    ---   Died: Trevor Howard, 71, British film actor, in Bushey, England. </TEXT></DOC>