<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0028 </DOCNO><HL> NASD SeeksTo Halt Firms'Refusal to Trade---Stiffer Penalty Is PlannedTo Hit Market MakersExiting From Trading---By Steve SwartzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MERSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><TEXT>   The regulator of the over-the-counter stock market moved to prevent dealers from dropping out of the market when prices fall sharply, the way some firms are said to have done during last month's market crash.    The National Association of Securities Dealers proposed a rule that, with certain exceptions, would allow the NASD to suspend for 30 days a market maker who withdraws bid and asked quotations in a stock. A market maker is a firm that buys and sells specific stocks and is obligated to handle transactions of specified numbers of shares.    During the suspension period, the market maker wouldn't be allowed to deal in the stock whose quotations he withdrew. The current penalty for such withdrawals is a two-day suspension.    The NASD also moved to increase the number of small trades executed automatically by computer, eliminating the need for a phone conversation between securities dealers in such trades.    &quot;The record trading volumes of October have made clear the limitations of telephone access in the operation of our markets and the need to expand computer-to-computer execution of trades,&quot; said Joseph R. Hardiman, president of the NASD.    For the majority of over-the-counter stocks, the proposed changes would also boost to 1,000 the number of shares a market maker must be willing to buy or sell at the price he has posted. Currently, market makers only have to make good at posted prices on transactions of 100 shares or fewer.    In another development, Stephen L. Hammerman, executive vice president and general counsel of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., is expected to be named chairman of the NASD. Mr. Hammerman would succeed Mr. Hardiman in the unpaid post. Mr. Hardiman gave up the appointment, which lasts for one year, when he was named full-time president of the NASD last summer.    Big securities firms and institutional investors have complained that smaller market makers weren't answering telephones while the market was plunging last month. Those firms that stayed in the market generally faced losses, as they were forced to buy customers' stocks that were falling in price.    In an interview, Mr. Hardiman denied charges by investors, industry people and legislators that over-the-counter market makers ran for cover during the crash. He said the NASD has received only two formal complaints about firms that allegedly stepped away from the market.    But Mr. Hardiman did say that some market makers were so swamped with phone calls during the crash that they couldn't answer their phones. &quot;If you're getting 220 calls and you have 15 people to answer them, you're not going to get to them all,&quot; he said.    Under current rules, securities firms may withdraw from market making without sanctions in the event of a computer failure or other mishap. Firms also must withdraw from making markets in stocks they are underwriting no less than 48 hours before the underwriting is scheduled to begin.    The NASD proposals, if implemented, would mark the first structural change in a major securities market as a result of the October market crash. The crash demonstrated weaknesses in the operations of the over-the-counter market as well as the major stock exchanges. Congressional committees and a special presidential panel are now studying the factors that led to the market crash, including the performance of various stock markets.    The biggest difference among the markets lies in their market-making functions. The New York and American stock exchanges have &quot;specialists,&quot; or single market makers in a given stock, while the over-the-counter market uses multiple market makers who compete among themselves.    The NASD's competing dealers post by computer the prices at which they are willing to buy or sell shares in companies they make markets in. A widely traded stock such as Apple Computer Corp. has about 40 market makers.    One proposed change would affect the NASD's automatic order execution system, which now is used by only about 210 of its 540 market makers. The system electronically executes trades of 1,000 shares or fewer -- at the most advantageous price to the customer -- in about 3,000 actively traded stocks. The automatic system also executes trades of as many as 500 shares for about 2,700 other stocks.    Under the proposed changes, any market maker who wants to deal in any of the 3,000 most actively traded stocks will have to do so via the automatic execution system. Currently, such participation is voluntary. This means they would have to guarantee prices for transactions of as many as 1,000 shares.    However, since small market makers often deal in thinly traded stocks, Mr. Hardiman said the NASD is &quot;actively&quot; considering a proposed rule that would lower guaranteed price levels in the automated system to 500 shares for stocks of medium-sized companies, and to about 200 shares for stocks of small companies.    In a move designed to ease processing snarls, the NASD also proposed that all members of the automated execution system would have to become members of a clearing operation that is partly owned by the NASD.    All market makers would enter their trades into the clearing operation's computer. The computer would identify trades where records don't match, and allow for a quick reconciliation. Firms that had to manually uncover such problems ran into considerable difficulties with the high volume of the market crash.    After a 30-day comment period, the proposals are expected to be sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission for approval.    The NASD also said a task force will study the possibility of further automating trading in the over-the-counter market. The task force, headed by securities lawyer A.A. Sommer Jr., a former SEC member, already has been studying the need for regulatory changes at the NASD in the wake of the insider-trading scandals of recent years. Now, it will also look at automation and such crash-related issues as the adequacy of capital in NASD member firms, Mr. Hardiman said. </TEXT></DOC>