<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Hard-Line Nature of Israel's Likud Bloc Eroded by Members' Changing Interests </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><DATELINE> JERUSALEM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just as the Likud is poised to dominate Israel's future, profound changes are eroding the political movement's once rock-solid, hard-line core.    The Likud bloc still has hawkish members such as Reuven Rivlin, whose family has lived in the Holy Land for eight generations. He spurns diplomatic approaches to Arab-Israeli problems and rejects gloomy projections that the Jewish population will be swallowed by the more-rapidly reproducing Arabs. &quot;I believe in God. I believe God is Jewish. I believe the demographic problem will be solved,&quot; Mr. Rivlin declares, his voice rising.    But the bloc also faces new challenges like that posed by Moshe Amirav.    Trying to find a peaceful Arab-Israeli solution, Mr. Amirav met secretly with Palestinians and raised the possibility of a Palestinian state, an idea that blasphemes Likud's deepest-held belief. For Likud, the Israeli-occupied West Bank -- Biblical Judea and Samaria -- is part of Israel.    Angered Likud officials convened their high court to judge Mr. Amirav last summer. &quot;I told them it's the end of ideology,&quot; says Mr. Amirav, a party veteran. &quot;If we keep this up, we'll die with our flag.&quot; He was stripped of his party titles and stalked out, ripping up his Likud membership card before the waiting television cameras. The act was as unnatural for him as eating pork, he told a friend.    Other challenges come from Sephardic Jews who swelled Likud ranks after emigrating from Arab nations. They care more about jobs, housing and education than keeping faith with the founders' ideology of a territorially inviolate Israel. Likud's fastest-growing membership is the Sephardim: This year, for the first time, they will account for 51% of voters, says Hanoch Smith, a Pittsburgh-born pollster.    Other challenges to Likud orthodoxy come from younger pragmatists struggling to balance the old values and the need to seek workable Arab-Israeli solutions.    Likud's maturation offers Israel its best chance for peace over the long term. Political reality dictates that in security-conscious Israel, the Likud, rather than its more-dovish rival, the Labor Party, has the credentials needed to make peace. Israelis, under siege, are growing more conservative, and trust only hard-liners to make political compromises.    Thus, Likud's new mix will dominate Israel's future, just as its coalition partner, the Labor Party, controlled the past.    The widespread uprisings of the past four months are accelerating the pressure for change. The riots shattered the myth -- perpetuated by Likud's founder, Menachem Begin, and his successor, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir -- that Israel could both occupy the captured territories and have peace.    Mr. Shamir, a colorless caretaker of the Likud theology, is buffeted by contending forces. His youthful advisers prod him toward peace; the hard-liners yank him back. National elections are set for later this year and as Likud heads toward that reckoning three factions vie for influence: The hawks, who believe Israel must keep the territories to remain strong; the Sephardim, who rose to power as Likud mayors demanding social services; and the sons of Likud's founders, known as the princes, who want to bridge the gap between ideology and practical solutions to the Arab-Israeli conflict.    Here are portraits of three men representing the struggle for the future of Likud, and of Israel:   The Hawk   Shmuel Pressburger, a Likud official and businessman, believes that the disturbances on the West Bank and Gaza began with Israel's war in Lebanon. &quot;Everything started because of the way we left Lebanon. The Arabs have the feeling today that if they press us they can achieve every goal they want,&quot; he says.    Mr. Pressburger, a 25-year army veteran, believes Israel must control the occupied territories for security reasons. He has little patience for the ambiguities of diplomacy. His hero is Gen. Ariel Sharon, whom he followed into battle and who now offers clear-cut, stark solutions. &quot;Either we stay alive in this battle for existence and remain a free nation,&quot; Mr. Pressburger says, &quot;or we give up the West Bank to the Arabs. But after we leave {the occupied territories} they will start talking about regaining Haifa and Tel Aviv.&quot;    Like other members of Likud, Mr. Pressburger concedes that the status quo has been shattered. But he thinks the Arab rioting makes Israelis more conservative. And he offers this grim view of the future: &quot;Either we're afraid of them, or they're afraid of us. We have to find a way that they're afraid of us. Otherwise, we won't be able to stay in this country.&quot;    The Mayor   Meir Shitrit, 40, a Moroccan-born Sephardic Jew, came to Israel at age eight to live in Yavne, a small town 15 miles south of Tel Aviv. He studied biochemistry, became a high school teacher and then was shocked to see that most of his Sephardic students were poorly educated and generally neglected by the government. When the Labor Party, which controlled Yavne, ignored his protests he and some friends decided &quot;if we wanted things to change, we had to take over,&quot; he recalls.    Snubbed by the Labor Party in his effort to run for mayor of Yavne, Mr. Shitrit turned to Likud. A party bureaucrat named Yitzhak Shamir encouraged him and in 1973 he became Israel's first Sephardic mayor. That year also marks the beginning of the decline of Labor's domination of Israeli politics; it had committed the unforgiveable sin of being caught by surprise in the Yom Kippur War.    Since then, Mr. Shitrit and other young Sephardic mayors from the so-called development towns, have become bright stars in Likud, bringing with them the Sephardic population. &quot;Our focus is on social problems; it's our first priority,&quot; he says. The energetic Mr. Shitrit organized Israel's biggest private construction project, a 1,600-home community called Nve Ilan, and tripled Yavne's population, to 21,000.    His parents' generation, which fled repressive Arab regimes, is rabidly anti-Arab. But Mr. Shitrit's peers are less so as they become more affluent and educated. They also aren't encumbered by Likud's ideology. He wants order restored in the occupied territories, a period of local autonomy for Palestinians, and, after that, &quot;everything is open. There are no preconditions to the negotiations,&quot; he says.    The Prince   Dan Meridor, 41, a member of Israel's Knesset, sits in the dining room at the parliament speaking above the din of legislators making deals. &quot;I know the political world. I know there's a difference between the dream and the reality. It isn't that I have a different dream. I'm just trying to find a way to achieve it,&quot; says Mr. Meridor, an adviser to the prime minister.    He inherited the dream -- and a Knesset seat -- from his father, who came here 50 years ago from Poland and joined Menachem Begin in the Irgun underground to battle the British and then the Arabs. The members of this &quot;fighting family&quot; founded a political party that today dominates the Likud bloc. Their answer to the problem of the West Bank is to annex it.    Dan Meridor and second-generation Knesset member Ehud Olmert, another key Shamir aide, struggle to bridge the gap between the old world and political reality. Sometimes they wear chains with gold medallions engraved with a map of Biblical Palestine beneath their modern business suits. But they claim they are more pragmatic than their fathers. It was Mr. Meridor and Mr. Olmert who met secretly in Washington with Secretary of State George Shultz earlier this year to discuss the U.S. peace plan.    But they also are cautious politicians. They knew about their good friend Moshe Amirav's meetings with Palestinians -- Mr. Olmert attended one of the sessions -- but when the news leaked in the Israeli press, they quickly distanced themselves.    Still, possibilities lurk behind their careful phrases. Mr. Meridor says, &quot;When negotiations come, I know the Arabs will say they want it all; I'll say the same. From that point, we'll start talking.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>