<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880503-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   LECH WALESA PROCLAIMED a strike at Gdansk's huge Lenin shipyard.    Thousands of workers joined the walkout for higher wages. It was the fourth strike in Poland in a week, considered the worst labor unrest since the Warsaw government's crackdown of the Solidarity trade union in 1981. The shipyard work stoppage came as authorities were reported mounting a nationwide roundup of regional leaders of the outlawed union. Opposition sources said police detained at least nine members of Solidarity's 13-member executive committee in several cities throughout Poland.    The U.S. urged the Polish government to negotiate with its labor unions and criticized the use of force against striking workers and demonstrators.    ---   ISRAELI TROOPS ENTERED Lebanon to search for Palestinian guerrillas.    Lebanese police said Israeli soldiers supported by helicopters and tanks moved into southeastern Lebanon to conduct the search operation. An Israeli army spokesman said the troops had moved into Israel's self-declared security zone because of &quot;increasing attempts&quot; by Palestinian guerrillas &quot;to infiltrate into Israel for purposes of murder and hostage-taking.&quot; Details of the operation weren't disclosed. At least three suspected Arab guerrillas reportedly were seized in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa Valley.    Israel closed an Arab newspaper in East Jerusalem, saying it was a tool for terrorists. Two other publications and a news service have been closed.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci has decided against sending Coast Guard ships to help the Navy patrol the Persian Gulf &quot;at this time,&quot; the Pentagon said. The proposal, part of an administration plan to expand operations in the gulf, had met with opposition from some members of Congress.    ---   Dukakis campaigned for Ohio's Democratic primary today and called on Reagan to endorse legislation to expand federal funding for child care. Recent polls in the state show the Massachusetts governor with a 3-to-1 lead over Jackson. On the GOP side, Bush accused Dukakis of unfounded criticism of U.S. actions in Panama.    ---   Federal investigators have found some metal-fatigue cracks around rivet holes on the Aloha Airlines plane that tore open last week in Hawaii. The cracks emanate from six rivet holes in the jetliner's aluminum skin. It is unclear whether the cracking contributed to the incident, in which one person was killed.    ---   Pravda published a front-page critique of the way the Communist Party has ruled the Soviet Union, saying the system that emerged over the past 70 years was dictatorial and destructive. The publication called for direct election to senior party posts by secret ballot and the introduction of genuine debate at party congresses.    The Soviet Politburo has approved Estonian government proposals to give the Baltic republic greater autonomy in managing its economy. The Kremlin reportedly will transfer management of seven important economic sectors -- including energy, transport and industry -- to Estonia.    ---   Kanak separatists refused to release nearly two dozen hostages in New Caledonia unless France named a Paris-based mediator to begin negotiations on independence for the French island territory. The Melanesian tribesmen rejected an offer by three politicians in the South Pacific territory to trade places with hostages.    ---   South Korea's President Roh nominated a moderate to head the country's governing party and was expected to revamp his cabinet. In a speech, Roh also adopted a conciliatory attitude toward the opposition, which won parliamentary elections last month.    ---   The State Department has warned American embassies, military bases and businesses that Iran may be preparing terrorist attacks on Americans in Europe, the Mideast and Southeast Asia in the &quot;near future.&quot; Officials didn't say what prompted the warning, which amplifies an earlier, more general alert.    ---   The White House played down a confidential report on proposed 1988 arms sales, saying it was required to outline all arms sales considered &quot;eligible for approval&quot; during the calendar year. The report, disclosed by the New York Times, showed that arms sales abroad could rise by $3.3 billion to more than $15 billion this year.    ---   Nicaraguan Contra leaders met in Miami amid indications that rebel troops are running short of supplies. The Contra directors were expected to discuss demands by some field commanders for the removal of their military chief, Col. Enrique Bermudez.    ---   A children's hospital collapsed in India's northern state of Kashmir, killing as many as 21 people, officials said. Dozens of children were feared trapped in the rubble of the three-story building.    ---   Five political parties in Belgium agreed to form a new government. If approved, the move would end an impasse that began when the last coalition collapsed in a language dispute in October. Wilfried Martens, prime minister of the last government and currently serving as caretaker, would lead the new center-right coalition.    ---   Baseball's Pete Rose was suspended from managing the Cincinnati Reds for 30 days for shoving an umpire during a game Saturday. The suspension was the longest for a manager since Leo Durocher of the then-Brooklyn Dodgers was suspended for the entire 1947 season. Rose said he would appeal the National League decision. </TEXT></DOC>