<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870522-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. CAUTIONED Iran against possible Persian Gulf shipping attacks.    At a time of increased tension in the region following Sunday's Iraqi missile strike on the USS Stark, Assistant Secretary of State Murphy suggested that an Iranian attack on ships under U.S. protection could provoke a war between the two nations. He said it was unlikely that Tehran would attack such ships because it &quot;would add a new dimension&quot; to the Iran-Iraq war. Meanwhile, the Senate voted to require Reagan to outline security plans in the gulf before sending any U.S. warships to protect Kuwaiti tankers.    The White House said it would delay a plan to sell F-15 warplanes to Saudi Arabia. The move followed disclosures that Saudi jets failed to pursue an Iraqi fighter involved in the Stark incident.    ---   DONORS SAID they dealt with North when making contributions to the Contras.    A panel of American contributors said they made donations to buy arms and planes for the Nicaraguan rebels during a ban on U.S. military aid to the insurgents. In testimony before congressional panels on the Iran-Contra affair, New York investor William O'Boyle and Ellen Garwood of Texas described both social functions and briefings in which North operated with conservative fund-raiser Carl Channell. Colorado brewer Joseph Coors said he was referred to the former White House aide by then CIA Director Casey.    Independent counsel Walsh subpoenaed David Kimche, an Israeli involved in the U.S. sale of arms to Iran. Kimche was served the subpoena in New York.    ---   The FDA has approved new rules to allow patients with serious or life-threatening diseases to obtain drugs that have undergone less testing than current rules require. Separately, the White House said Reagan is inclined to support mandatory AIDS testing for immigrants and marriage-license applicants.    ---   Federal authorities said 34 people were indicted on charges of smuggling and distributing illegal body-building steroids. Among those indicted were a former Olympic runner and an assistant football coach at the University of Miami. The drugs were manufactured in Tijuana, Mexico.    ---   The House voted 401-1 to approve an education bill that renews and expands programs affecting most of the nation's elementary and secondary school students. Spending levels for the programs covered in the measure won't be determined until an appropriations bill is passed. The Senate hasn't yet voted on an education measure.    ---   Jury deliberations began in the eight-month-old trial of former Labor Secretary Raymond Donovan. He and seven co-defendants, all construction company executives, are accused of winning a $7.4 million New York City subway tunnel project by falsely reporting that the sum was provided to a minority-owned subcontractor.    ---   Moslem kidnappers in Lebanon said in a statement released to a Beirut newspaper that an &quot;investigation&quot; of three American professors and an Indian educator found involvement with U.S. and Israeli intelligence services. The captors said &quot;adequate action&quot; would be taken against the four hostages once the probe was completed.    ---   Manila's armed forces chief said opponents of President Aquino were attempting to recruit former and current soldiers in yet another bid to oust the Philippine government. Separately, Aquino indicated that she may postpone the Aug. 24 local elections because of a delay in completing the tally from last week's congressional vote.    ---   The leader of Fiji's military coup said he will head the governor-general's council of advisers until new elections are held under a power-sharing agreement. The accord, which appeared to end the South Pacific nation's weeklong political crisis, was announced in Suva after a compromise was worked out by Fiji's traditional chiefs.    ---   Two Palestinian terrorists were found guilty by a jury in Austria of two counts of murder each in an attack on Vienna's Schwechat Airport in December 1985. The presiding judge of the regional court sentenced them to life in prison.    ---   Austrian Chancellor Vranitzky said a U.S. decision barring Waldheim won't destroy &quot;friendly and cooperative&quot; ties between the two countries. Vranitzky also said he was told by Reagan that U.S. law, rather than ill feeling toward Austria, required Washington to bar the Austrian president over alleged involvement in Nazi crimes.    ---   South Africa said it was suspending daily reports on racial strife and, if necessary, would draft new legislation to tighten censorship of the media under the 11-month-old state of emergency. In the Orange Free State, a clinic established by black nationalist Winnie Mandela was gutted by fire, and police said arson was suspected.    ---   Lebanon's Parliament scrapped the 1969 Cairo Agreement, which gave Palestinian guerrillas freedom of action in refugee camps and parts of southern Lebanon. The move is considered the biggest blow against Palestinian forces since Syrian troops entered West Beirut in February. </TEXT></DOC>