<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0059 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Sharp Rise in Oil Prices Is AttributedTo Weak Supplies and OPEC Concerns---By William PowerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PETROLEUM (PET)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN><TEXT>   Weak supplies of heating oil and strong concerns about next week's oil-cartel meeting sent oil prices rising sharply for the second day.    Following a world-wide gain in prices early yesterday, the January-delivery crude-oil contract on the New York Mercantile Exchange traded as high as $18.90 a barrel before closing up 31 cents at $18.87. On the spot, or noncontract, market, the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude for January delivery rose 40 cents, to $18.85 a barrel; prices in Europe for December-delivery North Sea Brent blend rose 25 cents to $17.90.    Analysts attributed the spurt in prices since Tuesday to continued worries about a heating-oil shortage and a cold winter, as well as buying caused by traders fleeing the market before next week's meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    January-delivery heating oil on the Merc closed at 56.67 cents a gallon, up a cent, and up 1.95 cents for the week. Gasoline futures closed at 48.42 cents a gallon, up 0.13 cent, after taking a tumble as heating oil rose on Wednesday.    Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc., New York, said the American Petroleum Institute's weekly inventory report from Tuesday night clearly made its mark on the market Wednesday and yesterday. Based on the API numbers, &quot;we're looking at historically low (heating-oil) stocks right now,&quot; he said.    Active oil buying has also been a reflection, analysts said, of short covering by traders -- buying back contracts to offset those sold earlier -- in advance of the OPEC meeting in Vienna Wednesday. The traders are squaring their books because they don't want to be vulnerable during the volatile market that often greets OPEC meetings, analysts said.    Nauman Barakat, energy-futures analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., New York, said that despite the oil cartel's current disarray -- at least in public statements -- OPEC has crossed up the experts at its past three semiannual meetings and come up with price-supporting agreements.    &quot;People are buying (on) the rumor that maybe they'll show more discipline,&quot; and oil prices will rise, he said.    Many analysts criticize the huge short-term impact that the API numbers can have, especially since they are only estimates and are sometimes later revised. Analysts caution that the statistics are best as a long-term barometer.    Still, analysts can't find much reason for heating oil's rally the past two days beyond the moderate 656,000-barrel drop-off in U.S. heating-oil stockpiles reported by the institute Tuesday.    &quot;It certainly seems quite clear that leadership is being provided by heating oil, as a result of the drawdown earlier in the week,&quot; Mr. Barakat said. &quot;A lot of people expected a one- to two-million (barrel) build, but when you have the drawdown, people get concerned, if there's a normal winter, whether we'll be short of heating oil.&quot;    In other commodity markets yesterday:    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices plunged in late trading as the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell through the psychologically important 1800 level, despite interest-rate cuts by several European central banks earlier in the day. The Dow Jones Industrials closed down 72.44 at 1776.53, its lowest close since the 508-point crash on Oct. 19 to 1738.74. Traders said several rounds of arbitrage-related program trading kept downward pressure on prices of stock-index futures. Arbitrage traders bought futures as they traded at relatively discounted levels, compared with their theoretical value, and sold the stocks in the indexes. Such buying supported futures prices momentarily, but was overwhelmed by the waves of sell orders hitting the stock market. The bellwether Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index future for December delivery fell 9.45 to close at 223.60, more than 1.5 points below the Sandamp;P 500 cash index. Theoretically, the future is valued at about 0.40 above the cash index, based on the time remaining until it expires at the same price as the cash index on Dec. 18, and a trader's borrowing costs. The close at a discount to the cash index indicates futures may fall further in early trading today, barring a rebound in financial markets overnight, traders said.    COTTON: Futures prices fell as much as the daily limit of two cents a pound for the third time this week as concern that a slowdown in the economy next year might curtail the use of cotton, analysts said. March-delivery cotton yesterday fell the two-cent limit to 66.06 cents. This position, as did May, also fell the limit on Monday and Tuesday. July was down two cents Monday as well as yesterday. After booming to over 81 cents a pound in mid-August on strong foreign and domestic demand, prices have dropped about 15 cents. &quot;There's a general worry that there will be an economic setback -- although not a real recession -- next year,&quot; said Ernest Simon, cotton specialist for Prudential-Bache Securities. Concern has been fueled by reports that some domestic mills have slowed their buying of cotton, he said.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle and hog futures tumbled in the face of big production and slack demand, analysts said. The December-settlement cattle contract finished at 62.77 cents a pound, down 1.33 cents. The contract found no buyers despite being lower than cash-market prices, analysts said. &quot;Buyers just aren't anxious,&quot; said Gerald Abbenhaus, an analyst with A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons Inc., St. Louis. The stock-market turmoil also worked against hog and cattle prices. &quot;The Wall Street disease is a very strong influence, we're dealing with items directly affected by consumer-spending habits,&quot; said Dale Durchholz, an analyst with AgriVisor Services Inc., Bloomington, Ill.    COCOA: Futures prices rose on the prospect that producing and consuming nations might reach agreement on the buying of surplus cocoa to steady market prices, but late selling trimmed advances. The March contract settled at $1,822 a metric ton, up $13, after rising as much as $41 around midday. Analysts said producing countries indicated willingness to lower the price at which the manager of the International Cocoa Agreement's buffer stock would have to buy cocoa, but producers didn't say how much of a cut they would agree to. They also wanted other conditions, which weren't specified, included in an agreement, analysts said. There was no response from consuming countries. &quot;Even if there is agreement, the supply situation is very bearish and there is concern . . . (whether) an agreement would hold up in light of past history and the Ivory Coast's strong opposition to any reduction in the intervention price,&quot; an analyst said. The Ivory Coast is the world's leading cocoa producer.    PRECIOUS METALS: Platinum prices, vulnerable to the stock market because of the metal's industrial uses, reacted to the market nosedive by falling $12.20 an ounce, to $506.70. The price is within platinum's recent range. Gold and silver prices were steady after an early rally. Shearson Lehman Brothers' bullion-trading manager, David Sobotka, said platinum's recent boost from &quot;South Africa strike talk&quot; has probably run its course. </TEXT></DOC>