<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870901-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   IRANIAN GUNBOATS ATTACKED a Kuwaiti freighter in the Persian Gulf.    The machine-gun and grenade assault on the unescorted vessel, an apparent response to three days of Iraqi air attacks on Iranian targets, was the first by Tehran's forces since the U.S. extended naval protection to Kuwaiti ships. Reagan officials said there is little the U.S. can do to quell the escalation of hostilities, which pose new risks that American forces in the region will be caught in the crossfire.    The U.S., while faulting Iraq's renewed attacks in the gulf, is consulting with U.N. Security Council members about an arms embargo against Iran.    ---   THE U.S. ASSERTED that the independent counsel law is unconstitutional.    The Justice Department, in a brief filed with a federal appeals court in Washington, said for the first time that the 1978 law establishing independent counsels should be struck down. Until yesterday, the Reagan administration had tried to sidestep or postpone a showdown on the legal question, arguing that it was premature for the courts to rule on the constitutionality of the Ethics in Government Act.    The department's stance isn't expected to affect the independent counsels investigating the Iran-Contra affair and Meese's dealings with Wedtech.    ---   AN EXPLOSION TRAPPED dozens of workers in a South African gold mine.    As thousands of black workers returned to coal and gold mines after a three-week strike that ended Sunday, an explosion sent an elevator crashing into a 4,600-foot shaft at a mine near the town of Welkom, southwest of Johannesburg. Officials said five miners were rescued and eight bodies recovered, but more than 40 people were missing. The cause of the blast was under investigation.    More than 800 miners, almost all of them black, died in mining accidents in South Africa last year, and danger pay was an issue during the strike.    ---   A Thai Airways jetliner plunged into the sea near the resort island of Phuket after evading an approaching Hong Kong-based Dragonair jet. Authorities believed that all 83 people aboard the Thai plane were killed. Two Americans reportedly were among the 37 foreigners on the plane, which was en route to Phuket from the city of Hat Yai.    ---   The Kremlin is prepared to accept verification proposals for underground nuclear tests, according to a senior Soviet arms-control official. He also offered to allow American scientists to explode a bomb at a Soviet test range to calibrate monitoring equipment. U.S. arms negotiator Max Kampelman said the offer was worth pursuing.    ---   The ACLU departed from its traditional neutrality in judicial selections and urged the Senate to defeat Judge Bork's appointment to the Supreme Court. The president of the civil-liberties organization described Bork's judicial views as &quot;extremist philosophy.&quot; Senate hearings on Bork's nomination are scheduled to begin Sept. 15.    ---   Rival parties in South Korea agreed on constitutional revisions that will provide for direct presidential elections and other democratic changes. Labor turmoil continued, however, with about 700 strikes for higher wages, improved working conditions and free unions still unresolved.    ---   Rebel troops proclaimed a provisional revolutionary government in the Philippines headed by a junta of junior military officers defeated in last week's coup attempt. President Aquino, who said there wouldn't be any leniency for the mutineers, reinforced Manila with tanks and jungle fighters to counter any new anti-government attacks.    ---   Jewish leaders met with Vatican officials in Rome to prepare for a meeting today with Pope John Paul II. The Jewish delegation reported progress in improving relations with the Vatican, which were strained by the pope's audience in June with Austria's Waldheim, who is accused of Nazi crimes.    ---   Britain's Social Democrats voted for a merger with the Liberal Party, its informal electoral partner since 1981. The move by the SDP's policy-making body at a meeting in Portsmouth, England, was seen as a further rebuff to former SDP leader Owen.    ---   Hundreds of aircraft workers blocked traffic in Jerusalem with burning tires and shouted anti-American slogans to protest Israel's decision to scrap production of the Lavi jet fighter. The Israeli cabinet voted Sunday to cancel the U.S.-financed project because it exceeded budget limits.    ---   NASA has apologized for an improper effort to organize industry lobbying against a cut in the space agency's budget. The move followed the disclosure by Aviation Week magazine of an Aug. 17 memo from NASA asking aerospace contractors to help lobby Congress, despite a federal law banning such activities by government agencies.    ---   A West German court convicted a former presidential secretary of treason after she admitted giving state secrets to a Soviet KGB agent. Prosecutors said the woman, who served as secretary to five West German presidents, was one of several &quot;lonely heart spies&quot; recruited by Moscow. She was sentenced to eight years in prison.    ---   Police in Poland dispersed an unofficial rally in the city of Wroclaw marking the seventh anniversary of the outlawed Solidarity trade union. At least 10 dissidents were detained. In Gdansk, Lech Walesa laid a wreath at a monument to shipyard workers killed by police in 1970 riots. </TEXT></DOC>