<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Tropical Forests and the Oxygen Scare---By S. Fred Singer</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   Doomsday predictions have been popular since biblical times, but the sources of doom are changing. Famine, war and pestilence have always been the old-time favorites -- so much so that people have almost learned to live with them. The possibility of destruction of life on Earth by the impact of a large asteroid or by the radiation effects of a close-by supernova or a solar superflare, has not evoked much public concern -- which is perhaps surprising because the probability of such natural catastrophes, though small, is finite.    Current fashion seems to be to predict man-made ecological disasters -- with the destruction of tropical forests as one of the front-runners. Although surrounded by considerable uncertainty, some of these potential disasters have a sound physical basis and need to be discussed seriously. In addition to deforestation, examples are:    --Possible global warming due to the increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels; or due to the increase of atmospheric methane from both human and natural sources, some as yet unspecified. Cutting down forests can make a small, temporary contribution to both carbon dioxide and methane.    --Possible global cooling due to dust, smoke and particulate material from a variety of sources: volcanoes, forest fires, industrial activities and conflagrations started by a nuclear war.    --Acidification of rain due to the increased emission of sulfur and nitrogen oxides, mainly from the burning of fossil fuels, with widespread ecological effects on surface waters, especially small lakes.    --Increases in the lower atmosphere of ozone and other oxidants commonly found in air pollution, with possible effects on vegetation and human health.    --Partial destruction of stratospheric ozone (above eight miles) caused by the release of chlorofluorocarbons (&quot;freons&quot;) that percolate into the stratosphere.    But there are also ecological concerns that can be disposed of quite definitively. A recurring scare is that the earth's atmosphere will run out of oxygen. Early on, people were worried that the burning of fossil fuels could deplete the oxygen supply and make the earth uninhabitable. Prof. Wallace Broecker of Columbia University's Lamont Geophysical Laboratory laid that one to rest when he calculated this depletion as seven molecules out of 10,000, i.e., a depletion of only 0.07%. Even if all photosynthesis were to stop, and bacteria and animals destroyed (i.e., oxidized) all of the organic carbon, including soil humus, the depletion would still be less than 1%.    The argument was advanced in a different form by Cornell Prof. Lamont C. Cole. In 1967, he told the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in New York City that the use of DDT and other pesticides could poison marine plankton, stop their photosynthesis, and thereby cut off 70% of the world's oxygen supply. Not so, said John Ryther of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution: A 10% decline would require more than a million years, even under the most adverse assumptions.    The point is that the production of organic matter is in a steady-state equilibrium with its consumption; therefore, oxygen production is balanced by utilization, and photosynthesis by respiration. The only exception is that about 0.1% of the organic material produced annually by photosynthesis is buried, i.e., not oxidized, to become peat and coal and other fossil fuels. This process increases the amount of atmospheric oxygen slightly, by about one part in 10 million per year, or 10% in a million years, according to the distinguished Yale ecologist G. Evelyn Hutchinson.    This issue has now reappeared. A current concern is that cutting down tropical forests can reduce the world's oxygen supply by removing a source of oxygen. Again, any decrease in oxygen production would be balanced by a decrease in oxygen consumption, mainly from a decrease in the bacteria and animals that inhabit these forests.    A more valid concern is that the destruction of forest habitat could spell the end of many animal species, a matter that is being hotly debated by ecologists -- although most incline to a gloomy view.    But those who hold this view cannot produce firm data to back up their contention that species loss presents a global crisis.    A similar disagreement about data prevails on the issue of deforestation. Is the destruction of tropical forests a global issue, as claimed by tropical-forest biologists? Or is the problem mainly local, and relatively unimportant on a global scale, as asserted by Roger Sedjo and Marion Clawson, forest economists at Resources for the Future?    With environmental groups actively opposing World Bank projects that would result in large-scale disturbance of the tropical forest, e.g. in Brazil, the controversy has now assumed an international political dimension. A recent glossy brochure, published by the Sierra Club, &quot;Bankrolling Disasters,&quot; tries to document development &quot;debacles&quot; in Brazil, India, Indonesia and Botswana. It is also an action guide against funding of government projects by international development banks. On this matter, many conservatives would agree with the Sierra Club, although not for ecological reasons.    Does this mean that we can now forget about ecological disasters? On the contrary, it is absolutely necessary to investigate each and every one of the side effects of our modern technology to its final conclusion and examine its possible influence on the global climate and on the ocean. There is probably nothing more important to man's future on this planet than an understanding of the long-range effects of his activities. The history of Earth gives abundant evidence of cataclysmic happenings. The stability of climate, for example, isn't known, nor is it known how close we are to the limit where another ice age could be triggered. The possibility that we might inadvertently start an irreversible reaction must be kept in mind constantly.    At the same time, we should be careful not to cry &quot;wolf&quot; needlessly or too often. The public and the media give special weight to statements from anyone who is a scientist, provided he makes news. Scientific credibility can easily be lost by exaggerated claims and extravagant statements. We need to provide a voice of reason, not just of alarm. As scientists, we have the responsibility to speak up, but we also must know when to stop talking.    ---   Mr. Singer is a professor of environmental sciences at the University of Virginia and currently Visiting Eminent Scholar at George Mason University. His forthcoming book on global environmental changes will be published by Paragon House. </TEXT></DOC>