<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880930-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Investigations That Might Have Been </HL><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>      1979:   --Rep. Claude &quot;Buddy&quot; Leach (D., La.), indicted on charges of buying votes in the 1978 general election and of violating the campaign finance laws. Acquitted of vote-buying charges; indictment involving the campaign finance laws was dismissed.    1980:   --Rep. Robert Bauman (R., Md.), accused of committing sodomy on a teen-age boy in Washington, D.C. Pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charge of sexual solicitation.    --Charles Carney, former member (D., Ohio) of the House Commerce Committee, indicted on charges of accepting an illegal gratuity in return for the promise of official favors. Charges were later dismissed.    --Sen. Robert Morgan (D., N.C.), accused of improper acceptance of campaign contributions from defense-contractor PACs.    --Rep. Michael Myers (D., Pa.), convicted of bribery, conspiracy and interstate travel to aid racketeering in the Abscam political corruption probe.    --Rep. John Jenrette Jr. (D., S.C.), convicted on two counts of bribery and one count of conspiracy in the Abscam case.    --Rep. Frank Thompson Jr. (D., N.J.), convicted of conspiracy, bribery and receiving an unlawful gratuity in connection with Abscam.    --Rep. Frank Murphy (D., N.Y.), convicted of conspiracy, acceptance of outside compensation for the performance of official duties and receiving an unlawful gratuity in connection with Abscam.    --Rep. John Murtha (D., Pa.), allegations of wrongdoing in connection with Abscam.    --Sen. Herman Talmadge (D., Ga.), accused of crimes possibly including perjury, false claims against the government, conspiracy to defraud the government, willful evasion of income and gift taxes, inadequate record-keeping for tax and election purposes, and receipt of campaign contributions in a federal building.    1981:   --Rep. Jon Hinson (R., Miss.) resigned after his arrest on a morals charge.    --Rep. Richard Kelly (R., Fla.), convicted on charges of bribery and conspiracy in connection with Abscam.    --Rep. Raymond Lederer (D., Pa.), convicted of bribery, bribery conspiracy, accepting an unlawful gratuity and interstate travel to aid racketeering in connection with Abscam.    1982:   --Reps. Daniel Crane (R., Ill.) and Gerry Studds (D., Mass.), censured by the House for sexual misconduct with teen-age congressional pages (the former for heterosexual misconduct, the latter for homosexual).    --Rep. Fred Richmond (D., N.Y.), pleaded guilty to income tax evasion, possession of marijuana and making an illegal payment to a federal employee.    1983:   --Reps. Ronald Dellums (D., Ca.), Barry Goldwater Jr. (R., Ca.), and Charles Wilson (D., Texas), allegations of illegal drug use.    1984:   --Rep. George Hansen (R., Idaho), convicted of violating the reporting requirements of the 1978 Ethics in Government Act.    --Rep. Geraldine Ferraro (D., N.Y.), found by the Ethics Committee to have violated the same law. Since she was not returning to the House in 1985, no further action was taken.    --Sen. Mark Hatfield (R., Ore.), accused of improperly supporting a pipeline project while his wife profited from a real estate deal involving a Greek businessman who promoted the venture.    1985-86:   --Rep. Dan Daniel (D., Va.), accused of accepting numerous free rides between Washington and his district on a corporate airplane owned by a defense contractor and of violating the reporting requirements of the Ethics in Government Act. The Ethics Committee concluded that he had misunderstood federal laws and House rules.    --Reps. Fernand St Germain (D., R.I.), James Weaver (D., Ore.), and Bill Boner (D., Tenn.), accused of using office to build personal wealth. Ethics Committee found Rep. St Germain had violated federal ethics laws and House rules. No punishment was recommended.    1987:   --Rep. Austin Murphy (D., Pa.), accused of diverting government resources to his former law firm, for allowing another member to vote for him on the House floor, and of keeping a &quot;no-show&quot; employee on his payroll. House reprimanded him.    --Rep. Mario Biaggi (D., N.Y.), convicted on charges related to accepting an illegal gratuity in the Wedtech case.    --Rep. Charles Rose (D., N.C.), accused of violating reporting requirements of Ethics in Government Act.    --Rep. Richard Stallings (D., Idaho), allegations of improperly borrowing campaign funds.    --Rep. Mary Rose Oakar (D., Ohio), accused of conflict of interest and payroll improprieties. She repaid the funds involved.    --Rep. Harold Ford (D., Tenn.), indicted on charges of bank, mail and tax fraud for his part in a scheme to buy political influence.    --Rep. Tony Coelho (D., Calif.), allegations of violating federal law prohibiting political committees from receiving more than $15,000 from one source; Rep. Coelho used a Texas Sandamp;L's yacht for eight fund-raisers in 1986 while he headed the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.    --Rep. Jim Wright (D., Texas), allegations of various financial irregularities.    --Rep. James Traficant (D., Ohio), found by a federal Tax Court judge to have accepted $108,000 in bribes from organized-crime figures while he was a county sheriff. The judge ruled he owed the government back taxes and civil penalties.    1988:   --Rep. Biaggi, convicted on additional charges growing out of the Wedtech case.    --Fofo Sunia, Democratic delegate from American Samoa, pleaded guilty to keeping &quot;ghost employees&quot; on his House payroll.    --Rep. Robert Garcia (D., N.Y.), implicated in a federal probe of alleged payoffs by Wedtech executives.    --Rep. Gerry Sikorski (D., Minn.), allegations of misusing office funds for personal and campaign purposes.    --Rep. Pat Swindall (R., Ga.), allegations of involvement in a scheme to launder drug money.    --Reps. Bill Chappell (D., Fla.), Roy Dyson (D., Md.), Andrew Ireland (R., Fla.), Samuel Stratton (D., N.Y.), and Thomas Downey (D., N.Y.), allegations of illegally trying to influence awarding of defense contracts in the so-called Pentagon scandal.    (See related story: &quot;Independent Counsels for Congress&quot; -- WSJ Sept. 30, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>