<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870818-0127 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Jude Wanniski was furious the day he heard that Alan Greenspan had been nominated as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and the supply-sider telephoned the White House to protest.    &quot;I called Howard Baker's office,&quot; he said later that day, still seething with indignation, &quot;and I told his secretary. . . .&quot;    Times are tough for Mr. Wanniski. His archenemy is taking over at the Fed, and secretaries are the only people at the White House who accept his calls. &quot;I've tried six or seven times to see {Chief of Staff} Baker or {Deputy Chief of Staff Kenneth} Duberstein,&quot; the New Jersey-based economic consultant says, &quot;and I keep getting put off.&quot;    It wasn't always that way. Mr. Wanniski was part of the band of influential ideologues who helped shape President Reagan's big 1981 tax cut. And as recently as last year, he consulted regularly with top aides of former Chief of Staff Donald Regan.    But now, fortunes have changed on the supply side. The small group of fellow travelers has lost favor at the White House. The supply-siders' presidential candidate, New York Rep. Jack Kemp, is trailing two traditionalist Republicans, Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas and Vice President George Bush. And the only other Republican candidate with an affinity for supply-side economics -- Pierre du Pont of Delaware -- is behind all three.    Moreover, the supply-siders are fractured by internal disputes. Three leading lights of the movement -- Mr. Wanniski, economist Arthur Laffer and former Treasury aide Paul Craig Roberts -- are barely on speaking terms. Those who do still communicate argue vehemently over such issues as whether to back a gold standard or how to reform Social Security.    &quot;It's the Che Guevara problem,&quot; says John Rutledge, the supply-sider chairman of the Claremont Economics Institute, a consulting firm. &quot;Every revolution is like that. Initially, people unite to destroy something they hate. Then, they splinter off to set up new churches.&quot;    Some former supply-siders have even abandoned the label in order to establish bonds with more-mainstream economists. &quot;Using the term 'supply side' alienates you from those who agree with you,&quot; laments Bruce Bartlett, who recently left the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank, to join the White House policy staff. &quot;I'd just as soon consider myself as having a free-market view.&quot;    In a way, supply-siders' problems are a measure of their extraordinary success. In the late 1970s, the group coalesced around the idea that high &quot;marginal&quot; tax rates -- those paid on each additional dollar earned -- were stifling economic incentives. Supply-siders argued that lower tax rates would revitalize the economy by stimulating more work, savings and investment.    The theories didn't attract a large following in academia, but they proved enormously appealing in Washington. After years of Republican sermons about austerity and balanced budgets -- sermons that much of the electorate often didn't want to hear -- President Reagan embraced the supply-side call for tax-rate cuts. He saw the cuts as a politically attractive way to spur economic growth, force Congress to slow spending and loosen the government's grip on the economy. As a consequence, the top tax rates took a breathtaking tumble during Mr. Reagan's two terms, from 70% in 1981 to 28% next year (or 33% for some affluent taxpayers).    &quot;I think it's neat what Reagan has done,&quot; an exultant Mr. Laffer says. &quot;If we can just keep the rate at 28%, I'll be happy.&quot;    The taste of success has whetted the appetites of most supply-siders and has led them to pursue new issues. But those issues don't have the same political appeal as tax cuts or generate the same consensus within the group. Nevertheless, supply-siders brandish their ideas like swords, and the result is constant combat.    Mr. Wanniski, for instance, recently wrote a letter to the New York Times attacking Mr. Roberts's ideas on monetary policy as &quot;dangerous&quot; and -- even worse -- &quot;demand-side in origin.&quot; Mr. Bartlett responded that &quot;calling Craig a demand-sider is silly. Craig was in this before Jude had even heard of supply-side.&quot;    And when a Wanniski associate, Alan Reynolds, wrote a column attacking Mr. Laffer's analysis, Mr. Laffer's riposte was: &quot;It's sort of flattering. I can't remember the last piece I wrote on Alan.&quot;    Some supply-siders have tried to make international monetary reform the top supply-side issue, but that has proved especially divisive. At a Washington conference on the topic at which Rep. Kemp was a co-host, Mr. Roberts stormed out in protest.    &quot;This is nothing but a bunch of socialists here,&quot; the economist declared loudly as he departed, according to two people attending the meeting. &quot;They are setting Kemp up.&quot; (Mr. Roberts, a professor at Georgetown University's Center for Strategic and International Studies, refused to be interviewed for this article, contending in a letter that the Washington bureau of The Wall Street Journal has a &quot;demonstrated inability to report objectively on supply-side economics.&quot;)    Mr. Laffer's defection has been even more extreme. Hurt by Rep. Kemp's failure to endorse him in his ill-fated California Senate bid last year, he signed up to help the presidential campaign of Vice President George Bush -- who once derided supply-side theory as &quot;voodoo economics.&quot;    Talking about his former comrades in arms, Mr. Laffer says, &quot;My native coalition is not with bomb throwers. Besides, I don't know where they get the chutzpah to define who is and who isn't a supply-sider.&quot;    Even among those who consider monetary reform the top concern, agreement doesn't come easily. At a luncheon with his advisers last fall, Mr. Kemp endured an intense, five-hour debate over the arcane issue of whether the dollar should remain an international reserve currency in a proposed gold-based monetary system.    &quot;These are people who take ideas seriously,&quot; says John Mueller, a Kemp aide. &quot;I think that's a strength rather than a weakness.&quot;    But although supply-siders may take their new ideas seriously, many people don't. Rep. Kemp has been ridiculed by opponents for advocating a gold standard, for instance, and his political advisers have decided to play down the issue.    From the very start, the supply-siders who came together in the 1970s were an uneasy coalition. They were an assortment of conservative economists, activists and journalists who shared not so much a coherent view of the economy as a disdain for the ruling economic wisdom. Rep. Kemp led the supply-side campaign in Congress, and The Wall Street Journal's editorial page, where Messrs. Wanniski and Roberts both wrote, became the movement's leading public voice. But behind the supply-siders' common fervor for tax-rate cuts lay a mine field of latent differences.    &quot;We had a lot of malcontents, a lot of deviants, a lot of people who backed causes,&quot; Mr. Laffer says. &quot;We were not the mainstream.&quot;    The supply-siders were hurt as well, when, after the 1981 tax cuts, the economy fell into a recession and the federal budget fell deep into the red. A decade ago, when politicians began to worry about the nation's low savings and investment levels, the supply-side tax cuts seemed to offer an easy solution. But the lower tax rates haven't triggered the new savings that the supply-siders had promised. Now, the country is grappling with huge budget and trade deficits, and, unlike tax cuts, all the solutions offered by all the various schools of economic thought seem politically painful or vaguely unconvincing.    The deficits soared for many reasons. Some observers blame the increase on the tax cuts and the administration's defense buildup, while others contend that Congress refused to give Mr. Reagan the spending cuts that he requested. Most supply-siders blame the deficits on the Fed's growth-stunting monetary policy.    But many mainstream economists agree with Charles Schultze, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, who says that &quot;a large part of the trillion dollars of national debt and hundreds of billions of dollars in foreign debt that has built up over the last few years is the supply-siders' legacy. They have saddled us with a long-term, very difficult legacy which is going to burden future generations.&quot;    Last year's debate over tax overhaul widened the divisions. Some supply-siders, such as Mr. Wanniski and Jeff Bell, who ran against Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley in the 1978 New Jersey Senate race, fervently supported the 1986 tax bill. Others, such as U.S. Chamber of Commerce economist Richard Rahn, feared that the elimination of tax incentives for investment would damage the economy.    On monetary policy as well, the divisions are deep. Some original supply-siders were trained in &quot;monetarism&quot; and believe that foreign-exchange rates should float freely while nations control the growth of their money supplies. Others are committed to the idea of a monetary system with fixed exchange rates and a currency based on gold. They contend that a stable currency would control inflation and promote growth. In between are countless variations on those themes.    &quot;There is no supply-side view of monetary policy,&quot; Mr. Bartlett says. Even among those who favor gold, he adds, &quot;I'm not sure there are any two people who believe in the same type of gold standard.&quot;    In 1984 and 1985, many supply-siders criticized as unduly tight the monetary policy being pursued by Paul Volcker, then the Federal Reserve chairman, who feared that fast economic growth would spark inflation. And they cheered over the next few years as President Reagan appointed four new members to the Fed's board of governors who seemed to share their views: Martha Seger, a Michigan GOP activist; Wayne Angell, a Kansas farmer and banker; Manuel Johnson, a former protege of Mr. Roberts's at the Treasury Department; and Robert Heller, a Bank of America economist who was first suggested to the White House by supply-siders.    But recent events have shown that those four officials hold widely differing views. Since early this year, Mr. Angell has led the drive for a tighter Fed grip on credit, arguing that rising commodity prices signal a possible resurgence of inflation. Ms. Seger, on the other hand, has insisted on easier credit to spur the economy.    &quot;I'm not sure who's holding the Holy Grail of supply-siders,&quot; says Mr. Heller, who never applies the term to his own views.    A similar battle has raged among supply-siders themselves. Keying on a rise in the price of gold, Mr. Wanniski rushed to Washington one day last April and met with governors Heller, Angell and Seger, as well as Fed Chairman Volcker, to advocate higher interest rates to fight inflation. Shortly afterward, Mr. Roberts, in an article in the New York Times, criticized Mr. Volcker for allegedly keeping credit too tight and crimping growth. That was the article that prompted Mr. Wanniski to write his &quot;demand-side&quot; rebuttal.    The selection of Mr. Greenspan as Fed chairman has also stirred contention. To Mr. Wanniski, Mr. Greenspan is the ultimate enemy of supply-siders. &quot;Every time I look across the trenches of the battlefield,&quot; Mr. Wanniski says, &quot;through the smoke I see Greenspan's beady eyes staring back at me.&quot; Peering through that same smoke, however, Mr. Laffer sees Mr. Greenspan as &quot;a really terrific man. A solid, stable guy.&quot;    Nevertheless, supply-siders can claim some role in having nudged the Fed to pay more attention to commodity prices and in encouraging Treasury Secretary James Baker's efforts to manage currency-exchange rates. &quot;Don't bury us yet, 'cause we ain't dead,&quot; Mr. Wanniski says.    Indeed, perhaps the greatest testament to their continued influence is a group of 40 or so young Washington staffers and policy makers who meet monthly to discuss conservative ideas over pizza and beer. The group recently changed its name from &quot;the supply-side tribes&quot; to the &quot;prosperity caucus&quot; -- an attempt to shed the negative connotations of the supply-side label. But the caucus organizer, Ralph Benko, readily acknowledges the debt it owes to the original supply-siders, whom he jokingly calls &quot;our antediluvian forefathers.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>