<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880315-0120 </DOCNO><HL> FERC Seeks Wider Corridors of Power --- Plan Calls for New Breed of Electricity Maker </HL><AUTHOR> Barbara Rosewicz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> SRP PCG </CO><IN> UTI </IN><G> ERG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ready or not, the monopolized electricity industry is about to see one of its highly regulated duties -- the generation of power -- opened to more outside competition.    Federal regulators this week plan to propose what many consider the most significant change for the industry in a decade. The intent is to give market forces, instead of regulation, a chance to set prices for new power supplies and to encourage a new breed of unregulated power producers to bid to build most of the new power plants historically built by utilities. The hope is that more competition will mean lower electricity bills for consumers.    The changes being proposed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission would be voluntary from state to state, so they won't transform the industry overnight. But they are widely seen as spurring the trend toward deregulation in the generation and transmission of power. The Northeast, where new power will be needed soon, would feel the effects sooner than states with a surplus of electricity.    &quot;It's not going to be a major restructuring of the industry next year. But if you're talking about 10 to 20 years from now, the industry will look very different than it does today,&quot; predicts William Berry, chairman of Dominion Resources Inc., Richmond, Va., and a major booster of the changes.    Gradually, it is expected that more companies, either entrepreneurs or established companies such as San Francisco-based Bechtel Group Inc., will jump into building plants and selling electricity, relieving utilities and their shareholders of the risk of building plants only to find they can't recover the full costs from consumers. The new competitors may be able to earn more on their investments than utilities, because they wouldn't be subject to the same strict regulations or limited to a state-approved rate of return.    But fiddling with the nation's trusty electricity system is controversial. Skeptics, mindful of problems after deregulation of the transportation and telephone industries, fear it will hurt reliability of service and question whether it will lower prices. The electric-utility industry is split; some utilities don't want to change from the traditional system, in which they are responsible for building and generating power subject to state review.    State regulators, who could lose some decision-making power over pricing of new power supplies, largely oppose the proposal. They handed FERC a resolution this month calling its changes &quot;unnecessary and unacceptable,&quot; and asking the five-member commission to drop the bulk of its plans. And not even FERC is unanimous.    While the proposals are sure to be debated and tinkered with for months to come, FERC's forceful chairman, Martha Hesse, is intent on seeing the regulations on the books before the end of the year. Among supporters are the Reagan administration; an ad hoc group of utilities known as &quot;the gang of 14&quot;; companies that now produce and sell alternative or renewable energy; and certain consumer groups. &quot;We think the industry could use a dose of competition&quot; as long as it's properly carried out, says Marc Cooper, research director for the Consumer Federation of America.    In many ways, the new proposals are a reaction to what is already happening in the industry. Utilities have become reticent to build expensive power plants. And utilities' monopoly-hold on power generation already has been broken by a small-but-growing set of industries and businesses born under a 1978 law to sell electricity produced along with industrial steam or from renewable resources, such as water, wind and sunlight.    These cogenerators and small, independent producers, which sell their power to utilities, accounted for 1.5% of electricity sold to consumers last year, according to the North American Electric Reliability Council. In California, 13% of peak demand is supplied by non-utility power producers. &quot;What we're proposing isn't very radical because it already exists today,&quot; says FERC's Ms. Hesse.    The coming FERC proposals seek to accelerate the trend toward competition in two ways. They would spell out a voluntary competitive-bidding scheme, in which producers would bid to win contracts to fill a utility's new power needs. Four states already have competitive bidding; otherwise, wholesale rates from cogenerators and small producers are set administratively for utilities, which are required by law to buy the power.    Second, the proposals would encourage new competitors to get into the electricity-selling business by becoming a so-called independent power producer. Independent power producers aren't as limited in the kind or amounts of power they can produce as are cogenerators and small power producers currently in business. FERC would help by streamlining the rules and paper work required for the new independent producers.    Before a new industry of independent power producers can really take off, however, other changes are required, some by Congress. But industry and government officials say the pressure for those changes will increase as businesses and even utilities get interested in building new power generators under the relaxed FERC rules.    There are clear signals that companies already are looking toward moving into the business of making and selling wholesale electricity. Sierra Pacific Resources, a Reno, Nev., utility-holding company, has launched plans, along with 10 partners, to build coal-fired plants in Nevada at its Thousand Springs project and sell the power wholesale.    Bechtel Power Corp., a unit of Bechtel Group, and Pacific Gas andamp; Electric Co., San Francisco, in December announced plans to form a joint venture to develop cogeneration and small power projects nationwide. &quot;Certainly the proposed regulations would enhance our opportunities,&quot; says a Bechtel Power spokesman. The company expects that 12,000 to 15,000 megawatts of new generating capacity a year will be needed by the mid-1990s, and it estimates that more than half could be supplied by independent producers.    &quot;The expectation is this is the way power plants will be built in the future,&quot; says Paul Elston, president of Long Lake Energy Corp., a New York-based developer of energy projects.    Until other legal barriers are removed, industry people say, they foresee energy developers, utility subsidiaries, or companies that currently sell equipment, engineering and construction services to the electric industry forming joint ventures to launch independent power projects. While some states might opt to keep their utility companies building plants the traditional way, with state regulators second-guessing construction costs, eventually utilities would do little building of their own plants, they predict.    Ultimately, &quot;some suggest the industry may look like a series of generating companies that will sell electricity to the distribution companies,&quot; which would remain utilities, says David Owens, a vice president of Edison Electric Institute, which represents investor-owned electric utilities.    Whether independent producers ever build huge plants that sell electricity to several buyers over long distances depends largely on whether FERC goes further and makes changes in transmission pricing and access rules. Whether utilities must turn over use of their transmission lines to other producers is an even stickier topic than injecting competition into power generation.    Ms. Hesse, FERC's chairman, says she expects to present &quot;policy ideas&quot; on transmission access and pricing to the commission by the end of the year. But, she says, &quot;I'm not suggesting there will be rules. I'm not suggesting the commission will have a position.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>