<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880930-0177 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: All Latins Should Try Chile's Homemade Growth Recipe </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Cohen </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> SANTIAGO, Chile  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Corto-plazismo is the curse of Latin America. Literally &quot;short-termism,&quot; the expression captures that pervasive mix of chronic anxiety and skepticism that leads to an inability to plan beyond next week. The result is the region's scarce investment, casinolike financial markets and capital flight. All this in turn spawns economic stagnation and national frustration.    Chile's lesson for the area is that cortoplazismo is not a curse from which there is no escape. Despite major economic crises in 1975 and 1982, the result of Chile's untiring application of market-oriented reforms is a country that seems geared for sustained growth of as much as 6% a year -- growth investors can rely on.    Of course, Chile has made this adjustment under the military rule of Gen. Augusto Pinochet. This, concedes chief debt negotiator Hernan Somerville, &quot;has facilitated things.&quot; It's easier to slim the state sector when strikes are banned. It's also easier to cap wages to ensure export competitiveness when labor unions are emasculated. Moreover, consistency of policy is more elusive in the region's young democracies than in a dictatorship. Still, as a crucial plebiscite approaches next week on the future of a repressive and sometimes murderous regime, recognition should be given to what has been achieved.    Finance Minister Hernan Buchi sums it up as &quot;integrating with the world economy.&quot; Import tariffs, slashed to a uniform 10% at the beginning of the process of liberalization, have now been stabilized at 15%. No longer protected, Chilean industry has had to learn to compete. Rules for foreign investment have been kept simple and largely consistent since 1974. Encouraged, foreign companies have committed some $5.5 billion to the country since 1982 alone. New export industries in sectors from kiwis to cellulose have emerged, bringing prosperity to the provinces. The Chilean economy no longer revolves around copper and Santiago.    At the same time, a rigorous privatization program has helped slash the public deficit from more than 25% of gross national product in 1973 to under 1% today. While Argentina is in the throes of nationalist torment over the proposed sale of 40% of state airline Aerolineas Argentinas to Scandinavian Airline Systems, Chile already is a country where Australian financier Alan Bond controls the national telephone company. While Brazil's state steel company Siderbras continues to lose billions of dollars a year amid vague talk of possible divestments, Chile already has privatized former state steelmaker Compania Acero Pacifico -- and steelworkers own one-third of the dividend-yielding stock.    &quot;When we talk to officials from other Latin American countries, we feel we are speaking a different language,&quot; says Manuel Macaya, deputy director of the state development company Corfo.    No wonder. In this inflation-racked continent, Chilean inflation was under 6% in the first half of this year -- a result gradually achieved by balancing the budget rather than through the spectacular, but largely abortive, &quot;heterodox&quot; attacks on inflation tried recently in Brazil, Argentina and Peru. Steady and clear rules on debt-equity swaps since 1985 -- unaccompanied by moratorium threats -- have helped bring Chile's foreign debt down to just three times annual exports today, from more than five times three years ago.    The change is palpable. Businessmen excitedly compare the country with Australia and New Zealand (which have been in the vanguard of foreign investment here). Ministries are brisk, efficient places, bereft of the crowds of idle employees and hangers -- on who clog Latin American ministries from Caracas to Buenos Aires.    Nationalist humbug, of the kind evident in the new Brazilian Constitution or Argentina's agonizing over Aerolineas, is conspicuously absent because the inferiority complex that spawns this kind of thing has disappeared. The stock market is attracting widespread interest as owning shares becomes popular: It's not just a playground for speculators. Talk is of new mining and industrial projects, rather than of the black market or the best hedge against inflation or the money-changer on Reforma who will give the best dollar rate for the peso.    &quot;We have tried to move from a short-term to a medium- and long-term vision,&quot; says former Mining Commissioner Bruno Philippi. &quot;This is fundamental. After all, why invest in an employee if you think everything may change in a year? And how can capital markets grow amid chronic instability?&quot;    The adjustment has not always been easy. The severe recessions in Chile in 1975 and 1982 were caused partly by external factors, but partly by the trauma of moving from a protected to an open economy. While many new export industries have emerged, several large industrial groups collapsed.    As is inevitable in a program so ambitious, there were also mistakes: For example, an overvalued currency between 1979 and 1982 swamped the country with imports and priced many national companies out of the world market. Mr. Buchi warns that no Latin American country contemplating such an opening -- and Brazil, Argentina and Mexico all say they are -- should imagine the process is easy or rapid.    Yet, it seems worthwhile. Corto-plazismo -- ingrained in the region through its recent history of high inflation, regular military coups and erratic policy swings -- leads countries nowhere. The economies of Brazil, Argentina and Mexico continue to hang in the balance as their governments give contradictory signals on whether there really will be a drive away from closed economies based on import-substitution, and whether this will be sustained over several years. Chile, meanwhile, has been growing more than 5% for the past four years and could continue to do so.    Of course, Chile's adjustment is no panacea. Poverty persists. Growth has been from a low base. There is evidence that some public services -- notably in health and education -- have suffered in some areas. But even the most die-hard critics of the regime concede that something has changed, something has been achieved -- and this could be a base for democracy with growth.    And herein lies the hope for Chile: that a shift to democracy -- which the country's educated and enterprising population merits -- will not be accompanied by some brutal economic about-face, but will favor continued growth toward an open and competitive economy. A reversion would plunge the country back into corto-plazismo, with all its frustrations. And eight more years of Gen. Pinochet, which a &quot;Yes&quot; vote in the plebiscite would ensure, could so polarize Chile as to eventually threaten further economic progress.    A completed Chilean success story would also point the lie to the argument that debt relief is the only answer for the region. Such relief could help, but Chile has put itself on the road to recovery without any. And there is no reason to think that any amount of relief would bring sustained growth to economies with the distortions of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico.    ---   Mr. Cohen covers South America for the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>