<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0126 </DOCNO><HL> Recruiting Drive:Shortage of TeachersPrompts Talent HuntBy Education Officials---Enticements Include Loans,Scholarships, Free Rent;The Search Moves Abroad---Career Change for a Farmer---By Francis C. Brown IIIStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Faced with a worsening shortage of teachers, education officials are peering behind every bush and around every corner in search of them. That means bushes and corners in a lot of unlikely places -- Spain, Germany, aboard New England lobster boats, in the depressed Texas oil patch, on military bases.    There are so few certified teachers available that employers who once paid scant attention to applications now must compete with one another for candidates, sometimes roving overseas to find them. Many districts are raising teacher pay substantially, and some beguile prospects with offers of free rent and other enticements.    At the same time, authorities are offering scholarships and student loans with a zeal unknown before, trying to divert more college students into teaching and to keep them there. And, under various programs, they are converting the likes of oil geologists, flight attendants, fishermen and soldiers into instant teachers.    Such extraordinary efforts are necessary because &quot;without enough teachers, all this reform, all this movement toward excellence in our schools, doesn't mean anything,&quot; says Albert Shanker, the president of the American Federation of Teachers.    The new recruiting drives appear to be working well in some places, but it is too early to tell whether any offer a lasting, comprehensive solution. Working against them are the powerful demographic and social forces that created the shortage -- and that promise to make it worse. Demand for teachers has been rising as the children of the baby-boom generation fill up more classrooms, but the supply has been shrinking; women and minority-group members, the traditional groupings from which teachers emerged, now have wider opportunities in higher-paying fields. Also, more teachers are retiring or quitting.    About 1.3 million people will have to be drawn into teaching between now and 1993 if the nation's elementary and high schools, both public and private, are to have enough staff. That is about 360,000 teachers more than the expected new supply, says the U.S. Education Department.    In certain states, including California, Texas and Florida, shortages are acute already; in certain subjects -- math, science, languages, special education -- they are nearly universal. Florida expects to graduate less than a third of all the teachers it will need to add over the next 13 years. In science alone, it will need 11,500 more but expects to produce only 1,000.    One result of the shortages, actual and potential: After many years of indifferent, even contemptuous, treatment in the job market, teachers are being fawned over and catered to by recruiters who scour the country for prospects.    &quot;Until three years ago we didn't leave the office to recruit,&quot; says Joe Lee, an associate superintendent at the Fresno, Calif., Unified School District. Now Fresno scouts college campuses and job fairs nationwide. Bakersfield, not far south of Fresno, has increased its recruiting budget sevenfold in recent years.    Teachers these days are valued commodities at job fairs rather than supplicants. At a recent fair in Orlando, Fla., the organizers showered teachers with prizes. At another in Boston last year, Prince George's County, Md., one of the most aggressive district recruiters, gave away book bags, balloons and apples to lure teachers to its table, where it told them about all the goodies they would get if they signed on -- including a month's free rent and cut-rate car loans.    Bad form, competitors complained. Tough, says a spokesman for the district. &quot;It's a cutthroat market out there. Teachers deserve to be competed for,&quot; he adds. The county was swamped with 4,000 applications for 400 jobs.    Some districts have been recruiting in Germany, Spain and other nations with an oversupply of teachers. Cincinnati recruiters work Belgium, West Germany and Puerto Rico, and New York has imported about 200 teachers from Spain over the past two years. (Though all spoke English, they didn't speak New Yorkese and had to learn street slang in classes arranged by the teachers' union.)    But the number of districts looking abroad is still small, and the difficulties of recruitment are great. &quot;There is not a high payoff in terms of a long-range solution to the teacher shortage. The numbers are always going to be way too small to make any substantive difference,&quot; says James Smith, deputy superintendent of the California State Department of Education.    So it still makes more sense to grow most needed teachers at home, which is what state and local authorities are trying to do. Money is the fertilizer.    Between 1972 and 1982, enrollment in teacher-education programs fell 50%. It has turned up slightly since, thanks in part to an outpouring of new scholarships and forgivable loans to students who agree to teach after graduation. In 1982, only three states offered these inducements; today, 38 do, says the Education Commission of the States.    Some of the payouts are substantial. Under New Jersey's Teaching Scholars Program, which began last fall, a high-school senior who agrees to teach at least four years in state schools can win a scholarship that will pay up to $30,000 of his college costs. In neighboring Pennsylvania, forgivable loans of considerable size are steering more people like Deborah Dressler into education.    The state forgave $10,000 in loans Miss Dressler used to get a degree in biology because she agreed to get a teaching certificate and become a science instructor for three years. Miss Dressler, who is now teaching at a middle school in Yardley, Pa., says the loan forgiveness was &quot;a very strong incentive that definitely shoved me in the direction of teaching.&quot; The Pittsburgh school district offers yet another lure -- guaranteed teaching jobs after college for graduating high-school students who meet certain academic criteria and go on to study education.    But all these inducements, while credited with increasing the teacher supply somewhat, are no panacea. Connecticut, which grants loans of up to $5,000 a year to students who don't have to repay them if they teach, says less than half the recipients are in classrooms. Some of the rest abandoned teaching quickly. Others apparently treated the program simply as a vehicle for low-interest loans -- the repayment for borrowers who don't teach carries an interest rate only one percentage point above the prime rate -- and never taught at all.    John Siegrist, the director of student financial-aid services for the Connecticut Department of Education, doubts the effectiveness of loan incentives. Then why have so many states adopted them? &quot;It's less expensive for a state to address the problem by giving a million in loans than it is to give school districts funds to pay teachers an adequate salary,&quot; he says.    Teachers have gotten some big percentage pay increases in recent years. But many raises were weighted heavily toward starting salaries rather than those of experienced teachers, giving the latter little incentive to stay in the profession. And in many cases even the jumps in starting pay have only lifted those levels from the abysmal to the substandard.    New York City, for one, has raised starting pay by a third over the past two years. However, that still leaves a new teacher in one of the world's highest-cost cities earning only $20,000. After a 21% rise last year, Maryland's Prince George's County now pays almost as much to start as New York.    But even if teachers everywhere were paid enough to attract more students into education courses, employers would still have trouble filling all their vacancies with these graduates alone. A report of the Carnegie Forum on Education estimates that nearly a quarter of all college graduates will have to go into teaching if the classrooms of the early 1990s are to be fully staffed. Since that isn't likely, the alternative is to make teachers out of people who have been doing something else.    At the University of Southern Maine, a lobsterman and a blueberry farmer are among those enrolled in a new midcareer teacher-training program. Delaware is converting people with chemical-industry backgrounds into science teachers, and Texas is retraining laid-off oil geologists and others. In Dallas, 1,600 people applied for 110 spots in a two-month training program that would enable those chosen to teach without going back to school.    One of them, former American Airlines flight attendant Kendall Haggerty, says: &quot;There's a limit to how much good you're doing serving tea and Coke. I identify more with being a third-grade teacher than I ever did with being a flight attendant.&quot;    The armed forces are particularly ripe for teacher recruiting. Military personnel retire early, get generous pension benefits to supplement a teacher's pay, and are experienced in discipline and leadership. So the University of West Florida now offers teacher training on nearby Navy and Air Force bases, and Arizona State University targets the military in a new midcareer program. More than 100 people have enrolled in the ASU program so far, and the university estimates the potential at 2,000 enrollees -- equal to the undergraduate enrollment in its teachers' college.    The training that non-teachers get before going into a classroom varies greatly. In 16 states, recruits who agree to complete the normal teacher-education program in a few years can get provisional certification and teach while they study. In areas beset by shortages, this avenue into teaching is now well-trod; about half the math, science, English, special-education and elementary bilingual teachers hired last year in the giant Los Angeles school district lacked credentials in those subjects and are teaching under emergency certificates.    The same number of states, 16, now permit some form of alternative certification. This allows people to bypass the normal complement of teacher-education courses needed for certification. In a few places, including Texas and New Jersey, school districts are permitted to accept people as teachers after crash courses lasting only a couple of months; typically, beginners must serve a year as teaching interns before becoming fully certified.    Teachers' unions, as well as teachers' colleges, believe the hurry-up programs operated by school districts may be putting incompetents into the classroom. The conflict of interest is blatant, claims Mr. Shanker of the American Federation of Teachers. &quot;Precisely the same school board that needs the teacher is the one that finally decides he or she is a wonderful teacher,&quot; he says. &quot;They're so eager to get another body in the room they'd hire illiterates.&quot;    Supporters of alternative certification reply that rather than lowering standards, such programs seem to be attracting highly qualified and motivated people who might not have taught otherwise. New Jersey, which is now getting one in every four new teachers from alternative programs, says these teachers have only half the failure rate of conventionally educated teachers on subject exams.    &quot;When it's allowed to happen, alternative certification is not just some marginal, fringe approach,&quot; says Chester Finn Jr., assistant secretary for research and improvement at the federal Education Department. &quot;It can actually be a major source of new teachers.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>