<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Marketers Tighten Rules on Rebate OfficesIn Effort to Reduce Large Fraud Losses---By Cynthia F. MitchellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN><TEXT>   In the dark of night, a group of midwestern housewives pulled off an elaborate theft. They drove to selected garbage dumpsters to pull out bags of trash that could be converted into $10,000 in cash.    The trash? Proofs of purchase and sales receipts that had been turned in for consumer-product rebates -- and already paid. The women resubmitted thousands of the rebates and camouflaged their trail by varying their names and using postal boxes all over the country.    Consumer-products companies say they are losing millions of dollars a year to such schemes -- and to much less elaborate ones. Of the more than $1 billion a year estimated to be paid out in refunds and rebates, nobody knows exactly how big a chunk is paid to people who never bought the product or who are violating the standard one-refund-a-household restriction. But everybody agrees that the problem is too big to ignore.    Indeed, after long viewing rebate fraud as an inevitable cost of doing business, marketers are seeking ways to cut their losses. To protect themselves, several clearinghouses -- the third-parties that handle the paperwork on most mass rebate offers -- now shred or burn processed rebate submissions. They use computer programs that track suspect names and sound bells when they spot duplicate requests. For their part, marketers are tightening up rebate rules and making proofs of purchase harder to forge or steal off store shelves.    &quot;We can't afford to keep getting burned,&quot; says Frank Shaw, an executive vice president of Coleman Co., a Wichita, Kan., camping-gear maker whose annual rebate program is being slashed about 30% this year because of suspected fraud.    In Minnesota, postal-fraud investigators in 1985 jailed a man who had swindled companies out of at least $20,000 by stealing proofs of purchase from stores and replicating receipts with a stolen credit-card machine. In Kansas, also in 1985, three women who submitted hundreds of rebates with forged receipts -- reading &quot;Thank you for shopping at K mart&quot; -- were caught after they tried to make claims on a floor-wax company that didn't sell products to the big discount chain.    And in Michigan, sources say that postal investigators are on the verge of cracking what the investigators believe is the biggest rebate fraud yet.    But more often individuals bent on getting something for nothing get away with rebate fraud. Even though the problem is getting more attention, many companies are loath to bite the hand that feeds them by prosecuting consumers. It is also tough to get prosecutors interested. &quot;They aren't really sexy cases,&quot; admits Neil Schorr, a U.S. Postal Service inspector.    Those who are caught usually escape severe punishment. In the Midwestern trash-theft scheme the ringleader -- who pleaded guilty to mail fraud and using false names -- was sentenced last month, in federal court in Chicago, to three years' probation with 10 hours a week of community service. She also has to repay $20,000 she was accused of making. Though prosecutors couldn't prove the ring got more than $52,000, companies and clearinghouses estimate their total potential losses from this scheme in the six-figure range. (The victims think the ring sold or traded thousands of sets of stolen rebate papers to others who also stood to profit.)    Some companies decline to discuss their misredemption problems, for fear of tipping off would-be criminals or offending honest customers. Clearinghouses and postal authorities say some companies even balk at printing warnings on redemption forms that mail fraud is a federal crime.    Others are more candid, but not necessarily more eager to prosecute. General Electric Co.'s lighting group a few months ago discovered counterfeit proofs of purchase submitted for an auto-headlight rebate. It also had problems with employee theft of packing materials -- including proof-of-purchase forms -- from warehouses. And last year, a clearinghouse discovered that a Florida man had bilked GE of $2,500 by using varied names and addresses to submit 400 rebate claims.    GE concedes it filed no charges. &quot;We just feel, from a PR view, that we'd never win, even though you could win handsdown in court,&quot; a spokesman says. &quot;We just don't want the publicity of jumping on a consumer no matter what he did.&quot; Instead, GE's clearinghouse filed in its computer the names of people suspected of abusing the rebate system; any further claims by those people will be studied carefully rather than paid routinely.    While no marketer seems immune to fraud perpetrated with forged or stolen proofs of purchase, some rebates -- such as those for products that aren't boxed and don't have labels -- are easier targets. &quot;When the requirement is simply to copy the number off of a can -- boy, it's hose time,&quot; says Robert Zwhalan, an executive with ACS Marketing Services Inc., a Beaverton, Ore., clearinghouse. Promotion Watch Inc., a Farmington Hills, Mich., promotion-security firm, has advised clients to attach adhesive proof-of-purchase stickers to vulnerable products. Then, at least, the number of rebate claims can't exceed the number of stickers.    Windmere Corp., a Hialeah, Fla., maker of personal-care products, decided it would make its proofs of purchase harder to get. It moved the universal product codes to the center of its curling-iron boxes from the end flaps, for example, after discovering that most of the flaps on boxes still in stores had been ripped off.    &quot;We're trying to make it a little tougher for even the small-time crooks,&quot; says David Friedson, Windmere's president. Windmere also pared the length of the offers and changed to a redemption house that destroys processed forms.    Helen of Troy Corp., an El Paso, Texas, rival to Windmere, has tried to enhance its rebates without increasing the chances of fraud. Now, it offers two-tiered &quot;bonus rebates.&quot; To get $7 back on a hair dryer, for example, the consumer now sends in a $5 coupon to one redemption house and a $2 coupon to a second. Lawrence S. Cohen, the vice president of marketing, thinks thieves will prefer a softer target -- one that pays $7 all at once. There's no guarantee, though, that the new rebate rules won't annoy honest consumers more than they deter industrious thieves.    Coleman isn't being so subtle. The company estimates that in 1986 its earnings were reduced $2 million because of rebate fraud; in the last four months its redemption rate -- long steady at about 24% -- jumped to 40%. Now, besides cutting the number and length of such offers, it is printing warnings on the redemption forms that mail fraud is a felony. And it has hired consultants to help it replace rebates with other kinds of promotions.    Most companies are relying on their clearinghouses to tackle the problem. &quot;Anybody who doesn't have a concern is sticking his head in the sand,&quot; says Harlan Strong, the vice president of sales of Young America Corp., a Minnesota clearinghouse. Mr. Strong says the company used to post an employee at a landfill site to make sure Young America's trash got buried, not stolen. Now it shreds the forms before they leave the premises.    But can the perpetrators ever be defeated? Some marketers fear not. Says Francis Doyle, the president of ACS Marketing Services: &quot;Anything we do, it seems that crooks find a way around it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>