<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0171 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Settling the Palestinian Problem </HL><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   The articles by Max Singer and Geraldine Brooks on &quot;What Can Be Done About the Palestinian Problem?&quot; (editorial page, March 16) focus primarily on the political aspects of the situation. It would be useful to point out some of the economic benefits that would flow from -- and might well accelerate -- the peaceful resolution of the Palestinian issue as part of an overall Arab-Israeli settlement.    Economic interdependence already exists linking Israel and the Arabs living on the West Bank and in Gaza. Before the riots, 120,000 West Bank residents and Gazans supported their families by traveling daily to work in Israel's factories and fields. Without this ready labor supply, Israel would have to expand the number of workers, now totaling 10,000, it imports from Portugal, the Philippines, Ghana and Taiwan. A peaceful settlement would be mutually advantageous to both parties.    Political stability could lead to the creation of a Middle East economic development corporation -- a private-sector operation using the expertise and capital of Israeli, Arab and American investors -- to develop joint economic programs between Israelis and Arabs who live on the West Bank and in Gaza.    These businesses would benefit greatly from Israel's Free Trade Agreement with the U.S. and its membership in the European Economic Community. Both these agreements give products carrying the &quot;Made in Israel&quot; label duty-free status when sold in the U.S. and Europe. To take advantage of these benefits, Israeli-manufactured products could be subcontracted to factories in the Gaza Strip and on the West Bank, then reshipped to Israel for additional processing. Upon completion, these products could then be sold to American and European buyers duty-free.    Industrial parks could be established on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip for the manufacture of products in factories owned by Israeli, American, West Bank and Gaza owners. They could be designated as free port zones similar to the one that has been created in the Israeli port of Eilat. The 25 Israeli-owned factories that have operated in Gaza could form the nucleus of these Arab-Israeli joint ventures. Pre-fabricated housing could be manufactured there for refugee families, some of whom have been living in camps for three generations.    The development of improved water systems, a pipeline for natural gas, new rail facilities, a Gaza seaport and other programs of economic cooperation already on the drawing board also would follow from a peaceful resolution of the Palestinian issue. Indeed, the peace process itself could be speeded up if sufficient emphasis were placed on the economic benefits for all concerned.    Elmer L. Winter   Chairman, Committee for Economic Growth of Israel   Milwaukee   ---   Ms. Brooks's article fails to consider basic flaws in the currently fashionable assumption that Israel should initiate peace talks with the Palestinian Liberation Organization. Implicit in this argument is the hope that Israel and the PLO can somehow negotiate a &quot;land for peace&quot; settlement. The news media has become frighteningly ahistorical in its perspective of the Arab-Israeli conflict, for it never mentions that the PLO was founded in 1964, a time when the Arabs controlled both the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. For those who believe that the PLO would be satisfied with a state in those two regions, what then was the PLO founded to &quot;liberate&quot;?    The Palestinian National Charter of 1964 was the founding document of the PLO and, as such, was a consensus statement of purpose of the disparate &quot;moderate&quot; and &quot;radical&quot; factions that make up the organization. This public document specifically denies in Article 18 that the Jews have any claim, religious or historical, to the land of mandate Palestine. Article 20 demands that all nations &quot;consider Zionism an illegitimate movement, and to outlaw its existence.&quot; Article 9 of the charter, as amended in 1968, states that &quot;armed struggle is the only way to liberate Palestine.&quot;    The PLO demands of 1988 are identical to those of 1964: a violent end to Israel and its supersedence by an Arab state. Article 24 of the charter specifically rejects &quot;territorial sovereignty over the West Bank or the Gaza Strip&quot; as a solution to PLO demands. Since inception, &quot;radical&quot; factions of the PLO have systematically murdered those of its members or other Arabs who have discussed the possibility of territorial compromise. No wonder Yasser Arafat, touted for his &quot;moderation,&quot; has not followed the example of President Anwar Sadat even if he were so inclined.    Those who demand that Israel initiate talks with the PLO are addressing the wrong party. They should, instead, urge the PLO to alter its fanatical opposition to Israel's existence in any territorial configuration. How can one expect a legitimately constituted nation -- ironically, the only nation created by United Nations vote -- to be an accessory to its own destruction?    Alan J. Nathanson   Bibliographer/Reference Librarian   Wesleyan University Library   Middletown, Conn.   ---   I heartily congratulate Ms. Brooks on her piece. This is the first time that I have seen a candid, just and realistic analysis of the sad situation in the Middle East. There is no one among our presidential contenders (except for Jesse Jackson) to give us frank and honest views on the situation in the Middle East.    The saddest part is played by the U.S. administrations -- one after another. The Reagan administration excoriates Daniel Ortega for his unwillingness to negotiate with the Contras and blames Pretoria for ignoring the African National Congress. We not only applaud Israel's deafness to the PLO, but we go out of our way to please our Jewish lobby in throwing out the PLO's offices from New York City. These offices were opened on the invitation of the U.N., which is supposed to be an international body and supposedly has its own authority in these matters. I wish President Reagan, in his final days in the White House, would see the light, and for once a U.S. president would stand up for the rights of a generation of Palestinians who have been raised in refugee camps.    J. Asgher   Cuba, N.Y. </TEXT></DOC>