<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881021-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. HAS DECIDED to seek a wide range of criminal charges against Marcos.    In the wake of signals that Reagan won't intervene in the case, federal prosecutors intend to seek racketeering, fraud and other criminal charges against the deposed Philippine president, who fled to Hawaii in 1986. Charges against Marcos and several others could come as early as today, according to a senior government official familiar with the Justice Department's two-year investigation of Marcos's finances.    Marcos's lawyers have been in plea bargaining talks with the U.S. The decision to seek the charges reportedly came after failure to reach an accord.    ---   THE EPA SAID global warming will result in ecological and economic changes.    In the first comprehensive report on the so-called greenhouse effect, the agency said air pollution will grow more severe, water will be redistributed and demands on electricity will increase. Effects will vary from region to region, and a world &quot;different from the world that exists today&quot; is outlined in the EPA study. Global warming results from fossil-fuel gases trapping heat next to the Earth.    Scientists said that last summer's drought wasn't caused by global warming, but hinted at what could lie in the decades ahead as the Earth warms.    ---   MOSCOW EXPRESSED concern about growing inflation in the Soviet Union.    Outlining Soviet economic performance in the first nine months of this year, a senior government official acknowledged &quot;an alarming trend&quot; of wages rising faster than labor productivity. Both industrial and consumer goods reportedly were affected. Moscow long has denied the existence of inflation, arguing that it was impossible in a centrally planned system where prices for all goods are fixed.    A Siberian official was named Soviet interior minister and the head of the news agency Novosti was named to a post responsible for foreign policy.    ---   Thousands of ethnic Serbs rallied in Yugoslavia's Kosovo province to demand that Communist Party leaders resign within five days. Other protesters forced two Politburo officials to flee as they tried to address the crowd. The demonstrations came amid weeks of ethnic and economic strife that has threatened the nation's stability.    ---   The British government proposed abolishing the right of suspects to remain silent under police interrogation in Northern Ireland, ending a centuries-old pillar of jurisprudence. The Thatcher government presented a draft order allowing courts &quot;to draw whatever inferences would be proper&quot; from an accused person's silence.    ---   The FAA ordered U.S. airlines to test all takeoff warning systems in Boeing Co. 727 and 737 jetliners to make sure they work. The systems are designed to alert pilots when control devices, such as wing flaps, aren't set properly for takeoff. The agency said it found &quot;a significant number&quot; of inoperative alarms.    ---   Reagan raised the possibility that U.S. forces in South Korea could be reduced &quot;in the near future.&quot; But following a White House meeting between Reagan and South Korean President Roh, a senior State Department official said such troop cuts wouldn't happen any time soon.    ---   Congressional negotiators forged new compromises to an anti-drug bill that is expected to authorize $2.5 billion in new money and give the government stern measures to combat illegal drugs. The House and Senate could vote on the legislation today.    ---   Dukakis compared Bush's campaign with Nixon's Watergate scandal, saying &quot;truth was the first casualty&quot; in both instances. The Republican presidential nominee, meanwhile, renewed his criticism of the Democrat as inexperienced in foreign policy.    ---   The Beijing government has ordered hundreds of Chinese trading companies to halt business and imposed controls on the bank accounts of thousands more in an anti-corruption campaign, Chinese sources said. Many of the capitalist-style firms are headed by relatives of high-ranking Communist politicians.    ---   Israeli leaders vowed revenge against pro-Iranian Moslems who claimed responsibility for Wednesday's bomb attack in southern Lebanon. Seven Israeli soldiers were killed. The pledges came despite a warning from the militants that two Israeli soldiers captured in 1986 would be harmed.    ---   Chile's cabinet offered to resign for the second time since President Pinochet was defeated in a presidential plebiscite Oct. 5. While it was unclear which way Pinochet would move with a new government, the resignation allows him to name a cabinet that could negotiate democratic changes with the opposition.    ---   Iran has withdrawn all its armed speedboats from an island in the southern Persian Gulf, diplomatic sources said. Abu Musa island was considered a major base for Tehran's attacks on merchant ships in the gulf. The move was viewed as part of Iran's effort to settle its war with Iraq.    ---   Afghanistan said seven foreign military advisers, including an American, were killed when their car, loaded with weapons for rebels, hit a land mine in a southeastern province. The state-run radio report didn't say when the incident occurred.    ---   Burundi's president appointed members of the majority Hutu tribe to the central African country's cabinet in a move aimed at promoting national reconciliation after tribal massacres last August. President Buyoya named a Hutu provincial governor as Bujumbura's premier Wednesday.    ---   Moslem political officials in Lebanon said Syria's Lebanese and Palestinian allies met in Damascus and joined ranks to confront their Iraqi-backed Christian foes and try to stop a permanent partition of Lebanon. It is the first time that Moslem and Palestinian forces have come together since 1983.    ---   Thousands fled the Caribbean coast of Central America as Hurricane Joan closed in with heavy rains and 110 mph winds, authorities said. The storm had stalled over the ocean after weakening slightly, but torrential rains lashed Costa Rica.    ---   Nicaraguan Contra leaders met with Reagan administration officials in Atlanta for an emergency meeting aimed at ending a rift within the rebel movement, Contra officials said. The rebel directors and U.S. officials sought to forge a strategy to keep the rebel army intact after some Contras moved to seek a negotiated peace with Managua.    ---   The Los Angeles Dodgers won baseball's World Series. The National League team defeated the American League's Oakland Athletics four games to one. </TEXT></DOC>