<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0092 </DOCNO><HL> The Go-Betweens:Some Brokers Do WellHelping Concerns GiveProducts to Charities---Unwanted Goods Can YieldTax Deduction to Donors;Often, the Stuff Is Usable---Dirty Books for Poor Youths---By Walt BogdanichStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES </IN><DATELINE> GALESBURG, Ill.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Norbert C. Smith beams as he surveys his custom-designed office with its red leather couch, matching desk chair and fireplace. &quot;I always wanted a fireplace,&quot; he confides.    His new Cadillac Sedan de Ville sits outside. His wife owns a Cadillac, too. And when not on vacation in China or a Caribbean golf resort, the 63-year-old Mr. Smith lives on a lake across from his country club. &quot;I like good things,&quot; says Mr. Smith, wearing his prep-school blazer, a monogrammed shirt and a deep tan.    Thirteen years ago, Mr. Smith was mired in personal bankruptcy proceedings. Now he lives like a successful corporate executive. But there is a difference. His is a tax-exempt, not-for-profit corporation, dedicated to helping minors, the sick and the needy. It also has greatly helped the Smith family. Last year, the corporation paid the Smiths and a son-in-law more than $348,000 in salaries and bonuses. Mr. Smith also had an outstanding, unsecured personal loan of $112,000 and enjoyed other perquisites. As for the board of directors that authorizes all this, well, four Smiths -- husband, wife and two children -- currently are the board of directors.    Mr. Smith found his professional niche in the little-known world of in-kind charity brokerage, matching corporations seeking tax deductions for donating products with charities that can use the goods. Some brokers work on commission; others, like Mr. Smith, charge the charities they serve an annual membership fee and expenses.    Brokers form a vital link in charitable giving. Without them, millions of dollars in excess inventories might go to waste each year. With them, much of the stuff winds up in the hands of worthy causes. Brokered gifts are &quot;the fastest-growing segment of the corporate giving system,&quot; says Luke Hingson, the president of the Brother's Brother Foundation, an international nonprofit broker in Pittsburgh.    But as brokers more and more control what becomes of donations, critics say, certain middlemen have become too powerful, often pursuing their own goals at the expense of the charities. One result is a practice, known as product dumping, in which corporations take tax deductions on merchandise that ultimately is junked as unsuitable for distribution.    Charities worry that publicity about mishandled contributions will discourage corporate giving. And, says Susan Corrigan, who helps manage a nonprofit Alexandria, Va., brokerage firm called Gifts in Kind, &quot;there are agencies and people in desperate need&quot; of donated products.    The rise in brokered donations is a result of tax legislation enacted during the past 11 years encouraging in-kind gifts by increasing the tax deduction for such donations. Largely unaffected by the 1986 tax changes, the law permits companies a deduction of up to twice the manufacturing cost of the products they give, so long as the products are new and go to the sick, the needy or minors. Before 1976, only the actual manufacturing cost was deductible. And that amounted to no more than what a company could write off by simply junking the merchandise.    Brokers make giving easier by allowing companies in some cases to ship a large quantity of goods to just one location, rather than having to arrange many individual shipments to different recipients. &quot;We offer food companies one-stop convenience,&quot; says Philip R. Warth Jr., the president of Second Harvest, a Chicago-based nonprofit brokerage firm that last year distributed 128 million pounds of food to groups feeding the hungry. Were it not for Second Harvest, Mr. Warth asserts, &quot;most of this would have been thrown away.&quot;    A Wisconsin concern, Jacques Seed Co., however, discovered just how easily a donation can backfire when it recently contributed tons of seed corn through a nonprofit New York broker, Church World Service. The broker, in turn, gave it to groups helping poor farmers in the Southeast. A North Carolina agricultural extension agent, however, charged that the corn wasn't suited for the area and could wind up costing farmers money if they planted it. The seed company says farmers knew what they were getting.    Problems associated with brokered donations may be most obvious in the book-publishing industry. Brokers are widely used because of the great number of unsold books and because it is difficult to match a particular book with a suitable recipient.    Larry Seratti, who set up a nonprofit book program for minors and disadvantaged adults in Michigan, recalls his excitement when his first two trailer loads of new, donated books arrived. Says Mr. Seratti: &quot;I climbed up on the pile and ripped open the first box. You can imagine my surprise when the first book I pulled out was called 'Faggots.'&quot; In all, there were 7,700 copies of Larry Kramer's graphic account of sex in New York homosexual bars and bathhouses.    Mr. Seratti says that at first he thought someone had made a mistake. Then he looked at the rest of the shipment -- hundreds of copies of such titles as &quot;Amatory Experiences of a Surgeon,&quot; &quot;Dirtier Little Limericks&quot; and &quot;Xaviera Meets Marilyn Chambers.&quot; Mr. Seratti says that at least 77,000 of the donated books were unsuitable. Had he tried to distribute them, Mr. Seratti says, &quot;we would have been out of business in 24 hours.&quot;    The man who brokered the books, Michael Blum of New York, said Mr. Seratti knew that some of the books, published by the book unit of Warner Communications Inc., would be adult-oriented. But Mr. Seratti says he was told only that a small percentage of &quot;airport&quot; books would be included. &quot;At the time, I didn't know what he meant. I figured they were romantic-type books,&quot; Mr. Seratti says.    Also encountering broker problems was Marsha Procopio, who runs a nonprofit book program for impoverished residents of Navajo Indian reservations. Among the items she received: &quot;How to Survive on $50,000 to $150,000 a Year,&quot; Roman road maps and 1986 calendars good for only one more month.    Ms. Procopio eventually wrote to her broker, Max Celnik of New York, complaining that &quot;during the past 18 months, the quality of materials has eroded to the point that approximately 50% of the current stock is unusable.&quot; An Indian official with another tribe, Ramos Sanchez, suggested in a letter that Mr. Celnik &quot;remind your clients that the Indian book program is not a dumping ground.&quot;    Mr. Celnik, whose commission is based on the volume of products he brokers, says that mistakes do happen but that nonprofit agencies often ask for more books than they can distribute. He says he doesn't recall receiving letters of complaint from Mr. Sanchez or Ms. Procopio. Stewart A. Smith, a lawyer representing Mr. Celnik, says his client &quot;enjoys an unquestionably high reputation for honorable dealing and rectitude&quot; with publishers and nonprofit groups.    Charities that get stuck with unwanted books must decide what to do with them. Mr. Seratti, for example, won't discard unwanted donations because, he says, that condones undeserved tax deductions. But storing books until a use for them can be found costs money. After a year and a half of waiting, Mr. Seratti recently reached an agreement under which Mr. Blum and Warner Books will remove the unwanted books for shipment elsewhere.    The Ottawa-based Canadian Organization for Development Through Education (CODE) finds it easier to destroy unwanted donations. CODE officials say they junk about 30% of books brokered through Mr. Celnik. Says Robert Dyck, the chief executive of the 29-year-old nonprofit group: &quot;We know when the truck is coming so we also call the scrapper at the same time. If we can't use it, we trash it.&quot; (Mr. Celnik denies sending to CODE books the organization didn't want.)    Even though CODE is one of the world's largest shippers of donated books -- last year it handled about one million copies -- Mr. Dyck says he is reluctant to criticize Mr. Celnik because Mr. Celnik arranges donations from many of the major U.S. publishing houses. &quot;The book famine is so great overseas,&quot; says Mr. Dyck. &quot;When you are dependent on one individual, you are very vulnerable.&quot;    Some groups say they are happy with Mr. Celnik's work. &quot;He's fantastic,&quot; says George Detorie, who oversees a book distribution program in New Mexico. &quot;Max knows exactly what he's doing.&quot;    Not all broker complaints involve unwanted products. Will Weatherford, the director of the International Book Project in Lexington, Ky., accuses Mr. Celnik of exploiting Mr. Weatherford's charity to further his own goals. Each time the Book Project received a Celnik-arranged donation, Mr. Celnik asked the group to pull six to eight copies of each title and send them to New York for shipment to Israel, Mr. Weatherford says. Over a three-year period, the Book Project said it sent hundreds of thousands of dollars in books for that purpose.    Mr. Weatherford produced letters he had written indicating that twice last year he asked Mr. Celnik to verify that the books were going to Israel, but he says verification was never supplied. Mr. Celnik says he didn't respond because, at the time, no books had actually been sent to Israel.    After interviewing Mr. Weatherford, a reporter visited the addresses to which the books were sent and found there Touro College, a small accredited liberal-arts school whose main campus is in Manhattan. Its salaried director of libraries is Mr. Celnik.    Thousands of books supposedly destined for Israel never made it. Books donated by at least five publishers were found on Touro library shelves. In numerous instances, the library used a Touro College sticker to cover a stamp identifying the books as a gift of the publisher and of the International Book Project. Many publishers don't want their donated books going to colleges that have money to buy books.    &quot;It just burns me up,&quot; Mr. Weatherford says. &quot;It's just pretty rotten that he would send them to his own library when he told us that they were going overseas.&quot; Mr. Weatherford says his group drew on its own limited resources to process those books.    Mr. Celnik says he did nothing wrong in taking books from Mr. Weatherford's group and another nonprofit agency for placement in Touro College. Students using those books, Mr. Celnik says through his attorney, are mostly poor, although he acknowledges that some books went to a branch campus in Huntington, N.Y., where Touro students are generally more affluent.    A Touro College spokesman said Mr. Celnik asked college officials to cover the fact that library books were donated because studies show &quot;recipients of institutional charity are deeply scarred and . . . resent constant reminders that they are the beneficiaries of public or private largess.&quot;    Mr. Celnik says that about 5,500 books have been sent to Israel and that some others are awaiting shipment.    Mr. Celnik also says, through his lawyer, that publishers knew in advance how the books would be used. But several publishers contacted by The Wall Street Journal say they were unaware that books went into Touro libraries. &quot;What you are describing here, I have no knowledge of,&quot; says Paul V. McLaughlin, a vice president of Little, Brown andamp; Co. of Boston. &quot;This certainly is not our understanding of how this thing is supposed to operate,&quot; says Herbert O. Nichols, the chief financial officer of Scott, Foresman andamp; Co., which is based in Glenview, Ill. Otherwise, the officials say, they have been very pleased with Mr. Celnik.    While, in many cases, brokers seeking to make a profit oversee book donations, nonprofit brokers handle almost everything else. One of the nation's most successful is Mr. Smith of Galesburg, who runs the National Association for the Exchange of Industrial Resources.    Using a 10-acre warehouse donated by a corporation, Mr. Smith expects next year to receive $100 million of in-kind corporate contributions, more than twice what NAEIR got last year. Other brokers report similar increases. The Virginia-based Gifts in Kind last year distributed $43 million in products, up 54% from the previous year.    Mr. Smith says he founded NAEIR 10 years ago because &quot;I recognized there were billions of dollars of surplus products being junked or thrown out.&quot; To make good use of all that stuff, Mr. Smith conceived a plan whereby NAEIR would take title to excess inventories and distribute them to nonprofit groups that became NAEIR members. The nonprofit groups pay annual dues of $395 plus a $25-per-shipment handling fee and the costs of shipping goods from NAEIR's warehouse in Galesburg. Corporate donors pay the cost of shipping their goods to the warehouse.    So far, several thousand corporations have donated goods, which have been distributed to more than 7,000 members; the items include screws, bathtubs, wire, jewelry, suntan lotion, copying machines, crystal, and building materials.    &quot;Unbelievable! You have done it again,&quot; wrote a West Virginia public-school official, praising a recent shipment arranged by NAEIR. An Iowa health-care group wrote, &quot;The syringes . . . save us a lot of money.&quot;    NAEIR boasted of its success late last year in this announcement to members: &quot;You know you must be doing something right when you get an award from the president of the United States.&quot; NAEIR said the President's Private Sector Initiatives had honored the group for displaying &quot;the American spirit of volunteerism and community action.&quot;    Thomas Lee, a former NAEIR employee, sees the group in a different light. &quot;It appears that NAEIR uses charitable nonprofit privilege to operate a self-enriching family business,&quot; he says. Mr. Lee says he was fired two years ago for criticizing the way things were run. Mr. Smith's lawyer, Paul S. Chervin, says Mr. Lee was fired for &quot;cause.&quot;    NAEIR has told its members that it &quot;watches pennies.&quot; But according to financial reports that it has filed with the Illinois attorney general, in the fiscal year ended June 30, 1986, it listed automobiles worth $102,000 and $140,000 in unsecured loans or cash advances to NAEIR employees. That is in addition to the $348,000 in salaries paid to Mr. Smith, his wife, a child and a son-in-law. (A fifth family member, a daughter, works for NAEIR, but her salary wasn't listed in the records.) After the fiscal year ended, NAEIR borrowed nearly $1 million for warehouse improvements.    Mr. Smith says NAEIR currently pays him $165,000 a year in salary, even though he now also has another job. He recently became the president of his alma mater, St. John's Military Academy in Delafield, Wis., about 170 miles away. &quot;He is essentially full time,&quot; says Karen Rehard, a spokeswoman for St. John's. &quot;He goes back {to Galesburg} on weekends.&quot;    NAEIR last year distributed just $20 of goods for every $1 in administrative expenses. Gifts in Kind, by contrast, reports $145 of goods for each $1 in expense, and Second Harvest, still another charity broker, reports $162 of goods per $1 in expense.    The Smith family's domination of NAEIR also appears to violate standards of two nonprofit watchdog groups, the National Charities Information Bureau and the Council of Better Business Bureaus. Both say that nonprofit boards should be independent and mostly volunteer. NAEIR says the Smith family members of its board all are paid corporate officers.    Mr. Smith declines to answer specific questions about his finances. However, in previous interviews Mr. Smith said NAEIR can't be compared with other groups because it provides unique services and handles hard-to-place products.    As for his income, he says his earnings are commensurate with what he could receive in a similar job with another corporation. &quot;Some people might question what someone from a nonprofit group is doing driving a Cadillac,&quot; Mr. Smith says. &quot;But for years when I started this organization, I drove a Chevette.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>