<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871027-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Urban Trauma:Day-to-Day ViolenceTakes a Terrible TollOn Inner-City Youth---Witness to Endless Brutality,Lafeyette Walton, 12, HasMany Emotional Wounds---A Comparison With Vietnam---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Saturday, June 13, 1987: Today is Lafeyette Walton's 12th birthday.    Under a gentle afternoon sun, Lafeyette and his nine-year-old cousin, Denise, skip across the worn lawn of the Henry Horner Homes public housing project, a seven-block stretch of red-brick apartment buildings on this city's West Side. The two are on their way to buy a pair of radio headphones with $8 Lafeyette received as a birthday gift.    Suddenly, gunfire erupts nearby. The frightened children fall to the ground. &quot;Hold your head down,&quot; snaps Lafeyette, covering Denise with her pink nylon jacket.    As the shooting continues, the two crawl through the dirt toward home. When they finally make it inside, Lafeyette discovers that all but 50 cents of his birthday money has trickled from his pockets.    ---   Lafeyette Walton lives in a neighborhood where gunshots are as common as the playful screeches of young children. He has watched men being beaten and has seen friends shot. Two bullet holes in the olive-green curtains of his family's apartment are reminders of a gang shoot-out at the project. Two years ago, the boy stood over a dying teen-ager who had been gunned down outside the Walton apartment. This year, not long before Lafeyette's birthday, his mother permanently lost the use of two fingers when she was attacked by knife-wielding muggers.    An account of three months in Lafeyette's life, based on visits with the boy and on interviews with the police and other sources, is a chronicle of almost constant exposure to frightening brutality: During the summer at Lafeyette's project, the police say, an average of one person every three days was beaten, shot at or stabbed. Henry Horner is far from the worst of Chicago's public housing projects.    Lafeyette's story is familiar to many of the nation's 5.3 million poor, inner-city children. &quot;These children are surrounded by a very real and immediate world of violence, of gunfire, of death,&quot; says Theodore Cron, special assistant to the U.S. surgeon general, who believes the problem is growing. &quot;It's every day,&quot; he says. &quot;We just simply didn't have that before.&quot;    Newly alarming to psychologists and social workers are recent findings that many youngsters routinely exposed to violence exhibit the same post-traumatic-stress symptoms that plague Vietnam combat veterans. Many frequently suffer nightmares, depression and personality disorders. Some withdraw and give up hope; others become more aggressive.    Lafeyette Walton reins in his emotions. He keeps to himself and tries to avoid trouble. More important, there is a passivity about him that therapists caution can be a direct outcome of witnessing the victimization of others. He only shrugs when asked what he wants to be when he grows up. He rarely laughs.    Lafeyette lives with his mother, LaJoe; his 17-year-old brother, Raydale; his nine-year-old brother, Pharoah; and three other siblings: triplets who are four years old. Lafeyette's father, a bus driver for the city, stays with the family sporadically.    The Waltons live in a ground-floor apartment. The dirty cinder-block walls and iron grilles over the windows lend a fortresslike feeling to their home. Graffiti, mostly gang-related, decorate the hallway walls like an ugly mural; Lafeyette boasts that his name appears on all seven floors of the building.    Lafeyette and his family often talk of moving, but it would be difficult, if not impossible, on the $837 a month his mother receives in aid. Five years ago, it appeared that they might have a chance to move to a quieter neighborhood because Mrs. Walton, who worked as a clerk at a nearby health clinic, intended to enter nursing school. But the triplets, two girls and a boy, were born prematurely and spent their first year in the hospital, disrupting Mrs. Walton's plans.    Both Lafeyette and Pharoah get headaches when they hear the gunfire. Nine-year-old Pharoah, a child whose intelligence is belied by a speech impediment, sometimes shakes uncontrollably when surprised by a loud noise. One evening earlier this year, Pharoah fainted after pleading with his mother to stop the shooting outside. But throughout the summer of 1987, the shooting went on.    ---   Tuesday, June 16: It is three days after Lafeyette's birthday, and once again the sound of gunfire fills the air. Lafeyette and his mother hurriedly herd the triplets onto the floor of the apartment's narrow hallway. They catch glimpses through the windows of young gunmen waving their pistols about. One youth totes a submachine gun. In an apartment upstairs, other gang members blast away at rivals in a building across the street.    In the middle of the battle, the elementary school across the street lets out. Lafeyette, who has left his fifth-grade class early this day, watches from his apartment as children pour out of the school, many of them panicking and running directly into the gunfire. He and his mother scream at the oncoming children to turn back. Lafeyette spots his brother Pharoah but then loses sight of him in the chaos. He begs his mother to let him go after his brother, who has a dangerous habit of running through gunfire when he first hears it. She refuses Lafeyette's request.    Lafeyette's friend James Cox, 13, who has cowered behind a nearby tree, sprints for the Waltons' apartment. Pharoah arrives about the same time. But with all the noise, no one can hear the two boys' pleas for shelter. Finally, the two run to another apartment upstairs.    &quot;We were beating on the door real hard,&quot; James later recalls. &quot;Then I kicked on it. I was hysterical. My heart was pounding hard.&quot; Pharoah talks about how he has learned to react to shooting: &quot;My mom told me when you hear the shooting, first to walk because you don't know where the bullets are coming.&quot;    Meanwhile, the police, who at first thought they were the targets of the shooting, have taken cover in their cars and in the building's lobby. Passers-by lie motionless on the ground, protected by parked vehicles and an ice-cone vending stand. Finally, the battle ends. No one -- amazingly -- is hurt. Lafeyette learns that one errant bullet from the shooting pierced a friend's third-floor window with such force that it cut through a closet door and lodged in the cinder-block wall.    The police make no arrests.    Wednesday, June 24: The summer sun highlights the hundreds of small shards of glass littering the asphalt. The debris is a reminder of the time two years ago when Lafeyette threw a chunk of glass that accidentally put out a friend's eye. &quot;I got real mad at myself,&quot; he mumbles. &quot;I thought of pulling my eye out.&quot;    Today, though, the boy is more preoccupied with a dream. On the way to a nearby McDonald's, he points to an empty basketball court and says that two nights ago he dreamed that his older brother had been fatally shot there. &quot;That's where Raydale was killed,&quot; he says, as if it had really happened.    Friday, June 26: Today, Lafeyette refuses to play basketball with some children his own age. &quot;I don't want to play ball with them, they might try to make me join a gang,&quot; he says.    Lafeyette constantly worries that he may be pulled into the gangs. His friend James, with whom he hunts for garter snakes along the nearby railroad tracks, recommends that if children are to make it out of Henry Horner, they should &quot;try to make as little friends as possible.&quot;    About a week ago, members of the Blackstone Rangers gang, which virtually controls Lafeyette's building, asked him to stand security. Before that could happen, his mother intervened, telling the gangs she will call the police if they keep after her son. &quot;I'd die first before I let them take one of my sons,&quot; Mrs. Walton says.    Gangs often recruit young children to do their dirty work. Nine days ago, a 14-year-old friend of Lafeyette's allegedly shot and killed an older man in an alley half a block north of Lafeyette's building. Residents and police say the killing was gang-related. The friend is now in custody. &quot;I wish he hadn't done it,&quot; says Lafeyette.    Saturday, June 27: A large, overweight man runs across a vacant lot. Lafeyette points to him and says he is the &quot;raper man.&quot; According to Lafeyette and other youths, the man has sexually accosted children. Quite matter-of-factly, Lafeyette points to two buildings and explains, &quot;That's where they have rapes.&quot;    Tuesday, June 30: Along with a crowd of chattering children and parents, Lafeyette watches as a police bomb squad removes a World War II-vintage grenade from a fourth-floor apartment. Lafeyette worries that members of a gang &quot;were figuring to blow up the building.&quot; The police believe there are more grenades in the building, but they can't locate them.    Monday, July 6: Lafeyette comes home with a gash over his left eye. He says his cousin Denise whacked him with a lead pipe. Lafeyette hit the nine-year-old when he heard she had carried cocaine for a local drug dealer. &quot;She's not my best little cousin anymore,&quot; says Lafeyette.    Saturday, July 11: Despite an increase in the number of policemen in the project, the drug wars and family scraps continue. (The police will confiscate 22 guns and 330 grams of cocaine from people in the project this week.)    Shortly after dusk, while Lafeyette is playing outside, the street and hall lights in his building suddenly go dark. Residents say gang members, who have keys to the janitor's closet, shut them off. The pitch-black darkness brings with it ominous signs that shooting may soon erupt. So Lafeyette slithers along the cinder-block walls into his apartment. In the back, Pharoah screams in terror as his mother leads him and the triplets inside.    Sunday, July 12: Lafeyette looks out his living-room window at a squad of plainclothes men arriving to break up a family squabble that has spilled over outside. An older woman pulls a long, curved butcher knife on a teen-age boy who threatens her daughter. As Lafeyette peers from behind the metal grates covering the windows, he says nothing.    Sunday, July 19: This evening, Lafeyette and his mother, while sitting on a bench, watch a tall, lanky teen-ager hold up a chrome-plated revolver to admire in the light of the setting sun. Lafeyette, who can more easily distinguish a .357-caliber Magnum from a .45-caliber revolver than he can a computer from a typewriter, points at the pistol. His mother slaps his arm down. Pointing, and snitching, can get you killed.    Monday, July 20: Lafeyette and his friends talk incessantly about leaving the project. They live in constant fear of being hit by cross fire. &quot;I'm going to have my own condominium in Calumet Park {a Chicago suburb}. It's nice out there. You could sit outside all night and nothing would happen,&quot; James tells Lafeyette, who breaks into a wide grin. &quot;They have flowers this tall,&quot; Lafeyette says, holding his hand four feet off the ground.    Tuesday, July 21: It is a hot summer; but with the police more visible than usual, the young children are out en masse today for the first time in many weeks. It leads to an incongruous scene.    An open fire hydrant has created a large wading pool outside Lafeyette's building. Gaggles of hollering children, including Lafeyette with his pant legs rolled up, throw buckets of water on one another.    The local leader of a gang called the Stones, whom everyone calls Junebug, wanders by. About 30 years old, Junebug has served two prison terms for armed robbery, has twice been accused -- then acquitted -- of murder, and has been arrested numerous times for drug-related charges, the police say. But his reputation doesn't deter the water brigade of children, who begin a slapdash run to wet the gang leader. In his white designer jogging suit, Junebug hurdles a 3-foot-high wire fence and escapes -- dry. He turns and laughs with the kids. Only his panting pit bull, which is tied to the fence, reminds Lafeyette and others who's in charge here.    As Junebug ambles away, Lafeyette pursues him. He wants the $10 he was promised as payment for getting the gang leader a bottle of apple juice the other day. Junebug assures him he will get his pay.    Thursday, July 30: Lafeyette watches as a group of about 10 teen-agers just outside his apartment hit James's stepfather with fists and sticks, leaving him with multiple welts and bruises on his head. The assault is apparently related to drugs.    In the next few days, James won't play with Lafeyette. He worries that his stepfather's assailants might come after him so he stays at a friend's apartment, inside. &quot;If they can't get to {the stepfather}, they'll try to get to me,&quot; he says. &quot;It has to get better. We can't keep living like this,&quot; he adds, sounding like a world-weary adult.    The beating clearly leaves its mark on James, who generally retreats from any kind of trouble. The next week, he and six others beat up a young girl, an almost direct imitation of the punishment administered to his stepfather.    Monday, Aug. 3: Something happens that Lafeyette refuses to talk about. According to the police, a gang member was shot while sitting in the back seat of a car parked about 50 feet in front of Lafeyette's building. Lafeyette stood in the entrance of his building when it happened. He refuses to say whether he witnessed the shooting, possibly for fear of gang repraisals.    Friday, Aug. 21: &quot;Bird Leg&quot; is dying across the street.    Bird Leg, whose real name is Calvin Robertson, has long been involved with the gangs, according to the police and residents. Earlier this year, the police confiscated a starving and scarred pit bull from him, which he had once used to threaten an officer. Bird Leg is 15.    Though Lafeyette knows the dying boy, he decides not to join the other children who run to the crime scene. &quot;I just didn't want to go,&quot; he says.    During his 12 years he already has seen two children shot, both two summers ago: a young girl hit in the leg while jumping rope outside his building and the teen-age boy who died from a bullet wound on the stairs just a few feet from his apartment.    Lafeyette's friend James, however, sprints across Damen Avenue and snakes through the large crowd. He later tells Lafeyette what he saw. On the grass, only 10 feet from a small playground full of young children, lay Bird Leg, his white jogging suit stained with blood. A shot from a sawed-off rifle had hit him in the chest. According to the police, Bird Leg, a member of the Vicelords gang, had been fighting with rival gang members. Wrapped around one hand is his main weapon: his belt.    &quot;I was just shocked,&quot; James tells Lafeyette. &quot;The eyes just rolled to the back of his head and he was gone.&quot;    Thursday, Aug. 27: Lafeyette is haunted by Bird Leg's death. At a friend's apartment, he says he saw Bird Leg's spirit. &quot;He was trying to tell us something,&quot; he says, though he isn't sure what.    Mrs. Walton worries that Lafeyette has become unusually withdrawn: &quot;He says talking isn't going to help him. He says that everything that goes wrong keeps going on and everything that's right doesn't stay right so why should I talk. He's got a lot of hate built up inside him.&quot;    Normally, when someone at Henry Horner is killed, mimeographed sheets go up in the halls giving details of the funeral. In Bird Leg's case, however, this procedure is forgotten.    Friday, Aug. 28: Lafeyette, Pharoah and James are among the first to arrive for Bird Leg's funeral service at the Zion Grove Baptist Church on the city's South Side. The three find seats in the church's red pews, which are packed with parents and children. Bird Leg's 13-year-old sister cries so long and hard that friends drag her out halfway through the service to get her some air. She later vomits at the burial.    The three boys file up to the open casket, where Lafeyette runs his fingers along Bird Leg's suit and then caresses his slightly puffy face. Lafeyette's own face is impassive. As they return to their seats and the services begin, James says, &quot;I'm figuring to cry&quot; and buries his head in his hat to hide the tears. Lafeyette, who sits solemnly through the funeral with his hand on his chin, holds the hand of his two-year-old nephew. Pharoah sits silent with a headache, his arms clutching his rolled-up sweatshirt like a security blanket.    ---   The morning after the funeral, a friend of the Waltons, a man in his early 20s, is fatally shot. Lafeyette decides not to attend a second funeral. &quot;I ain't going to nobody else's funeral,&quot; he says. &quot;I just don't want to go.&quot;    That same weekend, James is conked over the head with a glass bottle, opening a gash requiring seven stitches. On the way to a neighborhood grocery store, he exchanged words with a young girl whose cousin then came after him. James says he plans to go after the young assailant once he gets his bandages removed.    Both Lafeyette and Pharoah have become more withdrawn over the course of the summer, talking less about the goings-on here. Pharoah, in particular, often wanders off alone to collect soda cans, his shoulders hunched over, his unusually wide eyes drifting into space. Mrs. Walton plans to take him to a health clinic because his speech problem is worsening.    Lafeyette has begun to hang around with a more mischievous group of kids that even he admits is the &quot;wrong crowd.&quot; One day in September, a local grocery-store owner calls Mrs. Walton to ask that she pick up her son; Lafeyette is accused of shoplifting candy.    The opening of school is delayed by a teachers' strike. So Mrs. Walton sends her two sons to stay with their grandmother for a few days because she lives in a quieter neighborhood farther west. The boys have less chance of getting hurt there, Mrs. Walton says.    For his part, Lafeyette often prays before he goes to sleep. &quot;If I was God,&quot; he says, &quot;there wouldn't be no word 'killing.'&quot;    His mother has another philosophy: She has taken out burial insurance on all of her children, including the four-year-old triplets. </TEXT></DOC>