<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   AN IRAQI JET CRASHED in Saudi Arabia during a hijacking attempt.    At least 62 of the 107 people on board were killed as the Iraqi Airways Boeing 737 burst into flames during an emergency landing at a desert airstrip, Riyadh's Foreign Ministry said. Jordan's government said the plane was hijacked shortly after leaving Baghdad en route to Amman. The crash reportedly was caused when the hijackers detonated at least two hand grenades aboard the aircraft. An Iraqi official said one of the hijackers was killed by a security officer and the other died in the crash.    The hijackers reportedly had Lebanese passports and flew to Iraq from Yugoslavia. Two groups, including the pro-Iranian Islamic Jihad, claimed responsibility for the incident.    ---   NORTH OFTEN MET with Casey to discuss efforts to free American hostages.    Administration sources said that the former National Security Council aide had unusual, direct access to the CIA chief, and that they often discussed efforts to win the release of Americans held in Lebanon and to help the Nicaragua rebels. The sources said it wasn't known whether North told Casey about the diversion of profits from Iranian arms sales to the Nicaragua insurgents, but they said Casey was influential in both the Contra cause and the U.S. weapons sales to Iran.    U.S. officials have begun assembling lists of possible successors because Casey apparently hasn't recuperated as well as expected from surgery to remove a cancerous brain tumor.    ---   A former French hostage returned to Paris following his release Wednesday by Moslem captors in Lebanon. Aurel Cornea, a French TV soundman who was held for nearly 10 months, was the fifth Frenchman freed in Lebanon in six months. His pro-Iranian abductors urged France to stop arms shipments to Iraq.    ---   China's state-run media intensified warnings against students demonstrating for greater democracy, saying the current wave of protests could lead to anarchy. At least seven Chinese cities, including Peking, have been the scenes this month of pro-democracy rallies, the biggest since the end of the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.    ---   The Soviet news agency Tass reported that a concentration of methane gas exploded in a coal mine in the Ukraine and some miners were killed. Although it didn't give a death toll, there was speculation that casualties from the explosion Wednesday may have been heavy. The mine is located about 575 miles south of Moscow.    ---   Iranian troops attacked Iraqi positions on islands in the Shatt al-Arab waterway along the southern sector of their battlefront, Tehran said. Iran said at least 1,500 Iraqi troops were killed in the operation, which was launched Wednesday night. Baghdad, meanwhile, said its forces repelled an Iranian attempt to take the city of Basra.    ---   Ambushers fired machine guns at a Libyan Embassy car in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley, killing a Libyan diplomat who was based in Syria, police in Beirut reported. Another Libyan diplomat traveling in the vehicle escaped injury. Police said the identity of the assassins wasn't known.    ---   Israel said it didn't infringe on Italian sovereignty when it brought former Israeli nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu back from Europe to stand trial for allegedly leaking Israeli atomic secrets. Vanunu has indicated that he was abducted in Rome, and the Italian government has launched an inquiry into the incident.    ---   An Icelandic freighter capsized and sank in rough seas in the north Atlantic, Britain's Royal Air Force said. A Danish coast guard helicopter rescued five of the ship's 11 crew members. Three bodies were recovered and the other three people aboard the vessel were missing and presumed dead.    ---   The White House is planning a program aimed at ending hunger in Africa by the year 2000, officials said. While a large-scale aid program isn't planned, the initiative would involve exhorting the continent's nations to abandon policies that the U.S. considers discouraging to food production.    ---   A former U.S. mercenary said Sam N. Hall, an American being held in Nicaragua on suspicion of spying, relayed intelligence data in 1985 about the Sandinista government to a Contra leader and a private aid network. The former mercenary has been subpoenaed to testify before a federal grand jury in Miami probing the aid network.    ---   France plans to expel five of six people of Mideast origin arrested last week after a cache of arms and explosives was found outside Paris. An Interior Ministry spokesman said the two Syrians and three Jordanians were a &quot;menace to public order.&quot; The sixth person is a naturalized French citizen. </TEXT></DOC>