<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870504-0042 </DOCNO><HL> Iran Panels Want to Know if White HouseBacked North's Efforts to Delay Probes---By Andy Pasztor and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM EUROP FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congressional committees are investigating whether senior White House aides approved or participated in Lt. Col. Oliver North's repeated efforts to interfere in sensitive federal criminal probes.    Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), vice chairman of the Senate committee investigating the Iran-Contra scandal, said he is now convinced that Col. North improperly tried to manipulate or delay several criminal inquiries by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Customs Service. The inquiries were related to private efforts to assist Nicaraguan insurgents, known as the Contras, or to administration efforts to free American hostages held in Lebanon.    &quot;There have been those who tried to impose their political will on the bureau&quot; and other law-enforcement agencies in previous administrations, Sen. Rudman asserted in an inteview Friday. &quot;And I'm sure it happened here.&quot;    New information about such activities, which also has sparked increased scrutiny by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh, is expected to be an important element of the joint House and Senate committee hearings that begin tomorrow.    Meanwhile, two persons familiar with the congressional investigation said that retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, who is a central figure in the Iran-Contra affair and is scheduled to be the lead-off witness, is prepared to testify that neither he nor Col. North were signatories on Swiss bank accounts set up in the name of Lake Resources Inc., a Panamanian-registered company.    Lake Resources held funds used both in the U.S. arms sales to Iran and in efforts to assist the Contras. According to one person, Gen. Secord will testify that he couldn't withdraw funds from Lake Resources accounts and hadn't profited from his involvement in the covert activities.    Gen. Secord has estimated that from $2 million to $4 million of Iran arms-sales profits was diverted to help the Contras, according to one of the sources. Gen. Secord also has told investigators that he was involved in setting inflated prices on some of the arms sales to help cover expenses of the Iran initiative, including the transportation of the weapons.    In another development, a spokesman for Joseph Coors said that the prominent conservative and staunch Reagan backer contributed $60,000 to help the Contras after Col. North solicited his aid in 1985. In response to questions, Robert Walker, a vice president of Adolph Coors Co.'s Washington office, said &quot;North assured us at the time that all the legal research had been done on this and it was absolutely legal.&quot;    Mr. Walker, who said that he and Mr. Coors had recently been interviewed by the FBI, said the donation was made for medical supplies. He said he didn't know to whom Mr. Coors sent the money, and said Mr. Coors wasn't available for comment.    Allegations that Col. North interfered in FBI investigations, however, didn't prevent the Senate Intelligence Commmittee last week from unanimously approving FBI Director William Webster's nomination to be head of the Central Intelligence Agency.    During a news conference Friday, even Mr. Webster acknowledged that there was &quot;clear documentation&quot; that on at least four occasions, Col. North &quot;was asking for special consideration&quot; from law-enforcement agencies. But Mr. Webster said that Col. North's actions didn't impede any investigations. The full Senate is expected to confirm Mr. Webster's nomination soon.    Attorney General Edwin Meese, who asked the FBI in October to delay a criminal investigation of Southern Air Transport at the behest of the White House, is slated to undergo detailed questioning on this issue by the panels later this summer, according to congressional investigators. The Miami-based cargo airline transported weapons to both Iran and to Contra forces.    Moreover, Associate Attorney General Stephen Trott is scheduled to give closed-door testimony next week about Col. North's efforts to persuade him and Oliver &quot;Buck&quot; Revell, one of Mr. Webster's closest aides, to intervene in a separate 1986 Customs Service investigation of Southern Air. During a call to complain about the Southern Air investigation last November, Mr. Revell said at a meeting with reporters last week that Col. North specifically said Gen. Secord was &quot;concerned&quot; Customs Service subpoenas would reveal secret arms shipments to Iran.    Mr. Revell, who worked closely with Col. North on an anti-terrorism committee, also acknowledged that as early as 1985, FBI officials in the field and at headquarters received -- but failed to act on -- warnings that Col. North's involvement in raising funds for the Contras may have violated congressional restrictions.    While some of the messages apparently never got to the director or his senior staff because of transmission problems, Mr. Revell said, there were enough other hints of questionable activities by Col. North to warrant further investigation by lower-level FBI officials. &quot;I can't explain&quot; why nothing was done, Mr. Revell said. &quot;I can't justify it.&quot;    Behind closed doors, Gen. Secord last week began providing the panels with information on his involvement in the U.S. arms deals with Iran and in a private resupply network for the Contras. People familiar with the congressional inquiry said Gen. Secord is expected to testify that Swiss bank accounts used in the Iran-Contra operations were controlled by his business partner, Albert Hakim, an Iranian-American businessman.    One person said Gen. Secord is expected to say that a large amount of money involved in the Iran-Contra affair hasn't been spent, and some of it was intended to assist the Nicaraguan rebels. Another source said that Gen. Secord places the figure at $7 million to $8 million.    On another matter, Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii), chairman of the Senate committee, Sen. Rudman and another congressional investigator said there isn't any doubt that President Reagan knew money was being raised to help the Contras during the period when Congress had cut off U.S. aid. But they said it isn't clear that Mr. Reagan knew whether the administration was participating in that effort.    On NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; yesterday, Sen. Inouye said that Mr. Reagan &quot;was aware that monies were being raised to provide arms for the Contras&quot; and &quot;knew much more than what the White House has intimated.&quot; But the chairman also said Mr. Reagan's diaries show the president &quot;wasn't particularly knowledgeable about some of the details.&quot;    While traveling from Washington to New York yesterday, Mr. Reagan told reporters he was &quot;aware that there were people&quot; raising private funds to help the Contras, &quot;but there was nothing in the nature of a solicitation by the administration, to my knowledge, of anyone to do that.&quot; He also said he had &quot;no detailed information&quot; that the money was used for weapons.    Separately, it was reported that committee investigators have added some new details to earlier disclosures that the covert arms network supplying the Contras had obtained weapons in Poland and China. In February, The Wall Street Journal disclosed that a ship used to carry arms to the Contras had also transported Soviet-bloc weapons from Poland to a Pentagon warehouse in North Carolina for later distribution to anti-Communist guerrillas. The New York Times reported Saturday that committee staffers have evidence that the Polish weapons were bought for the Contras.    In addition, the Times said, the committee has evidence that weapons sold to the Contras by China included Soviet-made anti-aircraft missiles. China's role as a supplier was disclosed to the press in March by a Contra leader, but he described the purchases from China as ammunition.    While last-minute preparations for the hearings were being completed, Sen. Rudman and other investigators asserted that they already have substantial information showing efforts were made to impede criminal probes. The evidence, Sen. Rudman said on &quot;Meet the Press,&quot; is enough &quot;today to indict a number of people, in my view, on obstruction of justice&quot; charges. But he didn't elaborate or identify the individuals involved.    ---   John Walcott contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>