<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880119-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   PERES SAID Israel should hold early elections because of Palestinian unrest.    The foreign minister said he proposed holding elections within 90 days and would raise the question with the leadership of his Labor Party, which shares power with the rightist Likud bloc in a coalition pact that isn't due to expire until November. Peres said the vote would be aimed at breaking a deadlock on a Mideast peace conference, which he favors. Prime Minister Shamir said elections must wait until order is restored in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.    The U.S. vetoed a U.N. Security Council resolution condemning Israeli actions in southern Lebanon, saying it ignored a history of attacks on Israel.    ---   AN ARGENTINE REBEL ENDED a brief revolt by surrendering to troops.    Aldo Rico, dismissed last week as an army lieutenant colonel, and about 100 followers surrendered after a fight with about 2,000 government troops at a northeastern garrison. Rico led an April revolt aimed at ending prosecutions of army officers for human rights abuses. He was dismissed and ordered to stand trial, but escaped arrest. At least six other revolts broke out during his three-day stand, including one that briefly shut down Buenos Aires's airport.    President Alfonsin applauded the &quot;decisive action&quot; of the military in crushing the revolt and called an emergency cabinet meeting on the uprising.    ---   A top State Department aide said Nicaragua's offer to hold direct talks with the Contras and lift a state of emergency was a ploy to defeat a congressional vote on rebel aid. In Managua, the Interior Ministry said it freed seven opposition leaders accused of plotting with the Contras and Ortega promised tough action if rebel aid is approved.    ---   A Chinese airliner crashed in southwest China, killing all 108 aboard, the official Xinhua news agency said. The IL-18 plane, en route from Beijing to Chongqing, crashed about five miles from Chongqing's airport. It carried a crew of 10 and 98 passengers, including four foreigners, Xinhua said.    ---   Haitian opposition leaders said the results of a military-run presidential election should be thrown out because of low voter turnout, but the junta proclaimed Sunday's balloting a success. The Canadian government said that it wouldn't accept the election results and that it would review its relations with the military government.    ---   Senior astronauts are asking NASA to conduct an additional full-scale test-firing of the redesigned space shuttle booster rocket before going ahead with the first post-Challenger shuttle launch. The chief of the Johnson Space Center's astronaut office cited a problem revealed in a booster test last month as the reason for the request.    ---   Shevardnadze called for superpower elimination of short-range nuclear missiles in Europe and said Moscow is prepared to negotiate reductions in conventional forces. West German Foreign Minister Genscher, after talks with the Soviet foreign minister in Bonn, said he believes Moscow is ready to end its conventional-arms superiority.    ---   Aquino-backed candidates appeared to be leading in Philippine regional elections, which were marred by further violence. Partial returns showed gubernatorial candidates backed by the Philippine president were leading in seven of 15 provinces, while candidates backed by former dictator Marcos and Vice President Laurel trailed.    ---   Persian Gulf shipping attacks increased more than 50% in 1987, according to a report by the U.N. The report, based on information obtained from the London-based International Maritime Organization, said there were 167 attacks in 1987, compared with 101 in 1986. The report didn't say how many of the attacks were Iranian or Iraqi.    ---   A West German nuclear firm suspended its two top executives in a widening inquiry into allegations that it shipped nuclear materials to Libya and Pakistan in violation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. The shake-up at Nukem, a nuclear-fuel processor, is the latest twist in what is becoming an emotional national issue.    ---   South Korea's president-elect offered cabinet posts to opposition party members when his government takes office Feb. 25. Roh Tae Woo, the ruling party candidate in last month's presidential vote, said he would ask the opposition to recommend competent figures for posts in his government in an effort to form a &quot;suprapartisan&quot; cabinet.    ---   A U.N. mediator said Soviet troops would begin leaving Afghanistan two months after an accord is reached in indirect Afghanistan-Pakistan talks set to begin Feb. 15 in Geneva. The mediator, before beginning a trip to Islamabad and Kabul, expressed optimism that the talks would succeed.    ---   Taiwan's Interior Ministry said it would no longer punish Taiwanese who visit China illegally. The announcement signals a continuation of the policies of the late President Chiang Ching-kuo, who in November relaxed a 38-year-old ban on travel to China for those with relatives there. Chiang died last week and was succeeded by Lee Teng-hui.    ---   Died: Andrija Artukovic, 88, convicted of ordering thousands killed as a World War II fascist, Saturday, in Zagreb, Yugoslavia. </TEXT></DOC>