<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0164 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Will Diplomacy Bring Freedom to Nicaragua?---By Jaime Daremblum</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> SAN JOSE, Costa Rica  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As efforts in Washington proceed to block further aid to anti-Sandinista rebels, a recent flurry of diplomatic activity in Central America has shown how little can be expected from so-called &quot;political solutions&quot; to bring about democratic changes in Nicaragua.    In late January, the eight foreign ministers of the Contadora conglomerate -- Mexico, Colombia, Venezuela and Panama joined by its support group of Argentina, Brazil, Peru and Uruguay -- together with the secretaries-general of the United Nations and the Organization of American States, visited the Central American countries to explore new avenues of negotiation. Shortly afterward, a joint conference of the European Economic Community and Central American governments was held in Guatemala. This was followed by last Sunday's meeting here of presidents of the region's democracies.    Costa Rican President Oscar Arias convened last weekend's summit to gain endorsement for a regional peace initiative intended to democratize Nicaragua under a three-year timetable. While the plan does not single out Nicaragua in so many words, its liberalizing measures are specifically aimed at undermining the Sandinistas' totalitarian control of Nicaragua. An immediate, regional cease-fire would be followed by an amnesty for all combatants and a dialogue between the ruling governments and their armed and unarmed opposition. This dialogue would culminate in general, internationally observed elections. The plan also features an end to U.S. support of the contras coupled with the withdrawal of all Soviet-bloc advisers. The implementation of the agreement would be supervised by the Contadora conglomerate together with U.N. and O.A.S. officials.    Drafts of the plan submitted in advance to Mr. Arias's colleagues suggest that he had expected the other Central American presidents to join him in presenting Nicaragua with a kind of ultimatum. The odds looked good for Mr. Arias when, upon arriving in San Jose, both Jose Napoleon Duarte from El Salvador and Honduran President Jose Azcona granted news conferences warmly praising Mr. Arias's initiative. However, some difficulties began to surface as Guatemalan President Vinicio Cerezo -- invoking what he refers to as his &quot;active neutrality&quot; -- refused to make any comments to reporters.    All the participants appeared to agree that democracy is a must for Nicaragua, but the only consensus Mr. Arias was finally able to get from the summit was a rather general and highly lyrical statement of purposes. The detailed schedule leading to free elections became, instead, a &quot;constructive&quot; document to be discussed within 90 days by all Central American mandataries -- including Nicaragua's Daniel Ortega -- at a meeting in Esquipulas, Guatemala. Thus, what was intended to be a &quot;take-it-or-leave-it&quot; type of proposition, resulted in an uncertain agenda dependent entirely on Managua's acquiescence.    Daniel Ortega has announced plans to attend the meeting in Esquipulas, but he has conditioned his attendance on so many points (e.g., a group condemnation of U.S. policies in the region) that no one can say for sure if his conditions can be met. His &quot;hard-to-get&quot; attitude is probably due to the Sandinista regime's longstanding refusal to accept any democratizing formulas similar to those announced by Mr. Arias last weekend. Furthermore, at a presidential gathering in Esquipulas last year -- similar to the one being scheduled now -- Mr. Ortega admonished the other Central American heads of state to the effect that &quot;Nicaragua will not take any lessons on democracy from anybody.&quot; As the San Jose meeting was announced last month, Nicaragua denounced it violently as a U.S.-inspired maneuver &quot;to sabotage Contadora,&quot; and labeled Costa Rica, Honduras and El Salvador &quot;neocolonies of the United States in Central America.&quot;    Guatemala was not mentioned in this barrage, presumably because at that point it had not confirmed its attendance. This, in turn, added fuel to speculations about President Cerezo's entente with Mexico and the Sandinistas as part of a strategy to appease leftist guerrillas in his own country. Unlike Costa Rica, Honduras or El Salvador, Guatemala does not share a land or water border with Nicaragua. However, it does share a 1,500 mile-long border with Mexico, where communist insurgents nest and are granted haven by Mexican officials. The Mexican border presents Guatemala with security problems somewhat different from those of the other three Central American democracies. It also makes Guatemala more vulnerable to the influence and pressures of Mexico, which since 1979 has been closely identified with Cuba in supporting the Sandinistas.    While Mexico has not publicaly tempered its support for the Sandinistas, a meeting of the European Economic Community in Guatemala on Feb. 10 -- the third of its kind since first established in November 1985 to discuss cooperation with Central America -- indicated that sympathy toward the Sandinistas had cooled among some European governments. The president of the European Council, Belgian Foreign Minister Leo Tindemans, announced prior to the meeting in Guatemala that future economic assistance to Central America, until now heavily tilted in favor of Nicaragua, would be more evenhanded. European officials hinted their displeasure with the situation in Nicaragua by declaring that &quot;peace in Central America must result from an authentic pluralistic process . . . and from respect to human rights and public freedoms.&quot; French representative Didier Bariani was more explicit, saying that &quot;the Sandinista government has not understood the need to democratize Nicaragua.&quot; At the end of the conference, Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Miguel D'Escoto's response to all these proddings was to proclaim Nicaragua &quot;the purest democracy in the hemisphere.&quot;    Mr. Arias knows firsthand that not even such modest urgings as those expounded by the Europeans in Guatemala may be forthcoming from the Mexican-dominated Contadora Group. At his inauguration last May, he attempted to obtain a declaration along the lines of his current initiative, only to be pre-empted by a different sort of communique from the Contadora governments. While refusing to ask for democratic reforms in Nicaragua, the communique censured the U.S. for its support of the contras. (As has happened with prior resurrections of the Contadora conglomerate, its tour through the region last month coincided with the beginning in Washington of debates on new aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.)    The participation of the OAS's secretary-general in the last Contadora mission did not seem to rouse any of the participants' memories as to the promises of pluralism and disarmament made by the Sandinistas in a June 1979 OAS forum. Given their long record of broken promises, somebody has yet to reasonably explain why, by virtue of mere words, the Marxist Sandinista comandantes would dismantle the totalitarian apparatus on which their power rests. Betting on such an outcome could prove to be a dangerous course for Nicaragua's neighbors. Nevertheless, initiatives like Mr. Arias's may perhaps focus international attention on where the real obstacles to a peaceful settlement in Central America lie.    ---   Mr. Daremblum, a columnist for La Nacion, is a professor of political science at the University of Costa Rica and at CIAPA, a public-policy institute affiliated with Tulane University. </TEXT></DOC>