<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0091 </DOCNO><HL> As Iran-Contra Counsel Pursues Alleged Crimes,Experts Think Some Cases May Be Hard to Prove---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Attorney General Edwin Meese launched a full-blown criminal investigation of the Iran-Contra scandal last November, notes of the meeting show he warned his staff: &quot;Not clear any crime has been committed.&quot;    But after more than three months of televised congressional hearings and the release of boxloads of sensitive government documents, Mr. Meese appears to have changed his mind. &quot;If I didn't think that laws could have been broken,&quot; he said during a recent television interview, &quot;then I wouldn't have launched the criminal investigation and sought an independent counsel.&quot; Sen. Paul Trible (R., Va.), a member of the Senate investigating committee, puts it more bluntly: &quot;There's certainly evidence of clear wrongdoing, criminal wrongdoing.&quot;    Such assertions are based on disclosures of extensive shredding of documents, funneling millions of dollars of profits from arms sales to Iran into secret Swiss bank accounts, misleading Congress about U.S. military support for Nicaraguan rebels known as Contras and other questionable activities by officials in the White House and their associates.    Although polls indicate strong public opposition to prosecution of Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North and other participants in the affair, Lawrence Walsh, the court-appointed Iran-Contra prosecutor, is digging into potential violations of as many as 10 or 12 different federal statutes, according to law-enforcement officials and other persons familiar with his inquiry.    Lawyers for Col. North and Rear Adm. John Poindexter, the former national security adviser, have identified their clients as principal targets of Mr. Walsh's broad grand-jury investigation, though both men deny any wrongdoing. And the list of other targets is believed to include retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, who directed the Contra-resupply network, and his business partner, Albert Hakim.    At least 13 other participants in the affair are cooperating with Mr. Walsh in exchange for immunity from prosecution, according to law-enforcement sources, and the independent counsel is expected to file charges against some of the central figures in the investigation, perhaps as early as next month.    Here are four general categories of laws that may have been violated:    From the beginning, Mr. Walsh has talked about trying to unravel an alleged &quot;conspiracy to defraud the government by misusing its resources and diverting its funds.&quot; The Federal Bureau of Investigation has informed Swiss banking authorities that some proceeds from the arms sales &quot;are believed to have been unlawfully converted&quot; by Col. North.    Last week, Mr. Meese told the committees &quot;it is highly probable&quot; that the U.S. Treasury is entitled to all of the funds that remain frozen, adding that &quot;probable cause&quot; also exists to investigate whether there were violations of the Anti-Deficiency Act, which bars the executive branch from spending funds for purposes not authorized by Congress.    Still, Harvard Law School professor and former Watergate prosecutor Philip Heymann predicts that such cases may be &quot;very hard to bring.&quot; He expects &quot;tricky property arguments&quot; about whether proceeds from the arms sales clearly belonged to the U.S. In their testimony, Col. North and Adm. Poindexter tried to distance themselves from detailed knowledge of the movement of funds, asserting that the private enterprise Gen. Secord set up was responsible for financial details.    In addition to the question of fund transfers to the Contras, Mr. Walsh's investigators are poring over tax, insurance and financial records to determine whether participants personally and improperly profited from the affair, including details of a $16,000 security system installed at Col. North's house free of charge.    Lawmakers have accused Col. North and Adm. Poindexter of obstructing justice by preparing false chronologies of the Iran initiative and then destroying and altering official documents. Criminal-law experts are split over the significance of the issue.    &quot;Before there can be any obstruction of justice, there has to be a formal criminal inquiry under way,&quot; says Herbert Miller, a Washington attorney whose firm specializes in white-collar-crime cases. At the time most of the documents reportedly were destroyed, Mr. Miller and other veteran attorneys contend, the attorney general was conducting an informal fact-finding inquiry. Col. North, in fact, testified that he started shredding some material weeks earlier. &quot;I don't see any slam-dunks here&quot; for prosecutors, agrees attorney Richard Ben-Veniste, a former Watergate prosecutor.    But another school of attorneys and prosecutors believes that by admitting destruction of documents, Adm. Poindexter and others exposed themselves to possible criminal prosecution for impeding congressional inquiries. &quot;The statute covering such actions is broadly worded,&quot; says Stanley Brand, former counsel to the House clerk. Irvin Nathan, a former senior Justice Department prosecutor, says evidence of document destruction can be used to try to prove &quot;guilty knowledge&quot; on the part of some defendants. &quot;It clearly is an overt act that supports a broader conspiracy theory,&quot; he argues.    When Adm. Poindexter was questioned about destroying a 1985 presidential document explicitly spelling out an arms-for-hostages swap with the Iranians, the former White House aide acknowledged that his intention was to prevent disclosure that would embarrass President Reagan. The legal significance of the memo &quot;was a minor thing in my mind,&quot; Adm. Poindexter testified, adding: &quot;As long as it didn't exist.&quot;    Mr. Meese and others contend that purposely lying or misleading Congress is a felony, whether or not the statements are made under oath. Former Attorney General Benjamin Civileti says that, in general, unsworn statements &quot;don't preclude the possibility of prosecution.&quot;    Col. North, for example, testified to misleading members of the House Intelligence Committee &quot;face-to-face&quot; last year. But, since questions of motivation and intent are essential in successfully arguing such cases, some current and former prosecutors believe that the surge of public support for Col. North following his overall testimony last month could reduce his chances of prosecution in this area.    In sworn testimony before the investigating committees, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane repeatedly contradicted Col. North's assertions that Mr. McFarlane had authorized creation of a covert airlift to help the Contras. And in his testimony, Adm. Poindexter freely admitted to a history of withholding sensitive information from Congress and acknowledged participating in the drafting of false chronologies for use by the White House as the scandal erupted last year.    Investigators have identified a number of other statutes -- ranging from the 1976 Arms-Export Control Act and prohibitions against destruction of presidential documents to timely congressional-notification requirements under intelligence laws -- that may have been violated.    Mr. Nathan, the former Justice Department official, argues that &quot;you can make a prima facie showing that a substantial number of laws were broken.&quot; On Tuesday, House Speaker James Wright (D., Texas) issued a statement asserting that Reagan administration officials ignored, violated or flouted seven separate statutes. The list included a series of congressional strictures, loosely known as the Boland Amendment, barring certain military or other U.S. government support for the Contras.    While some of these statutes don't carry any criminal penalties, Mr. Walsh is pursuing a broad conspiracy theory that could hold individuals accountable for evading the intent of Congress, or for attempting to defraud the government. If such charges are filed, &quot;one of the fundamental elements of due process&quot; may be sacrificed, charges Mr. Miller. But Mr. Heymann, after studying court rulings on the issue stretching back six decades, says he is convinced that the Supreme Court has made it clear that criminal conspiracy statutes can be used to punish violations of laws that carry only civil penalties. </TEXT></DOC>