<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880114-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Iowa's Vaunted Caucus Is Really an Unfair Nonelection </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Gartner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> DES MOINES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If there's no snowstorm and the sidewalks aren't icy, if I'm not working late, and if there's no basketball game that my sons want to go to, on the evening of Monday, Feb. 8, I'll walk three blocks up the hill from my house to Merrill Transitional School. There, at 7 p.m., I'll attend the Democratic caucus for the 70th precinct here in Polk County.    I'll be one of 200,000 or so Iowans braving the cold to attend the 2,487 precinct caucuses in church basements, school cafeterias and living rooms from Grundy Center to Strawberry Point, from Swaledale to What Cheer, from Ackley to Zwingle.    By the end of the evening, the seers of politics and the sayers of the press will declare the winners in the campaign that began more than a year ago for the hearts and minds of my neighbors and me. Before rushing off for New Hampshire, these seers and sayers will declare, if all goes according to prediction, that Pete du Pont and Jack Kemp and Alexander Haig and probably Dick Gephardt and Bruce Babbitt are all but through, that Bob Dole and George Bush and Paul Simon and Mike Dukakis are alive and well, and that Al Gore and Pat Robertson are alive but not well. And there will be judgments passed on those special-category candidates, Jesse Jackson and Gary Hart.    All this is well and good but for one thing: By night's end, neither I nor any other Iowa Democrat who ventured out to feed the hopes or bludgeon the dreams of these able men will have stepped into a booth and cast a ballot for any one of them.    You should keep that in mind tomorrow evening as you watch the Democratic debate here in Des Moines and for these next three weeks as the news shows and the newspapers fill up with reports on how we Iowans will soon be selecting a front-runner in our first-in-the-nation presidential test. For the Iowa caucus system, hailed by some as democracy at its best, is, in relation to the president-picking business, democracy at its worst. It's especially bad on the Democratic side.    Here's how the caucuses work. At 7 p.m. on Feb. 8, I'll be joined by 100 to 200 of the 619 registered Democrats in my precinct. A precinct committee-man will call the caucus to order, and then we'll elect a chairman and a secretary. Next, we'll sign nomination papers for whichever candidates we're backing for the various state-house and congressional races. Then, we'll discuss some resolutions we want to submit to the county platform committee. Finally, we'll elect delegates to the county convention, each of us backing those delegates who favor our own presidential candidate; this can be by ballot or a show of hands.    It sounds fair, but isn't fair, for two reasons. The first is this: Before we Democrats elect delegates, we deal with platform ideas, and that debate sometimes influences the delegate selection. Let's say there are some rabid anti-abortionists at my caucus and there's a vigorous debate on whether we should support an anti-abortion plank. Let's say that John Smith is leading the anti-abortion forces, that June Jones is leading the opposition. And let's say that Smith prevails, that we support his plank.    Then when delegate-selection time rolls around, let's say that Smith is trying to gather support for his man, Dick Gephardt. Let's say that Jones, too, is a Gephardt supporter. But she says she'll support Mr. Gephardt only if the delegate the Gephardt people select is a pro-choice delegate, for she wants to limit the anti-abortion strength at the county convention on March 26. She won't back Mr. Gephardt if there's a chance the Gephardt crowd plans to elect Smith. But Smith won't support Mr. Gephardt unless the Gephardt people promise to elect an anti-abortion delegate. So, suddenly, Mr. Gephardt's strength in my caucus is determined by my neighbors' views on abortion -- not by the pluses or minuses of Mr. Gephardt himself or even by his own views on abortion. This sort of thing happens.    The second thing wrong with the Democrats' process is that there is no secret ballot. The secret election of an open government is the basis of democracy. Yet the caucuses, with their stand-up-and-be-counted way of backing candidates, open all of us to pressure, intimidation, harassment, ridicule and discomfort.    Example: Gary Hart is showing up well in the polls in Iowa, but no close observer, including savvy Democratic Party Chairwoman Bonnie Campbell, expects Mr. Hart to stand out in the caucuses. David Belin, a well-known Des Moines lawyer, Republican, and one of my partners at the Ames newspaper, explains why. What man will stand up in front of his wife and be seen announcing for Gary Hart? Mr. Belin asks.    John Chrystal, a farmer, banker, Democrat and likely candidate for governor in 1990, says the same probably holds true for Jesse Jackson. How many Jackson supporters will sit on their hands at the caucuses rather than be accused of throwing away their votes on a man who their neighbors say can't win the main election? he asks.    (To give them their due, Republicans do have a secret vote. But it's a straw vote with little or no bearing on the delegate-selection process, so the Republican caucuses are meaningless while the Democratic ones are misleading.)    Why should you care?    There are 550,000 registered Democrats in Iowa, about 1.5 million registered voters in all. So if 100,000 of us attend the Democratic caucuses, each of us is representing five to six Iowa Democrats and 15 Iowa voters. In the nation, there are 180 million people of voting age, and probably a bit more than half of those will vote in 1988. About half of those, in turn, probably will vote for the Democrat. So in this weeding-out process next month, each Iowa Democratic caucus-goer will be representing about 1,800 voting-age Americans, about 900 actual voters, about 450 Democratic voters.    We're not typical of the nation -- the caucuses are faulted for that reason, but what state is typical? -- but we're a pretty responsible, highly educated, sober-sided people here in Iowa. And I think you could trust us to do our homework, study the issues and the candidates, and represent you well if we were stepping into a voting booth that evening of Feb 8.    We won't be doing that, though. We'll be participating in an unfair, undemocratic, nonelection to determine the destinies of the would-be leaders of the free world.    That's sort of awesome and sort of awful. And that's why I sort of hope my sons will find a good basketball game for us to go to that night.    ---   Mr. Gartner, who joins the Viewpoint roster today, is editor and co-owner of the Daily Tribune in Ames, Iowa, and general news executive at Gannett Co. and USA Today. He formerly was editor of the Louisville Courier-Journal and of the Des Moines Register, and was Page One editor for The Wall Street Journal 1969-74. He is past president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors and a member of the bar in New York and Iowa. </TEXT></DOC>