<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN WAS FAULTED for his handling of the Iran-Contra affair.    A report by the three-member panel that Reagan appointed to investigate U.S. arms sales to Iran and aid to Nicaraguan rebels concluded that the president was driven by his desire to free the American hostages in Lebanon but was unaware of the consequences of his actions. It also found Reagan ignorant of what his aides were doing in his name, uninterested in the details of his own foreign policy, and unable to remember some of his most important decisions.    Administration aides secretly channeled military aid to Nicaraguan rebels during a two-year ban on such U.S. assistance, the report concluded. The findings suggest that laws may have been breached, though the commission avoided any conclusions on legal issues.    The special Senate and House committees investigating the Iran-Contra scandal voted to grant limited immunity to three individuals who may provide more details about the affair.    ---   THE SOVIET UNION CONDUCTED its first nuclear test in 19 months.    Saying it was forced to resume its program because the U.S. refused to join a Kremlin moratorium on weapons tests, Moscow said it detonated a nuclear device in remote Kazakhstan. It was the first such blast since Gorbachev's July 1985 announcement halting Soviet testing and followed two tests this year by the U.S. Soviet officials stressed that the Kremlin was leaving the door open for a test ban.    The State Department said Moscow's decision to resume nuclear tests was a Soviet affair and wouldn't change U.S. opposition to the Soviet moratorium.    ---   A Syrian commander ruled out a military mission to free Americans and other foreigners held hostage in Lebanon, because the safety of the hostages &quot;can't be guaranteed.&quot; The official also said Damascus's forces had closed all 70 Moslem militia offices in West Beirut in an effort to end the fighting for control of the sector.    ---   West Germany told the U.S. that Bonn expects strict application of the 1972 ABM treaty with the Soviet Union, opposing a Reagan administration plan to adopt a broad interpretation of the pact to allow testing of a space-based antimissile system. The message was conveyed to U.S. officials by West Germany's foreign minister.    ---   Afghan warplanes bombed two border villages in northwestern Pakistan, killing at least 35 people and injuring about 200 others, the Islamabad government said. The assault came as Pakistan, at U.N.-backed talks in Geneva, renewed its demand for a timely Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan.    ---   Shultz said China's internal political campaign against Western influences and its moves to improve relations with the Soviet Union probably would dominate his talks in Peking next week. The secretary of state, who is scheduled to arrive Sunday in Peking, also said he would urge Chinese officials to halt arms shipments to Iran.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres met with Egyptian President Mubarak in Cairo and said they discussed &quot;new ideas&quot; about an international Mideast peace conference. Peres indicated that the issue of Palestinian representation was unresolved. Prime Minister Shamir, who opposes such a forum, has insisted on direct Arab-Israeli talks.    ---   Italian authorities have established evidence indicating that the Vatican bank shared responsibility for the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, a magistrate in Milan said. Separately, Vatican sources said that despite an arrest warrant for fraud, it was unlikely that U.S. Archbishop Paul Marcinkus would be taken into custody.    ---   The NRC formally proposed a rule to ease emergency planning requirements for operating licenses for nuclear plants where local governments don't cooperate with emergency planning.    ---   France signed a $550 million contract to buy three early-warning radar aircraft, in another step toward greater defense cooperation with Paris's Western allies. Delivery of the Boeing Co. planes is to begin in late 1990. The contract also includes an option to buy two more Awacs planes within the next eight months.    ---   A judge in San Diego dismissed a criminal case against a California woman accused of contributing to the death of her brain-damaged baby by ignoring doctor's orders to avoid taking drugs and having sex while pregnant. The case was viewed as having important implications for the rights of women across the country.    ---   The Church of England voted to draft legislation for the ordination of women priests, considered a crucial move toward ending more than 400 years of male domination. The church's ruling Synod approved a motion by 44 diocesan bishops outlining steps to bring women into the priesthood.    ---   NASA launched a three-stage Delta rocket and boosted into orbit a $55 million weather satellite to be used in the coming hurricane season. It was the sixth consecutive space launch success for the U.S.    ---   A gangster was arraigned in a South San Francisco court on a charge of first-degree murder for the 1984 slaying of Chinese-American journalist Henry Liu. Tung Kueisen, a member of the United Bamboo Gang, has said that he killed Liu on the orders of the Taiwan government. Two others were convicted of the murder in 1985 in Taipei.    ---   NATO appointed U.S. Gen. John Galvin to take over as supreme allied commander of Europe, effective June 30. Galvin, commander of the U.S. forces in Central America, will succeed Gen. Bernard Rogers, whose departure was announced Tuesday.    ---   The Pentagon disclosed that one of two new air-to-air missiles fired at drones missed its target during an Air Force test last week over the Gulf of Mexico. A statement said the radar aboard an F-15 fighter jet couldn't distinguish two drones as separate targets. The failure was considered a setback for the Amraam missile program. </TEXT></DOC>