<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH REGULARLY DISCUSSED Contra aid and hostage efforts with Meese.    Administration sources said the fired National Security Council aide regularly conferred with the attorney general about the campaign to provide aid to Nicaraguan rebels and efforts to free U.S. hostages in Lebanon. The contacts began shortly after Reagan directed North in late 1984 to help form a private network to help the rebels. It wasn't known if North disclosed that funds from the arms sales to Iran were being diverted to the Contras.    The independent counsel in the Iran-Contra affair intends to delve into contacts Bush's office had with Contra supporters, law enforcement aides said.    ---   PHILIPPINE TROOPS KILLED at least 12 people in a clash in Manila.    In what was considered the worst violence since President Aquino took power 11 months ago, marines fired assault rifles into a crowd of about 10,000 peasants and leftists demanding agrarian changes. At least 94 people were wounded. Aquino said she was &quot;deeply saddened&quot; by the shootings, and warned that &quot;attempts to destabilize the government will intensify&quot; ahead of the Feb. 2 plebiscite on a new constitution.    Manila's peace talks aimed at ending a communist insurgency in the Philippines were suspended indefinitely because of death threats.    ---   KOHL SAID Bonn was seeking talks with the kidnappers of a West German.    The chancellor's comments came as officials said Bonn had received a written message from those claiming to have abducted the businessman Saturday in Lebanon, and had responded through a middleman chosen by Syria. A second West German was reported kidnapped this week. Sources also said that a U.S. request for the extradition of an Arab suspected in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet could take months to process.    Anglican envoy Waite, who hasn't been seen in public since Tuesday, sent word he was in talks to win freedom for two Americans held in Lebanon.    ---   Rep. Les Aspin reclaimed the House Armed Services panel chairmanship that he lost two weeks ago. The Wisconsin Democrat withstood a challenge by Texas Rep. Leath, whose conservative-liberal coalition fell short after three ballots during the closed-door meeting.    ---   Weinberger said proposals that the U.S. withdraw some of its troops from Europe &quot;would encourage Soviet aggression.&quot; The defense secretary also said that results achieved with experiments detecting, tracking and destroying objects in space may lead to an early partial deployment of a space-based antimissile system.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union resumed talks in Geneva on nuclear testing with Washington rejecting Moscow's call for a test moratorium &quot;at this time,&quot; but leaving open the possibility of a future ban. In Moscow, an Izvestia commentator said the Kremlin should look toward a period after Reagan's presidency for arms control progress.    ---   Iran said as many as 33,000 Iraqi troops had been killed or wounded in Tehran's drive toward Basra. U.S. aides said that while the offensive was slackening, Iran had advanced slightly on the Iraqi port city. The drive has given Iran a morale boost, and has increased Iranian military recruiting, diplomats confirmed.    ---   China dismissed two high-ranking officials of Peking's Academy of Sciences, apparently as part of a Communist Party campaign against liberal ideas, which began after student protests last month. Peking also announced the formation of a new office to control the news media and publishing.    ---   A major winter storm moved into the Northeast after dropping as much as 15 inches of snow on the South and causing the closure of airports, schools and highways from Mississippi to New England. The federal government began sending home early as many as 350,000 workers.    ---   A Pennsylvania official shot and killed himself during a news conference in Harrisburg, a day before he was to be sentenced for his conviction in a $300,000 bribery case. State Treasurer R. Budd Dwyer had faced as long as 55 years in prison for his role in the awarding of a no-bid contract.    ---   The Justice Department released an internal report -- endorsed by Attorney General Meese -- seeking to overturn the Supreme Court's landmark Miranda ruling, which requires police to tell criminal suspects of their rights. Critics said any challenge to the law probably would be futile.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett faulted school sex education programs for too often reflecting &quot;an abdication of responsible moral authority.&quot; Bennett, expressing doubts about the effectiveness of sex education, emphasized a role that clearly differs from the emphasis of HHS officials discussing AIDS prevention.    ---   Ecuador's Congress approved a non-binding resolution calling for the resignation of President Leon Febres Cordero, who was abducted last week and released after pardoning an imprisoned air force general. A spokesman for the president, accused of violating the constitution, said Febres Cordero would reject the lawmakers' request.    ---   Pakistan said Moscow and Islamabad hadn't made any progress during talks this week on a time-frame for Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan. Pakistan also said that its next round of U.N.-mediated talks with Afghanistan, scheduled to begin Feb. 11 in Geneva, may have to be delayed pending further talks with the Soviet Union.    ---   NASA's administrator told a Senate panel that a year after the space shuttle Challenger explosion &quot;we are well on the road to recovery.&quot; He said the space agency expects to have a plan within the next two weeks for using both the shuttle and throwaway rockets to launch satellites.    ---   Salvadorans staged a 24-hour general strike to protest the Duarte government's economic policies. Shops and factories were closed throughout El Salvador and radio and television stations went off the air in what appeared to be widespread support for the work stoppage. Leftist guerrillas pledged to halt the nation's highway transportation.    ---   Hundreds of mourners defied South Africa's state-of-emergency regulations and gathered for the funeral of one of four alleged African National Congress guerrillas killed last month. Troops surrounded a Soweto cemetery and wouldn't allow entry to anyone without a police-issued permit. </TEXT></DOC>