<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880913-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Dukakis Tuition Plan Flunks Its Tax Test </HL><AUTHOR> Martin Feldstein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT TAXES </CO><IN> BNK FIN </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Government financial assistance that allows low-income students to attend college enjoys widespread political support. The federal government now spends more than $10 billion a year to provide grants to students from low-income families and to subsidize student loans. States spend more than $30 billion a year to provide scholarships and, more important, to subsidize education at state universities and colleges by charging less than the actual cost for tuition, room and board.    But paying college bills remains a serious burden for middle-income families. In this election season, the candidates have seized on additional financial help for college education as a way to appeal to middle-class voters. Some months ago, George Bush proposed a special saving plan like an IRA that would help parents to save for their children's college education. Now Michael Dukakis has come along with a massive new middle-class entitlement tied to college attendance.    The Dukakis plan is an old idea that educators have thought about and rejected a number of times in the past. The essential feature is that in exchange for government help in paying college bills, the student agrees to an increased income-tax rate for all of his working life. The supplementary tax rate is supposed to be set so that the extra tax paid by each generation of students repays the principal and interest of the original loans.    The Dukakis plan makes the payments to students in the form of bank loans in order to keep the funding outside the official federal budget. But the combination of government guarantees on these loans and repayment through the tax system makes it clear this is just a multibillion increase in government spending. And since the taxes that are supposed to repay this spending are decades in the future, the jump in outlays is equivalent to an equally large rise in the federal deficit.    For the individual participant, the Dukakis plan can mean a major increase in the lifetime tax rate. The Dukakis staff has indicated each $1,000 of loan is likely to require a lifetime tax-rate increase of 0.25%. Although there's good reason to think a higher rate may be needed, let's take the Dukakis estimate at face value and see what it does to participants' future tax rates. To be specific, think about the $12,000-a-year cost of college that Dukakis campaign manager Susan Estrich cites. Four years of college means $48,000 of borrowing and, at a 0.25% tax increase $1,000 adds 12 percentage points to the graduate's tax rate for life.    Someone in the lowest tax bracket starts with a federal marginal tax rate of 15% plus a combined employer-employee Social Security tax rate of 15% and, if he lives in a state such as Massachusetts, an additional state marginal tax rate of 5% -- for a total marginal tax rate of 35%. Add the Dukakis 12% education repayment tax and the total marginal tax rate is 47%. And that's for someone in the lowest federal tax bracket. Many couples with two college-educated earners are likely to be in the 28% federal income-tax bracket, bringing the total marginal tax rate up to 60%.    Such high tax rates inevitably distort work effort and induce individuals to prefer fringe benefits rather than cash compensation. A 60% marginal tax rate is likely to be a very serious disincentive to second earners. The advantage of paying for college by a combination of traditional student loans, part-time jobs and family savings is that they avoid these distortionary increases in marginal tax rates.    The Dukakis education tax would collect the lion's share of the additional income that results from the college education. That happens because the Dukakis tax would apply to an individual's entire earnings and not just to the extra earnings due to the added years of schooling.    A simple calculation shows how the Dukakis tax grabs most of the extra income that results from education. Among individuals aged 35 to 54 who worked at a full-time job in 1985 (the most recent year for which official data are available), high-school graduates with no college education earned on average about $22,000 while college graduates earned $36,000. That $14,000 difference in pretax earnings means that the college graduates earned about $10,000 more after tax than the high-school grads. Someone with a 12% supplementary education tax who earned $36,000 would pay $4,300 in extra tax, or 43% of the increased income.    For someone in the 15% federal income-tax bracket, the total of all taxes -- including income and Social Security taxes as well as the extra education tax -- would take 67% of the extra $14,000 of pretax earnings associated with college education.    Will the proposed tax rate of 0.25% per thousand dollars borrowed actually be enough for the government to repay the banks that provide the cash in the first place? If not, the taxpayers will have to make up the difference. The required tax rate depends not only on future earnings trends but even more sensitively on just who among the college-bound students sign up to participate. If those who participate were representative of the entire freshman class, the required tax rate could be kept low. But there are strong incentives for those who expect to make relatively high incomes not to participate while those who expect lower-than-average earnings would be more likely to participate.    With higher earners out and the lower earners overrepresented, the required tax rate would have to be higher. And as the additional tax rate rises, more students would drop out of the plan. A vicious cycle would shrink the likely participation and push up the tax rate. (The proposal to allow graduates with high earnings to &quot;buy out&quot; their lifetime obligation with a one-time cash payment instead of a higher lifetime tax rate doesn't alter these incentives. If the cost of buying out is set high, those with high-income aspirations won't participate in the first place. If the cost of is set low, the program will be short of cash and the tax rate on the remaining participants will have to be high.)    The fair treatment of women poses a special problem for the Dukakis plan since nearly half of married women do not work for money. Would they, under the Dukakis plan, avoid all repayment of their education loans? (What's the alternative? A &quot;negative dowry&quot; that imposes a double tax burden on the husbands of women who borrowed but chose not to work?) If women who do not work avoid the education tax, those women and men who do work have to pay a higher-education tax rate to make up for the lack of payment by those who are not working.    The incentive effects of this are clear: Women who expect to spend much of their life raising a family would borrow as much as possible and enjoy a big subsidy while those women and men who expect to work will be deterred from participation. The result: an even more powerful vicious cycle shrinking the number of participants and pushing up the tax rate.    Ironically, the biggest beneficiaries of the governor's plan are likely to be state governments and their universities and staff. With the U.S. government guaranteeing loans to all students, states could raise tuition at state universities and cut back on their $30 billion annual aid to higher education. Private universities would probably also increase fees, reduce scholarships and raise the salaries of faculty and staff. Higher faculty pay may be a desirable goal in itself, but the Dukakis plan is certainly a roundabout and inefficient way to reach that goal.    In addition to being bad educational finance and bad tax policy, the Dukakis plan is equivalent to a massive increase in the federal budget deficit. While some of the borrowing under the Dukakis plan would simply replace current borrowing, if additional borrowing averaged even $2,000 a year per student enrolled in higher education, the total additional borrowing would be $25 billion. Although this technically would be a loan from the banks to the students, the government's guarantee makes it functionally equivalent to an increase in the budget deficit. Increased borrowing crowds out funds from other uses just as much as a government bond to finance government spending. The result is that less funds are available for investing in plant and equipment and for construction of homes. And while each cohort of loans is (in principle at least) ultimately self financing, the pool of outstanding debt never gets paid off but just keeps growing.    The Bush education saving plan avoids these problems. No increase in personal tax rates. No unfair treatment of working women. No adverse incentive that forces the more able and ambitious not to participate. And no rise in government back borrowing. Instead, it offers a plan that everyone should want to participate in and that, by increasing savings, would actually add to the nation's pool of capital for investment in plant and equipment.    ---   Mr. Feldstein, past chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard. He is an economic adviser to George Bush. </TEXT></DOC>