<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870811-0013 </DOCNO><HL> REGIONS:New Fish-Raising TechniquesCause a Ruckus in Northwest---By Ken SlocumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   IVAN WERSTIUK'S new, 2,600-square-foot-home looks down at the nearby water at Bell's Beach on Whidbey Island off Seattle, where at the moment a bald eagle walks along the shore. Sealions often bark at Mr. Werstiuk from the beach and seals are a common sight. For the retired contractor, the $300,000 investment in such a setting was the realization of a lifetime dream.    But after moving in, Mr. Werstiuk learned that the cove in front of his house is the proposed site for a commercial fish-raising operation called salmon net-pens, a sort of floating island of about two acres that opponents condemn as &quot;marine versions of cattle feed lots.&quot; Fumes Mr. Werstiuk, &quot;I wanted a place without garbage and traffic.&quot;    For people involved in the cultivation of seafood, Mr. Werstiuk is a dreaded Nimby, an acronym for &quot;not-in-my-back-yard,&quot; and he and others like him are producing the biggest aquaculture ruckus the Northwest has seen in decades. It seems likely to decide whether these scenic shores are mostly the domain of residents and sportsmen; and it could tilt for decades the U.S. role in a growing world industry.    The whole idea seemed simple enough. Why not take a mere 80 acres of Puget Sound's three million acres to raise premium-quality salmon for winter sale to the white tablecloth restaurant trade. That not only would produce several profitable business ventures and jobs but would lower the federal deficit by completely offsetting the $80 million in pen-raised salmon the U.S. imported last year.    BUT THE BEST SPOTS for farming seafood are Puget Sound's coves, near-shore spots protected from storms that also happen to be where recreational fishing is best and homeowners have put life savings into coveted shoreline property. The result has been an explosive court, media and legislative confrontation from the San Juan Islands off Canada to the Washington state capital in Olympia.    Most aquaculture did fine as long as it stuck to nature's way and raised oysters or other seafood beneath the water's surface and mostly out of sight. But in recent years, some entrepreneurs innovated. They increased production by turning to new techniques involving racks that protrude from the water at low tide or sea cages that ride the waves and are visible even at night.    Several types of aquaculture are involved, but the storm centers on salmon net-pens, common in Norway, fast-growing in Canada and, until recently, catching on in the U.S. Each pen is about 40 feet square, stands some five feet above the water and has nets forming a fish cage some 15 feet below the surface. Clustered along floating walkways and anchored to the bottom, the cages form a floating island, usually up to two acres.    SALMON NET-PENS are an emotional lightning rod on Whidbey Island and elsewhere. When a reporter recently made an appointment with an island resident to discuss them, he was met by a contingent of 33 people. Their complaints track environmental lines. Stating that a five-acre net-pen operation produces the excrement of a town of 4,000, they contend the sea cages present a possible health hazard to humans, choke out sea life below the cages and may spread disease to wild fish. They point to the unknowns, such as the effects on wildlife of antibiotics used in aquaculture.    While not professional environmentalists, they're wise to the &quot;system.&quot; Charles R. Caldwell is a retired finance official for the Los Angeles school system; L. Joe Miller was city manager of Bellevue, Wash., and Rochester, N.Y., and Harold Logan is a retired vice president of Seafirst Corp.    In addition to hiring an attorney, local folks have made sure they're heard in the state capital. &quot;We're determined not to sacrifice our environmental concerns for a few jobs,&quot; says the state representative for the area, Mary Margaret Haugen.    THE SHORE RESIDENTS, who are often joined by sport and commercial fishermen, are having an impact. Washington state has seven commercial salmon net-pen operations, all but one built within the past five years. But Island County, which takes in Whidbey Island, and some other counties have put a one-year moratorium on new salmon net-pen applications. Sea Farm of Norway Inc., which operates net-pens off Port Angeles and Port Townsend, dropped plans for a salmon-raising operation near the San Juan Islands after objections from local residents, and the county ordered an environmental impact statement that the company said would cost it upwards of $100,000.    Noting that &quot;we're a clean-water industry, and we'd be the first to suffer if we polluted,&quot; John Forster, general manager of Sea Farm of Norway, says, &quot;Part of our job is to show we're good neighbors and will deliver jobs. But the air has been poisoned by people who use exaggerated arguments and hysterical attitudes.&quot;    Some aquatic experts worry that the state and the nation may suffer in the long run if salmon raising flees to another country. Observing that salmon net-pens do involve legitimate environmental concerns but that they can be overcome with proper siting, John Pitts, aquaculture coordinator for the state Department of Agriculture, says that only three states, Maine, Washington and Alaska, have ideal environmental conditions for farming salmon.    He ponders: &quot;It seems to me that since we import 65% of our seafood and with the ocean catch static and U.S. consumption rising, it makes sense that we should turn to aquatic culture as other countries have to make up that shortfall.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>