<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Weakened Lenders:Major Banks' IncreasesIn Loan-Loss ReservesMay Crimp Expansion---Some May Have to Pass UpAcquisitions, Sell Assets;Problem: Equity Capital---Super-Regionals Will Benefit---By Robert GuentherStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PNCF FLT FUNC SOVN I MHC BAC CHL CMB FNB CCI LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   By increasing loss reserves on shaky loans to developing countries, the big banks have traded one set of problems for another.    On May 19, Citicorp, the nation's largest bank, raised such reserves by $3 billion, and about a dozen other major banks soon followed suit. The moves were generally regarded as helping the industry. They are expected to strengthen the banks' hand in negotiating with developing countries. And by officially acknowledging that billions of dollars of such loans may be uncollectible, the banks bolstered shareholder confidence in the candor, if not the strength, of their balance sheets.    But the banks also have paid a stiff price, according to many bankers, economists and securities analysts. Most money-center banks find themselves weakened by the reserve additions just when they need to invest in new strategies to compete with foreign banks, fast-growing regional banks, investment-banking firms and other financial-service companies.    What's more, the reserve additions have eroded the major banks' equity capital, and some have been so weakened that they face intense pressure to sell assets or issue new shares. New stock issues would dilute a bank's equity, depress its stock price and make acquisitions for stock prohibitively expensive. For the next year or two, industry people predict, weakened balance sheets will force many money-center banks to shelve aggressive plans for expansion into new regions and new business activities.    Signs of such a retreat are already appearing. Manufacturers Hanover Corp., which added $1.7 billion to loan-loss reserves in the second quarter, now would probably have to pass up a major acquisition opportunity, according to Peter Tobin, the chief financial officer of the nation's fifth-largest bank. &quot;At this moment, our equity base is such that we couldn't do it tomorrow,&quot; he says, adding:    &quot;We very clearly recognize a need for other money-center banks and our bank to increase levels of common equity. We would consider any and all options to do that. We have no plans at the moment to go to the {stock} market. Before you can do that, you've got to have a story to tell investors.&quot;    On July 8, BankAmerica Corp. unveiled a plan aimed at raising about $100 million by offering shareholders its common stock at a 5% discount. A spokesman for the San Francisco bank says the offering is &quot;part of an overall effort to raise capital that we announced at the beginning of the year.&quot; However, industry people note that although BankAmerica long has had major problems, the move came soon after it had increased loan-loss reserves by $1.1 billion. By offering 10 million shares, the bank would increase shares outstanding about 6%. Depending on demand, it may raise the size of the offering.    And at Chase Manhattan Corp., which announced a $1.6 billion addition to reserves, Thomas G. Labrecque, the president and chief operating officer, says: &quot;If you're asking is there a constraint of some sort on us, the answer is obviously yes.&quot; He acknowledges that Chase's interest in acquiring smaller banks has cooled, but he blames the high prices that such institutions are commanding. &quot;It isn't viable to pay 2.5 times book value for some of these institutions and still make 15% return on equity,&quot; he says.    With New Jersey opening up fully to out-of-state acquisitions next year and California doing so in 1991, money-center banks would have an opportunity to expand into important markets. But with high prices and the money-center banks' shortage of equity, &quot;people may find that very few show up for the party,&quot; says Donald Noe, an analyst at Moody's Investors Service Inc.    Thomas J. Stanton, the chairman of Newark-based First Jersey National Corp., says the need to rebuild equity &quot;will slow down some of the money-center banks for a year or so. I wouldn't be surprised to see regulators say, 'We don't like your equity-capital levels.'&quot;    Many bankers say a weakening of the money-center banks could be a windfall for so-called super-regional banks. They say that thanks to strong, steady earnings and low exposure to foreign debt, super-regionals will be able, by acquiring other banks, to grow even faster than they have been as the barriers to interstate banking continue to fall in the years ahead.    Among the highly regarded super-regionals:    --PNC Financial Corp., the parent of Pittsburgh National Bank, which recently acquired Citizens Fidelity Bank of Louisville, Ky.;    -- Fleet Financial Group Inc., of Providence, R.I., which,after a pending merger with Norstar Bancorp., of Albany,N.Y., will rank among the top 20 banks;   --First Union Corp., of Charlotte, N.C., which has acquired a number of banks in the Southeast;    -- Sovran Financial Corp., of Norfolk, Va., which hasagreed to acquire Commerce Union Corp., of Nashville, Tenn.;   --And First Interstate Bancorp., of Los Angeles, which owns banks in Oregon, Nevada, Arizona, Oklahoma and Texas. Its most recent major acquisition was Allied Bancshares Inc., of Houston.    The super-regionals are a product of the trend since 1980, when certain states began allowing bank mergers on a reciprocal basis. The super-regionals were already faster-growing and more profitable than most money-center banks before the latter's recent additions to reserves. In the future, some bankers expect the super-regionals to challenge money-center banks for leadership of U.S. banking.    William G. Foster, investment executive officer of Sovran Financial, says, &quot;The super-regionals are in a better position to utilize their capital for technological and geographic expansion than the money-center banks.&quot;    Analysts and consultants concur. John Devereaux, a management consultant with the accounting firm of Touche Ross andamp; Co., says, &quot;The super-regionals have fairly extensive growth plans. I see a very, very active time ahead of us.&quot; George Salem, a Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Inc. analyst, adds that the diminution of the money-center banks' equity &quot;does give the edge to the super-regionals in terms of acquisitions. The money-center banks will have to play more defensive ball.&quot;    Analysts and bankers expect super-regionals to be especially active in New Jersey, Tennessee, Ohio and Washington state over the next couple of years. In addition, California opens up to regional banking with other Western states next month. Already, several transactions involving super-regionals are pending in those states.    And even where barriers still exist, super-regionals are finding ways to keep expanding. Although Bank of Boston currently can't acquire banks outside New England, for example, it owns a mortgage-banking company with 60 offices in 12 Southeastern states. If it eventually can take deposits in those states, it can convert its mortgage offices into full-scale banking operations, says Alan McKinnon, an executive vice president.    Meantime, bankers, analysts and investors are questioning whether money-center banks have been strengthened financially by increasing reserves. They are stronger, some say, because they have finally acknowledged the shaky nature of many Third World loans. These observers add that the banks' capital levels, as defined by regulators, are the same as or slightly higher than before.    But doubters, noting that regulators include loan-loss reserves as part of capital, argue that this is only appearance, not reality. &quot;If reserves are genuinely needed for anticipated losses, I would question whether they should be counted as capital,&quot; says Edward Crutchfield, the chief executive of First Union in Charlotte.    Mr. Crutchfield calls the reserving &quot;the nearest thing to a free lunch that you'll ever see.&quot; He explains that the banks haven't written off any of the loans, the reserves are counted as part of the capital base for regulatory purposes, and investors have bid up the stocks.    At a recent International Monetary Fund meeting in Hamburg, West Germany, Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker also questioned whether U.S. banks should count as capital the reserves set aside in anticipation of specific losses. European banks don't.    Had the stock market not applauded the reserve additions, federal regulators might be more nervous about the condition of money-center banks. Comptroller of the Currency Robert L. Clarke says he would become concerned if loss reserves made up too much of a bank's capital base.    &quot;There will be pressure to raise equity,&quot; he adds, &quot;but we're not bent on sticking to a formula for each institution. We look at each situation individually.&quot;    Rebuilding equity bases won't be easy for money-center banks, following the expansion of loss reserves. Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods Inc., a securities firm specializing in bank stocks, estimates that to match prior levels, Manufacturers Hanover would have to increase its common shares outstanding (based on current stock prices) by 59%, BankAmerica by 40%, Chemical New York Corp. by 31%, Chase Manhattan by 30%, First Chicago Corp. by 29% and Citicorp by 22%.    Measured by levels of common equity, the money-center banks' strength has diminished some 20% to 33%, analysts estimate. Most big banks' common equity is now about 2.5% of assets, down from about 4% before the additions to reserves.    Meanwhile, the perils posed by the Third World loans have only been lessened. Raphael Soifer, a Brown Brothers Harriman andamp; Co. analyst, says, &quot;The money-center banks are in no way over with their Latin American loan problems.&quot;    This could be especially true for banks that, like Citicorp, have built their reserves to 25% of their loans to developing countries. Some banks suggest that the loans may be worth considerably less than 75% of their face value. In the first quarter, First Jersey National sold its Mexican debt for 58 cents on the dollar and its Brazilian debt for 66 cents on the dollar.    Thus, more additions to reserves are expected. &quot;I have no doubt that we have not seen the end of reserving,&quot; Donaldson Lufkin's Mr. Salem says. &quot;Anybody who's not thinking about reserving 50% for these loans is kidding themselves.&quot;    Finally, some observers worry that the reserving has brought some banks to the brink of catastrophe. &quot;The equity position of some of these banks, such as Bank of America and Manufacturers Hanover, is so thin,&quot; says Kenneth Cooper, a Touche Ross bank consultant, &quot;that one major trading loss and they're in the tank. You can't run a major institution without a cushion.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>