<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871026-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev Raises Stakes for Summit;U.S. Officials Bet That He Is Bluffing---By John Walcott and Mark D'AnastasioStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev is playing high-stakes poker with U.S.-Soviet relations and prospects for a new arms-control treaty and a continued thaw in East-West relations now depend on whether he is bluffing.    To the surprise of Reagan administration officials, Mr. Gorbachev abruptly refused to schedule a visit to the U.S. to sign a treaty eliminating the superpowers' intermediate-range nuclear missiles unless Mr. Reagan accepts new restrictions on his Strategic Defense Initiative. That dashed the White House's plans for a telegenic summit next month that could eclipse such embarrassments for the White House as the collapse of the stock market and the Senate's rejection of Supreme Court nominee Robert Bork.    Nevertheless, the Reagan administration is betting that the Soviets can't walk away from the almost-completed intermediate-range nuclear forces treaty. Officials believe Moscow won't want to risk losing most of the political capital it has accumulated in Western Europe and the U.S. by appearing more forthcoming on a variety of arms control and human rights issues.    Moreover, once the treaty is completed, both Mr. Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev probably will want to take credit for it. So at least a perfunctory summit to sign the treaty, either in Washington or in a third country, such as Ireland, still seems likely.    But the surprise attempt to raise the price of a summit has sparked an intensified debate in the West about Mr. Gorbachev's motives and his domestic political strength. Mr. Gorbachev may have decided to make another try at squeezing concessions on SDI out of Mr. Reagan, but some Western analysts suspect that growing resistance to his efforts to restructure Soviet society has forced the energetic Soviet leader to slow down.    Mr. Reagan remains unwilling to negotiate new restrictions on development of space-based missile defenses, popularly referred to as Star Wars. &quot;I cannot make that a bargaining chip,&quot; the president said. &quot;We have the prospect of a defensive system that could practically make nuclear missiles obsolete.&quot;    In his weekly radio address, Mr. Reagan said he isn't in any hurry for a summit and added pointedly: &quot;We certainly will not be pushed into sacrificing essential interests just to have a meeting.&quot;    The administration moved during the weekend to ensure the Soviets don't hold the INF treaty hostage to a summit, and therefore, to concessions on SDI, as well. If Mr. Gorbachev isn't willing to come to the U.S. to sign the treaty, Secretary of State George Shultz said, the administration will consider other ways to get the document signed, including holding another summit in a third country.    Speaking yesterday on NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press,&quot; Mr. Shultz turned the tables on Mr. Gorbachev, suggesting that if the Soviets don't move quickly enough, the opportunity for another summit will be lost to the 1988 presidential election campaign.    The administration's bet that the Soviets won't walk away from the almost-completed INF treaty appears to be a good one. Mr. Gorbachev has twice tried to link INF to restrictions on Star Wars but each time he has reversed himself. And while he was balking last week at scheduling a visit to the U.S. to sign the accord, his underlings were removing some of the final obstacles to completing it.    Specifically, the Soviets dropped a demand that they be allowed to keep some three-warhead SS-20 missiles until West Germany dismantles 72 smaller Pershing 1As. U.S. and Soviet negotiators also made progress toward completing a schedule for dismantling the U.S. and Soviet missiles, and limited headway toward agreeing on ways for each side to ensure the other isn't cheating.    With sufficient energy, officials on both sides said, work on the treaty at the Geneva arms talks probably could be finished in three weeks. But the prospects for a far more important treaty to halve the superpowers' arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles remain uncertain. Mr. Gorbachev has never agreed to negotiate such a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (or START) without a parallel agreement restricting the development of new missile defenses.    During Mr. Shultz's two-day stay in Moscow last week, the Soviets narrowed some of the remaining differences on strategic missiles, although U.S. officials rejected their proposals for limits on submarine-launched ballistic missiles and cruise missiles carried by bombers.    But Mr. Gorbachev's strategy may call for negotiating the details of a new START treaty, and then refusing to sign it without American concessions on SDI.    Without a clearer understanding of the pressures on Mr. Gorbachev, if there are any, it is difficult to predict how he will play his cards.    One school of thought in Moscow holds that despite Washington's expectations, there was never a firm consensus within the ruling Politburo in favor of a summit in the U.S. to sign an INF treaty. After the September talks, while the Western press loudly trumpeted the advent of a new era in superpower relations, the state-run Soviet press paid little attention to the expected summit.    One Kremlin group that opposes the summit, Western analysts said, argues that a friendly visit to the U.S. by a Communist Party general secretary would undermine the depiction of the U.S., in official Soviet ideology, as the Soviet Union's permanent archenemy. With harder times and more sacrifices ahead as Mr. Gorbachev tries to implement his reform program, some Soviet leaders may believe this isn't the time to weaken such a valuable prop to political stability.    Another school of thought holds that Mr. Gorbachev always planned to hold the summit hostage to a broader strategicarms agreement. The Soviets may have assumed that under duress Mr. Reagan would make concessions in order to lure Mr. Gorbachev to the U.S.    If so, that appears to have been a &quot;fundamental miscalculation,&quot; said Sen. Sam Nunn (D. Ga.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and a frequent critic of the administration's arms-control policies.    &quot;I think that is a mistake, because I don't think we ought to make any concessions in order to have a summit,&quot; said Sen. Nunn of Mr. Gorbachev's latest move. Appearing yesterday on CBS-TV's &quot;Face the Nation,&quot; Sen. Nunn argued: &quot;The summit should not be the end goal of America.&quot; Instead, he said, the U.S.'s goal &quot;ought to be sound arms-control agreements that stand on their own.&quot;    Another possibility is that Mr. Gorbachev and his supporters wanted the summit in the U.S. to sign the INF treaty, but were stopped by conservative opponents. This theory holds that Mr. Gorbachev's detractors scotched the trip to rein in the dynamic, sometimes impulsive leader, to prevent the enhancement of his domestic authority that might result from a foreign-policy success, and to slow down Mr. Gorbachev's drive to curb the power and privileges enjoyed by the enormous class of party apparatchiks.    The official line in Moscow now is that preparations continue for &quot;an extensive agenda for a summit meeting in Washington&quot; this year. But &quot;extensive&quot; means including an outline of an agreement on strategic arms and SDI. Pravda quoted Mr. Gorbachev, who is laboring to keep the ball in the Americans' court, as saying: &quot;I hope that one and a half months are enough to work out and duly prepare all this.&quot;    More likely, both Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Reagan will have to settle for just an INF summit that satisfies neither of them. </TEXT></DOC>