<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880331-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Invisible Man: Bush's Role in Policy Is Difficult to Discern, Reagan Officials Say --- Many People He Works With Aren't Sure of His Beliefs; He Says Advice Is Private --- Soaking Up Data at Meetings </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Henry Kissinger, according to a dinner-party companion, offers this scenario for the 1988 election: The divided Democrats won't be able to agree on any nominee. The Republicans will select Vice President Bush, who will run unopposed -- and lose.    Experienced, likable George Bush has mustered impressive support for his candidacy from a raft of congressmen and governors.    But missing from his list of enthusiasts are many of those who have worked most closely with him in government. In a nutshell, these officials say that they are troubled that the now-certain GOP nominee hasn't left &quot;footprints&quot; -- that is, he has been such a silent figure that they aren't sure what he really believes in or whether he can be a strong leader.    &quot;Strange as it may sound,&quot; says Jeane Kirkpatrick, the former Reagan United Nations ambassador, &quot;after 4 1/2 years of serving on the Reagan administration's senior foreign-policy team and being in meetings with the vice president, I don't feel I know what he feels about most issues in the world, and I don't feel I know where he stands. And that bothers me.&quot;    William Niskanen, who served on the Reagan administration's Council of Economic Advisers, says, &quot;The problem that I worry about with Mr. Bush is I've known him since 1979 and I still don't have much of a sense of what he wants to do as president.&quot;    Admittedly, serving as vice president isn't an easy way to make a mark, but it has been done: Walter Mondale clearly influenced a range of Carter administration policies. By contrast, interviews with more than two dozen former Reagan administration officials find little evidence that Mr. Bush has had much impact on Reagan policies. These findings suggest that in specific assignments -- including leading drug, terrorism and deregulation task forces -- the vice president's performance was competent but undistinguished. Rarely did he have any important effect on administration decision making.    In economic debates, Mr. Bush had little discernible role. Former Budget Director David Stockman tried to enlist his support for a controversial deficit-cutting campaign in 1985 but failed, officials say. Similarly, Mr. Bush didn't weigh in during debates on tax reform, the most significant domestic achievement of the second Reagan term, except when he spoke up in a 1985 meeting to protest proposed cuts in oil-industry tax breaks.    At one early Cabinet-level meeting when interest rates were stubbornly high, recalls a former official, Mr. Bush raised a series of questions that seemed to show little understanding of Federal Reserve operations, then floated the idea of a windfall-profits tax on banks charging excessive interest rates. The idea got nowhere, and Mr. Bush was rarely heard from again, the official adds.    Even in foreign policy, Mr. Bush's claimed area of expertise, his impact is hard to find, and critics assert that he fumbled some of the missions that he did undertake.    Shortly after Israel invaded Lebanon in 1982 to expel the Palestine Liberation Organization, Mr. Bush led an entourage to Saudi Arabia for the late King Khalid's funeral. At the time, the PLO appeared poised to leave Lebanon, but it suddenly hardened its position and refused to go. In his book on Reagan foreign policy, former Secretary of State Alexander Haig blames the foot-dragging on Mr. Bush and former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who was in the funeral delegation. The Bush delegation, Mr. Haig and other officials believe, implied to Saudi officials that the U.S. would stop Israel from entering Beirut to pursue PLO fighters -- a signal that the Saudis passed on to the PLO, easing the pressure on the Palestinians to go. (Bush aides insist that any such signals were sent by Mr. Weinberger, not the vice president.)    Whatever the reasons, &quot;there are a lot of people who've worked with him {Mr. Bush} in the past who don't want to work with him,&quot; maintains Kenneth Adelman, who headed Mr. Reagan's Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. &quot;It's because they think he's light.&quot;    Of course, one particularly important official has a different view: President Reagan. Though officially neutral in the campaign, Mr. Reagan has called Mr. Bush &quot;a part of everything we've been doing&quot; and appears to favor him. And a variety of other Reagan-era officials are Bush enthusiasts -- notably Treasury Secretary James Baker, who ran Mr. Bush's 1980 campaign.    Mr. Bush wouldn't be interviewed on the subject but issued a statement through a spokesman. He frequently insists that while he has attempted as vice president to soak up information at meetings and in briefings, he has offered advice only in private talks with President Reagan. In the statement, he also asserts that he and Mr. Mondale have helped establish a &quot;model&quot; in which the vice president provides &quot;counsel and advice to the president in private and not in groups.&quot; The statement adds: &quot;I think that the system has worked well for Vice President Mondale and for myself in that the president is always secure in his knowledge the information conveyed remains confidential.&quot;    Thus, backers say, it isn't that Mr. Bush has made few contributions to the administration -- they argue in particular that he did a good job representing the U.S. on trips abroad -- but merely that it is hard to document his contributions. Mr. Bush's spokesman, Peter Teeley, maintains that those former Reagan aides who are criticizing Mr. Bush aren't familiar with his performance. &quot;It's obvious that these people had no real involvement with the vice president,&quot; Mr. Teeley says. &quot;They may have been in the administration, but they didn't have any real dealings with him.&quot;    Former Interior Secretary James Watt sees political overtones in some of the criticisms: He argues that some former top Reagan aides don't like Mr. Bush because they never really agreed with the conservative Reagan agenda, while Mr. Bush genuinely embraced it. And former national security adviser Richard Allen says, &quot;The idea that George Bush hasn't contributed to the substance of this administration is preposterous.&quot;    Whatever the reason, five former Reagan Cabinet officers campaigned hard for Mr. Bush's main Republican rival, Robert Dole, before the senator withdrew from the race. They include former Labor Secretary and onetime GOP Chairman Bill Brock, Mr. Haig and, of course, Mr. Dole's wife, Elizabeth. Also prominent as a Dole supporter was former White House Chief of Staff and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, who served with Mr. Bush in the Nixon and Ford administrations.    Politically, Mr. Bush's performance as vice president may not matter much. He is sweeping through Republican primaries largely on the strength of his simple, unblemished loyalty to Mr. Reagan.    But loyalty alone may not adequately explain Mr. Bush's vague vice presidential record. Champions of former Vice President Mondale, as well as Mondale critics like former Attorney General Griffin Bell, say that he was influential in areas as disparate as shaping Middle East policy, pushing the administration ahead on affirmative action and obtaining spending increases for education.    Mr. Bush's history suggests that he rarely leaves a strong personal imprint on jobs. He is credited with restoring morale at the Central Intelligence Agency in the mid-1970s, but he left little substantive legacy. He didn't make much of a mark as U.N. ambassador compared with Adlai Stevenson, Daniel Moynihan and Mrs. Kirkpatrick, or as Republican party chairman compared with Mr. Brock and Robert Strauss, the former Democratic chairman.    The nature and the limits of Mr. Bush's contributions as vice president are illustrated by the task forces he led. He has said that one of the proudest accomplishments of his long career was his leadership of the Reagan administration's South Florida drug task force, set up in 1982 to stanch drug flows. Law-enforcement officials generally agree that the task force did increase seizures and improve coordination among the Coast Guard, Customs Service and other federal agencies.    But the task force's main impact was to shift drug routes away from South Florida, not to reduce the overall flow. And when the administration decided more than three years later to revamp drug-interdiction policy, Attorney General Edwin Meese was named to lead a new National Drug Policy Board, which has been far more active than the vice president's task force.    Mr. Bush's deregulation task force was formed early in the administration to cut government red tape, and it has made recommendations that are considered useful in areas like reducing paper work and deregulating natural gas. But its efforts were completely overshadowed by the administration's big budget- and tax-cutting drives.    &quot;I wouldn't say any major initiatives came forward from the task force,&quot; says Lawrence Kudlow, a former associate director of the Office of Management and Budget.    The vice president's task force on terrorism produced what Mr. Bush has called the best report ever written on terrorism. But its key recommendation -- that the U.S. pre-position anti-terrorism forces in some spots around the world -- was already being put into effect. And at a crucial meeting in the White House Roosevelt Room in late 1985 to discuss implementing the report's recommendations, officials say that Mr. Bush let an aide run the proceedings and failed to resolve a dispute over whether the State Department or the Pentagon should control the U.S. response to terrorist incidents.    Even more damaging, while the task force was recommending against dealing with terrorists, Mr. Bush knew that the administration was selling arms to Iran in hopes that Tehran would help win freedom for American hostages in Lebanon.    Mr. Bush was given a vehicle for making an impact on national-security issues early in the administration when President Reagan named him -- over Mr. Haig's strong protests -- to lead a &quot;crisis management group.&quot; But the group hasn't met since the 1983 Grenada invasion, Mr. Bush's aides say.    &quot;I didn't see any evidence of Bush being involved in foreign policy, at least where I sat,&quot; maintains Gen. Bernard Rogers, who served as the commander of North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces for most of the Reagan years.    Mr. Bush did fill in for the president at one crucial juncture: He presided at a 1984 meeting at which the administration decided to pull U.S. Marines out of Lebanon. Mr. Reagan was flying to a California vacation, Lebanese army troops were losing control of Beirut and Congress was clamoring for a withdrawal. So Mr. Bush, whose aides say he favored getting the Marines out, led a meeting where officials decided to recommend such an action. The vice president telephoned Mr. Reagan and obtained his approval. Then Mr. Bush and the other officials drafted a statement that, rather than simply announcing that the Marines were being withdrawn, asserted that the Marines were being &quot;redeployed&quot; to ships off the Lebanese coast.    Within the administration, though, the decision wasn't universally popular. Secretary of State George Shultz, who was traveling in Latin America at the time, learned about it in a makeshift communications shack in Grenada. Former aides say that he was deeply distressed, convinced that the hasty withdrawal represented a surrender to domestic political pressure and made the U.S. seem unreliable.    The vice president's most important contribution to Reagan administration foreign policy efforts may have come on his numerous trips abroad, when he sometimes had to explain American policy in delicate situations. He made two early trips to China in which he soothed Chinese anger over Mr. Reagan's pro-Taiwan sentiments. In a tense 1983 meeting, he told Salvadoran military officers to stop condoning right-wing death squads and did &quot;an absolute dynamite job,&quot; says Langhorne A. Motley, an assistant secretary of state who accompanied him.    Mr. Bush's aides also say that he played a quiet but important role in June 1986 in prodding President Reagan to end intra-administration feuding that was holding up progress on arms control, although other officials involved in the issue say that they couldn't detect Mr. Bush's impact. Bush partisans say that the vice president also helped moderate the administration's reaction to the Soviets' downing of a Korean airliner in 1983.    And some former aides give Mr. Bush good marks for helping lower a few Japanese trade barriers. When President Reagan returned from a trip to Japan in 1983, he asked Mr. Bush to clear up some festering trade grievances. The vice president dispatched two trade experts to Tokyo with firm orders to stay until they had derailed some proposed Japanese legislation. The officials succeeded in stopping the most offensive aspects of the laws, which would have facilitated copying of American computer software and severely limited U.S. companies' participation in Japanese telecommunications projects. &quot;Had Bush not been there, it's likely those bills would have passed,&quot; asserts Clyde Prestowitz, a former Commerce Department aide.    The efficient Bush presidential campaign has shown another positive side of Mr. Bush: When he has a big political organization of his own to run, he effectively delegates responsibility and oversees a smooth operation. Thus, many Republican leaders figure that as president he might develop a more substantial record than the one he has assembled as vice president. </TEXT></DOC>