<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BORK SOUGHT to reassure senators that he respects Supreme Court precedents.    During the first day of Judiciary Committee hearings on Bork's nomination to the high court, much of the questioning centered on the judge's criticism of Supreme Court decisions that found a constitutional right to privacy implied, although not specifically mentioned, in the Bill of Rights. Bork didn't back away from his legal positions. Instead, he explained the ideas that form his views, pointing out when possible that other constitutional scholars or Supreme Court justices share his criticisms.    In his opening statement, Bork said that he &quot;is neither liberal nor conservative,&quot; and that it isn't a judge's role to &quot;legislate a social agenda.&quot;    ---   REAGAN MET with Shevardnadze to discuss a superpower arms-control treaty.    The president and the Soviet foreign minister held Oval Office talks in an effort to conclude an accord to abolish intermediaterange nuclear missiles. It would be the first-ever pact requiring the dismantling of an entire class of weapons. Shevardnadze also delivered a letter to Reagan from Gorbachev, and U.S. aides said the message termed a superpower summit a reasonable step. Shevardnadze arrived at the White House after nearly three hours of talks with Shultz, which are to resume today.    Shultz and Shevardnadze signed an accord that provides for a new superpower communications channel aimed at averting accidental nuclear war.    ---   Cancer researchers found that an experimental vaccine, made of proteins, increased the survival rates of a group of lung-cancer patients. The findings by U.S. and Canadian scientists bolster hopes that a new form of cancer therapy, called immunotherapy, may be in the offing.    ---   Perez de Cuellar concluded a four-day peace mission to the Persian Gulf region, with Iran and Iraq apparently still wide apart on terms for a cease-fire in their seven-year-old war. The U.N. secretary-general is expected to report back to the Security Council today about his discussions with officials in Tehran and Baghdad.    ---   The State Department said it would close the PLO's Washington office. A spokesman said the department ordered the closure of the office, which was opened in 1978, within 30 days to demonstrate U.S. concern about terrorism.    ---   Europe's Ariane rocket was launched from French Guiana and put two satellites into orbit. The mission, the first flight of a European Space Agency rocket since an abortive liftoff in May 1986, was delayed for nearly two hours to check a possible fuel problem.    ---   The Senate Judiciary panel approved the nomination of federal Judge William Sessions as director of the FBI. The move by the committee, which said the judge's record &quot;demonstrates a sensitivity to individual rights and civil liberties,&quot; set the stage for speedy confirmation by the full Senate.    ---   House GOP leader Michel plans to seek new aid for Nicaragua's rebels, although he likely will have trouble getting the proposal approved while attempts are made to implement a peace plan in Central America. He said the aid would be a stop-gap measure, designed to keep money flowing to the Contras after funding expires Sept. 30.    ---   Austria assured the Reagan administration that it will enact tougher sanctions against the illegal diversion of strategic goods to the Soviet bloc. The move, in response to a longstanding U.S. complaint, could improve Vienna's access to U.S. high technology.    ---   Pope John Paul II urged Roman Catholics to cling to &quot;a responsible moral life&quot; even if it means &quot;being out of step with the majority opinion.&quot; The remarks were made in Los Angeles, the nation's largest archdiocese. The pontiff later addressed a group of 6,000 young people and linked teen-age suicide with spiritual emptiness.    ---   West German computer hackers tapped an international network used by NASA and obtained data on space shuttle projects and rocket boosters, a London newspaper and West German TV reported. The unidentified computer enthusiasts reportedly had access, gained through a flaw in the electronic security system, between May and this month.    ---   The Senate Appropriations panel cleared changes in the federal nuclear waste program as part of a bill allocating an estimated $15.96 billion to energy and water programs. Under the legislation, Nevada would be left as the most likely location for a permanent underground waste repository.    ---   Two Argentine cabinet ministers quit, bringing to four -- or half the eight-member cabinet -- the number of ministers to resign following election losses last week. President Alfonsin's ruling party was set back by the Peronists in the parliamentary elections.    ---   South Korea's Roh was assaulted on a Washington street by a demonstrator critical of the Seoul government. The ruling party leader reportedly was unhurt. Roh, a presidential candidate, said in a speech before the National Press Club that democracy in South Korea &quot;must be protected from . . . extremists of the right and left.&quot;    ---   A presidential AIDS panel dismissed its executive director, saying organizational problems and a lack of staff leadership were causing delays in the commission's work on the disease. A panel member said Dr. Eugene Mayberry, the chairman, dismissed the director, Linda Sheaffer, last week.    ---   Five Arab defendants pleaded innocent in a Pakistani court to charges of hijacking and murder in the September 1986 airport seizure of a Pan Am jumbo jet in Karachi. Twenty-one people were killed and nearly 200 were wounded in the incident.    ---   Members of Congress called for compensation for Vietnam veterans who claim to have been made ill by exposure to Agent Orange. Announcing plans for legislation to facilitate payments, the congressmen also faulted the VA's handling of scientific studies into the herbicide's effects.    ---   Indian peacekeeping troops fired at gunmen of the Tamil Tigers separatist group that massacred at least 75 people in Sri Lanka over the weekend. One man was wounded, and the troops took him and two others into custody, police in the eastern Batticaloa district reported. </TEXT></DOC>