<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Besieged Backstop:A Liquidator's RoleIs Vital as FDIC TriesTo Avert Cash Squeeze---Bigger, Costlier Bank FailuresMean Trouble for Agency;Reserve for Losses Climbs---Peddling a Surplus Strip Mall---By Jeff BaileyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> CLEARWATER, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A.J. Felton drives a long white Cadillac, chews constantly on a big cigar and has some incredible real-estate deals to offer.    There is a gravel pit that Mr. Felton figures could make a swell garbage dump once all the gravel is out. Or a time-share condominium project gone bust. Then there is a nearly deserted shopping mall, empty except for a saloon and a used-clothing shop -- for sale cheap, 50 cents on the dollar.    Mr. Felton, in fact, has a quarter of a billion dollars of property to unload, but he isn't one of the overenthusiastic developers who built the Tampa Bay area into a glut. He is a liquidator for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., disposing of the shaky assets of failed Park Bank here in one of the agency's biggest liquidations ever. Mr. Felton's hard-sell approach is part of an agencywide effort to ward off a cash squeeze as bank failures grow more numerous, bigger and more costly.    To preserve its precious cash reserves, the FDIC's liquidation division is turning into a high-speed merchant banker of junk loans and unwanted property. The agency is liquidating banks faster and taking bigger losses up front to avoid holding on to assets that often keep falling in value. It is keeping more failing banks open by putting its own capital into them. And it is hiring outside experts to help keep up with all the work.    &quot;We're trying to keep our head above water,&quot; says Thomas P. Horton, an FDIC budget official.    The continued growth and liquidity of the deposit-insurance fund, which stands at $18.4 billion, have been among the few reassuring trends in a U.S. banking industry riddled with losses from energy, agriculture, real-estate and Latin American loans.    But the fund, created in the Depression to protect small depositors from bank failures, has begun to take a beating, raising questions about its adequacy as a backstop to the banking system. (FDIC-insured depositors have nothing to worry about; even if the fund ran into serious trouble, the U.S. Treasury would stand behind it.) The FDIC is saddled with $10.8 billion in loans and properties from failed or assisted banks, up more than fivefold from 1982, and that requires an even faster-growing reserve for losses on those assets.    &quot;If a bank had that kind of growth in that period of time, regulators would be all over it,&quot; says former FDIC Chairman William M. Isaac. &quot;There's no way you can manage that kind of growth.&quot;    Bank failures are the main factor in the deposit-insurance fund's performance, and their rising cost is taking a heavy toll. After more than 50 years of consistent year-to-year increases, the fund may actually decline this year for the first time, FDIC Chairman L. William Seidman acknowledges. The fund earned just $164 million in 1987's first half. That follows an equally modest $297 million for all of 1986 and a healthy $1.4 billion for all of 1985.    The FDIC's gross income is expected to be about $3.4 billion this year, with half coming from assessments on member banks and half from interest income on the fund's investments. But bank failures are expected to soar to about 200 from 138 in 1986.    More disturbing is the trend toward larger failures. Combined assets of failed and assisted banks more than doubled to $8.1 billion last year, according to Federal Reserve Board data compiled by Veribanc Inc., a Woburn, Mass. consulting firm. Yet FDIC officials acknowledge they haven't budgeted for a major bank failure in 1987. &quot;There is no super mega-deal in there,&quot; says Steven A. Seelig, a top liquidation official.    However, the FDIC is expected to assist in a takeover, now being negotiated, of First City Bancorp. of Houston, a major energy lender that has said it is searching for a buyer or partner to shore up its capital. The agency's cost could be $1 billion or more, and an FDIC official says that whether the fund shrinks this year or not depends in large part on First City.    Meanwhile, about 20% of the nation's banks are losing money, a fivefold jump since 1979. The recent increase in interest rates will further weaken many troubled borrowers. The regional economic downturns killing off banks have abated only slightly. And federal and state regulators are behind schedule in examining hundreds of banks.    What's more, the FDIC's sister agency, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., is broke and undoubtedly will need assistance beyond the rescue plan just passed by Congress. At the least, the FDIC is expected to help out by insuring deposits at some thrifts healthy enough to convert to FDIC protection. That will lower the ratio of FDIC reserves to total industry deposits.    And the FDIC's auditor, Frederick D. Wolf, the director of accounting and financial management at the government's General Accounting Office, worries that Congress, under pressure to hold down the federal budget deficit, will at some point turn to the FDIC fund to help bail out the savings and loan fund. Some banking officials support a merger of the funds, though the FSLIC's huge deferred losses could easily bury the FDIC.    To avoid being swamped, the FDIC is counting on liquidators like A.J. Felton. A former vice president of General Motors Corp.'s big finance subsidiary, Mr. Felton, 69 years old, is one of a growing number of retired financial executives the agency has recruited to help it stave off a cash squeeze.    After retiring in 1983, Mr. Felton says, he sat home in suburban Detroit long enough to drive himself and his wife, Jeanne, &quot;crazy.&quot; She saw a newspaper ad for liquidators, and he joined the FDIC at its big Knoxville, Tenn., office. When regulators prepared to close Park Bank in Clearwater last year, they asked Mr. Felton to move here to head the liquidation. The bank was closed on a Friday and its charter and better-grade loans were sold that weekend to Chase Manhattan Corp., which reopened it as a new entity after the weekend.    Mr. Felton's effort to dispose of the remaining $288 million in loans, mostly bad real-estate loans, shows why the FDIC faces an uphill struggle in warding off a cash crunch. &quot;It's going to be a long haul,&quot; Mr. Felton says. The FDIC figures the job will last four years.    Right now, Mr. Felton, a balding man with a barrel chest gone slightly southward, is suffering through his second sweltering summer in central Florida. He confides that being around so many old people depresses him sometimes, but he doesn't act dispirited. In fact, he rarely sits still, yanking an unlit cigar from his mouth just long enough to swallow another cupful of coffee. The local real-estate market, however, isn't nearly so active: An office-space glut allowed Mr. Felton to find fully furnished offices for his staff of 70 just days after the bank closing.    He expects to recover about 60 cents on the dollar in disposing of Park Bank's assets. But could he get that today? &quot;Hell, no,&quot; he says. So far, his staff has collected just $70 million.    Mr. Felton is doing everything he can to move things along. His strategy is to avoid the legal hassles of foreclosure and instead talk borrowers into giving the FDIC their projects voluntarily. &quot;I guess we could foreclose on all of them,&quot; he says. &quot;Most have spent their last dollar.&quot; Still, many resist. &quot;They think, given enough time, they've got the best piece of property in North America,&quot; he says.    He keeps in regular contact with investors from as far away as New York, Minnesota and Canada in hopes of selling property. And when they come to town, he puts them in the hands of his best salesman, account officer Leo Pelek. Says Mr. Felton, &quot;Leo has never heard a discouraging word.&quot;    The well-tanned Mr. Pelek has a smooth pitch. &quot;You've just got to close your eyes and visualize,&quot; he tells potential buyers of a mostly vacant strip shopping mall that Mr. Felton concedes is probably his worst asset.    When times got tough, the mall's developer sold adjacent lots that now house an auto-repair shop and yet another strip mall that hides much of the original one. A saloon sits quietly at one end of the original mall, and used trousers flap in the breeze outside a consignment clothing store -- &quot;one of those you-bring-in-your-stuff, we-sell-it places,&quot; Mr. Pelek explains cheerfully.    Unloading such assets is tough. The FDIC was willing to settle for half the mall's cost of about $4 million but found no takers. Price wasn't even an issue with one investor, Mr. Felton says: &quot;He said he wasn't interested at any price.&quot; The liquidator reluctantly agreed in recent weeks to an offer of $1.6 million.    A recent auction of real estate failed to attract a single bid, though Mr. Felton says it did generate some subsequent offers. In one recent deal, Mr. Felton was saddled with a 50-unit condominium project, built to sell for as much as half a million dollars per unit, in a fishing area where other, more spartan projects were selling for one-fifth of that. Mr. Felton is negotiating to sell cheap and, in return, take a piece of future profits the buyer might make. That is an increasingly common move by the FDIC.    The FDIC, in fact, is willing to consider just about anything. &quot;The whole portfolio is for sale,&quot; says Mr. Seelig, the liquidation official in Washington, of his $12 billion in assets. Though some Wall Street firms have approached him about mass purchases, they quickly lose interest once they see the quality of the loans, he says.    When the FDIC is able to keep a bank open with an infusion of capital, that takes far less cash than liquidation does. Continental Illinois Corp. in Chicago got $1 billion in FDIC money, enabling the agency to keep more than three times that amount in shaky loans out of the FDIC's hands. Similarly, the agency figures that a liquidation of BancTexas Group Inc. would have cost it several times the $150 million it spent helping to recapitalize the Dallas bank.    The agency has other options. For example, it sells a failed bank's assets to another institution whenever it can. But many bank failures defy such cash-saving solutions. Either the bank's operations or its loan portfolios aren't attractive enough to justify a new lease on life. In that case, it must be partly or totally liquidated, and that involves a payoff to depositors -- a huge cash outlay.    This year the agency will have to increase its collections by 50% just to keep its portfolio of assets under liquidation from growing. That means selling some loans at big discounts to move them out fast.    Last year the FDIC disposed of the $89 million in assets of one failed bank, First National Bank andamp; Trust Co. of Enid, Okla., in just 60 days. As soon as the bank was closed on Thursday, Nov. 6, FDIC staffers began rounding up officials of nearby banks and finance companies for a weekend sale of $24 million in installment loans.    &quot;It was a manhunt to get people in there,&quot; says Paul G. Heafy, the FDIC's chief liquidator in the state, with staff members calling people at home and paging them in airports.    The phone call that sealed the sale came while Mr. Heafy was watching a Monday-night football game on television. Next he called in bankers to bid on commercial loans. &quot;We handed each of them {a computer printout of the loans} and one of those colored pens,&quot; he recalls, &quot;and said, 'Color in the ones you want.'&quot; Those sessions occurred weekly until the loans were all gone.    Mr. Heafy sold some extremely distressed loans -- &quot;people you'll never hear from&quot; -- for one cent on the dollar. He carried on an auction of the bank's real estate during a blizzard, taking what he could get from the few bidders who fought their way through the snow. And he timed an auction of the 90-year-old bank's furniture, paintings, equipment and even its Christmas tree for the holiday shopping season. &quot;A lot of people did their Christmas shopping at our auction,&quot; he says.    When it was all over, the FDIC had lost about $25 million. And the liquidators moved on to the next bank. </TEXT></DOC>