<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880811-0115 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Can Bush Run Outside? </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   George Bush's credentials as a Washington insider are impeccable. The election's outcome, however, may turn more on whether George Bush can run to the outside.    These thoughts occurred as we tried to figure out Michael Dukakis's 17-point lead in the post-convention polls. A Gallup Poll this week trims the Dukakis lead to seven points, but the quizzical fact remains that a candidate from Massachusetts about whom most people knew virtually nothing had a large lead two weeks ago over the Vice President.    Since Mike Dukakis said little concrete during the dwarf primaries and still hasn't, what does he have going for him? On reflection, it's largely the same thing Jimmy Carter used against Jerry Ford. It's the same thing Ronald Reagan used against Jimmy Carter. He looks acceptable enough on TV, and his most recent office was in Boston. Michael Dukakis, in short, is the outside-the-Beltway candidate.    Behold George Bush, the quintessential member of the Washington establishment. The Washington Post is currently unspooling a long tome on Mr. Bush's life, which only someone at the beach would have time to read. But the photos and headlines tell the story -- George Bush with LBJ, George Bush with Richard Nixon, George Bush as CIA Director. Mr. Bush isn't from Texas or Connecticut or Kennebunkport. He's from the Beltway.    Voters don't want a candidate who knows how to run with Washington; they want a candidate who will run at Washington. If they wanted a candidate adept at working with such eminent institutions as the House and Senate, Bob Dole would now be running for President.    The easiest way for Mr. Bush to grasp this problem is simply to look at his boss. Ronald Reagan has sat at that desk at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue for eight years and he's still as much an outsider to the Washington establishment as the day he arrived. Only this past Monday Mr. Reagan went to the National Governors' meeting in Cincinnati and denounced Washington. And the governors, including Democrats, applauded and praised his speech.    Now, Mr. Bush's role as the Beltway candidate, while understandable, is in many ways a bum rap. As we saw with Jimmy Carter, electing an unknown governor is a sure formula for turning the whole government over to the inmates. And on occasion, Mr. Bush has shown that he can go outside. For example, he's dismissed the National Economic Commission, an establishment vehicle seeking a phony consensus for a tax increase. His remarkable initial response to the plant-closings juggernaut -- &quot;I'm for plant openings&quot; -- was the basis for elaborating a substantive Bush vision of continued economic growth, though he ran off the field when the consensus closed in.    Yet to succeed, Mr. Bush needs to convey -- in his vice-presidential selection, his acceptance speech, the themes of his campaign -- the notion that he's against government-as-usual. That he doesn't want to continue to roll with the consensus. That he wants to continue, if in his own more cerebral way, the Reagan legacy of confronting the system, of shaking up the Beltway.    The biggest target in that town is Congress -- the people who can't pass budgets on time, who do pass giant continuing resolutions packed with pork while saying the line-item veto would give the President too much power, the Speaker who thinks independent prosecutors are good enough for everyone else but not for him, the grandstanders who thought they'd parade Ollie North in shame before the people and ended up getting punched out themselves on national TV, the PAC-supported 98% House that hypocritically exempts itself from the coverage of federal laws that it makes every other American obey.    One member of this august Washington body had a high time at the Democratic Convention in Atlanta making fun of Mr. Bush's name. About 40 years ago, Mr. Bush's own party's Washington insiders thought they'd also win the White House by laughing a presidential candidate out of town. That Democrat, down in the polls, ran to the outside and won. &quot;Give 'em hell, George&quot; has a nice ring to it. Just saying it, though, won't win. George Bush will have to do it. </TEXT></DOC>