<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890901-0099 </DOCNO><DD> = 890901 </DD><AN> 890901-0099. </AN><HL> Capital Force:@  Bob Mosbacher Wields@  Rare Degree of Power@  For a Commerce Chief@  ---@  An Old Pal of Bush, He Wins@  Key Export-Policy Battles@  In Supporting U.S. Trade@  ---@  Herbert Hoover and a Hint@  ----@  By Peter Truell@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/01/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> BIOGRAPHY (BIO) </IN><GV> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </GV><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Except for the vice presidency, the job of commerce secretary usually is just about the most important sounding but uninfluential post in the nation's capital. In most administrations, the commerce secretaries have been figureheads, bit players to the secretaries of state, defense and treasury in setting and executing policy. Though the Commerce Department has many roles, such as collecting economic statistics, its views traditionally haven't counted for much.    That perception may soon change.    The views of the current commerce secretary, Robert Mosbacher, seem to be counting for a great deal. He benefits from the fact that the Commerce Department is more in the limelight today. Promoting exports and making U.S. companies more competitive internationally have risen in the list of the nation's priorities as it struggles to cut its huge trade deficit and retain its economic leadership.    But more important, the 62-year-old former oil man, whose net worth is estimated at more than $200 million, has as much White House clout as anyone in the cabinet. In an administration loaded with George Bush's friends, Mr. Mosbacher is one of his two or three closest pals, along with Secretary of State James Baker and Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady.    And Mr. Mosbacher isn't shy about dropping the president's name -- so much so that some of his colleagues already seem wary of his close ties to Mr. Bush. &quot;At cabinet meetings, he's like the 800-pound gorilla,&quot; says a senior official in the Reagan administration. &quot;He can sit where he wants.&quot;    Although Mr. Mosbacher comes across as easygoing, he has already won some significant battles, especially against Defense Secretary Richard Cheney.    Mr. Mosbacher carried the day in a dispute over terms for the joint development with Japan of a new jet fighter, the FSX, which the Pentagon opposed on national-security grounds. At a crucial point in the deliberations, shortly before President Bush's final decision, Mr. Mosbacher flew down to Texas with him and, during the trip, lobbied him. The terms to which the administration eventually agreed were those advocated by Mr. Mosbacher.    In another incident, Mr. Cheney publicly complained, also on national-security grounds, about a Mosbacher decision, announced a day before, to decontrol many computer exports. The White House supported Mr. Mosbacher. Mr. Cheney backed down.    And pressure from Mr. Mosbacher helped push the administration into reviewing its policy on mergers and acquisitions. Some big companies argue that the U.S. must relax its antitrust policy to remain competitive in new, capital-intensive industries, such as high technology.    But in pushing his views, Mr. Mosbacher has done little to avoid the appearance of being somewhat cozy with big business -- and has stirred up some criticism.    For example, he recently backed Motorola Inc. in a trade spat with Japan. Michael P. Galvin, a major contributor and fund-raiser for Mr. Bush's presidential campaign, is a former Motorola executive; in fact, Mr. Galvin's father, Robert, heads the big electronics concern. Today, Michael Galvin is an acting assistant secretary at Commerce.    Or take the personal-computer industry. For years, the American Electronics Association has been lobbying for the government to ease export controls on PCs. When Mr. Mosbacher finally opened the door in July, the order was signed by James LeMunyon, the deputy assistant secretary for export administration. Only a few weeks earlier, working six blocks away, Mr. LeMunyon had been the trade group's lobbyist on the issue.    There's nothing illegal in either of these potential conflicts of interest. Michael Galvin recuses himself from any actions involving Motorola, officials say. And Mr. LeMunyon's role in the PC issue was judged lawful by agency attorneys.    But to many, even the appearance of a conflict is undesirable. The PC-export decision &quot;isn't illegal, but it stinks,&quot; says Frank Gaffney, director of the Center for Security Policy, a Washington think tank worried that the Soviets would get access to more-powerful computers.    Mr. Mosbacher doesn't care about such appearances, however. He believes that any action that benefits U.S. business in an increasingly global economy enhances national security. And in this, he is flexible. Where free trade benefits U.S. industry, he is a free trader. Where other industries are helped by protectionism, he's a protectionist. Where government intervention provides a solution, he is an interventionist.    And where friendships and connections come into play, he is a crony capitalist. Through the years, he has had notable cronies. For many years, in fact, the Bush, Baker and Mosbacher families lived within a two-mile radius in Houston.    &quot;It's hard to believe the same ZIP code would produce all these people,&quot; says James Bayless, a Washington lawyer whose family hails from that same clique. Mr. Mosbacher's valuable friendship with Mr. Baker is evident on his office wall at Commerce, where he displays a framed Time magazine cover of Mr. Baker bearing the headline &quot;A gentleman who hates to lose.&quot; Mr. Baker presented the picture after adding an inscription: &quot;To Bob, who hates to lose even worse.&quot;    As Mr. Bush's national finance chairman, the personable, glad-handing Mr. Mosbacher raised millions of dollars for the presidential campaign. The two native Easterners had become fast friends in the 1950s, when both were building their fortunes in the clubby, trust-your-buddy world of the Texas oil and gas industry. Like Mr. Bush, Mr. Mosbacher came from a wealthy family. After he graduated from Washington andamp; Lee University, his father, a successful New York investor, staked him in the business. The son then built up one of the larger private oil and gas companies in Texas.    Even then, Mr. Mosbacher and Mr. Bush held remarkably similar political ideas -- a pragmatic, less ideological brand of Republicanism. &quot;Bob stayed pretty much behind Bush. They were strong Ford people. Reagan upset them,&quot; says E.O. Buck, a Houston banker who has known Mr. Mosbacher for years.    The commerce secretary, in fact, sees possible future parallels in his career and the president's. When Mr. Bush dropped by his department, Mr. Mosbacher pointed to the portrait of one-time Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover hanging in his office and reminded Mr. Bush of the job to which that illustrious engineer eventually rose.    Mr. Mosbacher's blindness to ideological compass points enables him to draw power from yet-another source: congressional Democrats. Among his social friends here are Rep. John Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who heads the powerful House Commerce Committee, and Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, the Senate's most forceful voice on trade issues.    What Mr. Mosbacher is doing with his power is nothing short of radical in a government that has long tried to eschew the coddling of peacetime industry. Mr. Mosbacher believes that if promoting global competitiveness requires a federal policy toward industry, so be it. He has advocated &quot;business-led industry-government partnerships,&quot; particularly for development of high-definition television and other technology industries.    That approach, he said in a recent interview, is applicable to &quot;all sorts of areas: space and aviation, composite-wing development, the next generation of planes and rockets, biochemistry and many other areas I haven't even thought of.&quot; He has also proposed relaxing antitrust rules, particularly to encourage such joint ventures as the newly established consortium, led by International Business Machines Corp., for developing advanced computer memory chips. In addition, he has vigorously used the nation's anti-dumping laws. When Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co. recently began stonewalling on the department's request for reams of information on mobile-telephone pricing, the agency simply made use of the evidence advanced by American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and Comdial Corp., a Charlottesville, Va., telephone-equipment company. Matsushita could face heavy penalties.    Mr. Mosbacher's intervention against the Japanese has been so forceful that his third wife, Georgette, was recently asked on a business trip to Japan how she could live with such a tough guy.    His unrelenting pursuit of interventionist strategies has run afoul of some other administration officials. After hearing of his comments to Congress on business-government partnerships, Budget Director Richard Darman and Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Michael Boskin &quot;went ballistic,&quot; according to an administration official. The two men complained to White House Chief of Staff John Sununu, who called a meeting at which Mr. Mosbacher was dressed down. That cooled the commerce secretary's rhetoric but didn't change it fundamentally.    Mr. Mosbacher has suffered other defeats. Steel import quotas weren't extended for as long as he and the nation's major steelmakers wanted. In implementing tough provisions of the 1988 Trade Act, the president didn't come out as strongly against Japan and other nations with trade barriers as the secretary had sought.    Similarly, Mr. Mosbacher's initiative to encourage U.S. development of HDTV was quietly slapped down by the administration. A six-page draft of a report on encouraging the industry drew &quot;hundreds of pages of comment,&quot; according to Wayne L. Berman, a former lobbyist now serving as Mr. Mosbacher's personal counselor. &quot;It was a bit rough around the edges,&quot; Mr. Berman concedes.    Such disappointments don't greatly disturb Mr. Mosbacher, an eager team player and former Olympic sailing champion (whose brother successfully defended the America's Cup). Mr. Mosbacher says he is happy to scrap one day and make up the next. And his victories have been more notable than his defeats.    At least one friend in the Texas oil business expects Mr. Mosbacher to stretch his influence into an area beyond his department's traditional domain: the energy industry. &quot;We're going to have an energy problem in two to three years. Mosbacher knows that, Bush knows that,&quot; the friend says. Reminded that Mr. Mosbacher has recused himself from decisions involving the oil industry, the friend responds, &quot;Yes, but in those private conversations with the president&quot; he'll get his view across. </TEXT></DOC>