<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861208-0037 </DOCNO><HL> Poindexter Approved Transfer of ProfitsFrom Arms Sales to Contras, Sources Say---By John Walcott and Jane MayerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM FREST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Former National Security Adviser John Poindexter approved transferring profits from U.S. arms sales to Iran to anti-Sandinista rebels in Nicaragua, according to sources familiar with the secret operation.    In addition, the sources said, President Reagan explicitly gave advance approval in August 1985 for Israeli sales of U.S. arms to Iran. The sources said Mr. Reagan promised to replace the weapons taken from Israeli arsenals for the sales. The Reagan administration previously hadn't acknowledged giving advance approval for arms sales to Iran before last January.    Mr. Reagan authorized the Israeli sales after a secret exchange of messages with Hojatoleslam Hashemi Rafsanjani, the speaker of the Iranian parliament, and after a White House meeting with his top national security advisers, the sources said.    Other new information suggests that Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey, Secretary of State George Shultz and other senior officials solicited contributions to Nicaraguan rebels, or Contras, from the Asian nation of Brunei and from Saudi Arabia and other foreign governments.    White House officials continued to deny yesterday that Vice Adm. Poindexter had informed his superiors about the diversion of funds to the Contras, which could have violated a federal law requiring that all profits from CIA covert operations be paid to the U.S. Treasury. White House spokesman Dan Howard neither confirmed nor denied that Mr. Poindexter approved the secret Contra funding, and he cautioned that the entire matter is under investigation.    But Mr. Howard did suggest that the latest revelation about Mr. Poindexter's role was &quot;not a contradiction of what Attorney General (Edwin) Meese said&quot; in his initial briefing on the affair. Vice Adm. Poindexter resigned following disclosure of the diversion of funds to the Contras.    &quot;From what John (Poindexter) told Meese, he knew or suspected -- was aware -- that something like this was going on,&quot; Mr. Howard said. &quot;The reason he resigned was because he failed to inform his superiors.&quot;    The president, referring to the Iran-Contra affair in his Saturday radio address, finally followed the advice offered him by many top aides for weeks, and admitted that &quot;the execution of these policies was flawed, and mistakes were made.&quot; But the president defended his Iran initiative, repeating assertions that it was designed to build a bridge to &quot;responsible moderates&quot; in Iran. And he vowed that &quot;I will set things right.&quot;    Senate Republican leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.), speaking yesterday on CBS's &quot;Face the Nation,&quot; called Mr. Reagan's speech &quot;a big step in the right direction.&quot; Sen. Dole suggested that the president summon his former aides into his office and tell them: &quot;You tell me what happened so I can tell the American people.&quot;    But the political furor over the administration's policies showed no signs of abating. Mr. Howard denounced an assertion by House Speaker Thomas O'Neill (D., Mass.) in &quot;Washington Jewish Week&quot; that President Reagan knew about the diversion of Iranian funds, which he described as &quot;probably one judgment the president made on his own.&quot; Mr. O'Neill claimed to have no special information on the matter.    &quot;It's a completely irresponsible statement which has no basis in fact,&quot; replied Mr. Howard.    Knowledgeable current and former administration officials said Mr. Reagan overruled two of his top advisers and made the controversial decision to sell U.S. arms to Iran -- despite evidence that Iran paid for the 1983 bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in Beirut that killed 258 servicemen.    The Miami Herald yesterday reported that the National Security Agency intercepted communications revealing that Iran financed the bombing with more than $1 million. U.S. intelligence sources have long believed Iran was involved in the bombing, but they have previously said that a captured terrorist told Lebanese officials that Syrian intelligence agents actually planned and directed the attack.    Administration officials say Iranian support for terrorism has abated since the Beirut bombing, noting that Iranian officials interceded in June 1985 to help free four American hostages from a hijacked TWA jetliner. The hostages were being held by a pro-Iranian terrorist group in Lebanon.    Mr. Reagan subsequently sent a message to Mr. Rafsanjani, the speaker of Iran's parliament, thanking him and expressing interest in improving U.S. relations with Iran, according to current and former administration officials. The message was delivered by Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, these sources said.    Administration officials confirmed a report in the current issue of Newsweek magazine that Mr. Rafsanjani replied through intermediaries that if the U.S. was serious about improving relations with Iran, it should release some of the weapons that were purchased by the late Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlevi but never were delivered to the Ayatollah Khomeini's regime.    Those weapons, stored at New Jersey's McGuire Air Force Base, included Hawk and TOW missiles, and spare parts for F-4 and F-14 jet fighters, according to Pentagon officials. Such weapons ultimately were among those transferred, although it isn't known if they were the ones stored at McGuire.    Also during July 1985, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane received parallel signals from Iran through David Kimche, then the director general of the Israeli Foreign Ministry. Mr. McFarlane told the Senate Intelligence Committee last week that he reported the signals to the president, who at the time was recuperating from surgery, according to sources familiar with his testimony.    Mr. McFarlane told the Senate committee that he and Mr. Kimche met again in August. This time, the Israeli diplomat said the Iranians wanted U.S. arms, and he suggested that Israel could supply them if the administration agreed to the sales and promised to replace the weapons in Israeli stockpiles, according to the sources.    Mr. McFarlane told lawmakers that he reported this at a meeting attended by the president, Vice President George Bush, White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, CIA Director Casey and Secretary of State Shultz. Messrs. Shultz and Weinberger opposed arms sales to Iran, but Mr. Casey, Mr. Regan and the president favored them as a way to win the release of the hostages and to cultivate Mr. Rafsanjani and other moderates in the Iranian leadership, Mr. McFarlane reportedly told the intelligence committee.    Mr. McFarlane said the president then directed him to tell the Israelis to sell some defensive weapons to Iran, and to assure them that the U.S. would replace all the U.S.-made weapons they sold to Iran, according to the sources familiar with his testimony.    In September, Israel sent 508 U.S.-made TOW anti-tank missiles to Tabriz in northwestern Iran after Mr. Reagan authorized the move. Shortly thereafter, one hostage, Rev. Benjamin Weir, was released in Lebanon.    But even before the president approved sales of U.S. arms to Iran, administration officials claim, CIA Director Casey tacitly condoned smaller Israeli shipments of non-American weapons to Iran in an effort to win the release of hostages in Lebanon -- especially William Buckley, the CIA station chief in Beirut who had been abducted in March 1984.    In August 1985, these sources said, the Israelis sent a small shipment of Soviet-made arms captured from the Palestine Liberation Organization to Iran. But the sources said the arms, sent with the CIA's knowledge, were seized by revolutionary guardsmen at the Tehran airport, and Mr. Buckley wasn't released.    The sources said Rev. Weir later suggested that Mr. Buckley apparently had died three months earlier, after being tortured extensively. Rev. Weir told of hearing Mr. Buckley screaming, then of hearing the screams fall silent one night in early June.    Besides trying to win Mr. Buckley's freedom, CIA Director Casey solicited Saudi Arabian contributions to anti-communist guerrillas in Afghanistan, Angola and Nicaragua, according to U.S. and Saudi sources. Saudi sources say they agreed to help support the Afghan and Angolan rebels, but insisted they hadn't agreed to help the Contras.    Congress in 1985 authorized the State Department to solicit so-called humanitarian aid from other governments for the Contras, but it forbade the CIA and Defense Department from doing so.    An administration official confirmed reports over the weekend that Brunei agreed to a State Department request to provide funds for the Contras. The official said the request was made at the suggestion of Elliott Abrams, assistant secretary of state for Inter-American Affairs, and was approved by Secretary of State Shultz. Reached yesterday, Mr. Abrams said he had no comment on the story, first reported in the Los Angeles Times.    State Department officials said they don't know whether the funds Brunei contributed, which were deposited into a Swiss bank account, actually were used for nonlethal aid. The account reportedly was controlled by Lt. Col. Oliver North, who was fired last month from the White House's National Security Council staff for his role in the Iran-Contra affair.    Justice Department investigators suspect that some middlemen may have reaped illegal profits by helping the U.S. sell arms to Iran, according to administration officials familiar with the investigation. Lax financial record-keeping and loose oversight of the transactions by White House aides, these officials asserted, provided numerous opportunities for American or foreign intermediaries to benefit from the transactions.    Officials said efforts have been stepped up in the past few days to obtain Swiss bank records and other documents that investigators hope will reveal the extent of any such profits. Over the weekend, a Swiss Foreign Ministry spokesman confirmed that one Swiss bank agreed to freeze an account used in the arms sales to Iran, but U.S. and Swiss officials declined to provide further details.    Meanwhile, several administration officials backed away from earlier claims that Michael Ledeen, a consultant to the National Security Council, negotiated an illegally low price on some TOW missiles that were sold to Iran by Israel and then replaced in Israeli stocks by the Pentagon. Mr. Ledeen insisted that he never discussed the price of U.S.-made weapons sold to Iran. The officials who had implicated him then conceded that the Israeli and Iranian arms dealers who actually handled the transaction may have fixed the price.    ---   Also contributing to this article was Andy Pasztor. </TEXT></DOC>