<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871124-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Hutton SeeksMerger PartnerOr Cash Infusion---Move Stems From SeriesOf Setbacks, the Crash;Shearson Shows Interest---By Steve SwartzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EFH SHE AXP MER S TA CCC CSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   E.F. Hutton Group Inc., plagued by internal doubts about its future and fearing a crippling drop in its credit rating, is looking for a merger partner or a substantial infusion of cash.    Hutton is talking to Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., the securities firm whose $50-a-share, $1.55 billion bid for Hutton was spurned by the firm a year ago. One person close to Hutton said he believes many Hutton officials and directors now wouldn't oppose a Hutton-Shearson merger.    Any deal Hutton reaches now is likely to be for less than the $50 a share Shearson offered last fall during much rosier times for the securities industry. Analysts now say Hutton could bring about $1 billion, or somewhere in the $30-a-share range. Hutton has about 33 million shares outstanding.    Hutton, the nation's 10th-largest securities firm at the beginning of the year with about $1 billion in capital, is the first major Wall Street firm to be forced into merger talks as a result of pressures stemming from last month's stock market crash and the pessimism it generated about Wall Street's earnings potential over the next year or more.    Hutton announced yesterday morning that it had &quot;received expressions of interest&quot; from parties it didn't identify concerning a merger or &quot;substantial equity investment,&quot; and said that it had authorized its investment bankers, Salomon Brothers Inc. and Blackstone Group, to pursue discussions with prospective investors and acquirers. Shearson said a few hours later that it had been contacted and was interested in pursuing talks.    Hutton appears to be quite eager to strike a deal. At a two-hour meeting between Hutton's investment bankers and Shearson officials at Hutton's new midtown Manhattan headquarters, the Hutton bankers said they want to reach a deal with some party by next week at the latest, according to people familiar with the talks.    Among the firms that have also been contacted by Hutton are Merrill Lynch and Co.; Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America; Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co.'s Dean Witter Financial Services Group Inc.; and Transamerica Corp., according to a person with knowledge of the talks.    Hutton officials are also known to have talked with former Wall Street executive Sanford I. Weill, now head of Commercial Credit Co., about a possible merger, but those talks have broken off.    Investment bankers for Hutton also recently approached Nikko Securities Co., one of Japan's &quot;big four&quot; securities firms, but Nikko said it wasn't interested, people with knowledge of the talks said. Both Mr. Weill and Toshio Mori, chairman of Nikko's U.S. unit, declined to comment.    By publicly looking for a partner, Hutton's new management team is apparently throwing in the towel after more than a year of trying to resuscitate the flagging firm, which has experienced several setbacks, the most prominent of which was its 1985 guilty plea to 2,000 federal counts of mail and wire fraud related to a check-kiting scheme.    The stock market crash increased Hutton's vulnerability, sending its stock skidding from about $30 a share to as low as $11 a share, well below Hutton's book value of $26.40 a share. Yesterday's announcement sent Hutton's stock surging $7.125 to close at $27.375 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. It was the second most-active issue in Big Board trading with volume of 2,199,000 shares.    People close to Hutton said that the decision to seek a buyer was encouraged by Hutton's board -- which has lost confidence in management's ability to turn things around.    Among those directors said to be pressing for a sale of the firm leading the opposition to Hutton Chief Executive Officer Robert P. Rittereiser's attempts to keep the firm independent are Peter V. Ueberroth, the commissioner of Major League Baseball, and Edward Cazier, a Los Angeles attorney and a longtime friend of Hutton's former chairman, Robert Fomon.    The board also was motivated by a belief that the two major credit rating agencies, Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. and Moody's Investors Service Inc., were prepared to lower Hutton's debt rating.    Such a move would sharply increase Hutton's cost of doing business and would also shake the confidence of employees and customers. A drop in the credit rating could also push some of Hutton's all-important retail stockbrokers, whose confidence in senior management was already waning, to flee with their clients to another firm.    John Kriz, an analyst at Moody's, declined to comment on whether a downgrade of Hutton's debt was in the works before its announcement yesterday. Moody's did place its ratings on Hutton debt &quot;under review with direction uncertain&quot; in the wake of Hutton's announcement. Standard andamp; Poor's analysts didn't return phone calls.    While evidence has been mounting for some time that Hutton management wasn't succeeding in turning the firm around, the stock market crash dealt a final blow, people familiar with the firm said. They said that the crash raised the specter of a prolonged downturn that some board members and firm officials felt Hutton couldn't survive on its own.    Following a late Sunday night meeting of Hutton executives, directors and investment bankers, Hutton's chief executive officer, Robert P. Rittereiser, telephoned Peter A. Cohen, chairman of Shearson, and invited Shearson to take a look at acquiring Hutton, people familiar with Hutton's situation said. Mr. Rittereiser, who had led the fight against the earlier Shearson merger proposal, told Mr. Cohen that &quot;we're in a new environment&quot; and that his board wanted him to explore all alternatives for Hutton's future, the people said.    Mr. Rittereiser told Mr. Cohen that Hutton had done &quot;pretty well&quot; during the October crash, losing only about $1 million for the month, people familiar with Hutton's situation said. However, Mr. Rittereiser said this figure didn't include the drop in value of certain investments Hutton had made, nor did it include some unsecured margin debt owed by customers to the firm, these people said.    In a statement, Shearson said, &quot;We believe E.F. Hutton could represent an attractive and complementary addition to our organization.&quot; Mr. Cohen, Shearson's chairman, declined to elaborate on the release.    Mr. Rittereiser, in a brief interview, said, &quot;There is no question that the entire industry is in a new environment&quot; since the stock market crash in terms of the amount of capital needed to be a major player. He said he advised Hutton's board that in light of the crash, the firm had to undertake a study of its place in the industry, and that this study resulted in the announcement of yesterday morning. &quot;I have had the full support of the board in this process,&quot; Mr. Rittereiser said, declining further comment.    A merger between Shearson and Hutton would mark a new chapter in a long history of consolidation in the securities industry. Shearson itself is the creation of several industry mergers over many years, most notably its 1984 combination with Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc. Many firms have either merged with another securities firm or sought a larger, better capitalized partner outside the industry.    Hutton's capital of about $1 billion looks increasingly small in an era where some major competitors, such as Salomon Inc., Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and Shearson, each have more than $3 billion in capital.    Hutton's strength is its 6,500 retail stockbrokers, who are considered some of the most skillful salesmen in the industry. The firm, which has about 19,000 employees, long has been hampered, however, by a pronounced weakness in securities underwriting, mergers and acquisitions, and securities trading.    Joining Hutton with Shearson, which has about 6,000 stockbrokers, would rival Merrill Lynch as the largest retail brokerage operation in the industry. One of the biggest obstacles to operating a retail brokerage is the high cost of supporting brokers with computers and other services. Shearson is known for having one of the most efficient retail operations, and it recently built a new computer processing center which has plenty of excess capacity, Shearson officials say.    However, a Shearson-Hutton combination would also probably produce substantial layoffs, particularly in the processing area. It is also uncertain whether Shearson would want to keep on many of Hutton's traders and investment bankers, given that Wall Street is already going through a period of consolidation in which Shearson and several other firms are laying off people.    People close to the earlier talks between Hutton and Shearson, which is 60%-owned by American Express Co., have said that senior Hutton executives objected to a merger because they doubted that they would have a meaningful role in the combined firms. Hutton's chairman and chief executive at that time, Mr. Fomon, was believed to favor a merger, but the board supported Mr. Rittereiser and made him the new chief executive. Mr. Fomon was eased out of his chairman's role several months later.    But Hutton directors, most of whom joined Hutton's board before Mr. Rittereiser arrived at the firm, have refused to give him the chairman's title, believing he hasn't proved himself. Mr. Rittereiser joined Hutton as president in 1985, coming over from Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. in the aftermath of Hutton's check-kiting scandal.    Since coming to Hutton in mid-1985, Mr. Rittereiser has brought in from outside the firm a new general counsel, a new chief financial officer, a new head of fixed-income trading, a new head of investment banking and a new head of marketing.    The marketing chief, Jerry C. Welsh, was brought in from American Express this spring for what people close to the negotiations said was a guaranteed salary of about $1 million a year, a lot of money even by Wall Street standards.    There were signs last summer that Mr. Rittereiser felt he was failing badly in his attempt to turn Hutton around. He gathered the firm's 400 top retail branch managers and brokers in Washington in July and told them, &quot;We are slowly bleeding to death&quot; because expenses were far outstripping operating earnings.    Mr. Welsh angered many of the firm's employees at that time by passing out to each of them a coloring book, complete with a box of crayons, that explained the problems Hutton faced. The book, titled &quot;The Hutton Neighborhood Coloring Book,&quot; included such sayings as, &quot;We're no longer the nicest house on the block.&quot;    Aside from the simple language, the book also had a stark message: &quot;We're not even close. In fact, we're in big trouble.&quot;    Hutton officials say that over a period of several years the firm's highly productive retail brokerage network had been given too many concessions and that costs were far out of control. The firm has also been plagued by sagging investment banking revenue over the past several years and by several costly trading mistakes.    Last January, for example, Hutton established a $130 million reserve, primarily to cover customer losses on some municipal bonds that had been improperly marketed and traded a few years earlier. The reserve caused Standard andamp; Poor's to lower its credit rating on Hutton's senior debt, citing &quot;continued evidence of the (management) control weaknesses that have hurt E.F. Hutton's performance over the last few years.&quot;    For all of 1986, Hutton had a net loss of $90.3 million, which included the reserve. For the first nine months of 1987, Hutton's profit from continuing operations was up only 2.4% to $28.1 million from $27.6 millon in last year's nine months. Most of Hutton's $120.6 million in net income for the nine months came from the sale of discontinued operations.    Senior Hutton officials have argued that they haven't been given enough time to work together as a team. The new investment banking chief, Kendrick Wilson, has been with Hutton only since April, and the new fixed-income trading boss, Mark Kessenich, has been at Hutton for only a year.    But as the steam began running out of the bull market, time began running out for Hutton. Just before the Oct. 19 stock market crash, Hutton suffered significant losses in government bond trading. These losses, together with the equity-market setbacks suffered during the crash, left Hutton with a net loss of $20 million for the first 20 days of October. Rumors swirled about the firm that it was facing insolvency.    These events touched off a series of discussions between Hutton directors and senior officials and outside investment bankers. Those talks convinced many of the participants, including Mr. Rittereiser, that the firm's attempts to remain independent were ill advised.    The news releases issued by both Hutton and Shearson yesterday reflected a new concern on Wall Street over failure to disclose any serious merger talks on a timely basis. The Securities and Exchange Commission has been investigating the Shearson-Hutton talks held last year for possible disclosure violations and for possible leaks of information that may have led to illegal trading in Hutton's stock before those merger talks were disclosed.    One firm that looked at Hutton last year is Chrysler Corp. But a source close to the Hutton situation said Chrysler isn't interested this time around. A Chrysler spokesman declined to comment. </TEXT></DOC>