<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880624-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Institutional 'Investor' or 'Speculator'? </HL><AUTHOR> Felix G. Rohatyn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> STK SCR BON ECO BNK </IN><G> FED SEC EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Nine months after the near collapse of the financial system and six months after the publication of the Brady Commission report, the question is asked, all over the industrialized world, as to what we are going to do to prevent a recurrence of Oct. 19 and 20, 1987. The answer, by now, is obvious: Practically nothing.    The study group set up by the administration to review the Brady Commission's report could not find even a modest area of agreement. The Brady Commission report is now a dead letter. The only firm recommendation appears to be the adoption of &quot;circuit breakers&quot; to close the stock markets for an hour or two if the Dow Jones index goes up or down by more than a certain number of points. But the notion that a one-hour or two-hour cross-market shutdown is an appropriate, and exclusive, cure to the disease that brought us Oct. 19 is unresponsive from a public policy point of view.    Since it is obvious that no meaningful action will be taken before the next market crisis, let's look at the overall aspects of this issue, instead of being limited to technical market questions.    It is well to remember, first, that last October's crisis was a series of interconnected collapses by securities markets world-wide. Second, it was preceded by a serious break in the credit markets. Third, it was accompanied by great volatility in the foreign-exchange markets.    And it is equally important to remember that what saved the situation on Oct. 20 was a virtual banking guarantee of the securities industry by the New York Fed, support of the Japanese stock market by the Japanese government, and massive buy-backs announced by more than 150 U.S. companies.    The fundamental weakness in the securities markets, world-wide, is the result of excessive speculation, excessive use of credit, and inadequate regulation. This speculative behavior is not driven by individuals, as was the case in the 1920s, but by such institutions as pension funds, banks, savings and loans, and insurance companies. In many cases these institutions are backed by federal government guarantees. Curbing speculation and promoting investment must be the objective of reform.    To reduce speculation, it is necessary to change the behavior of institutional investors. Many types of institutions fall into that category, from hedge funds to insurance companies, from junk-bond funds to Sandamp;Ls. However, the term &quot;institutional investor&quot; is well on its way to becoming a contradiction in terms. Too many institutions are speculating in every type of financial vehicle -- from options to junk bonds, from real estate to foreign exchange. Too many are active players in the takeover game, encouraging corporations either to sell out or to engage in drastic, highly leveraged restructurings aimed essentially at maximizing short-term profits. They are becoming active participants in proxy contests.    &quot;Power Without Property,&quot; referring to professional managers of other people's money, was the name of a book written 30 years ago by Adolf Berle. That power, multiplied manifold, has now been combined with speculation. Many of these institutional investors are risking the assets of retirees, depositors and policyholders. Since many of these institutions carry the explicit or implicit guarantee of the federal government, they also are putting the taxpayers at risk.    The financial interests supporting such behavior are very powerful. One has only to remember that when then -- Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker wanted to effect a very slight change in the margin requirements on junk bonds, the board vote was 3-2 after furious lobbying that went all the way to the White House. The recent 3-2 vote by the SEC on the issue of regulation of derivative products is a similar phenomenon. Institutions' speculative behavior is affected by financial deregulation as a whole; by the lax enforcement of the remaining regulations; and by the drive for short-term performance (at the expense of long-term safety) by the asset managers.    The price that the taxpayers will pay in the long run for deregulation and laxness in oversight will be staggering. Bailouts such as the rescue of Continental Illinois Corp. and the present efforts to rescue First RepublicBank Corp. will cost billions of dollars. The bailout of the savings and loan industry could, according to some experts, ultimately cost taxpayers more than $50 billion.    Changing institutional behavior will be difficult and could include the following steps:   1) Impose a 50% tax on the profit of securities held for less than a year. This tax would apply to individuals, corporations, partnerships and currently tax-free institutions. At the same time, reduce capital-gains taxes, on securities held for more than five years, to 15%.    2) Sharply limit the type and the proportion of speculative investments held by federally insured institutions. A lesson in speculation and the failure of deregulation is the current status of Sandamp;Ls.    3) Amend the care and diligence standards to which trustees, directors and other fiduciaries are held with respect to investments by federally insured institutions. Penalize speculative and careless investment; at the same time, allow business judgment to be exercised in forgoing the quick takeover premium in favor of long-term holdings.    4) Encourage equity investment and discourage excessive debt leverage through changes in the tax laws. Eliminate the double tax on dividend payments by corporations, and limit, to some extent, the tax benefits of high leverage.    Change is also clearly needed in the regulatory area: Regulation of securities and derivative products should be the sole province of the SEC. On the other hand, regulation of margins and of the capital requirements of the securities industry, which I believe to be seriously deficient, should be the province of the Fed.    Both the administration and Congress have to consider the lik ely consequences of their failure to take preventive action. We were very lucky last October. Lucky not only because decisive action by various governments (particularly the U.S. Federal Reserve Board) stabilized the situation, but also because the market collapse did not include the bond market or the dollar. Although the tendency during a stock-market crash is a &quot;run to quality&quot; and, therefore, support for the credit markets, it is far from certain that this would be the case if the dollar were to come under serious pressure in a future emergency. Stabilizing the markets under those circumstances could be much more difficult.    There is obviously no guarantee that any actions will eliminate the risk of a recurrence of the market crisis. However, if we act now, it might be possible to limit its impact, thereby mitigating its damage. We have created a gigantic financial house of cards and have had fair warning about its weakness. At the very least, we should be ready to take action after the next shock to the system.    Such a shock could well be more far-reaching than the last one as a result of the delay and a possibly less benign economic climate. It is no coincidence that the explosion in speculation over the past few years has also been accompanied by a significant increase in the level of illegal or unethical behavior in the financial community. The public's confidence in the fairness of the system has been undermined by the combination of highly volatile markets and concerns about fair treatment. At a time when the need for domestic investment is very great, confidence must be restored. It can be restored only by strong action by the administration, Congress and the regulators.    ---   Mr. Rohatyn is a senior partner of Lazard Freres andamp; Co. </TEXT></DOC>