<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870623-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CHUN IS EXPECTED to accept proposals to quell South Korean unrest.    A senior official of South Korea's ruling party said he believes President Chun is prepared to accept a series of recommendations made by the party -- including a limited resumption of debate on revising the country's electoral system -- in a bid to stem the current spate of anti-government protests. Chun already has agreed to meet with opposition leader Kim Young Sam, but Kim has set certain conditions for such a meeting, which could frustrate efforts to carry it out.    The U.S. welcomed Seoul's plan to meet with opposition leaders, but cautioned the South Korean military against intervening in the political crisis.    ---   A judge in Puerto Rico sentenced three former hotel employees to prison terms ranging from 75 to 99 years in connection with a New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel in San Juan. The three men had pleaded guilty in April to setting the blaze, in which 97 people were killed.    ---   Sources at the Iran-Contra panels said they expect North to testify publicly in July. Prior to the appearance by the White House aide, who was granted an extra day to turn over certain data, investigators would have an opportunity to question him under oath in a closed-door session.    ---   Saudi Arabia agreed in principle to a U.S. request for expanded surveillance of the Persian Gulf region, the State Department said. Under the plan, U.S.-supplied Awacs planes would have a Saudi pilot with Americans forming the rest of the crew.    Kuwait said it would seek protection in the Persian Gulf from the Soviet Union or other nations if Congress blocks a Reagan administration plan to escort 11 Kuwaiti tankers sailing under the U.S. flag.    ---   Three IRS employees told a Senate subcommittee that the agency's managers routinely pressure revenue officers to seize the property of delinquent taxpayers even when less extreme steps are warranted. The hearing was the latest in a series on proposed legislation that would limit the IRS's ability to seize property.    ---   Deaver was ordered by a federal judge in Washington to stand trial July 13 on charges of perjury. The judge also turned down a prosecutor's request to subpoena Canada's ambassador to testify at the trial. Separately, the former Reagan aide asked the Supreme Court to decide the constitutionality of the independent prosecutor law.    ---   Bonn's government has decided against extraditing Mohammed Ali Hamadi to the U.S. because of concern for the lives of two West Germans held hostage in Lebanon, security sources said. Meese is to meet with officials today in Bonn to discuss the air piracy and murder case against Hamadi, a suspect in a 1985 TWA hijacking.    ---   The Marine Corps accused a former Moscow embassy guard of perjury and making false statements to investigators in the espionage case involving two other Marines. Cpl. Robert J. Williams, 22, of New York, faces a hearing that will determine whether he should be court-martialed.    ---   House Speaker Wright intervened with the Federal Home Loan Bank Board on behalf of a Texas Sandamp;L executive who had raised millions of dollars for Democratic candidates. The disclosure is the third such case in which the Democratic lawmaker talked to regulators about thrifts in his home state.    ---   A U.S. judge in New York sentenced five of 16 defendants in the so-called Pizza Connection drug case to lengthy prison terms and ordered four of them to contribute $2.5 million to a &quot;victims&quot; fund. Among those sentenced was reputed Sicilian Mafia leader Gaetano Badalamenti. The other defendants are to be sentenced this week.    ---   Syrian President Assad sent the commander of Damascus's armed forces in Lebanon to meet with the leader of the pro-Iranian group Hezbollah in an effort to win the release of an American journalist kidnapped last week. In southern Beirut, factional fighting flared, killing eight people.    ---   U.S. Catholic bishops expressed support for a call by American Jewish leaders for a meeting with Pope John Paul II to discuss a Vatican decision to grant an audience this week to Austrian President Waldheim.    ---   The Supreme Court struck down a Nevada law aimed at imposing mandatory death penalties for prison inmates who commit murder while already serving life sentences without possibility of parole. The justices also reinstated the death sentence of John Harvey Adamson for the murder of a newspaper reporter in Arizona in 1976.    ---   State Department officials said Assistant Secretary of State Murphy would inform a Soviet diplomat that unless Moscow adopts a more constructive policy, the U.S. will oppose a Soviet role in Mideast peace talks. Murphy is to meet with a Soviet specialist on the Mideast next month in Geneva.    ---   Surgeon General Koop endorsed a preliminary report by the American Medical Association's governors calling for limits on mandatory AIDS testing. The proposal, which is expected to be adopted by the organization, has drawn criticism from some physicians who urged a stronger commitment to providing care for AIDS patients.    ---   About 300,000 Spaniards marched silently through downtown Barcelona in a demonstration against terrorism following a bomb attack Friday in which at least 17 people were killed and 35 injured. Basque separatists claimed responsibility for the blast.    ---   The Contras have received more than 200 tons of equipment since April, according to estimates by Nicaraguan officials and Western diplomats. The U.S.-financed supply flights increased in late March after Nicaraguan insurgents launched a spring offensive against Sandinista government forces.    ---   Died: Fred Astaire, 88, dancer, in Los Angeles, of pneumonia. </TEXT></DOC>