<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880617-0137 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Goodbye Gift </HL><SO> </SO><CO> CANDA JAPAN EUROP TAXES </CO><IN> MON FRX CMD PCS ECO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Next week's economic summit in Toronto will be Ronald Reagan's last, but it will be more than a going-away party for the man whose economic policies confounded conventional wisdom by both promoting a speedy end to a world-wide inflation and leading the way to a resumption of real growth. An important piece of unfinished business is on the reported agenda: the adoption of a price index as an indicator for exchange rates and monetary creation.    The price rule in this case is a composite price of a basket of commodities, the thought being that money creation is intended to promote price stability and is best guided by an index of prices set in real markets. Such an index would also promote the goal of exchange-rate stability, by providing an outside indicator of whether unstable rates result from too much money creation in country A or too little in Country B.    Actually, the Fed has devised two composites. Both include that barbarous metal, gold. But one includes and one excludes oil, which would dominate any trade-weighted index but is only partly a market-determined price. The precise number of components in the index and the precise weight of such components as gold can be debated, but are far less important than the principle of a price guideline.    The probability of very little opposition to this principle at the summit shows how far Group of Seven finance ministers and central bankers have moved toward re-establishing international monetary stability. There is not yet a hue and cry to bring back Bretton Woods and the gold-exchange standard it was founded on, but there is a genuine desire for greater monetary order. While this movement was already under way from experience with volatile exchange rates, last October's world-wide crash of financial markets certainly hastened it.    When all the entrails of that bleak October -- program trading, index arbitrage et al. -- were examined and re-examined, one truth remained: The crash was international. Financial sector dislocations attributable to the dollar's 30-month tailspin had to be a factor. In the first week of January this year, the world's central banks moved in to put a floor under the dollar. The financial crisis went away, and now everyone is remarking how little effect the crash had on the real economy.    Indeed, greater confidence in money and the final phase of the 1986 tax reform have given the long-running U.S. economic recovery a second wind, much to the surprise of doomsayers. The recovery has moved into a new phase, with heavy investments in factory modernization and expansion auguring well for anti-inflationary productivity improvements. As always, other industrial democracies are benefiting from the sales and investment opportunities created by U.S. economic vigor.    The lessons of this experience are not widely understood. In particular, we would be much more sanguine about the prospects for 1989 if the U.S. Congress were working on a capital-gains tax cut instead of a protectionist trade bill. But the world's finance ministers and central bankers have learned quite a lot, the main point being that they are all in the same boat -- an increasingly integrated world economy. Supply-side fiscal policies, now embraced to one degree by most industrial democracies, were a recognition of an eternal verity: Taxes can kill. Price-rule monetary management acknowledges a corollary: Unreliable money can kill.    Under the Bretton Woods system, which provided a reasonable degree of monetary stability until the U.S. itself ceased to accept its discipline, the dollar was fixed to gold and other currencies fixed to the dollar with provisions for altering exchange rates as circumstances demanded. In that case, the dollar price of gold was the price rule. Clearly, adoption of a price rule is a necessary first step to any move back to a more formalized monetary order. There now seems little debate in the Group of Seven over the desirability of making that move; there will be some debate over whether the mere targeting of baskets of commodities will be sufficient discipline.    At least we now are on the right path, back to political acceptance of a price standard. Politicians for centuries have passed through cycles of abandoning sound money in the pursuit of expediencies, only to become victims of their folly. At Toronto, heads of state will have a chance to affirm a first step toward renewed stability. If they do so, this low-key summit could be the most momentous yet. </TEXT></DOC>