<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871228-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Relying on Intuition to Pick a Winner---By Egon P.S. Zehnder</HL><DD> 12/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Every manager  </DATELINE><TEXT>   if he is honest with himself and not afraid of being considered foolish -- will admit that intuition plays a significant role in both his business and personal life.    One man who readily acknowledged the importance of trusting his intuition was David Starr Jordan, who in 1891 was the 40-year-old president of Indiana University. In the spring of that year, he received a rather dubious offer: the presidency of a proposed university in the wilds of the West. He accepted the same day. This university -- where Mr. Jordan remained until he died at age 80 -- is one you may have heard of: It's called Stanford.    Mr. Jordan summed up his decision-making philosophy like this: &quot;When the evidence is in, I like to say yes or no at once and take my chances.&quot;    Perhaps not all of us are so bold when it comes to making business decisions. But whether you call it intuition or insight, hunch, speculation, imagination, judgment, gut feel, sixth sense or good guesses, &quot;it&quot; plays a key role in top management decision making. Nowhere, I would posit, does it figure more importantly than in the evaluation and selection of candidates for senior executive positions.    Intuition is a major force in our lives: We rely on it in selecting friends, marriage and business partners and in educating our children. But until recently, the mind skills stressed and relied on for executive decision making were those housed in the left side of the brain -- the linear, deductive part. Business schools and organizations concentrated on the teaching and practice of &quot;left-brain&quot; analytical techniques, such as economic forecasting models, to chart their future course.    In my estimation, the &quot;hard facts&quot; can't take us more than 80% of the way in evaluating senior executives. Certainly a thorough, systematic investigation will unearth an evaluation of performance and of the professional skills of the candidate. But problems arise when it comes time to relate this professional record in its technical form to the management position in question.    When we get to the point of appraising potential willpower, self-discipline, willingness to learn, to give one's &quot;all&quot; for the company -- we can no longer depend on facts alone. To be sure, references from former superiors, colleagues and subordinates are relevant, but we have to remember to be aware of the limits of these highly subjective reports. Never underestimate the significance of &quot;human chemistry&quot; -- the personal likings and dislikings between the reference giver and the person in question. Moreover, there is always the possibility that a negative reference may reflect more on the person giving the reference and his inability as a superior to activate the total potential of the candidate.    Carl Jung, the psychologist, found that managers skilled in the use of intuition tended to possess particular decision-making skills that most people lack. Specifically, these managers have a sense or vision of what is coming and how to move their organization in response to that vision. They are particularly adept at generating new ideas and in providing ingenious solutions to old problems. They also function best in crises or situations of rapid change. Does this sound like a description of the sort of managers your company could use?    A series of studies by Weston H. Agor, a professor at the University of Texas and president of a management consulting firm, also examined the problem. Since 1981, Mr. Agor has been conducting studies on executives' ability to use intuition -- as well as their actual use of the skill -- in making management decisions. He has tested several thousand executives from a wide range of organizations and settings all over the U.S.    His findings demonstrate, without exception, that top managers in every organization differ significantly from middle- and lower-level managers in their ability to use intuition to make decisions on the job. And interestingly, women score consistently higher than men in their ability to use intuition, as do managers with Asian backgrounds.    Those who scored the highest on these tests included top executives at some Fortune 500 companies. While these executives are quick to point out that they are not advocating the abandonment of traditional &quot;left-brain&quot; management practices, they acknowledge that they use their intuitive ability to guide their most important decisions. Many stress that good intuitive decisions are based in part on input from facts and experience gained over the years, combined and integrated with a well-honed sensitivity and openness to other, &quot;right-brain&quot; cues.    In our data-oriented world, it may not be easy to get accustomed to making use of intuition. But the first step is to resist using either a strictly rational or a strictly emotional yardstick to evaluate executives for top management positions. An intellectual evaluation, complemented by a personal reaction, rounded out by one's intuitive perceptions will result in a multidimensional picture of the candidate. Hiring decisions that result from such a process will, in the long run, prove superior to a purely rational or purely emotional decision.    There is no question that a certain amount of courage is required to give intuition the credit it deserves, both privately and publicly, in making hiring and other vital business decisions. But in the end, I see the training and use of intuition as a means of preserving a most valuable element in decision making: that of common sense. As Blaise Pascal, the French thinker, noted: &quot;We know the truth not only by reason, but also by the heart.&quot;    ---   Mr. Zehnder heads Egon Zehnder andamp; Partners, a Zurich-based management consulting firm. </TEXT></DOC>