<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880111-0003 </DOCNO><HL> The Brady Report -- Market Medicine: Brady Panel Proposals Underscore Worries '87 Crash Could Recur --- Its Call for Radical Changes Is Spurred by Finding System Neared Collapse --- Friday's 140-Point Nosedive </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR CMD NDX </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The critics hadn't even seen the Brady commission's report on October's stock-market crash before they were predicting that its recommendations would go unheeded. Yet in a chilling coincidence, even as the report was being delivered to the White House Friday afternoon, the futures and stock markets went into free fall -- a stark reminder that what happened in October could happen again.    Now that the full report is out, the reason for its radical proposals -- &quot;circuit breakers&quot; to halt trading, coordinated margin requirements, and a single regulatory body over stock, options and futures markets -- is clear. The task force found that during a harrowing period in October, the markets &quot;disconnected&quot; and spun out of control, and it said that only major changes can insure against a repetition.    &quot;Sitting in my office&quot; during the October crash, says commission member Robert G. Kirby, chairman of Capital Guardian Trust Co. in Los Angeles, &quot;I had no notion of how close we came to a collapse of the financial system. We came within a gnat's eyelash of things really falling apart.&quot; The commission, he says, &quot;wouldn't suggest something as radical&quot; as it did unless it &quot;really felt we came very close to something God-awful.&quot;    How precarious the financial markets remain is clear from the activity Friday, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 140 points, much of it during the last hour of trading. Traders say it isn't just the magnitude of the drop that is alarming. Rather, the plunge is evidence that nearly three months after the crash, the futures and stock markets for that period were again disconnecting and heading into free fall.    As the stock market closed Friday afternoon, both stocks and futures were sinking simultaneously. Significantly, the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 futures contract closed at a discount of nearly three points to the cash value of the index -- the first time since October that the futures closed at such a deep discount to the cash index. Thus, Friday marked a return of some of the same ominous factors identified by the Brady commission as the causes of the October near-meltdown.    Though the commission's report is written in diplomatic, even dry, prose -- the word &quot;crash&quot; is never used -- it describes a crisis far graver than has been officially recognized. It concludes that at midday Tuesday, Oct. 20, &quot;the financial system approached breakdown.&quot; The report describes in detail how massive selling by so-called portfolio insurers was the immediate trigger of the crash.    And in a withering critique of Wall Street's performance, the report shows that key participants -- including some major firms, stock exchange specialists and portfolio insurers -- not only failed to stem the chaos, but helped make it worse. It makes clear that the interests of small investors were abandoned as sophisticated professionals rushed to protect their own interests first.    The report strongly implies that one or more securities firms engaged in intermarket &quot;front-running&quot; by buying futures in anticipation of corporate stock buy-back announcements early in the afternoon of Oct. 20. The task force said this aspect merits further investigation.    The panel, led by Nicholas F. Brady, chairman of the old-line firm of Dillon, Read andamp; Co. and a former Republican senator, was expected to take a cautious view reflecting Wall Street's public stance that the system had worked and didn't need major change. Instead, concluding that stock, options and futures trading really constitute &quot;one market,&quot; it called for giving a single agency -- preferably the Federal Reserve -- cross-market authority. It urged that margin requirements in the various financial marketplaces be consistent. And it said the financial system should be protected with &quot;circuit breakers,&quot; such as limits on price movements or coordinated trading halts.    The proposal for consistency in margins -- the amount of a security's value that the buyer must put up -- is far more than the technical recommendation that it seems. Stock-exchange margins, set by the Federal Reserve Board, are 50% for individuals, lower for professionals. Futures exchanges set margins themselves, and the level is far lower -- roughly 10%. This creates the opportunity for massive speculation with little capital.    While the task force wasn't specific, the logic of its arguments suggests raising the margins on futures. This would do much to curb abuse, traders say, but would significantly reduce volume. The proposal has been bitterly opposed by Chicago futures interests.    But the Brady commission said change is imperative. It wrote that &quot;there must be in place a regulatory structure&quot; consistent with the economic reality that &quot;stocks, futures and options constitute one market.&quot; That, says Mr. Brady, &quot;is the key conclusion of this report.&quot;    The notion of one market is underscored by what the task force found to be the causes of the October crash, or &quot;break,&quot; as the commission labeled it. While the report discussed various fundamental factors in the stock-price run-up during most of 1987 and the decline beginning Oct. 14, it found that intense selling from just a few institutions triggered what nearly became a meltdown on Oct. 19, when the DJIA dropped 508 points.    The Brady report laid much of the blame on a few portfolio insurers. Portfolio insurance is a hedging strategy designed to protect stock holdings from declining prices by selling stock-index futures as stock prices go down. The strategies are computer-driven and go into effect automatically when stock prices fall by certain percentages. The task force found that &quot;a few portfolio insurers&quot; sold futures equivalent to just under $400 million in stocks in the first half hour of futures trading on Monday.    Those sales led to another kind of automatic trading -- by index arbitragers, or program traders as they are often called. The portfolio-insurance selling early Monday drove the prices of futures contracts to deep discounts to the underlying stocks. In such a case, index arbitragers buy the futures and sell the stocks, which is what happened on Monday morning, the task force found.    That caused stock prices to decline and futures prices to rebound. Futures prices subsequently reached a premium to stock prices, and the Dow began to rally from its early morning lows.    But then, between 11:40 a.m. and 2 p.m., &quot;portfolio insurance sales overwhelmed the rally,&quot; the report says. The volume of sales swamped the Big Board's computerized execution system, known as DOT, for Designated Order Turnaround.    This meant that index arbitragers couldn't be sure of locking in their arbitrage positions. Many of them quit trading, granting the stock market a brief respite. But it also meant that the arbitragers weren't buying futures.    The result, the report says, was that the futures and stock markets became &quot;disconnected.&quot; Enormous discounts of futures relative to stocks were free to develop as the futures market plummeted. &quot;The rest of Monday afternoon was disastrous,&quot; the report added.    &quot;Monday, Oct. 19 was perhaps the worst day in the history of U.S. equity markets,&quot; the report concluded. But it also found that for the world financial system, Tuesday was even worse. The report confirmed a detailed account of &quot;Terrible Tuesday&quot; published in this newspaper Nov. 20.    Hoping to get a better value for their $1.3 billion in stock inventories left over from Monday, many Big Board market makers opened stocks at prices substantially higher than closing prices on Oct. 19, and then unloaded stocks. Initially, the Dow rallied nearly 200 points, but many stocks soon fell rapidly to levels at or near their Monday closes, unnerving investors.    At 9:30 a.m., the Big Board stopped members from using the DOT system to execute index arbitrage. While many people have hailed this bold attack by exchange Chairman John Phelan on arbitrage trading, the Brady commission strongly suggests the move made matters worse.    The stock and futures markets &quot;disengaged&quot; again, just as they had done on Monday afternoon, the report says. A near free fall developed in both markets. At one point on Oct. 20, discounted stock index futures were &quot;forecasting&quot; a Dow Jones Industrial Average of 1400, and this &quot;billboard effect&quot; scared away stock buyers, according to the report.    Trading in stocks of many major corporations opened late and was halted at various times during the day. Tuesday morning, 90 stocks failed to open promptly; between 1 and 1:30 p.m., 49 stocks stopped trading; during the course of Oct. 20, trading was halted in 175 stocks, including some of the most actively traded Big Board issues. With many stocks closed, and price information difficult to get, the Chicago Board Options Exchange and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange suspended futures and options trading around noon.    The Brady commission said that by midday Tuesday the financial system was on the brink of collapse: &quot;The ability of securities markets to price equities was in question.&quot;    But even more serious, it states, was the fact that the crisis was on the brink of imperiling the world financial system. Because of the near-shutdown of the markets, &quot;a widespread credit breakdown&quot; seemed likely, the report says. Rumors swirled of financial failures by some clearing houses and several major market players. Some banks tried to cut off unsecured credit lines to securities firms. Demands for credit were almost beyond the capacity of the banking system. The task force reached a chilling conclusion: &quot;The financial system came close to gridlock.&quot;    Ultimately, of course, the system didn't collapse on Terrible Tuesday. The Federal Reserve leaned heavily on banks to lend to Wall Street, big corporations announced a blizzard of stock buy-backs, and there was a sudden rise in a thinly traded stock futures contract, the Major Market Index. Buyers returned to the stock market.    But the recovery may have masked what appears to be serious misconduct by some of Wall Street's most sophisticated professionals. While portfolio insurers might have been the chief immediate cause of the crash, the report details how some other Wall Street players walked away from responsibilities to investors and often contributed to the market plunge.    Big Board specialists in normal times earn millions from their monopolistic status as market makers. In return, they are expected to create orderly markets by acting as the buyers and sellers of last resort. Yet 30% of specialists sampled by the Brady commission were net sellers of major stocks on Black Monday, indicating they sold into the plunge rather than buying stock to ease the crash. On Tuesday, when some specialists' capital was depleted, their performance appears to have been even worse: 82% of the specialists were net sellers. On Tuesday, specialists sold a total of $450 million in stock.    While professing sympathy for the specialists' desire &quot;not to sacrifice&quot; large amounts of money in the face of overwhelming selling pressures, the commission concluded that a substantial number of the specialists failed to discharge their most vital function.    The interests of small investors were ignored by market makers and by some of the large firms that handle their accounts, the commission found, with some investors unable even to reach their brokers. Large firms may have favored their own trading and that of their large institutional customers in executing trades, it said, recommending that &quot;consideration should be given to favoring public customers in execution over institutional and other proprietary traders.&quot;    The implications of the Brady study -- some 340 pages of text and appendixes -- are ominous. It reports that the &quot;October experience illustrates how a relatively few, aggressive, professional market participants can produce dramatic swings in market prices.&quot; The commission concedes that it didn't have either the time or the investigatory power to pursue evidence of wrongdoing.    Unless restraints are imposed, the task force declares, another crash is possible, one that could have even more dire consequences for the world's economic well-being. It concludes that the October crash &quot;underscores the need for immediate action to protect the equity market and financial system from the destructive consequences of violent market breaks.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>