<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Boesky and Drexel Aides JoinedIn Illicit Scheme, Records Suggest---U.S. Said to Study EvidenceSecurities Were 'Parked'To Profit on Takeovers---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DIASECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Government investigators are focusing on secret records and other evidence suggesting that Ivan F. Boesky and officials of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. engaged in a wide-ranging illegal scheme to profit from corporate takeovers, according to people familiar with the government's probe of the Boesky scandal.    The government is examining evidence suggesting that Mr. Boesky and Drexel officials agreed to unlawfully conceal ownership of large blocks of stock, agreed to share profits from their holdings and concealed evidence of their relationship. The evidence also suggests that Mr. Boesky and the Drexel officials may have given false explanations of payments related to the suspected scheme to auditors, lawyers and potential investors in the Boesky partnership that invested in takeover stocks, these sources said.    Exactly which Drexel officials were involved couldn't be determined.    People familiar with the probe said that such a scheme, if it occurred, would involve numerous criminal violations of the securities laws, as well as laws forbidding insider trading. If the government brings charges, it would break new ground in its attack on illegal takeover practices, believed by some to be widespread.    As part of the suspected scheme, Mr. Boesky had secret records kept that gave details of his relationship with Drexel, the sources said. These records, copies of which have been obtained by the government in its investigation, provide data on $5.3 million that Mr. Boesky paid Drexel in March 1986, people familiar with the case said.    The government is also examining evidence suggesting an arrangement between Mr. Boesky and Drexel involving illegal &quot;parking&quot; of large stock positions to conceal the true ownership of the stock, the people familiar with the case said. Parking occurs when one investor buys stock for another who doesn't want to be identified as the owner. The government has evidence suggesting that Mr. Boesky parked stock for Drexel, and that Drexel, in turn, parked stock for Mr. Boesky, the sources said.    The sources said that investors and securities firms might have various reasons for entering into a parking arrangement. For example, an investor might park stock in order to avoid having to file Securities and Exchange Commission disclosure documents required for those who acquire more than 5% of a company's stock. An investor might also want to avoid the so-called short-swing profit regulations, requiring investors who hold more than 10% of a company's stock for less than six months to forfeit profits made on the sale of their holdings.    For its part, a securities firm might park stock with an investor because the firm was restricted from trading in a company's stock since it had inside knowledge as a result of an investment banking relationship.    The securities firm might wish to secretly acquire stock in a potential takeover target and then attempt to set in motion a bid in which the firm would have a role. Or it might park stock with a client, in return for other favors, guaranteeing a profit on the holding because it knows of a pending takeover or other major transaction. The client, for example, might agree to purchase high-yielding &quot;junk&quot; bonds issued in connection with a takeover.    It couldn't be determined which, if any, of these possible motives figure in the government's probe.    Harvey Pitt, a partner at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver andamp; Jacobson, representing Mr. Boesky, declined to comment yesterday. Charles Carberry, the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the case, and Gary Lynch, head of enforcement for the Securities and Exchange Commission, also declined to comment.    As previously reported, Drexel is the subject of both SEC and grand jury investigations of the Boesky scandal. Drexel and some of its officials, including Michael Milken, the Beverly Hills, Calif.-based head of Drexel's high-yield bond operation, have received government subpoenas. Neither Drexel nor any of its officials have been charged with any wrongdoing, and Drexel has said repeatedly that it knows of no wrongdoing by anyone at the firm.    Last November, Mr. Boesky agreed to plead guilty to a felony and settled SEC charges of insider trading by paying a record $100 million. He agreed to cooperate fully in the government's continuing investigation of the scandal.    In its investigation, the government is focusing on the $5.3 million payment Mr. Boesky's company made to Drexel last March. As reported in this newspaper, the payment was questioned by the Boesky partnership's auditors after Mr. Boesky didn't produce documentation for the sum. Drexel produced a letter signed by two officials in its Beverly Hills office saying the payment was a fee for &quot;consulting and advisory services.&quot;    Last month, Drexel, answering questions about the payment, characterized it as an &quot;investment banking fee&quot; and denied any impropriety.    However, people familiar with the government's investigation said that evidence suggests the payment represents the profit by Drexel on the stock it may have parked with Mr. Boesky, after subtracting the profit Mr. Boesky earned on stock that may have been parked with Drexel. They said that Mr. Boesky and Drexel officials reviewed the transactions to arrive at the amount of the payment.    In doing so, Mr. Boesky relied on the secret documents recording the dealings with Drexel, which were never shown to the company's auditors or lawyers at the time the payment was questioned, the sources said.    The sources added that a Drexel official kept secret records related to the transactions for Drexel.    A Drexel spokesman reiterated that the $5.3 million payment was for &quot;investment-banking and advisory services&quot; and declined to comment further yesterday.    The people close to the investigation said that the government is looking closely at a number of specific stocks that it believes might have been the subject of parking arrangements between Mr. Boesky and Drexel officials. They are stocks that have been reported as subjects of the government's inquiry.    They include Fischbach Corp., Harris Graphics Corp., Lorimar Inc., Telepictures Corp., MGM/UA Entertainment Co., Occidental Petroleum Corp., Diamond Shamrock Corp., Pacific Lumber Co., Phillips Petroleum Co., Trans World Corp., Unocal Corp., Wickes Cos. and Gulf andamp; Western Inc.    An analysis by this newspaper last December showed that Mr. Boesky acquired large positions in the stocks in advance of significant transactions involving the stocks, and that Drexel was involved in most of the transactions. The government is now probing to determine if in some of those cases, Mr. Boesky avoided public disclosure requirements through a parking arrangement with Drexel. For example, Mr. Boesky had stakes in Trans World and Gulf andamp; Western, but he never filed any disclosure documents relating to those two stocks.    The government is also seeking to determine whether some of Mr. Boesky's positions that were disclosed actually represented stock parked with him by Drexel, the sources said.    While declining to comment in any respect on the government's continuing investigation, Mr. Carberry noted that the willful violation of various provisions of the securities laws is a criminal offense.    Among the provisions that can give rise to criminal charges, he said, are the Section 13D disclosure requirements for investors who acquire more than 5% of a company's stock; net capital requirements for securities firms; prohibitions against market manipulation; regulations governing tender offers; record-keeping requirements for broker-dealers; prohibitions against falsifying records; and most broadly, anti-fraud provisions of Section 10B-5 of the SEC regulations. In addition, participants in a scheme might be charged with conspiracy to commit any of those offenses.    Moreover, the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange could seek administrative sanctions against a firm and its top executives for alleged supervisory failures. Penalties could include fines and suspensions.    Court papers filed yesterday indicated that one of the stocks, Diamond Shamrock, figures in the government's investigation. Mr. Boesky was subpoenaed in a Texas case involving T. Boone Pickens and Diamond Shamrock, and the government intervened to prevent Mr. Boesky from giving testimony, citing its continuing criminal investigation. A federal judge Monday granted the government's request that a subpoena to Mr. Boesky be quashed. </TEXT></DOC>