<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0135 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> TAXES LABORFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   The ABCs of personal financial planning are spelled out in certificates studding the walls of Dennis Gurtz' and Paul Yurachek's upscale suite of offices in Washington. All the letters fit to print hang in black frames over the head of someone on their staff: CFP, ChFC, CLU, CPA, JD, CFA, IAFP's Registry.    And there are more credentials the firm tucks away in drawers or under desk blotters, admitting some aren't worth much more than the dues they paid to get them. Even the ones that show a bit of proficiency may not mean a lot; Mr. Yurachek, a lawyer and certified public accountant, says he earned one of his securities certificates by passing an exam he left two hours early because he had Redskins playoff tickets.    Open the yellow pages across the U.S. and there are as many as 400,000 listings for financial planners or financial planning consultants, the Consumer Federation of America estimates in a study. With the uncertainty of the market, more people may be turning to financial planners for help. And there's no fast, risk-free way to choose one. Unlike an M.D. for doctors, there is no one credential required for financial planners that signifies even a minimum level of competence. There's no such thing as a specific financial planning license. Indeed, anyone can use the title. Usually it's followed by an assortment of abbreviations, registrations or licenses from other fields, some of which attest to a financial planner's know-how, and some of which don't.    &quot;I know how long it takes to go to law school. I know how long it takes to be a nuclear magnetic resonance technician,&quot; said a nurse who got bilked by a life insurance agent peddling a hospital-bed leasing investment. &quot;I don't know anything, really, about how long it takes to be a certified financial planner, what they learn, or anything else,&quot; she complained to Congress last year.    Cracking the credentials code -- knowing which ABCs count and which don't -- is a step toward screening financial planners. But anyone who's driven to get the help of a financial planner (clients often seek them after a death, divorce or inheritance, or near retirement) still must be prepared to make lots of choices.    Financial planning is such a new field and is so diverse that the industry itself isn't sure how many are practicing it, either full time or as a sideline, or exactly what services they perform. A 1985 survey by three Iowa State University professors, which was limited but still serves as a guide, found 29% of financial planners are self-employed, 13% work with brokerage houses, 8% with investment companies, 6% with insurance companies, and 11% in banks, accounting firms and law offices. That left 33% unknown.    Self-employed, or so-called independent financial planners, hail from various backgrounds, but often have experience in tax law, accounting, insurance, securities or real estate. In addition to any financial expertise they start out with, many go through the voluntary certification programs available for financial planners. They may or may not do financial planning exclusively, but are the most likely to do &quot;comprehensive&quot; financial planning. A comprehensive plan, examining everything from taxes to pension plans to types of investments, is the top-of-the-line model, though also the most expensive, starting at around $2,000. Seeking advice on specific goals, like saving for retirement or a college fund or reducing taxes, is a less expensive alternative.    An estimated 5% of planners work for fees only, usually a rate of $75 an hour or more. By eschewing commissions, they argue, they give more objective advice. Most other planners get half or more of their income from commissions on financial products they sell to the client. &quot;You have to remember when you are dealing with (most) financial planners, it's the same thing as dealing with a salesman,&quot; advises Kathryn McGrath, director of investment management at the Securities and Exchange Commissiion.    This is especially true in the securities industry. Most brokerage houses and many investment or mutual fund companies can give some form of financial planning advice. At the top end, some offer services costing $10,000 or more for high net-worth clients. But most have at least some free or very low-cost plan that relies heavily on computer-generated analyses. These are generally as good as the personal information a client gives the planner, and can cost a few hundred dollars.    Whatever customers pay for these low-priced plans usually doesn't cover the cost of producing them, and the companies expect to make up the cost in commissions from sales of investments they recommend. IDS Financial Services Inc., for example, a subsidiary of American Express that offers set-price financial plans starting at $150, says to break even it would have to raise the price of its plans 25% or more. Instead, it hopes to make up the difference by selling the customers its financial products. Some 70% to 80% of these clients do buy at least one product from the firm.    One brokerage account executive who does financial planning, but who asked to remain anonymous, says the computer-generated plans &quot;have the common theme of how much the client should invest and where it should be invested&quot; and are pushed &quot;as a means to create greater commission dollars.&quot; Few brokers, he says, have any financial planning training.    Life insurance is another area in which financial planning is used widely as a sales tool. Agents traditionally carried out many of these functions before financial planning became the buzzword; they used to call themselves &quot;estate planners.&quot;    But many life insurance agents now independently pursue financial planning credentials, and it may be difficult to discern whether those agents are primarily life insurance salesmen or financial planners. The difference is increasingly obscured as more insurance agents acquire licenses to sell securities. Agents will likely charge a fee for financial planning work if it is more than a simple analysis of assets and liabilities, in addition to commissions they collect on sales of policies or other investments.    Certified public accountants are forbidden to collect commissions, so those who do financial planning typically earn hourly fees from about $75 and up. While some will do a full financial plan, much advice is given on a piece-by-piece basis -- tax planning, later an estate plan, and so on. Strongest in tax planning, they generally aren't formally educated in insurance or investment advice. Most accountants are exempt from registering with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the investment advice they legally can give is general. Some won't even recommend a specific portfolio mix.    A few CPA firms, though, have registered with the SEC so they can beef up the investment advising done by their financial planning specialists. While accountants in small offices may do financial planning for a range of clients, big firms such as Coopers andamp; Lybrand are geared to do financial plans primarily for executives making $75,000 or more. Coopers andamp; Lybrand's price for each customer: $4,000 to $6,000.    Banks and law firms have the potential to move into financial planning in a big way. The American Bar Association has set up a task force to look into the area. Banks have been dashing in and out of the field since the mid-1970s. It's still uncertain how big a stake they want, but some now offer services through their trust departments. American Security Bank in Washington provides financial planning through its private banking division to customers earning more than $150,000 a year or those with a net worth of $750,000. It charges an hourly fee, and a full plan costs from $3,000 to $5,000. Less detailed plans to solve particular problems go for $500 and up.    To varying degrees, the advice given can be influenced by which profession the planner is affiliated with. You shouldn't expect a life insurance agent and a certified public accountant, if given the same case, to make exactly the same financial planning recommendations. Some of these professional leanings will show up in the alphabet soup of a financial planner's credentials. Besides the common professional designations for lawyers (J.D.) and certified public accountants (CPA), other ABCs that count in financial planning are:    Registry of Financial Planning Practioners: This is a voluntary distinction available to those who make financial planning their primary vocation, meet certain educational requirements, pass a four-hour written exam, have a minimum of three years' experience in comprehensive financial planning, submit a written plan for review, and receive 30 hours of continuing education a year. The registry has only 800 members currently.    Certified Financial Planner (CFP): It's a voluntary certification acquired by passing six three-hour exams covering all aspects of financial planning, usually over two years; most who sit for the exams are enrolled in a six-course self-study or classroom program offered by the College for Financial Planning in Denver, but some professionals may take the exams without doing the coursework. The course is considered tougher today than in its early years, and 15,000 planners now hold the certificate.    Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC): This designation is held in comparable esteem with the CFP. It's awarded by American College in Bryn Mawr, Pa., for passing a 10-course program through home study or in the classroom and 10 two-hour exams over about two years. Most graduates also hold the CLU.    Chartered Life Underwriter (CLU): CLU means that the holders have passed American College's 10 course, 10-exam life insurance program.    Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA): This is a highly regarded securities distinction from Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts, a professional organization, for passing three six-hour exams, one a year. It demands a minimum of three years' experience as a financial analyst.    Chartered Property and Casualty Underwriter (CPCU): You may see this professional mark, but it's mainly used in the insurance industry and is not considered vital for financial planners. The same is true for Registered Health Underwriter (RHU).    Registered Investment Adviser: While a person or firm is legally required to register to give investment advice for compensation, basically anyone who pays a $150 fee to the SEC and files a seven-page application can use the title. Registration does obligate the adviser to give clients written information on his business background, education, commissions, conflicts of interest and investment strategy (found in Part 2 of the adviser's Form ADV). Under new SEC rules, any fraud, theft or disciplinary violations against a firm or its important employees within the past 10 years must be disclosed, but not necessarily in the ADV.    Registered Representative (Reg. Rep): If a planner is going to make securities transactions, he must be a registered representative. To get it, holders must pass the Association of Securities Dealers' Series 7 exam, which tests knowledge of securities laws but not investment expertise.    Enrolled Agent (EA): This requires passage of a difficult IRS test on the tax laws and enables one to represent clients before the IRS along with attorneys or CPAs.    The industry's primary trade groups or membership organizations are: the International Association for Financial Planning (IAFP) in Atlanta; The Institute of Certified Financial Planners (ICFP) in Denver; the American Society of CLU and ChFC in Bryn Mawr, Pa.; and the National Association of Personal Financial Advisors (NAPFA) in Buffalo Grove, Ill., a small organization for fee-only planners.    Even when a financial planner has been chosen, the process isn't a passive activity for a client. He must be prepared to provide personal details on such things as household income and spending, insurance policies, and work-related benefits like pension plans and health. He is asked to spell out and rank his financial objectives. Especially when a computer-generated analysis is used, the client might be asked to identify his risk tolerance -- sometimes given only the choices of limited, moderate or high -- and to predict an inflation and interest rate. And, ultimately, he must decide for himself whether the adviser's recommendations make sense.    ---   Ms. Rosewicz is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>