<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870604-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Farm Subsidies Yield Costly Harvest---By Mitzi Ayala</HL><DD> 06/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   At its meeting in Paris last month, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development urged governments to cut back on farm subsidies, the first time that ministers of the 24 leading industrial nations reached any consensus on the subject. It's high time. According to the World Bank, agricultural subsidies amount to at least $110 billion a year world-wide. They drain national treasuries, disrupt trade and antagonize allies, and have created a world awash in food for which there is no market.    The U.S. will spend $26 billion on agricultural subsidies this year. The European Community admits to a similar amount and some economists believe it spends double that. Agricultural subsidies in Japan amount to about $40 billion, while consumer costs in the form of government-mandated prices account for an additional $20 billion.    In short, we have created a monster. Paying farmers to grow food for which there is no market has all the economic benefits of maintaining the buggy-whip industry. With the reduction and eventual elimination of subsidies and other barriers to free trade in agriculture, supply and demand would ensure that farmers no longer produce food for which there is no market. Consumers could buy food from the lowest cost-highest quality producers. Varieties of food available would increase dramatically, as Canadians had access to American wines, Japanese could buy California rice, and Americans could choose among the hundreds of varieties of European cheeses that cannot now get past U.S. import quotas.    American agriculture would do well in open competition. The U.S. has the world's largest expanse of fertile land in a temperate climate with adequate moisture. It has the world's most highly developed infrastructure of roads, rivers, railroads and ports. It has the world's most advanced agricultural technology. Most American farmers I talk with on my travels around the country would be delighted to compete if the playing field were level.    Instead, the government's Byzantine system of wasteful subsidies encourages some people to become farmers just so they can &quot;farm&quot; the government -- something I can speak to from personal knowledge as a rice grower in Davis, Calif. Since someone figured out a way to take advantage of the rice-subsidy system last year, the number of rice growers in my county has grown to 72 from 50. They are not planting rice because Americans suddenly have discovered a passion for Rice-A-Roni.    To understand why subsidies have created more rice farmers, consider the hypothethical example of &quot;Farmer Brown.&quot; Farmer Brown owns a 2,000-acre parcel of rice land, slightly more than double the size of the average California rice farm. Under the rice-subsidy program, which was set up to protect small farms, his maximum payment is $50,000 a year. Farmer Brown knows exactly how many acres of rice to plant to reach that limit, roughly 200. Any rice he plants beyond the 200 acres will not be profitable.    Does that mean that he takes his remaining 1,800 acres out of rice production? Not at all. Instead, he rents 200 acres each to nine others, who grow just enough rice to get their maximum $50,000 payments in government subsidies. These nine other farmers probably never grew rice before, and they certainly would not be doing so now if it weren't for the subsidies.    It is absurdities of this kind, compounded in country after country for the past 40 years, that finally led the OECD to demand a halt last month. But while the OECD members agree that getting rid of trade barriers is desirable, they don't agree on how it should be accomplished.    In the U.S., there are two schools of thought: the &quot;Rambo&quot; approach and the diplomatic solution.    Proponents of the &quot;Rambo approach&quot; maintain that the U.S. needs leverage to force its competitors to negotiate seriously. No country is going to reduce its trade barriers unless it becomes too expensive not to do so, they say.    The Senate trade bill, which is due for consideration late this month or early in July, may increase the pressure. The bill is likely to contain large increases in agricultural trade subsidies to ensure that American agricultural exports are competitive on the world market. Proponents of the Rambo approach view the bill as a ticking time bomb for other countries to watch; competitors know that unless they make rapid progress in reducing their agricultural subsidies and unfair trade practices, the U.S. response will have unpleasant consequences for them.    Those who support the diplomatic solution, however, fear that the bill may further cement America's dependency on subsidies. They maintain that diplomacy will work, since there are strong forces for change. The European Community can barely afford what it now pays in subsidies, and consumer activists in Japan, aware that the Food Control Laws in Japan cost every resident $600 a year, are putting pressure on the government to liberalize trade.    The agreement among OECD members to seek cutbacks in agricultural subsidies means the U.S. now has the opportunity to press for an all-out diplomatic offensive that would aim to reduce food stockpiles world-wide, save the taxpayers of all nations concerned billions of dollars, and open up closed agricultural markets.    The perfect opportunity to do this comes at next week's economic summit in Venice. At this meeting, the U.S. should emphasize that it is prepared to phase out all agricultural subsidies and trade barriers if other countries will make the same commitment. The details could be negotiated at the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. A 10-year program of dismantling subsidies and trade barriers could be in place by the middle of next year.    I am not blind to the dislocations such a change would entail, but over a decade's time, many of the farmers affected would simply retire and not be replaced. Others could be helped by redirecting some of the money that once went into subsidies into job-retraining programs. Other farmers -- especially in Japan, where land is scarce -- would find it advantageous to sell their noncompetitive agricultural land for development. Many should find that the opening of closed foreign markets will enable them to stay in business and prosper.    If the U.S. is willing to take the lead in seeking an end to agricultural subsidies, consumers may someday see an end to what has become one of the world's most colossal misallocations of resources.    ---   Ms. Ayala is president-elect of American Agri-Women, which represents 35,000 members nationwide. </TEXT></DOC>