<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871120-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Civil Servants: Why Not the Best?---By Elliot L. Richardson</HL><DD> 11/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT </IN><TEXT>   Lacking any real knowledge of how government works, too many members of the business community subscribe to the notion that the abler the government official, the more he or she will seek to enlarge the sphere of government at the expense of the private sector. To prevent this, they want the machinery of government placed in the hands of unambitious timeservers who will keep the wheels turning but can be counted on not to reach out for larger roles.    They mirror the views of Terry W. Culler, associate director of the Office of Personnel Management in President Reagan's first term. In an article published on this page last year, he contended that &quot;government should be content to hire competent people, not the best and most talented people.&quot; The &quot;best and brightest,&quot; indeed, should not work in government at all, but should instead be channeled into the private sector where national wealth is created.    This simplistic view is diametrically opposed to the interests of business itself. Mere competence will not ensure that government programs fulfill their purposes with the least possible encroachment on the private sector.    The confident era of expanding government that attracted the &quot;best and brightest&quot; to the New Deal, the New Frontier and the Great Society is long since over. Today's challenge is more complex. It is to keep the federal government from being totally overwhelmed by the additional tasks that no other level of government is equipped to perform. Among these new demands are cleaning up toxic wastes, ensuring air safety, deterring insider trading, containing terrorism, holding down the escalation of health-care costs, combating the AIDS pandemic, promoting competitiveness, and fighting drug abuse.    If this daunting array is to receive any response at all, it can be only in a manner that makes the most efficient possible use of limited political, managerial and fiscal capacity. Today's constraints on federal ambition are practical, not ideological.    This is why our nation now needs better motivated, better trained, better qualified and better paid public servants than ever before. The government decision maker, administrator, or program designer must have a deep understanding of the systemic relationships affected by government action. Equally necessary is a sophisticated capacity to select the tool best suited to the task at hand.    To minimize the risk of undesired side-effects, government programs have to be designed and executed with knowledge and skill. Conversely, clumsiness, ignorance, or indifference can lead to further intervention in order to correct the mistakes caused by the initial intervention. The result can be like trying to even up the legs of a chair so that it will sit firmly on the floor: You take a little off one leg and then a little off another and another until you end up with a legless chair.    The more concerned you are, therefore, with protecting individual freedom and preserving private initiative, the more you should care about the quality of government. An ideological bias against big government is of less than no use. Indeed, all it does is get in the way of the understanding necessary to control big government. For one thing is certain: Big government won't go away.    A second consequence of the mediocrity-is-sufficient fallacy is its tendency to undermine the relationship between political appointees and the career services. This relationship requires cooperation and respect between competent political managers who have a clear sense of what they want to accomplish and experienced bureaucrats who know how to get things done. Highly capable civil servants, in any case, could not by themselves, even if they wanted to, bring about the enlargement of the government's role: This kind of decision is not in their hands.    The trouble is that all too many political appointees enter government service without understanding any of the above. They suspect, instead, that senior civil servants lie awake at night scheming to sabotage the president's agenda and devising plans to promote their own. Having worked with most of the career services under five administrations, I can attest that this is not true. Although many civil servants have ideas they are glad to put forward and would like to see adopted, they do not see themselves as performing a policy-making role. When approached with distrust, they respond with hostility, and the loser is the public interest.    Compounding all these negative influences on the career services are the increase in turnover and the decline in quality of second- and third-echelon political appointees. According to a recent study by the National Academy of Public Administration, the tenure of Senate-confirmed appointees, which was 2.8 years under President Johnson, 2.6 years under President Nixon, and 2.5 years under President Carter, has dropped to two years under President Reagan.    One result is that the tour of duty of a given appointee seldom overlaps for more than a few months with the tours of the other non-career people with whom he works. There has been a drop, meanwhile, in the experience level of political appointees with respect both to government generally and to their agency's field of responsibility. A contributing factor, no doubt, has been the elimination from the pool of eligible prospects of those who cannot meet the ideological litmus test.    As if all this weren't bad enough, more and more political appointees are being pushed into jobs traditionally held by career officials. In addition to reducing the number of positions at the top that remain open to a civil servant, the consequence is to place minimally qualified individuals in highly important posts.    Almost any job at the deputy assistant secretary level, for example, is more responsible and has wider impact on the national interest than most senior corporate positions. In the State Department, a deputy assistant secretary is responsible for all of Southeast Asia. In the Commerce Department, a deputy assistant secretary is in charge of export controls. A deputy assistant attorney general heads the war against organized crime. Comparable responsibilities belong to every similar position throughout the government.    But a White House personnel assistant sees the position of deputy assistant secretary as a fourth-echelon slot. In his eyes that makes it an ideal reward for a fourth-echelon political type -- a campaign advance man, or a regional political organizer. For a senior civil servant, on the other hand, it's irksome to see a position one has spent 20 or 30 years preparing for preempted by an outsider who doesn't know the difference between an audit exception and an authorizing bill. From 1981 to 1986, the number of non-career Senior Executive Service members increased 13.1%, while the number of career SES members decreased 5.3%.    I have many friends who once held responsible but not necessarily prominent roles in government and who now occupy prestigious and well-paid positions in the private sector -- some of them very prestigious and very well-paid. Not one finds his present occupation as rewarding as his government service. If they feel this way, so must a lot of others, and that could explain why business executives are paid so much more than their government counterparts. Society treats public servants, together with teachers, ministers, and the practitioners of certain other honorable but low-paid callings, as the beneficiaries of a high level of psychic income. But the psychic income of public service is being steadily eroded, harming the government's ability to respond to the ever more difficult demands that the years ahead are sure to place upon it.    To combat this erosion, I and others have formed a National Commission on the Public Service. Headed by Paul Volcker, the panel will seek to build public awareness of the essentiality of the career services to carry out the national agenda, promote measures for strengthening the morale and efficiency of government employees at all levels, encourage the pursuit of excellence by government workers themselves, and make government a more attractive and accessible career choice for young people. The commission's effectiveness will depend on convincing business that it has an enormous stake in the fulfillment of these objectives.    ---   A former cabinet member and ambassador, Mr. Richardson is a Washington attorney. This is adapted from a longer article written for the Ripon Society. </TEXT></DOC>