<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870811-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Now More Than Ever, Banking Needs an Overhaul---By C. Todd Conover</HL><DD> 08/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   In early 1981, a group of men and women went to Washington with a mandate and a mission. They were businessmen and women who had signed on to staff the bureaus and agencies of the new Reagan administration. The 1980 election landslide, they felt, was a call to cut the tangle of bureaucracy that was strangling American initiative and competitiveness. &quot;Give the marketplace a chance to work&quot; was the battle-cry.    In the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which I was appointed to head, and at the Treasury Department, our mandate was clear: to free the banking and financial services industries from the Depression-era regulations that, 50 years later, had produced a fragmented and illogical banking system unresponsive to consumers, disadvantageous for banks and unhealthy for the American economy.    Now, Congress has finally done something, producing the so-called Competitive Equality Banking Act. This compromise legislation, which will bring neither competitiveness nor equality to the banking system, breezed through the House and Senate last week, and was signed by the president yesterday.    For those of us who went to Washington to do something about our obsolete banking system, the Competitive Equality Banking Act is a sorry joke wrapped in a title that ought to be investigated by the Federal Trade Commission for false and misleading advertising.    The act does infuse a necessary, although hardly adequate, $10.8 billion into the troubled Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. But that portion of the bill was used as a justification for other onerous provisions, such as halting the creation of non-bank banks and imposing a moratorium on expanded securities, real-estate and insurance powers for banks.    Limited-service banks and expanded banking powers are necessary tools in the construction of a financial-services industry that allows consumers to benefit from increased competition and product offerings. They are also crucial in rebuilding the competitiveness of the U.S. banking system, currently waging an unequal struggle against foreign financial-services giants and other commercial enterprises with other financial services. By slowing down the process of deregulation, Congress has set back reform that is desperately needed. It has also betrayed its promise to bring American financial services out of the dark ages.    In 1981, newly arrived officials at the Comptroller's Office and the Treasury Department found an ancient set of regulations bearing virtually no relationship to the problems confronting modern American finance. A world market, vastly more complicated financial instruments and increased competition had rendered much of existing banking legislation obsolete or worse, an impediment to progress. And yet there were those who, in their legislatively protected niches, saw little reason to allow reality to intrude into comfortably defined market segments.    Reality did intrude, in a small way, in the form of criticism by those who wondered if there was any intrinsic reason why banking, insurance, real estate and other financial-service needs should not be provided under one roof.    And it intruded in a big way, in the form of fierce competition from foreign banks and investment firms not subject to the same regulatory and competitive impediments as American financial services companies. It was not mere happenstance, for instance, that in 1970 six of the 10 largest banks in the world were American, but by the mid-'80s only one, Citibank, was in the top 10.    America's competitive disadvantage was due, in part, to a dizzying array of protectionist and exclusionary regulations. It was also due to a system of geographic restrictions in which out-of-state U.S. banks were prohibited from crossing state lines, while foreign banks could move in. This helps explain why six of the top 10 banks in California are foreign-owned, and the principle holds true in all 50 states.    Recognizing that many features of the regulatory system were crippling American financial competitiveness, many of us entering office in 1981 aimed to bring rationality to the American banking system. We thought we could do this by breaking down geographic barriers to competition and by allowing financial institutions to sell the products that would allow them to compete in dangerous and rapidly changing market conditions.    With Congress stalled by factionalism and competing special interests, it seemed both necessary and prudent for the regulators to increase the snail's pace of deregulation through imaginative interpretation of ancient law. However, we also recognized that regulatory interpretation ultimately could be no substitute for legislative action to reform laws decades behind the times. The Garn-St Germain Act of 1982 provided some impetus toward modernizing an archaic banking structure. It also offered hope that we would be able to work with Congress to craft a comprehensive reform of the legal framework within which financial institutions operated.    When no further congressional action came, major financial institutions, impatient for change, sought various kinds of relief from restrictive laws and regulations. The Comptroller's Office took the lead on many of these requests for a more expansive interpretation of existing banking regulations. And while other regulatory agencies such as the Federal Reserve Board under Chairman Paul Volcker toed a more cautious line concerning banking powers and the appropriate separation between banking and commerce, there was general agreement that the banking system was in need of serious reform.    But more than six years after we had arrived in Washington, and several years after some of us had left, there was still no comprehensive banking legislation that addressed the need for fair and open financial-services competition. In the interim, however, the market had moved on its own, slipping through regulatory loopholes, such as the ones that allowed the formation of non-bank banks.    Companies such as Sears, General Motors, American Express, J.C. Penney and Merrill Lynch began offering a wide range of banking products and services, beginning a period of what might be called deregulation by &quot;squatters' rights.&quot; Banks, however, still had their hands tied by archaic regulations.    Finally, at the beginning of this year, it appeared as if the Senate Banking Committee, under Sen. William Proxmire (D., Wis.), was going to take action on an &quot;Omnibus Banking Bill.&quot; Although far from perfect, the original bill at least held out the promise that consumers would benefit from increased competition and product offerings and that U.S. banks would be allowed the expanded powers that they needed to compete effectively against both foreign banks and domestic non-bank financial-services providers.    But somewhere between the cup and the lip, Sen. Proxmire's bill slipped. Instead of allowing banks, securities firms and other financial institutions to compete more fully, the legislation -- now known as the Competitive Equality Banking Act -- does essentially the opposite. Worse, it obscures the fact that we have not yet come to terms with providing fundamental reforms needed to assure a competitive, safe and sound financial-services system.    America's banking system was in grave need of an overhaul when President Reagan entered the White House in 1981. It is in even graver need today. But the current legislation is not the answer. It is simply the latest manifestation of an inability to take necessary action. The urgency is still there. Unfortunately, the will doesn't seem to be.    ---   Mr. Conover, comptroller of the currency 1981-85, is a partner at Edgar, Dunn andamp; Conover Inc., management consultants, and a principal of Conover andamp; McNamar Inc., merchant bankers. </TEXT></DOC>