<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880914-0107 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Firms Face a Probe in Nuclear Bids --- Korean Legislators Want to Know if Influence Was Used </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph P. Manguno (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST CANDA EUROP JAPAN CSP GE WX </CO><IN> NUK CON UTI </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A special panel of the opposition-controlled National Assembly is looking into the award two years ago of $436 million in contracts won by U.S. companies to install a pair of nuclear-power plants in South Korea by the mid-1990s.    Some losing bidders, including another U.S. company, have contended that the bid process was distorted by two of the winning companies with help from prominent Americans and Koreans, including two brothers of former President Chun Doo Hwan. The investigation is part of the legislature's broader probe of alleged irregularities during Mr. Chun's seven-year term, which ended in February.    The stakes are large. The nuclear plants will cost an estimated $4.4 billion. Furthermore, state-owned Korea Electric Power Corp., or Kepco, which awarded the contracts, plans to use the U.S. designs for six more nuclear-power units.    The Assembly panel plans to call witnesses after the Seoul Olympic Games end Oct. 2. Legislators say they want to know how agents, consultants and advisers figured in the contract-award process.    Kepco says it selected Stamford, Conn., power-plant contractor Combustion Engineering Inc., Chicago-based consulting engineer Sargent andamp; Lundy and General Electric Co. of Fairfield, Conn, as well as Korea's Hyundai Heavy Industries Co., a member of the Hyundai Group, because they offered the best systems and services, the lowest prices, and in the case of Combustion Engineering, a promise to transfer the most technology to Korean engineers.    The contracts were announced in September 1986. Hyundai's totaled $395 million, Combustion Engineering's $269 million, Sargent andamp; Lundy's $144 million, and General Electric's $23 million. Most of the rest of the estimated $4.4 billion total cost is for construction. Within days, competitors protested that CE and Sandamp;L weren't the best qualified and didn't offer the lowest prices.    There weren't any complaints about General Electric, and it hasn't figured in the controversy.    U.S. government officials are pleased the contracts went to American firms, though they acknowledge that the selection of CE and Sandamp;L has raised eyebrows. Neither company had the broad overseas experience of losing bidders, including Westinghouse Electric Corp. of Pittsburgh and Bechtel Group of San Francisco, which have been building nuclear plants abroad for years.    Westinghouse says the system that CE proposed to sell Kepco violated bid specifications and should have been disqualified from the bidding.    Kepco and Combustion Engineering deny the contract award was tainted in any way. Sargent andamp; Lundy declines to comment, and members of the Chun family couldn't be reached.    Officials at the Korean agencies responsible for energy, technology and nuclear-plant safety also expressed private misgivings about the qualifications of CE and Sandamp;L for the job. And Korean intelligence officials who monitored the bid process say CE and Sandamp;L had a network of agents and political figures in Korea and the U.S. to help it land the contracts.    Among those who helped CE were William Clark, a longtime friend of President Reagan and his national security adviser from January 1982 until October 1983, and retired Army Maj. Gen. John Singlaub, former commander of U.S. forces in South Korea. Gen. Singlaub testified before congressional investigative panels last year that he worked for White House aide Lt. Col. Oliver North in soliciting funds from two Asian nations and buying arms for the Nicaraguan Contras at a time when Congress prohibited U.S. military assistance to the rebels. Congressional investigators identified the two countries Gen. Singlaub solicited as South Korea and Taiwan. Sandamp;L engaged prominent Koreans to lobby for its bid.    &quot;Political influence is necessary&quot; in Korea, says a Combustion Engineering executive. &quot;That's the way the game is played here.&quot; A U.S. official who monitored the contracts says companies &quot;all have their political insiders here, and have for years. If one guy doesn't use influence, he gets eaten alive by the others.&quot; Even so, Combustion Engineering maintains that the contract award was fair.    Eighteen companies were originally invited to bid on parts of the two reactor systems in November 1985. Aside from the five U.S. companies mentioned, four other U.S. companies, and companies from France, Japan, West Germany, Britain and Switzerland were in the running. But in the months following the bid invitations, some of the non-American companies dropped out, contending that it had become clear that Korea had made a political decision to choose U.S. companies as a way to ease pressure over South Korea's mounting trade surplus with the U.S.    Other non-American companies, including Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. and France's Framatome S.A., both of which had provided earlier Korean power systems, chose to fight. In March 1986, 11 companies submitted bids. The U.S., French and Canadian governments weighed in heavily for their companies with promises of financial and technical assistance. Richard Walker, U.S. ambassador to Korea from 1981 to 1986, says his embassy &quot;pulled out all the stops&quot; to try to help the American companies.    The lobbying didn't stop after Kepco announced on Sept. 30, 1986, that Combustion Engineering had won the bidding to supply the nuclear steam-supply systems, furnaces and nuclear fuel, with General Electric providing the turbines and generators, and Sargent andamp; Lundy the overall plant plans and architecture. Westinghouse, CE's rival to supply nuclear technology, launched a campaign to get the decision reversed, insisting that its $180 million bid was lower than CE's. Neither CE nor Kepco will say what CE's bid was.    Lim Han Kwae, a Kepco executive, responds that CE was chosen in a fair bidding process. Mr. Lim acknowledges that he met secretly with executives of CE, Sandamp;L and General Electric in a Seoul hotel days before the contract decisions were announced, but just &quot;to further discuss price.&quot; He says the CE, Westinghouse and Framatome systems were equal technologically, but CE got the nod on the basis of price and its willingness to transfer technology.    &quot;Most important is the attitude,&quot; Mr. Lim says. &quot;CE's attitude is good. Westinghouse's isn't.&quot; Although Westinghouse has supplied six nuclear plants to Korea, it &quot;didn't release the technical skills to us to do it ourselves next time. We believe that CE will.&quot;    Peter Mihan, president of CE International Korea, a wholly owned CE subsidiary, says Westinghouse's real objection is that it lost. A Westinghouse official counters: &quot;Normal considerations used to choose a contractor for such a high-technology project went out the window. What it all came down to was political influence. We had none, CE had a lot.&quot;    Among the Americans and Koreans who helped Combustion Engineering was Pyo Sang Kie, president of Sangjie Commercial Co. People involved in the bid process say he had close links with Chun Kyung Hwan, the former president's younger brother. Mr. Pyo says he never even met the younger Mr. Chun, who was sentenced last week to seven years imprisonment on charges of embezzlement, influence-peddling and tax evasion in an unrelated case.    National Assembly investigators say they want to determine if Mr. Pyo used pressure from President Chun via his brother to secure CE its contract.    Gen. Singlaub, the former U.S. army chief in Korea, and Mr. Clark, the former U.S. national security adviser, also helped CE. People involved in the bidding process say Mr. Clark did so in part through U.S. Trading Co., a now-defunct Washington-based consulting firm that included among its executives Lyn Nofziger, the former aide to President Reagan recently convicted of illegal influence-peddling in an unrelated case. U.S. Trading Co., those involved in the bidding process say, brought CE and Chun Kyung Hwan together.    These same people say Mr. Nofziger, Mr. Clark and U.S. Trading Co. Managing Director John Caldwell visited Seoul in May 1985, half a year before bid invitations were issued, to discuss bringing Mr. Chun into the lobbying effort. Mr. Nofziger and Mr. Caldwell, in the presence of Mr. Clark, pressured U.S. Embassy officials to support CE's use of Mr. Chun's influence to win the contract, people with knowledge of the meeting say.    But Combustion Engineering's Mr. Mihan says that Chun Kyung Hwan &quot;had no role&quot; in gaining the contract for the company; he does confirm that Mr. Pyo was an agent for the company on the nuclear contract and that Mr. Clark and Gen. Singlaub were paid advisers to CE.    &quot;Everybody uses what political help they can, or loses contracts. There's no other way to do business here,&quot; the CE executive says. Mr. Clark acknowledges advising CE on the contracts, but won't say what his advice involved; Gen. Singlaub couldn't be reached for comment.    Shelby Brewer, CE's senior vice president for nuclear-power systems and a former U.S. Department of Energy official, says Gen. Singlaub helped the company get an introduction to Kepco's President Park, a former Korean army colonel. &quot;We just wanted to get a fair hearing,&quot; says Mr. Mihan. &quot;We don't set the rules. We only play by them.&quot;    Meanwhile, the National Assembly is investigating the roles played by men alleged to be to be agents in Korea for Sargent andamp; Lundy, Korean-American businessman Charles Kim Chong Sun, known in the U.S. as Charles Kim, and Lee Min Ha. Korean intelligence officials identify both men as business associates and friends of Chun Kyung Hwan and another Chun brother.    The intelligence officials say the Chuns lobbied with their brother, the president, and with Kepco's Mr. Park to get Sandamp;L the contracts. An Sandamp;L spokesman describes Mr. Kim as a &quot;regional representative&quot; but says he never heard of Mr. Lee. Mr. Kim acknowledges representing Sandamp;L, but declines to discuss his role or comment on any relationship with the Chun brothers. </TEXT></DOC>