<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Critics Accuse the Mine-Safety AgencyOf Mismanagement, Endangering Lives---By Bryan BurroughStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><TEXT>   The federal Mine Safety and Health Administration is coming under fire in Congress and elsewhere.    Internal agency memos, congressional testimony and interviews with current and former MSHA officials indicate that the agency has dragged its feet on critical safety regulations, approved deficient mine-safety plans and ignored its own inspectors' pleas to better police hazardous mines. MSHA's problems have been aggravated by bureaucratic infighting, overworked inspectors, and a philosophical approach favoring cooperation with Big Coal.    &quot;MSHA is risking the lives of miners every working day,&quot; says Sen. Edward Kennedy, the Massachusetts Democrat who recently headed a congressional hearing critical of MSHA. Utah Republican Sen. Orrin Hatch says that he observes &quot;a disturbing pattern of misconduct, mismanagement and serious abuse&quot; at MSHA. This spring, the Labor Department's inspector general started investigating allegations of misconduct at the agency.    An analysis five years ago by Herschel Potter, then MSHA's safety director, concluded that lax inspection and enforcement by the agency contributed to eight of the 16 multiple-fatality mine accidents under study. &quot;MSHA hasn't changed any since I wrote that memo,&quot; says Mr. Potter, who retired in January after 28 years with the agency.    At a congressional hearing in April, agency officials conceded that their failure to enact long-proposed rules on smoke detectors and other safety matters had contributed to the deaths of 27 miners in a Utah mine fire in 1984.    Coal-industry executives defend the agency, citing a decline in mine deaths in recent years. But others within the industry, including the United Mine Workers union, attribute that decline to the sharp drop in the number of U.S. coal miners.    At MSHA, officials point to changes that they believe will strengthen the agency's watchdog function. Alan McMillan, the agency's interim director, recently reversed a policy that reduced criminal convictions for negligent operators. And under pressure from Congress, the agency has hired about 100 new mine inspectors. (Among the new hires, though, was a former MSHA inspector who pleaded guilty to falsifying federal safety records in 1980. He is being dismissed following an inquiry by a reporter for this newspaper.)    The improved cooperation between MSHA and the industry dates back to 1981, when Ford B. Ford, who then headed MSHA, met with agency supervisors in Beckley, W.Va. Mr. Ford, a close friend of President Reagan, told the supervisors that coal operators and regulators shouldn't be adversaries, and he criticized issuing penalties for offenses he considered &quot;too technical&quot; or &quot;nitpicky.&quot;    After that meeting, changes were detected immediately. Inspectors complain that supervisors began harassing them for cracking down on problem mines and, in some instances, overturned their citations. A revision of mine-safety regulations was begun, and many of the proposed new regulations paralleled industry recommendations. For many violations, fines were reduced to $20, a level that doesn't discourage unsafe mining practices, according to a study last year by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress.    The changes haven't improved conditions in the coal fields. For example, despite warnings of dangerous conditions, agency officials failed to take action before an explosion killed seven miners in Virginia in June 1983 at a mine run by the Clinchfield Coal unit of Pittston Co., based in Greenwich, Conn. In the six months before the explosion, MSHA inspectors had issued 122 citations at the mine, including 49 for various ventilation violations, and union safety officials had made complaints as well. Ronald Shell, MSHA's acting safety director, contends that the inspectors' citations weren't alarming enough to worry the agency. As for the union's warnings, he says, &quot;I'm sure they raised concerns. But those concerns must have been of a general nature.&quot;    In some cases, MSHA's problems have been exacerbated by inspector shortages. In June 1984, inspectors grew worried about high levels of methane in an Indiana County, Pa., mine. But despite their efforts, their Pittsburgh-based supervisor didn't approve extensive ventilation checks, and six days later the mine -- run by a unit of Pennsylvania Power andamp; Light Co. -- exploded, killing three miners and injuring several others.    The supervisor &quot;told me it didn't do any good the last time&quot; MSHA attempted to reduce methane at the mine, an inspector later told a state investigative hearing, &quot;and he also told me he didn't have enough people, which was true.&quot; MSHA's Mr. Shell says that the inspectors' request was under review at the time of the accident.    MSHA's approval of a faulty ventilation system has been linked to an explosion that killed 13 miners at a Grundy Mining Co. mine near Jasper, Tenn., in 1981. Jerry L. Spicer, now the agency's top safety official, approved the plan, and he told a congressional hearing in March that at the time, he &quot;had no reason to think&quot; that the plan was inadequate.    Others within the agency are critical, nonetheless. &quot;Any mining man should have known that plan was dangerous,&quot; says Larry Layne, an MSHA investigator. In congressional testimony, he also said that Mr. Spicer had attempted to conceal his approval of the plan but had been dissuaded by an agency attorney; testifying himself, Mr. Spicer said that he couldn't recall that. In any case, concludes Paul Componation, the former head of MSHA's mine-ventilation section, &quot;the accident at Grundy began when MSHA approved the wrong plan.&quot;    In another accident, miner Richard Boggs was crushed by a 12-foot-high block of falling coal at a Harlan County, Ky., coal mine in June 1985, after the mine's owner and MSHA supervisors had ignored repeated warnings of unsafe roof conditions. &quot;There were blocks of coal half as big as a Jeep hanging off the {walls},&quot; says inspector Paul Helton, who issued the warnings. &quot;It was the same as if they'd put a gun to his head and shot him.&quot;    A Labor Department administrative law judge, citing, among other things, MSHA's failure to pursue Mr. Helton's recommendations, recently ruled that the mine operator couldn't be held negligent and reduced a fine to $2,000 from $11,000. But an MSHA spokesman says that Mr. Helton's warnings weren't urgent enough to prompt stricter measures.    Mr. Helton also complains that he was removed from inspecting Bon Trucking Co.'s Burger #2 mine in 1984 after the mine operator complained to an MSHA supervisor about numerous safety violations issued by Mr. Helton. In a conference, the operator &quot;started yelling about having problems getting along with me,&quot; Mr. Helton recalls. &quot;I said in front of my supervisor, 'The only problem you have is the paper {citing violations} in your hand.' {Later} I was taken off the inspection.&quot;    Within three months of Mr. Helton's removal, four men were killed in a roof fall at the mine. One factor leading to the accident was a roof weakened by excessively wide entryways, a violation Mr. Helton says he had cited the mine for repeatedly. MSHA's Mr. Shell says that the case is being investigated by the U.S. attorney's office in Lexington, Ky.    Even when a major safety problem is identified, MSHA is slow to respond. For instance, the agency has done practically nothing about abandoned mine tunnels, or &quot;gobs,&quot; even though experts like Mr. Componation think they represent the biggest danger in U.S. coal mines today. An MSHA task force has identified more than 150 such areas, which can harbor concentrations of methane and can explode if accidentally breached during mining. At least two mine disasters in the last five years have been attributed in part to the tunnels.    Robert Elam, an MSHA ventilation specialist, says that MSHA regulations that call for the areas to be sealed or ventilated are sufficient and that they are adequately enforced. But Mr. Potter and other critics contend that MSHA refuses to force coal companies to undertake the costly sealing or ventilation.    &quot;There's going to be another explosion because of the gobs, and there will be a large loss of life,&quot; says Mr. Potter. &quot;The question is not if it will happen, it's when it will happen. The agency knows that.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>