<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880426-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT VOTED, 5-4, to consider overturning a racial-bias ruling.    In one of the first actions to clearly mark the impact of the Reagan years, the court announced it will reconsider its 1976 ruling permitting a broad range of racial discrimination suits against private parties when it examines a North Carolina job-discrimination case next term. The five justices raised the issue on their own, without being asked by lawyers in the case or the Justice Department. The majority included three Reagan appointees, the chief justice promoted by Reagan and another justice. The minority dissented sharply.    The court also let stand an Arizona ban on sexually explicit telephone dialup services. Justices refused to hear free-speech arguments in the case.    ---   John Demjanjuk was sentenced to death by hanging after an Israeli court ruled he was &quot;Ivan the Terrible,&quot; a Nazi guard who ran gas chambers at Treblinka where about 800,000 Jews died. The retired U.S. auto worker's sentence will be appealed. Only one man, Holocaust architect Adolph Eichmann, has ever been executed in Israel.    ---   Arafat met in Damascus with Syrian President Assad to try to end five years of violent rivalry and revive a hard-line alliance against Israel and a U.S. peace plan. A spokesman for Assad said the president and the PLO leader discussed the need for united support of the Palestinian uprising in Israel during their lengthy meeting.    Israeli military officials said a navy patrol craft sank a rubber dinghy, killing two people, off the coast of Lebanon. Military sources said it carried Palestinian guerrillas seeking to infiltrate Israel. Separately, the U.N. Security Council voted 14-0 to condemn the assassination of PLO deputy commander Khalil al-Wazir. The U.S. abstained.    ---   Dukakis was optimistic on the eve of Pennsylvania's Democratic presidential primary, with polls showing him a clear favorite in the 178-delegate contest and a national survey indicating he could beat Bush decisively in November. Jackson's campaign manager said the candidate would concentrate on California after today's vote.    ---   Three submarine crewmen remained missing following an explosion and fire on the USS Bonefish that injured 22 of 92 aboard during a training mission 160 miles off Florida Sunday. Search teams are waiting for toxic smoke to dissipate before boarding the 30-year-old boat, one of the last diesel-powered submarines in the Navy.    ---   Pakistan's President Zia-ul-Haq said he wants to quickly improve relations with the Soviet Union now that Moscow has agreed to withdraw its estimated 115,000 troops from Afghanistan. Pakistan has served as a conduit for U.S. aid to Afghan rebels, but the settlement may cause its relations with Washington to cool.    Najibullah offered to withdraw Afghan troops from the Pakistani border if rebels and Pakistan agree to do the same. The proposal, however, appeared to be a face-saving acknowledgement of rebel dominance in the area. Separately, the State Department dismissed the Afghan president's call for better ties with the U.S. as &quot;absurd.&quot;    ---   The White House said Reagan is weighing options and has made no decision about an expanded Navy role in the Persian Gulf. Administration officials said last week that the U.S. had decided to allow its warships to aid neutral vessels under attack. The White House, however, said Reagan may order a return to limited rules of engagement.    ---   Mitterrand called for the voiding of election results in New Caledonia after violence in which six people were killed prevented many polling places from opening. The Socialist president's rival, Premier Chirac, won a landslide victory in presidential balloting in the French Pacific territory that was marred by Kanak separatist violence.    ---   Panama's president reshuffled his cabinet in an attempt to find a way out of a worsening financial and political crisis brought on by U.S. efforts to oust military strongman Gen. Manuel Noriega. Separately, Panama's disputed envoy to the U.S. said former Panamanian military officers will move to oust Noriega next week.    ---   South Korean students demonstrated and rival political groups clashed on the eve of parliamentary elections. The Democratic Justice Party of President Roh Tae Woo is expected to win a majority in the 299-seat National Assembly in today's vote.    ---   A French appeals court ruled that Haiti can sue deposed dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier in France for $120 million that the new Haitian government alleges he stole from state funds before he was ousted in 1986.    ---   The Senate approved legislation that would grant disability benefits to military veterans who were exposed to radiation and subsequently developed cancer, and to their survivors. About 250,000 servicemen were exposed during nuclear tests in the 1940s and during the occupation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, lawmakers said.    ---   Died: Victor Holt Jr., 79, former president of Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., Saturday, in Palm Beach, Fla., of complications from Parkinson's disease. </TEXT></DOC>