<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871029-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Stock Turmoil Threatens Capital Plans---Many Firms, GovernmentsReview Share Sales---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   The world-wide stock market turmoil is creating huge headaches for companies and governments from Ankara to Zurich. Consider the case of Eurotunnel.    Ever since Napoleon suggested building a tunnel under the English channel 185 years ago, countless proposals and several attempts to build it have been scuttled. Now, because of the collapse of stock prices, there's a real danger that the latest, and probably most viable, attempt to build the link could go the way of all the others.    Eurotunnel, the Anglo-French consortium behind the project, needs to raise #750 million ($1.28 billion) next month to complete its financing before construction starts in December. If the planned equity offer fails, the group won't be able to draw on #5 billion of bank loans pledged last August, and the entire project could collapse.    For the moment, Eurotunnel is trying to keep a stiff upper lip. &quot;Obviously, it would have been better to do the issue in a stronger market,&quot; says a spokeswoman. &quot;But everything is still going full steam ahead.&quot;    Many analysts aren't so sure. &quot;However much arm-twisting there is, a fund manager is going to require . . . a lot of convincing that it's worth investing&quot; in Eurotunnel, says Richard Hannah, an analyst at the London brokerage house Phillips andamp; Drew.    Investors the world over have lost money as stock prices have plummeted. But many others are suffering, too. Governments are finding their plans to sell off state assets in jeopardy, often leaving them with the prospect of curbing spending or seeing budget deficits on the rise. Once-sleepy stock markets that had started to wake up, attracting the interest of local companies and investors, now fear for their future. Long-established companies or start-up entrepreneurs hoping to use booming markets to raise capital for future growth are being forced to reconsider.    Already there are casualties. Spain's state-controlled telecommunications company announced yesterday that it is suspending its planned 66 billion-peseta ($575 million) rights issue. Cia. Telefonica Nacional de Espana had wanted to use proceeds of the share issue to fund the modernization of the country's telephone system.    In France, the government has postponed indefinitely selling its 51% stake in defense contractor Matra S.A. and yesterday announced that it will delay quotation of shares in the banking group Cie. Financiere de Suez, which was due to beging today following the sale of the state's stake to the public. Air France has delayed the planned sale of a 15% stake to the public, and the French bond market for new corporate issues has been shut since Oct. 15, affecting some issues by small to medium-sized French banks.    In Switzerland, the Geneva stock exchange has postponed the opening of a market for venture capital, worrying about the effect that volatile world markets would have on new companies wanting to go public.    In Tokyo, finance officials and brokerage houses say that several Japanese corporations have postponed indefinitely plans to issue domestic and Eurodollar bonds. The companies, which include some major gas and electric concerns, are waiting for the markets to calm down. Finance officials and brokers said they don't think the delays will cause any major cash crunches. Still, &quot;it may have an effect on (companies') long-range planning,&quot; says Kazuo Tanaka, deputy general manager of the capital-markets division of Nomura Securities Co.    For every casualty already announced, there are potentially many others. One of the biggest could be the looming fiasco of the huge British Petroleum Co. share sale. BP's stock has plunged well below the government's 330 pence-a-share offer price, so the issue's U.S. and British underwriters almost certainly will be left holding a lot of unwanted BP shares at a paper loss if the #7.24 billion ($12.33 billion) issue goes ahead as planned. Nigel Lawson, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, is expected to decide today whether to proceed with the offering or scrap or postpone it.    &quot;Unless the government has a change of heart, the underwriters are going to get stuffed on BP,&quot; says Mr. Hannah of Phillips andamp; Drew. &quot;That obviously is going to make them very reluctant to underwrite new issues, unless the market picks up again.&quot;    In France, big stock sales planned for next month by Yves Saint Laurent S.A. and Canal Plus, which operates France's nationwide pay-television channel, could both be in danger. Before the market slump, the 20% of its stock that Saint Laurent had planned to sell would have been worth as much as one billion French francs ($170 million), sources close to the company say. Robert de Bruin, a spokesman for Cerus S.A., the holding company for the interests of Italian financier Carlo De Benedetti in France, which owns 37% of Saint Laurent, says Cerus and Saint Laurent &quot;haven't changed our plans, we hope to go ahead. But if the markets a couple of weeks before Dec. 4 are as bad as they are now, we would obviously have to reconsider.&quot; He adds: &quot;It's not that people won't snap up the shares, the questions is what price we could get.&quot;    In West Germany, the stock-market crash threatens to derail the government's long-awaited sale of its remaining 16% stake in auto maker Volkswagen AG. Despite public assurances this week by Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg that Bonn still plans to go ahead with the sale, it may yet be postponed.    &quot;Ultimately, it is Stoltenberg's decision and I don't think he has decided yet,&quot; says one Finance Ministry official. This would be the largest sale of government assets in German history, and its postponement would be a significant loss of both income and prestige for the government. &quot;The VW sale is not as important financially as it is psychologically,&quot; the official says. &quot;If we don't move forward it will be a setback for our future plans.&quot;    For the moment, many others are putting a brave face on the situation, insisting that they will continue with their plans, or else waiting nervously to see how markets settle down.    Japan's Ministry of Finance says it intends to forge ahead with the sale of 1.95 million shares of Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp. starting Nov. 10, despite the huge burden this will place on the already beleaguered Tokyo stock market. &quot;We aren't thinking of changing anything. And nobody has advised us that we should,&quot; says the Finance Ministry official who is overseeing the distribution of NTT shares.    Proceeds from the planned sale are supposed to help fund a supplementary budget package. When the price of NTT shares soared to more than three million yen ($21,270) last April, the government had visions of financing the entire six trillion-yen ($42.5 billion) supplementary budget with the proceeds from next month's sale. But with the share price of NTT recently swinging between 2.65 million yen and 2.80 million yen, it seems unlikely that the revenue from the sale will now pay the whole bill. Nevertheless, officials say they aren't worried. &quot;It won't have any significant effect,&quot; says the Finance Ministry official. The government is currently considering selling off part of Japan Air Lines Co. following the NTT sale.    Similarly, the Austrian government is pressing ahead with the largest stock offering in the nation's history, the sale next month of a 25% stake in the state oil and gas company, OMV AG. &quot;We will not deviate from our plans just because the market goes beserk for a few weeks,&quot; says a spokesman.    Nonetheless, the climate for future state asset sales has deteriorated in many countries following the markets' downturn.    Austrian analysts fear the international crisis may undermine the government's hopes of winning over as many as 100,000 new shareholders with its denationalization program. At present, only 1.5% of Austrians own shares, far fewer than in most of the country's neighbors.    The French government already has sold most of the big state-owned companies it had planned to sell this year, raising slightly less than 100 billion francs ($16.96 billion), much more than expected at the beginning of the year. But it still hasn't sold about half the 65 companies and banks it intends to denationalize by 1991. While the government, which has announced budget and tax cuts for next year, isn't desperate for the proceeds from future privatizations right now, it has staked much political capital on its denationalization program.    Turkey's ambitious plans to sell more than 250 companies to the public over the next five years also could suffer. Some market analysts say plans by a group of international investors to pool their resources and form a fund to invest in the Turkish market is likely to be postponed. &quot;After the stock market crash, it isn't the best time to talk about such a fund,' says Reynaldo Ortiz, a representative of the International Finance Corp., a World Bank affiliate that has advised the Turkish government.    For many companies not owned by the state, the market crash marks the end of an era of fast growth through internal investment and acquisitions. Companies may have to rely more on bank borrowing and cash reserves, and less on bold equity issues, to finance takeovers, for example. &quot;Deals for a while are going to be on fundamentals, not financial jiggery,&quot; says Richard Lapthorne, finance director of Britain's Courtaulds PLC, a chemicals, textiles and engineering concern. &quot;The froth's gone out of the paper companies, the conglomerates.&quot;    The meltdown may even effect the future of entire markets.    In Switzerland, for example, the past couple of years have seen an incredible boom in the number of companies issuing to the public for the first time, or taking advantage of a receptive market to strengthen their capital base. The volume of new stock issues more than tripled between 1985 and 1986. Now, bankers anticipate that this will change.    The first sign of a likely slowdown? Werner K. Ray, Switzerland's only hostile corporate raider, has just postponed plans to take his holding company, Omni Holding AG, public next month. </TEXT></DOC>