<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Surprising Majority Agrees on Need for Weaker Dollar---Passing the Buck Downward Is SeenAs Remedy for U.S. Trade Deficit---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 11/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN EUROP JAPAN GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Agreement is rare in economics.    But ask two dozen top U.S. economists, bankers and business executives shaken by a stock-market crash how to correct the nation's trade deficit, and a surprising majority agrees: Push down the value of the dollar. Even though the currency has already dropped steeply from its 1985 peak, they want it to fall more -- some say a lot more.    By all appearances, their view has permeated the world's finance ministries and central banks. The dollar has fallen about 5% since Oct. 19, Black Monday. Yesterday, it fell again, hovering near a 40-year low against the Japanese yen and close to a low against the West German mark. &quot;Central banks seem determined to send the dollar lower,&quot; says John Lynam, vice president, foreign exchange, of Security Pacific National Bank    &quot;This is just the beginning,&quot; says Harvard economicsprofessor Lawrence Summers, who believes a sustained dollardrop is under way. &quot;I think it's got a long way to go.&quot;   A classic maneuver, pushing down the dollar aims to slow imports by raising their price in the U.S. while cutting the foreign-currency price of U.S. exports. But even advocates warn of related pain. Inflation often follows, as it did in the 1970s. Costs of foreign travel and doing business overseas rise. American companies and real estate become bargains for foreign shoppers.    Moreover, some dissenters call such a strategy &quot;crazy&quot; and likely to shake confidence in the currency and stimulate &quot;a mad rush&quot; of investors out of dollar assets, sending U.S. stock and bond markets plunging again. &quot;I don't think it's a risk worth taking,&quot; says Douglas Lamont, a professor at Northwestern University's School of Management.    Still others say such short-term measures are irrelevant. &quot;There isn't any silver bullet that will solve the trade deficit. That's the news,&quot; says Harvard Business School professor Joseph L. Bower. Pushing down the dollar, he says, is analagous to &quot;the company that can't sell its goods and responds by cutting the price regardless of whether it's making a profit.&quot; He adds, &quot;We know what happens to companies that do that.&quot;    Few agree on how to depress the dollar. Some would do it suddenly by international accord. Others would let the dollar drift down unaided. Some favor a package of measures. Others say dump the dollar and let markets do the rest. However it's done, says Paul Krugman, professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, it is &quot;the only reliable way to get the trade deficit down fast enough and far enough.&quot;    The trade deficit matters, economists say, because -- symptom or cause -- it was intimately involved in last month's stock-market crash. On Oct. 14, the Commerce Department reported a $15.68 billion deficit in U.S. merchandise trade for August. Although narrower than in July, the deficit exceeded most forecasts.    Responding within minutes, the dollar sank, short-term interest rates soared, bond prices plunged and the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell by a then-record 95.46 points on the day. The reaction capped years of growing apprehension over the nation's twin budget and trade deficits, which have been increasingly financed by foreigners' willingness to hold dollars and U.S government bonds, ballooning U.S. foreign debt.    While postwar budget deficits have been chronic, the U.S. had a trade surplus -- exported more goods and services than it imported -- in almost every year from World War II through 1981. In 1982, however, that surplus evaporated, fell $36.8 billion into the red in 1983 and grew steadily to $125.7 billion last year; quarterly deficits for this year were $38.2 billion in the second period, widened from $33.7 billion in the first quarter, according to the Commerce Department.    Meanwhile, fears mounted that foreigners would grow less inclined to finance these deficits. If so, the Federal Reserve Board would have to raise interest rates continually to keep U.S. government bonds attractive. But that would make stocks increasingly unattractive in the short term and push the U.S. into recession in the long term. Better to get out before that happened, traders figured. Ergo, crash.    If the U.S. could only reverse its trade deficit, many traders and economists think, it would give the Fed more room for maneuver, and give politicians more time to deal with the budget deficit in an orderly manner, restoring market confidence.    To do that, says Rudiger Dornbusch, another MIT economist, a 25% cut is needed in the dollar's value against currencies of major U.S. trading partners to shrink the trade deficit to about $50 billion. He derives that from a computer model, which calculates that for every 16% gain in the competitiveness of U.S. export prices and every 8% rise in net foreign spending levels, the U.S. gains net exports equivalent to 2% of gross national product. But every six years, 1% of GNP is eroded from U.S. net exports by gains in the export capacities of developing countries.    It would also add 2 1/2 percentage points to inflation, Mr. Dornbusch says. But economists warn that once it starts, inflation can be hard to fine tune. When the U.S. devalued the dollar in August 1971 by ending its obligation to redeem dollars held by foreigners for gold, for example, it unleashed a flood of consequences. Members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, who price their oil in dollars, reacted to the erosion of their revenue with a price increase. It worked so well that they went on, aided by a Middle East War and a tightening market, to boost the price of oil in several steps by more than 10-fold to a high of nearly $40 a barrel.    Domestic manufacturers, relieved of foreign competitive pressure by rising import prices, took the opportunity to raise their own prices. Inflation leaped from under 4% in 1972 to double digits in 1974 and again in the years 1979 through 1981. Interest rates rose correspondingly.    The current falling dollar is already taking its toll on Americans traveling abroad. At 36,000 yen per night, a standard single room in Tokyo's deluxe Imperial Hotel cost $136 in March 1985. Today, with the yen at 137 to the dollar, a night's sleep costs $262. Should the dollar fall to 100 yen, that room at the Imperial would soar to $350.    Likewise, a top-of-the-line Mercedes-Benz 560 SEL sedan cost $51,200 in the U.S. in March 1985, when a dollar bought 3.4395 marks. Today, with the mark at around 1.70 to the dollar, the car's list price is $68,660. The increase &quot;includes some product improvements, but basically it's the result of the dollar and the mark,&quot; says a Mercedes spokesman. Another 25% drop in the dollar would bring the 560 SEL's list price to more than $80,000. &quot;If the dollar falls against the mark, our prices have to reflect it,&quot; says the spokesman.    Meanwhile, Japanese poured an estimated $4.1 billion into U.S. real estate last year and another $2.2 billion in the first half of 1987. Exxon Corp., among several major U.S. companies that once owned their own headquarters, now pays rent to a foreign landlord. It is largely the falling dollar that has brought &quot;all these Japanese investors over here,&quot; says Daniel Neidich, a partner in the real estate department at Goldman Sachs andamp; Co.    Mr. Dornbusch of MIT also concedes that a 25% drop in the dollar could temporarily panic foreign investors. But he thinks there's more danger keeping the dollar where it is: &quot;Right now people are loitering around, saying 'Be sure you get out before it falls,'&quot; while &quot;the Fed pays them high interest rates for hanging in.&quot; He thinks if the dollar were to plunge quickly, foreign investors might leap out temporarily, then return -- less edgy -- as the dollar hit bottom. &quot;If we had it behind us, we could have low interest rates and be cheerful,&quot; he says.    &quot;Do it in one fell swoop,&quot; says Robert Lawrence, an economist at the Brookings Institution in Washington, who suggests a secretly negotiated overnight devaluation. Investors would have taken their losses before they knew what happened. Then they would see the U.S. as a good place to invest again, he says. And while a quick devaluation would mean a price rise, it would be a one-time effect rather than a force for chronic inflation, says C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics, also in Washington.    Robert Hormats, vice president of Goldman Sachs and a former under secretary of state for economic affairs, agrees that the dollar must come down. But he says the fall must be moderate and internationally coordinated in a package of measures to reduce both trade and budget deficits.    Cutting the federal budget deficit is vital, says Mr. Hormats. That will relieve pressure on the Treasury to borrow, enabling the Fed to lower interest rates. This is needed, says Mr. Hormats, both to keep from pushing the economy into recession and &quot;to give us greater credibility in asking other countries to lower their interest rates.&quot; Lower they must, he says, to stimulate their economies to buy more U.S. exports, to compensate for declines in their own exports and to keep the dollar from falling too far. &quot;You want a dollar decline to improve the trade balance, but not to have the dollar fall through the floor,&quot; he says. Finally, says Mr. Hormats, the U.S. and its major trading partners must agree to stabilize the dollar around a new central rate.    Such a package depends on deft international cooperation, says Mr. Hormats. &quot;But other countries can't have it both ways. If they want stable currencies, they can't run big trade surpluses. If the U.S. does shrink domestic demand by cutting the budget deficit, other countries must expand&quot; to pull in U.S. exports. &quot;It's hard to get people to do these things in the absence of a crisis,&quot; but the stock-market crash may provide the incentive, he says.    Another view of pushing down the dollar holds that it is already happening and no further action is required. &quot;Relax,&quot; says a former Citicorp chairman, Walter Wriston. &quot;The trade deficit will solve itself over time.&quot; Prescriptions to cure it are worse than inaction, he says. &quot;There are two well kept secrets in America,&quot; he adds. &quot;One is that exports are rising and the other is that tax revenues have increased every year since marginal tax rates were cut.&quot;    Mr. Wriston also suggests there has been considerable progress in opening foreign markets to U.S. goods, especially the recent free-trade agreement with Canada. &quot;If it survives our legislature and theirs, it will do an enormous amount of good,&quot; he says.    Likewise, Harvard economist Martin Feldstein, a former chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, says dollar weakening and righting of the trade balance are not only well under way, but also inevitable. (The dollar now stands 50% below its March 1985 high against the mark and the yen.) Cutting the budget deficit faster would speed a decline of interest rates and the dollar, shrinking the trade deficit faster, too, says Mr. Feldstein.    Not everyone wants to see the dollar drop. John Hagens, vice president at WEFA Group, Philadelphia-based economic consultants, thinks that would be &quot;crazy.&quot; In addition to the possibility of investor panic, he says the falling dollar would tend to stimulate exports more than constrain imports. Such export industries as paper, rubber, plastics and chemicals are already running up against capacity, he says. Along with rising import prices, most economists say that could be inflationary.    Instead of depressing the dollar to correct the trade deficit, Mr. Hagens favors restraints on domestic demand to slow imports. &quot;One way you do that is a stock-market crash,&quot; he says. Another method is a tax increase to pull purchasing power out of the private sector. But Mr. Hagen concedes that too large a tax increase could induce recession. &quot;It's a balancing act.&quot;    While agreeing that exchange rates are important, some say focusing on a weaker dollar misses the point. &quot;The fundamental cause of the trade deficit,&quot; argues S. Bruce Smart, under secretary of commerce for international trade, is the failure of domestic savings to fund both private investment and our budget deficits. &quot;The trade deficit climbs because the only way foreigners can get money to finance our fiscal deficit is by running a trade surplus with us,&quot; says Mr. Smart. But as interest rates rise to attract foreign financing of the budget deficit, they also draw savings away from the private investment needed to make industry competitive.    That, says Mr. Smart, leaves &quot;two acceptable options and one unacceptable option to improve the trade deficit.&quot; One is to cut the budget deficit and another is to increase private savings. The &quot;highly undesirable&quot; option would be to reduce private investment. &quot;Some combination may have to be used,&quot; he muses.    Taxes on consumption such as an oil-import tariff or a value-added tax -- a form of sales tax widely used in Europe -- could spur savings, says Laura D'Andrea Tyson, professor of economics at the University of California at Berkeley. Such taxes would also help balance the budget, she adds. Ideally, she says, the U.S. should have implemented consumption taxes two years ago when the economy was stronger and the taxes would have been less recessionary. But even with today's instability, &quot;the U.S. needs to bite the bulllet&quot; on consumption. &quot;Brazil and Mexico didn't want to take 90% of their austerity measures. But they had to because of international creditors. It's no different for the U.S. today,&quot; she says.    It goes deeper than that, says Mr. Bower, the Harvard Business School professor. &quot;Many of our companies aren't competitive at the factory level,&quot; he says. Ultimately, the solution will involve reform of American education to provide the scientists and engineers needed to restore an American edge. Meanwhile, he says, &quot;Markets must get used to the fact that they're dealing with a fundamental problem.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>