<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880719-0011 </DOCNO><HL> Arms and the Men: Weapons Inquiry Soon Will Provide a Look At Consultants' Role --- Do Some of Them Furnish Inside Data to Contractors Before Submission of Bids? --- World of 'Slam Dunk' Galvin </HL><AUTHOR> Edward T. Pound (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MD ML UTX UIS </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the corridors of the Pentagon and in the offices of some military contractors, consultant William Galvin is known simply as &quot;Slam Dunk.&quot; Explains one former Defense Department official: &quot;He is a real big name-dropper.&quot; But &quot;he doesn't just drop a name, he slam dunks it.&quot;    What people such as the gregarious Mr. Galvin do and how they do it is a hot topic these days. For defense industry consultants are the focus of the huge, unfolding Pentagon contracting scandal. And while expertise in the often-arcane business of weapons-system procurement is their stock-in-trade, it is becoming clear that connections, glad-handing and access are also what some sell -- and what some hungry and competitive corporate clients seek.    Vivid details of this glad-handing and access-seeking may be revealed in the next few days as scores of documents are unsealed in the Justice Department's two-year-old investigation of alleged contracting abuses. But the expected excerpts of tapped telephone conversations aren't likely to do a lot to clarify the broader question of just where customary procurement practices stopped and the illegal buying of inside information may have begun. That probably will have to be decided in the courtroom or by future regulations imposed by Congress.    So far, investigators seeking search warrants in the inquiry known as Operation Ill Wind have disclosed in federal court papers that they believe that some consultants paid &quot;bribes or gratuities&quot; to Defense Department officials for secret bid-related information and then provided the data to would-be contractors.    But definitive answers aren't likely soon. To date, investigators have publicly connected fewer than 10 consultants with their inquiry. No one has been charged; no one has been formally accused of unethical behavior, and investigators haven't cited any specific illicit payments.    The investigation is already having an impact, however. It has put the spotlight on the murky, confusing and -- until now largely overlooked -- world of defense consulting. It is a business that, in the eyes of some lawmakers, needs strict new rules of conduct. Right now, just what constitutes improper activity isn't even clear.    &quot;Who are these people? What services do they perform? . . . Who monitors what they do?&quot; asks Sen. David Pryor, an Arkansas Democrat, complaining about &quot;shadowy figures clinging to the Pentagon's coffers.&quot;    Thousands of consultants make a living, one way or another, out of dealings between business and the Pentagon. They range from one-person operations to small &quot;boutique&quot; firms studded with former admirals and generals to giant concerns such as BDM International Inc. of McLean, Va., with nearly 3,800 employees. The business is so vast that some consultants make a living advising other consultants.    Top people in the field rake in large annual retainers from multiple clients for helping win chunks of the Pentagon's annual $160 billion procurement budget. Melvyn Paisley, the consultant and former assistant Navy secretary who is a key figure in the current study, was selling his services for up to $200,000 a year per client. His other fees were closer to more typical fees consultants charge, which are in the range of $2,000 to $10,000 a month.    Some live in style, like the beefy and wise-cracking Mr. Galvin, a former Marine aviator with 30 years of military contacts. A chauffeur drives him to his luxurious Watergate apartment in Washington and his 17-acre Front Royal, Va., estate, where he has entertained industry and military friends.    Arms companies differ in what they expect. Some consultants have received bonuses for obtaining contracts and for information about competitors, one industry official says. &quot;That was the driving force in their world,&quot; he says, &quot;and there weren't any explicit rules on how to proceed.&quot;    A consultant specializing in Navy work confirms that some contractors have an &quot;insatiable appetite for information.&quot; But others, he says, mainly want an analysis of their bid proposals without necessarily relying on Pentagon information.    At times, consultants not only gather information on what defense officials want for particular programs, but also lobby those officials to make choices that benefit the contractors they represent. A defense-industry lawyer describes a typical role:   Before the Pentagon issues a &quot;request for proposal&quot; on a contract (an outline of what it wants to buy), consultants often will try to get particular kinds of requirements into or out of the proposal, depending on what the company wants. &quot;An RFP can be 10 volumes long and in one little footnote, it can say XYZ software is required for this product.&quot; If that software belongs to another firm, consultants &quot;may go in and see the same lieutenant colonel 50 times and bitch that to have XYZ software is not fair,&quot; the lawyer says.    To be effective in such cases, a consultant obviously needs access. Many are former high-ranking Defense Department officials and retired generals and admirals who move through the so-called revolving door into private business. The Pentagon inspector general's office acknowledges that the few rules that exist to govern disclosure or ethics for these consultants aren't effective. Nor have contractors who have increasingly hired consultants to help them navigate the complex procurement system exerted much control.    Unlike lobbyists who push Congress on behalf of various interests, defense consultants who push the Pentagon don't have to register. Current regulations impose limits on what departing Pentagon officials can do in the arms industry, but there are plenty of loopholes and confusion for those who become consultants. And in any event, Pentagon officials who become consultants aren't as restricted as those who go to work directly for arms companies.    &quot;The rules for consulting aren't clear,&quot; says one consultant who recently left the Navy. &quot;No one I know has ever really defined what constitutes a conflict of interest here.&quot;    The majority of consultants, who aren't caught up in the current scandal, understandably object to the lumps their occupation is taking. Consultant Richard DeLauer, formerly the Pentagon's top research official, says consultants are highly valued for advising contractors on whether their future plans make sense or not. And Robert Bennett, an attorney for several contractors, worries that &quot;in this frenzy, people aren't making distinctions between what is appropriate and what isn't appropriate conduct.&quot;    But even practices that have been long accepted as appropriate are now being questioned. Some consultants, like Mr. DeLauer, work for contractors while also advising the Pentagon for pay. And some lawmakers were outraged by a recent General Accounting Office report that the Pentagon spent at least $2.8 billion last year on consultants for such things as management reviews, technical assistance and research and development services.    Often consultants sit on powerful Pentagon advisory committees that help shape new weapon priorities. Although this may not help with pending contracts, it gives consultants valuable leads on how the services plan to spend their money.    The Defense Department doesn't always pay attention to what consultants are up to, either. Mark Saunders, a former civilian Navy contracting official, was fired in 1982 after being convicted of using Navy inside information in the stock market. He continued to maintain contact with the Navy office that fired him, according to a recent government affidavit filed in federal court in Dallas. It alleges that he acquired secret bid figures from his successor in the procurement post and sold the data. His lawyer denies that he did anything improper in the Pentagon case.    Some people argue that the passage back and forth between civilian and military roles promotes ideas and develops expertise. But consultants who &quot;work both sides of the street . . . {have} gotten out of hand,&quot; the Pentagon's deputy inspector general, Derek J. Vander Schaaf, told a House committee.    In many instances, consultants operate with small staffs, often only a secretary. But there also are think tanks and hundreds of profit-making &quot;professional services&quot; companies. One of the largest, and busiest, professional services companies is BDM International, which figures prominently in the current investigation and which Ford Motor Co. recently agreed to acquire for $425 million.    BDM founders gained a reputation by helping the military structure its early nuclear arsenals in the 1950s. The company, which now has a $500 million backlog in Pentagon contracts, analyzes how U.S. weapons will measure up on the battlefield. A major contractor on Star Wars research, BDM has advised the Pentagon on vaulting giant mirrors into space off which lasers would be bounced to destroy traveling missiles.    &quot;Consultants like BDM are great pools of talent the government can tap,&quot; says Byron Callan, an aerospace analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities. At BDM, he adds, &quot;you're buying the best and the brightest in a slew of electronics fields.&quot;    Now, however, agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Naval Investigative Service are looking into a number of close ties between BDM and Mr. Paisley, the Navy official turned consultant. While he was with the Department of the Navy, Mr. Paisley's wife, Vicki, went to work for BDM in 1983 and three years later became a consultant for the concern, which made a push to gain additional Navy business during Mr. Paisley's watch. He left the Navy on March 31, 1987, to work as a private consultant, signing up, among others, BDM.    In a search of Mr. Paisely's suburban Virginia home last month, agents seized, among other things, letters and other documents relating to BDM. They also seized documents showing that BDM had a business arrangement in 1985 with Mr. Paisley's one-time good friend, Mr. Galvin. A BDM spokesman says the firm hasn't engaged in wrongdoing.    How Messrs. Paisley and Galvin operated is at the heart of the criminal investigation. Their phones were tapped by FBI agents, and much of their dealings are recorded in secret transcripts.    Mr. Galvin excelled at getting things done -- using the phone and one-on-one meetings to accomplish his tasks. He preferred low visibility, setting up meetings for clients with Navy and Air Force officials and then stepping in the background. &quot;He was known as a deal-closer, he put things together,&quot; explains retired Marine Col. R.N. Patrick, who was an aide to Mr. Paisley in the Navy and later worked for Mr. Galvin.    Some in the defense industry say Messrs. Paisley and Galvin provided information to contractors on competitors' prices but don't say the actions were illegal. The two men aren't talking, nor is Mr. Galvin's lawyer. Mr. Paisley's attorney, Robert Plotkin, says, &quot;Mel Paisley did not leak or improperly disseminate classified or confidential information.&quot;    As the Reagan administration pushed for greater competition among weapons contractors, the Navy actively encouraged companies to bid on defense jobs previously awarded to sole suppliers. Navy officials often provided companies sensitive contract information to encourage their participation.    Several people who know Messrs. Paisley and Galvin say they weren't aware of a friendship between the two until Mr. Paisley came to Washington in 1981 from the Boeing Co. in Seattle. Mr. Galvin set up his consulting business around the same period. But they weren't surprised that the two quickly became friends. Mr. Galvin relished entertaining military people and industry executives, taking them to lunch, hockey games and racetracks.    Mr. Paisley and the Brooklyn-born Mr. Galvin, 57, who used to operate a medical services business in Florida, often partied together and twice went on ski trips together to Idaho. Mr. Galvin helped his friend's wife set up her own consulting firm, and industry sources say Mr. Paisley even suggested that arms-suppliers hire Mr. Galvin to solve any problems with the Navy. On the other hand, a former business associate recalls Mr. Galvin's saying he would tell prospective clients: &quot;I can get you access to Paisley.&quot;    Mr. Galvin enjoyed great success during Mr. Paisley's time in the Navy, picking up fees of more than $100,000 a year. He consulted for at least 10 contractors, including Unisys Corp., United Technologies Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp., three concerns that also retained Mr. Paisley and have been linked to the investigation. Mr. Galvin also is a director of a Florida defense subcontractor, Armtec Inc., whose offices were searched by federal agents. Unisys and United Technologies decline to discuss details of the investigation. Martin Marietta confirmed that it retained both Messrs. Galvin and Paisley but says contracts with both have lapsed. After he left the Navy almost 16 months ago, Mr. Paisley worked briefly as a consultant to Mr. Galvin. The relationship soured and the two men no longer are engaged in business activities together.    As the entire Pentagon procurement investigation proceeds, a paramount question still unanswered is: Just how high up the corporate ladders were consultants dealing? In court papers, investigators allege that employees of some companies took pains to conceal the roles consultants played in winning defense work.    On Capitol Hill, lawmakers are looking at holes in the conflict-of-interest and revolving door rules that encourage abuses. Some strengthening seems inevitable.    And with the heat on, contractors seem to be cracking down on the use of consultants, much to the chagrin of consultants.    &quot;Everybody's running for cover,&quot; says a former Pentagon official who recently set up a consulting operation and who now wonders if his fledgling company can survive.    ---   Andy Pasztor and Tim Carrington in Washington and Eileen White Read in Los Angeles contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>