<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0175 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Mexico's Phantom Bankers Come Out of the Shadows---By Sergio Sarmiento</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Alan Garcia of Peru often has shown an inclination for things Mexican. He has claimed that his party, the Popular American Revolutionary Alliance (APRA), derives its ideology from the Mexican revolution. During a visit to Mexico earlier this year, he sported a sombrero and sang Mexican songs in public. Now he has taken a page from recent Mexican history as he sets out to nationalize his country's private banks and related lending institutions, echoing the words of former Mexican President Jose Lopez Portillo when he claimed the move &quot;irreversible.&quot;    There are few irreversible things in politics or in economic realities, however, and Mexico's financial sytem is a case in point. Not only was 34% of the banks' stock sold back to the public this year, but a new private financial market, often described as a &quot;parallel banking system,&quot; has emerged and gained increasing strength in the five years since the banks were taken over by the state.    This private financial system began to develop almost immediately after Mexican banks were nationalized on Sept. 1, 1982. Illegal foreign-currency transactions were the first manifestations, as the erratic last months of President Lopez Portillo's administration provoked a capital stampede. Later, treasurers of large companies began to lend money to each other, as distrust of the nationalized banks was prevalent.    Instead of fighting the trend, though, the administration of Miguel de la Madrid, which took over the government on Dec. 1, 1982, promoted the development of the private financial system. Non-banking companies owned by the nationalized banks were sold back to the private sector, often to the banks' former owners. They included stock-brokerage houses, insurance firms and bonding companies, among other financial institutions.    The parallel system really began to take off in August 1985, when the government raised reserve requirements on bank deposits to 90%. The move, which it said would last only three months, remained in place as the fall in oil prices compelled the government to seek new resources to finance a growing budget deficit. In 1986, in fact, the reserve requirement was raised to absorb virtually 100% of all new bank deposits. Desperate for credit, private companies began to scramble for loans anywhere they could find them. Though perhaps not as efficient as private bankers, agents from non-banking institutions -- stock-brokerage houses, insurance companies, etc. -- stepped in, arranging loans, placing commercial paper and securing new investments.    The Mexican government doesn't like the expression &quot;parallel banking system,&quot; generally used to describe the new private financial network. Officials emphasize the technical differences between real banks and the non-banking financial institutions. This linguistic distinction is deemed necessary because the Mexican Constitution was amended after the banks' nationalization to prohibit private ownership of banks (of course, there have been at least 335 ammendments to the current Mexican Constitution). A result is that investment banks established in Mexico must officially operate as so-called &quot;financial engineering firms.&quot;    Whatever the definition, the fact is that non-banking institutions are taking an increasingly larger share of the country's financial business. Although they represented only 3.1% of the nation's financial market in 1981, this figure had grown to 17.3% by 1986, according to the official Bank Association of Mexico. This figure does not include informal operations by small firms and individuals that are impossible to measure. The much vaunted Mexican stock-exchange boom, with average quotes running close to 1,000% above the levels of 12 months before, may well be a consequence of this growth.    The banks, though, are beginning to fight back. New savings instruments have been introduced by the government, and formal bankers are now back on the streets trying to round up business. The banks want to be rid of, in fact, many of the restrictions imposed on them by the government. Miguel Mancera, general director of the Bank of Mexico, the nation's central bank, said last June in the third annual meeting of the Association of Mexican Banks: &quot;{It is} crucial to allow our credit institutions to operate competitively.&quot;    A result of this new attitude has been a drop in the reserve requirement, although banks still can lend freely only 15% of their deposits. The portion of the reserve channeled to financing the government deficit was reduced from 58% to 35% of new deposits on Aug. 1. More interesting still is the fact that the banks actually have gone over to the parallel system and are offering their own acceptances at rates higher than they quote for their normal deposits.    The non-banking institutions are not yielding, however. According to Jaime Gallastegui, a former banking official who set up his own financial and foreign-trade organization after the nationalization, lack of bank credit prompted companies to turn to the parallel system in 1985 and 1986, but now the reason is &quot;lower financial costs.&quot;    Not everyone, of course, has access to formal credit in Mexico. Only large companies are getting financing from the banking or parallel systems. With credit continuing to be tight, small companies and private individuals have virtually no access to either. The real-estate market, for example, has collapsed to a large extent after the almost complete disappearance of mortgage loans.    A surprising voice of support for the continued liberalization of the country's financial system comes from Clemente Ruiz Duran, who was technical director of the Bank of Mexico during the last three months of President Lopez Portillo's administration, just after the banks' nationalization. The economist, who was largely in charge of developing exchange controls and setting up the rules for the new state-controlled banks, says that the government should indeed &quot;ensure the modernization of the entire financial system, including both banks and non-banking institutions.&quot; And he adds, &quot;Fortunately, the authorities have abandoned the obtuse idea that the banks should function only as the government's cash register.&quot;    Mr. Gallastegui, the former banker, insists that &quot;the parallel system will continue to exist in one way or another as long as it remains necessary.&quot; Indeed it is a token of Mexico's economic vigor that a reasonably healthy and competitive financial system has developed so quickly after the 1982 nationalization, and at a time when the country is still struggling to overcome its most severe and prolonged crisis since its revolution.    This is a Mexican lesson that should travel far -- as far south at least as Lima, Peru, where things Mexican seem to be in fashion once again.    ---   Mr. Sarmiento, editor in chief of Spanish-language publications for Encyclopaedia Britannica Publishers Inc., is also a columnist for the Mexican daily El Financiero. </TEXT></DOC>