<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Beyond the Ollie Show---By Albert R. Hunt</HL><DD> 07/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Ollie North Show was tailor-made for television, and the networks turned it into a sporting event with breathless reports of knockout punches, slam-dunks and home runs.    The cool, brave, articulate Marine officer displayed a public-relations skill that even his commander in chief must envy. The substance of what he was saying, and of what the Iran-Contra investigating committees have turned up, was lost.    But Olliemania may prove to be very transitory; the valuable information and insights developed by these committees may be far more important. These go beyond whether certain witnesses score points or not, who is or isn't indicted, or whether the Boland amendment barring U.S. assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels was applicable to the White House.    Instead, the hearings go to the heart of how to conduct foreign policy while living both in a dangerous world and in a democratic society. As House Majority Leader Thomas Foley of Washington says, the Ollie Show has been &quot;terrific on charisma but awful on civics.&quot;    Even many administration defenders reject the self-sustaining private intelligence agency that Lt. Col. North says he and the late CIA Director William Casey envisioned. But even short of that extreme, the Iran-Contra investigation is raising disquieting issues, some of which, unfortunately, are being distorted.    First, there's the matter of whether Congress has any right to be involved in covert operations at all. Lt. Col. North and some of his allies feel that these hearings are specifically embarrassing and endangering U.S. interests. More generally, they argue that covert operations are vital in today's world, and that Congress can't be trusted to keep them quiet or provide sufficient support.    They're wrong. After all, it wasn't Congress that exposed the Iran operation; it was a Lebanese magazine on Nov. 3, with a leak from the Iranians with whom this administration decided to deal secretly. And it was in mid-December -- before these Iran-Contra committees even were formed -- that the Kuwaitis invited the Soviets into the Persian Gulf, in large part out of contempt for U.S. behavior in the secret Iranian arms-for-hostages swap. Moreover, unlike some critics of a decade ago, most members of the committees today acknowledge that covert operations are necessary. It's just this one that bothers them so much.    Ollie North thinks it was &quot;neat&quot; to use Ayatollah Khomeini's money to fund the Contras while getting our hostages out. But look at this &quot;neat&quot; deal. Few of the funds made it to the Contras, there were as many hostages when the deal ended as when it began, and the ayatollah had critical weapons for his war against the Iraqis. The ayatollah ought to contribute to the Ollie North defense fund.    What if the administration had notified Congress about the Iranians? Under an arrangement negotiated, ironically, by Mr. Casey, it would have been necessary only to notify eight leading lawmakers. Tom Foley says Republicans would have beaten his Democrats to the punch in killing the absurd notion. &quot;Republicans like Dick Cheney and Henry Hyde would have been outraged over swapping arms for hostages with the Iranians,&quot; he says.    Congress is full of leakers. But when it comes to national security issues, a lot more leaks have come from administration agencies -- often for political purposes -- than from Capitol Hill. Moreover, most intelligence experts say Congress's record on covert operations over the past decade is impressive; lawmakers have rarely leaked anything about successful operations and have privately scotched some clearly dumb ones.    &quot;The record is very clear that there have been many covert operations throughout a series of administrations, some involving larger sums of money than the Contras, where there never has been a discernible leak from the Congress,&quot; says Adm. Bobby Inman, the deputy CIA director in the early Reagan years. &quot;The difference is that the work was taken {in those other operations} to ensure you had bipartisan support. When you've got bipartisan support . . . you don't read about it.&quot;    The decades-old struggle between Congress and the executive branch over the formulation of foreign policy will continue unabated; the Boland amendment is only the latest controversy, and critics are correct in assailing Congress for the slipshod fashion in which it handled Contra aid.    But what the Iran-Contra committees are turning up should transcend normal partisan and philosophical differences. Consider, for example, the following hypothetical case: It's 1990 and President Joe Biden decides to supply the African National Congress with Stinger anti-aircraft missiles and with money to help recruiting and training, and turns over to the ANC the best U.S. intelligence on South Africa. He does it without any congressional authorization or even notification because he thinks it's essential for stability in Southern Africa to maintain an operation. Just imagine the reaction of conservatives.    The hearings also have revealed extraordinary details about the privatization of American foreign policy. Maybe, as Ollie North says, you can't get Mother Teresa to do these dirty jobs, but this crew didn't even come close.    For instance, there is Richard Secord, a personal and financial associate of Edwin Wilson, the despicable former CIA official and convicted felon who turned on his country to make a fortune off the Libyans. Gen. Secord was also investigated for a possible role in a scandal involving arms shipments to Egypt; he was never charged, but he retired from the military soon after the case became public. Records show that, among other things, Mr. Secord paid for a $31,800 used Porsche, a $52,500 airplane and a stay at a weight-reduction spa with funds from &quot;the enterprise&quot;; he indicated that some of the money represents loans, but he admits that he hasn't repaid them.    Then there are the other top two officials of &quot;the enterprise&quot;: Albert Hakim, another Wilson crony and a man who made payoffs to Iranian officials in the 1970s, and Manucher Ghorbanifar, who the CIA says is both an Israeli agent and a known liar.    These are the sort of characters who were making commitments to foreign governments on behalf of the U.S. government, even pledging once to topple another regime -- at the same time they were apparently financially benefiting more than the Nicaraguan rebels from the entire operation. If you were concerned about security, would you trust this crowd?    Private citizens can sometimes be useful in foreign policy by carrying information or making contacts. Television newsman John Scali played a role in meeting Soviet officials during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, and other private citizens have been intermediaries with the Palestine Liberation Organization. But in &quot;the enterprise,&quot; Lt. Col. North's questionable crew was used to actually run an important operation and, in the process, was given extraordinarily sensitive data. &quot;The idea that you could negotiate with another country through CIA annuitants, a retired general and an Iranian businessman . . . is shocking,&quot; says Michael Armacost, the Reagan administration's undersecretary of state for political affairs.    The hearings also have uncovered alarming questions about solicitation of funds from other countries to help the Contras. The chief problem here isn't whether the Boland amendment prohibits solicitations; limiting the president's activities at least in this sphere seems a dubious proposition. Rather, the problem is that these countries don't do us any big favors without expecting a quid pro quo. Rep. Edgar Jenkins, a Georgia Democrat, drove home this point when he noted that Taiwan gave us assistance just about the time the president was vetoing textile quotas.    Even the secretary of state didn't know about some of these solicitations. It's clear that whatever the merit of the help these countries provided, this administration gave no serious thought to the trade-offs.    Last week's TV extravaganza, focusing on the cult of personality, confused the issue, notes Thomas Mann, executive director of the American Political Science Association. &quot;These hearings really are about the fundamental foreign-policy-making process and how it ran amok,&quot; he says.    Some critics argue that if lots of high-level officials aren't sent to jail or if President Reagan isn't impeached, this entire episode will be quickly forgotten. Sen. William Cohen, the thoughtful Maine Republican, doubts this. &quot;As a result of these hearings, future administrations will be very hesitant to engage in similar behavior; they'll fear the paralytic effect it might have on their administration,&quot; he says. &quot;This deterrent value will last for at least the next 10 or 12 years.&quot;    By then Ollie North may be a trivia question or a game-show host. Or perhaps he'll parlay his current popularity into elected office, where he may gain more respect for our political process. But the substance that emerged from these hearings and the lessons learned are likely to prove far more useful and durable than the last few days of entertainment.    ---   Mr. Hunt is the Journal's Washington bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>