<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880830-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: God and Mammon: Viewing the Business-Clergy Rift </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Walter W. Benjamin, chairman of Hamline University's religion department, believes that business and the clergy in the U.S. have seldom been more at odds philosophically. Business conservatives complain bitterly, for example, about the liberal-left orientation of the National Council of Churches. Churchmen rally behind the 1984 pastoral letter drafted by Roman Catholic bishops condemning &quot;privileged concentrations of power, wealth and income&quot; and calling for a new economic order.    To plumb this gulf, Prof. Benjamin last year mailed a detailed questionnaire to 100 chief executive officers and 100 Protestant ministers in Minnesota. He got a big response, 72 CEOs and 76 pastors, and extensive comments. As a follow-up last April, Hamline held a &quot;Boardroom and the Pulpit&quot; forum at its St. Paul campus, bringing together ministers and business people to discuss their mutual antipathies. The results of all this were pretty much what Prof. Benjamin had suspected.    &quot;It's amazing how illiterate each is of the other's world,&quot; he says as he relaxes on his patio in St. Paul's Arden Hills suburb. &quot;Of course, pastors will talk about the upstanding businessmen in their congregations. Or businessman will say, 'My clergyman is a fine man; he works much harder than most business people I'm acquainted with.' But it's almost like, I love my doctor but hate the AMA. I love my business members but, boy, the National Association of Manufacturers. Or I love my clergyman but, oh, liberation theology. It's that kind of dichotomy.&quot;    Prof. Benjamin discussed his survey results in the February issue of the magazine Corporate Report Minnesota. He wrote that many pastors find the business world &quot;unclean,&quot; or lacking in moral principles. CEOs, on the other hand, thought the need to satisfy customers holds business to a higher ethical standard than other professions.    Prof. Benjamin planted the following paragraph in his questionnaire without disclosing its source: &quot;We deplore the selfish spirit which often pervades our economic life. We support policies which encourage workplace democracy, cooperative and collective work arrangements. Increasing technology and exploitative economic practices impoverish many persons and make poverty self-perpetuating. We do not hold poor people morally responsible for their economic state.&quot;    The CEOs interpreted the paragraph as a defense of sloth, but it was excerpted from the Social Creed of the United Methodist Church.    Backgrounds of the CEOs and clergy differ sharply. Of the responding CEOs 51 were Republicans and five were Democrats, compared with 12 Republicans and 42 Democrats among the clergy. Two-thirds of the CEOs but only one-fourth of the clergymen had served in the military. Most of the corporate heads had six-figure salaries. Most of the ministers earned between $30,000 and $40,000 a year. Only 20% of the pastors had taken a course in economics, and only 5% could identify Apple founder Steve Jobs.    Businessmen can't understand why clergymen attack the U.S. economic system when it delivers so much material abundance. But the clergy isn't necessarily sharing in the abundance. James Davison Hunter in This World quarterly last year noted that since 1965, the United Methodist Church had lost 1.6 million members, the Presbyterian Church (USA) close to one million, the Episcopal Church 65,000 and the United Church of Christ 250,000.    &quot;I think there are a lot of frustrated people in the clergy,&quot; says Prof. Benjamin. &quot;We had somebody come up from Duke and speak to a pastors conference at Hamline. He spoke about the low morale in the clergy. By worldly standards things are going downhill. Officialdom is always asking for more money, more members. In many areas of the Midwest where Protestantism was strong, you have communities devastated by the economic shakeout, particularly in the agricultural community, and an aging clientele or constituency.&quot;    Businessmen tend to blame the decline of the mainline denominations on the attitudes that have set them so much apart from business. &quot;Conservatives believe that liberal ideology is responsible for the membership loss,&quot; says Prof. Benjamin. But he notes as well that as corporations respond to competitive pressures by closing plants or introducing new labor-saving technology they become enemies of settled communities. Churches, moored as they are to communities, fall victim to rapid economic change.    One seeming anomaly is that the clergy's resentment of business is growing at a time when corporations are becoming more, not less, socially conscious. Most big corporations today, and quite a few medium-sized and smaller ones, are mini-welfare states, offering employees a wide range of benefits and services. Prof. Benjamin wrote in the spring issue of The Hamline Review that corporations are becoming &quot;a surrogate parent in providing day care, surrogate doctors in paying for chemical dependency treatment, surrogate teachers retraining us when we are technologically illiterate and surrogate children who care for us in our golden years.&quot;    Of course, in some sense that makes the corporation a competitor of the clergy. But while the corporation can be an association, aiding its employees as they pursue corporate goals, it cannot simply give away the store. A lot of clergymen have trouble understanding that, says Prof. Benjamin. Corporations can never become communities, serving the needs of members in the same way that families and churches do.    Clergymen see a lot more of the seamy side of corporate success than corporate managers see, of course. They counsel members whose lives and psyches have been disturbed by transfers, forced early retirements, and their own obsolescence. The harsh words the Catholic bishops have for industrial competition no doubt derive in part from such observations.    Yet businessmen know that competition forces greater efficiency and ultimately creates new wealth. They can't understand why churchmen can't see the vital importance of wealth generation to the fulfillment of the church's own goals of helping the world's underprivileged to escape the bonds of ignorance and poverty.    &quot;I think there should always be healthy, informed criticism or conflict,&quot; says Prof. Benjamin. &quot;The church represents the largest voluntary association in the U.S. The Founding Fathers didn't want the religious controversy or established church of the Old World, but we do want a free church that can critique all bastions of power, or as the phrase goes now, 'speak truth to power.'    &quot;However, we have to be a kind of loving critic and I think I see a lot of criticism not founded very much on love, but on hate of the United States or hate of the systems that have brought millions of people, the refuse of Europe, into affluence. If more clergy could follow the heels of business people and get to know them and read their literature, and vice versa, then we could have more informed debate.&quot;    On the other hand, there was one encouraging finding from the professor's survey. Only six of the CEOs had left a church because of discontent with the pastor's attitude. So perhaps, to some degree, the conflict between the men and women of the cloth and the men and women of the marketplace is more perceived than real. </TEXT></DOC>