<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire:A Special Weekly Report FromThe Wall Street Journal'sCapital Bureau---Compiled by Rich Jaroslovsky</HL><DD> 11/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES EUROP JAPAN FREST GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   REAGAN AND THE RIGHT seem headed for a rupture.    Conservatives see the Kennedy Supreme Court nomination as the latest in a series of affronts that includes the arms-control accord with the Soviets and the Central American peace plan. &quot;The conservatives' feeling is that the president has abandoned them,&quot; says activist Richard Viguerie. The result could be trouble for some Reagan priorities.    Conservatives are prepared to fight the arms treaty, as well as any new trade concessions to Moscow growing out of the summit. They also will oppose any deficit-reduction plan that includes major new taxes. They won't fight Kennedy's nomination but won't work hard for it either -- a problem if liberals mount strong attacks.    They also step up demands for Chief of Staff Baker's ouster, arguing that a hard-line approach now would set the stage for conservative gains in 1988.    A DEFICIT DEAL may not be enough to satisfy Bonn and Tokyo.    Treasury Secretary Baker hopes to use deficit cuts as leverage to win an international agreement to stimulate the global economy; further dollar declines will increase pressure for some action. But the Germans and Japanese, skeptical of U.S. intentions, are slow to disclose how much stimulus they will offer.    Besides a deficit cut, they may demand an administration pledge to veto the trade bill and stop the dollar's fall. Meanwhile, Baker may have trouble winning Fed agreement on any coordinated interest-rate cut: Fed officials worry that working too closely with him will erode market confidence by making it appear they have lost their independence.    PRESSURE BUILDS on Meese as legal and political problems mount.    Though an indictment of the attorney general in the Wedtech scandal isn't expected, even his own aides worry about unsubstantiated reports that he will be named as an unindicted co-conspirator. The likely indictments of some close associates will generate further embarrassment, as will former White House aide Nofziger's January trial on illegal-lobbying charges.    The bungled Ginsburg nomination costs Meese support even among the conservatives who have been his staunchest backers. His denial of responsibility for the nomination is widely ridiculed. Some White House aides believe his problems will weaken his clout in internal administration battles.    But Meese remains personally close to Reagan, who shows no willingness to see him resign.    DOLE'S STRATEGISTS say a budget accord will provide a big push for their man; he will appear a key player while other rivals seem to be standing on the sidelines -- especially Bush. &quot;I haven't heard George say a word since the crash,&quot; Dole gibes.    CLOAK AND DAGGER: Clair George, head of CIA covert operations, tells associates he plans to retire at year end; Director Webster's choice to succeed him is said to be Gus Hathaway, head of CIA counterintelligence. But the nomination could prove controversial because the spy scandals have pointed up counterintelligence weaknesses.    MONDALE FAULTS Democratic presidential candidates for &quot;skittishness&quot; on the issue of taxes. The 1984 nominee, who was hurt by his call to raise revenue, says he doesn't believe that ducking the question will prove to be good strategy in 1988. But he warns that Democrats should avoid a &quot;big-government, high-tax binge.&quot;    NO CONTEST: A Florida GOP straw poll tomorrow, once billed by Robertson forces as a major show of their candidate's strength, is now regarded as an easy win for Bush. Large numbers of pro-Bush elected officials are included in the state party conclave, virtually assuring him of a big victory.    WEINBERGER'S DEPARTURE could make a summit Star Wars deal possible.    The defense chief has barred all talk of limiting the program in exchange for a wider arms accord. But incoming Secretary Carlucci is viewed as at least willing to consider the idea. Proponents of a deal say that agreeing to deployment limits would mute criticism and budget-slashing efforts by showing that Star Wars doesn't stand in the way of a strategic-arms accord.    &quot;There's a great deal of testing of SDI-type weapons that can be done under the narrow interpretation of the ABM treaty,&quot; says Harvard defense expert Ashton Carter. But hard-liners insist that any such compromise would be a sellout of the project; they mount strident attacks on arms negotiator Nitze for allegedly discussing some limits.    The hard-liners' best hope is that Reagan himself will bar any limits. He hasn't yet indicated what he will do.    MINOR MEMOS: Justice Blackmun, who was confirmed after the rejection of Judges Haynsworth and Carswell, says he is writing Judge Kennedy to &quot;welcome him to the club of third-timers.&quot; . . . Damned if he does: Bush, under attack for being a &quot;wimp,&quot; also comes under assault from the Manchester Union Leader for using profanity. . . . Noting that many Democrats want to nominate someone who isn't currently in the race, Babbitt observes: &quot;That could be Mario Cuomo, Bill Bradley -- or me.&quot; . . . In a letter accompanying informational booklets, the Soviet Embassy asks journalists to &quot;please mail us back the postage.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>