<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   AQUINO RAISED the possibility of declaring martial law in the Philippines.    During her weekly radio address, the Philippine president ruled out an immediate move to govern through emergency powers, but indicated that such a step would be taken if &quot;it is absolutely necessary&quot; and &quot;for the greater good of the country.&quot; Her statement came as police and soldiers in Manila dispersed a rally by thousands of workers protesting for higher pay. At least 27 strikers were taken into custody.    Aquino is facing renewed coup threats from renegade army officers and a wave of strikes planned for this week by moderate and leftist unions.    ---   IRAQI WARPLANES BOMBED an oil tanker sailing under Iranian protection.    The fighter jets struck the vessel with missiles, killing at least one crew member and setting the ship ablaze, shipping executives in the Persian Gulf reported. It was the ninth Iraqi attack in a week on tankers either leased by Iran or trading with it. In Beirut, a pro-Iranian Kurdish group said it kidnapped three Italian engineers in northern Iraq and demanded the withdrawal of Italian ships from the gulf.    Tehran said it has access to advanced technology and currently produces 70% of the weapons and ammunition it needs in its war with Baghdad.    ---   INDIAN TROOPS BATTLED Tamil rebels in the Sri Lankan city of Jaffna.    Thousands of Indian peacekeepers, backed by tanks and helicopters, fought house-to-house battles in an effort to capture the Tamil separatist stronghold in the northern part of the island nation. The Colombo government said about 170 Tamil rebels had been killed and 260 captured since the offensive was launched Saturday. At least 14 Indian soldiers and paramilitary police were slain, according to a spokesman.    The offensive was the first by Indian troops since they were sent to Sri Lanka to enforce a July 29 peace accord aimed at ending ethnic violence.    ---   South Korea's National Assembly passed a new constitution, clearing the way for a national referendum on the charter later this month and direct presidential elections by Dec. 20. The document, drafted by lawmakers from both the ruling and opposition parties following nationwide demonstrations in June, was approved 254-4.    ---   Reagan said he would like the Senate to vote this week on Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court. A quick vote would permit Reagan to move ahead with a new nominee if, as expected, Bork's confirmation is defeated. Senate leaders plan to begin debate on the nomination as early as today.    ---   Bush formally declared his candidacy for the 1988 GOP presidential nomination. In a speech in Houston, the vice president vowed to transform the Reagan economic boom into &quot;prosperity with a purpose.&quot; He is considered the front-runner among the six Republican candidates.    ---   The Contras shot down a Soviet-made helicopter in central Nicaragua, government and rebel officials said. Sandinista aides said the helicopter, with four aboard, was firing on rebel troops when it was hit by a missile. The attack was the first since Managua set a limited cease-fire last week.    ---   The Nobel Prize in medicine was given to Susumu Tonegawa, 48, a Japanese researcher who has been working at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology since 1981. The Nobel Assembly of Sweden's Karolinska Institute cited his work in discovering how the body makes millions of kinds of antibodies to fight disease.    ---   Argentina has drafted an emergency austerity plan to turn back inflation and gain the confidence of foreign creditors. Financial sources said the package, which is expected to be announced by tomorrow night, includes a wage and price freeze and a tax increase.    ---   An Amtrak passenger train struck a railroad crane car just outside Russell, Iowa, and derailed. At least 115 people were injured in the incident, authorities said. The California Zephyr, reported to be carrying 248 passengers and 22 crew members, was bound for Chicago from San Francisco.    ---   Florida officials canceled hurricane warnings as Hurricane Floyd diminished after lashing southern Florida earlier in the day with 80 mph winds and heavy rains. A hurricane warning remained in effect for the northwest islands of the Bahamas.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union resolved differences over a timetable for the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear missiles, a Soviet official said. He said arrangements for verifying compliance with the accord remain an obstacle. The U.S. said it hadn't any information on the statement.    ---   Israeli troops killed a Palestinian woman and wounded five other people in demonstrations that spread throughout the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. The violence erupted during a general strike by Arabs protesting an attempt by Jews to pray at an Islamic holy site in Jerusalem.    ---   Solidarity founder Walesa faulted Poland's new market-oriented economic program, saying it has no chance of success unless it is accompanied by political changes. The government package is aimed at reducing bureaucracy and allowing the market to influence prices and wages.    ---   Officials in Brazil isolated two more houses and the number of people hospitalized rose to 41 after radiation spread from a cesium 137 capsule found last month near a partly dismantled medical clinic.    ---   The Minnesota Twins won baseball's American League championship, defeating the Detroit Tigers, four games to one.    ---   Died: Alf Landon, 100, former Kansas governor and the Republican presidential candidate of 1936, in Topeka, Kan. </TEXT></DOC>