<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861208-0001 </DOCNO><HL> )HL    What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/08/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AGREED that Nicaragua's rebels would leave Honduras.    Responding to pressures related to the Iran-Contra initiative, Washington consented to a request by Tegucigalpa that the anti-Sandinista guerrillas leave their Honduran bases and move into Nicaragua. U.S. officials and rebel leaders called the pact routine. Meanwhile, Tegucigalpa's army battled Nicaraguan soldiers who crossed into Honduras, and the U.S. began airlifting Honduran troops into the border area. Managua denied that its troops were in Honduras and claimed that U.S. planes had bombed two Nicaraguan villages, injuring eight people.    Poindexter approved the transfer of profits from U.S. arms sales to Iran to Nicaragua's rebels, sources said. In addition, the sources said Reagan -- who conceded over the weekend that &quot;mistakes&quot; had been made in the covert operation -- gave advance approval in August 1985 for Israeli sales of U.S. arms to Tehran.    Britain's Thatcher won support at a two-day Common Market summit for a united display of support for the U.S. during the Iranian arms controversy.    ---   French Premier Chirac appealed for calm after weekend clashes between police and students protesting a proposed education bill left one person dead. The students said the measure would increase tuition and make college entrance more difficult. Meanwhile, union leaders joined students in calling for nationwide strikes Wednesday.    ---   Israeli troops shot and wounded a Palestinian youth in the Gaza Strip as protesters clashed with soldiers in a dozen towns and refugee camps in Israeli-occupied territories. Three Palestinian youths have been killed by Israeli troops since Thursday.    ---   A Philippine rebel leader said the planned cease-fire between the Manila government and communist insurgents could be jeopardized if the military insists on patrolling rebel-held areas. The 60-day truce is scheduled to begin Wednesday. The leader emphasized that the rebels would honor the pact, but wouldn't put down their arms.    ---   Iran said it fired three missiles into the southern Iraqi city of Basra, and bombed five other &quot;military and economic targets&quot; in retaliation for recent air raids by Iraq. Baghdad, which said 16 civilians were killed in the assaults, also reported that its fighter jets attacked a tanker off Iran.    ---   Shiite Moslem militiamen battled Palestinian guerrillas at refugee camps in Beirut and in southern Lebanon despite efforts by Syria and Iran to enforce a truce before today's meeting of Arab foreign ministers. The emergency meeting in Tunisia was urged by the PLO. At least 600 people have been killed in the past nine weeks.    ---   Factional fighting erupted at a South African gold mine about 80 miles southwest of Johannesburg, killing 10 black miners and injuring 21 others, the mine's owners said. At least 20 workers have been killed since Friday night. The clashes were prompted over whether to support a union boycott of a tavern at the Vaal Reefs Gold Mine.    ---   A newly organized opposition party won 12 of 73 available seats in Taiwan's lawmaking council in Saturday's legislative elections. The strong showing by the Democratic Progressive Party, which is illegal under current law, has created new uncertainties surrounding the pace of planned political changes.    ---   Hong Kong's chief secretary will serve as acting governor of the British colony until a successor is named for Sir Edward Youde. Sir Edward, who was involved in negotiating the transfer of Hong Kong to Chinese sovereignty in 1997, died Thursday in Peking. Hong Kong's financial markets slumped on news of his death, but later recovered.    ---   The National Cancer Institute said the death rate from cancer is decreasing for Americans under age 55 despite a slow increase in the incidence of the disease among the age group. The agency, citing statistics from 1975 to 1984, attributed much of the 7% decline in the death rate for the group to advances in cancer treatment.    ---   Government buildings must restrict smoking in most office areas but can allow it in some general office areas if nonsmokers' exposure to &quot;passive smoke&quot; is limited, according to new General Services Administration rules. The rules follow a ban the GSA proposed last spring.    ---   The FDA announced that prescription drugs containing sulfites will be required to carry warning labels. About 1,100 drugs contain sulfites, which are used as preservatives and may cause severe reactions in about 500,000 Americans.    ---   Pakistani opposition leaders said they would seek parliamentary elections within six months, but stopped short of issuing an ultimatum to President Zia, who has said balloting won't be held until 1990. Earlier this year, the opposition lost an often violent confrontation with the government over demands to hold elections by fall.    ---   Died: Frank P. Samford Jr., 65, former chairman of Torchmark Corp., Saturday, in Hilton Head, S.C. </TEXT></DOC>