<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Federal Fiasco: Banks and Sandamp;Ls Face New Wave of Failures As Regulators Goof Up --- Insurance Agencies' Resources Are Strained to the Limit; Texas-Size Woes in Texas --- Greenspan's Ill-Starred Letter </HL><AUTHOR> Jeff Bailey and G. Christian Hill (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FRB FIN GOVMT </CO><IN> BNK FIN </IN><G> FED </G><TEXT>   The letter said to stop worrying, and it was signed by none other than Alan J. Greenspan.    Sent to the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the Greenspan letter sought to ease fears about some fast-stepping savings and loan associations. That was four years ago, when Mr. Greenspan was a paid consultant to one such Sandamp;L. Today, he is the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. And 15 of the 17 Sandamp;Ls he praised have failed, leaving behind about $3 billion of losses.    Mr. Greenspan isn't the only powerful federal official to vastly underestimate the problems in the nation's banking system -- problems that instead of peaking last year, as many had hoped, have grown far more severe in recent months.    Today, the agencies that regulate banks and Sandamp;Ls face a wave of costly, complex failures unprecedented in the postwar period. And &quot;a lot of the stuff these agencies have done has only made matters worse,&quot; says Frederick D. Wolf, the director of accounting and financial management at the General Accounting Office. &quot;It costs us billions of dollars.&quot;    Federal officials have allowed failing institutions to recklessly grow and make acquisitions -- at the eventual cost of even bigger bailouts. They have covered up problems with voodoo accounting and let hidden losses mount -- at a rate of $1 million an hour at insolvent Sandamp;Ls. And they have concocted bailouts that increase risk instead of reducing it.    Two staggering examples:   --First RepublicBank Corp. in Dallas is the product of a year-old merger that regulators hoped would help them avoid or delay a big bailout for years. Now, the merged company is failing. The rescue cost will probably hit $3 billion, topping the Continental Illinois Corp. record.    --Financial Corp. of America, though already broke, was nevertheless allowed to go on a wild bond-trading spree. Today, the cost of fixing the Irvine, Calif., Sandamp;L holding company is estimated at $1 billion to $3 billion, including hundreds of millions of dollars of bond losses.    The upshot: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., the banking system's principal backstop, will almost certainly suffer the first decline in its $18 billion insurance fund this year. This comes despite repeated assertions by Chairman L. William Seidman that the agency's income from insurance premiums and investments would again just cover its cost of aiding failing banks. And the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., which insures Sandamp;Ls, remains deeply insolvent despite a $10.8 billion recapitalization.    The Bank Board said yesterday that a group of 345 insolvent Sandamp;Ls lost $9.5 billion last year and that other money-losing Sandamp;Ls lost an additional $3.9 billion. The industry as a whole posted a record annual deficit of $6.8 billion, with the losses accelerating during the fourth quarter.    The problems are again stirring up proposals -- including a bill in Congress -- to merge the two deposit insurers. But the $40 billion of accumulated losses at insolvent Sandamp;Ls would plow under both funds.    &quot;There isn't enough money in the FDIC to solve the {Sandamp;L} problem -- even if you spend every penny,&quot; says Robert L. Clarke, the comptroller of the currency. The only resort left is what everyone calls the last resort: a taxpayer bailout of the FSLIC that could cost more than $20 billion, based on thrifts' current losses. Before tapping the taxpayers, however, the government probably will turn to yet another round of accounting gimmickry or consider appropriating some of the reserves held by the country's 12 Federal Home Loan Banks, which make secured loans to thrifts.    Meanwhile, more trouble may lie ahead. A recession would further weaken many banks and Sandamp;Ls. Secondary-market prices for banks' Latin American loans have fallen, and if the biggest banks are forced to write the loans down to those values, at least one top 10 bank, Manufacturers Hanover Corp., would go broke.    What's more, the rush by the FDIC and some healthier banks to liquidate their real-estate and problem loans is glutting the market for such assets, and those sales will slash the value of properties on the books of Texas banks, insolvent Sandamp;Ls and the FSLIC. And the shaky world oil market could spark a replay of the 1986 price collapse that sent Texas banks from bad to worse.    Amid all these clear dangers, bank runs -- rare on the financial scene since the 1984 panic at Continental Illinois -- have cropped up again. Huge deposit outflows at First RepublicBank and Financial Corp. of America in recent weeks forced regulators to guarantee virtually all the money at those institutions. Other Texas banks are worried that First RepublicBank's liquidity problems could spread.    Nevertheless, regulators continue to push losses into the future, either playing down the problems or insisting that they haven't any alternative. People who think Congress will vote taxpayer funds to end the thrift crisis &quot;are consuming some kind of controlled substance,&quot; says M. Danny Wall, the chairman of the Bank Board.    But Mr. Wall's own assessment of the Sandamp;L industry depends on heavy use of a hallucinogen of sorts, some stuff known as regulatory accounting principles. RAP has him saying that insolvent Texas Sandamp;Ls can be fixed for $7 billion, even though their tangible negative net worth -- the amount by which their debts to depositors exceed the value of their loans and other assets -- is twice that. RAP has him contending that $15 billion, rather than $40 billion, is enough for now to handle the entire Sandamp;L problem. And sometimes even RAP isn't enough. Although 345 Sandamp;Ls are insolvent even under the liberal RAP guidelines, Mr. Wall's list of fix-it cases totals only 210.    Mr. Wall says he has enough money to meet problems over the next three years, but he concedes: &quot;As we approach the end of that three-year period, we have to do something in anticipation of reaching the end of the FSLIC's resources.&quot; By 1991, the FSLIC's borrowings will leave it awash in debt, unable to raise much more money and, at best, successful in resolving only half the insolvencies, according to FSLIC data compiled by Veribanc Inc., a Woburn, Mass., consulting firm.    And some of Mr. Wall's bailouts appear to expose the FSLIC to big risks in the future. Consider the bizarre case of Far West Federal Bank, of Portland, Ore. In January, the Bank Board approved a transaction that will reduce the Sandamp;L's $290 million negative net worth by only 10%. And then the Federal Home Loan Bank of Seattle will help finance the purchase of $1.5 billion of mortgage-backed bonds by Far West's new owners, a Silicon Valley investor group named Trinity Ventures. That far exceeds what other Home Loan Banks consider safe to lend to such an Sandamp;L.    The plan is similar to Financial Corp. of America's ill-fated bond play, though Far West's new owners, putting in just $27 million to gain control, claim expertise in hedging interest-rate risk. &quot;Risk arbitrage has a place,&quot; Mr. Wall says, though efforts to hedge mortgage-backed bonds in the futures and options markets have proved disastrous for some financial companies.    Much of the Sandamp;L debacle can be traced to the 1982 Garn-St Germain legislation, and subsequent state deregulation, that gave broad and risky new powers to Sandamp;Ls. Now, with those problems still unresolved, Congress is contemplating further banking deregulation, the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act that separates commercial and investment banking. However, the GAO's Mr. Wolf worries that some commercial banks would run wild and pile up losses in investment banking -- just as some Sandamp;Ls did when their lending and investment powers were expanded.    Nonetheless, further deregulation is backed by nearly all top federal regulators, including Mr. Wall, who wrote much of the 1982 law when he was the Senate Banking Committee's staff director, and Mr. Greenspan, the Fed chairman.    Mr. Greenspan says he hasn't any regrets about his 1984 letter to the Bank Board arguing that Sandamp;Ls should be allowed to continue investing depositors' money directly in real-estate deals and securities. Despite the subsequent failures of 15 of the Sandamp;Ls he had praised, he now says, &quot;I still think the principle is correct,&quot; though he concedes that oversight of the Sandamp;Ls may have been inadequate. He won't say how much Lincoln Savings of California paid him to write the letter.    Are the banking problems too big for regulators to handle? Already, some experts are calling for resurrection of the Depression-era Reconstruction Finance Corp. to refloat the sickly Southwest economy, much as huge farm subsidies have rescued agriculture. &quot;The problem is so widespread that it cries out for an overall federal solution rather than a series of ad hoc responses,&quot; says H. Rodgin Cohen, a New York lawyer involved in many major bailouts. Former FDIC Chairman William M. Isaac agrees.    In Texas, the problem is immense. In addition to festering Sandamp;Ls, banks there lost a combined $2 billion last year, according to Federal Reserve data compiled by Veribanc. The FDIC is bailing out First City Bancorp. of Texas for $1 billion. MCorp, another big Texas banking concern awash in bad real-estate loans, is trying desperately to raise private capital, though its officials say it is in no danger of collapse. Regulators are doubtful, however, and fixing MCorp could cost $1 billion or more. And a few smaller pending failures could raise the FDIC's cost to $6 billion to $8 billion or more in the state.    At First RepublicBank, regulators lost their biggest double-or-nothing bet. Last June, they let RepublicBank Corp., though wobbly itself, acquire InterFirst Corp., another big Dallas banking concern that was failing, on the dim hope that the Texas economy was turning around. At the least, regulators figured at the time, the combined banks could last two years.    In less than a year, however, the state's plunging real-estate market doomed the new institution. A senior federal regulator acknowledges that attracting private capital to one huge bank, with assets of $33.2 billion, will be a lot harder than fixing two smaller ones.    And private capital is avoiding most bailouts. When it does show up, it is on terms that leave almost all the risk with the government. In the First City bailout, all the bad loans had to be removed, and an immediate 15% return on equity promised, to attract $500 million of investor money. Regulators say that's the best they could do.    In one of this year's showcase private-sector deals, regulators wound up with -- so far -- one missing element: the private sector. The FDIC pumped $295 million into two big, failing banking concerns in Alaska and turned control over to a European investment group, Hallwood Group Inc., that agreed to raise $65 million in a stock offering. The offering flopped, and Hallwood had to borrow $65 million from First National Bank of Boston. Now, if Hallwood can't find a buyer, the FDIC has agreed to buy back all the stock. </TEXT></DOC>