<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880526-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Muscular Dystrophy Study Marks Major Advancement </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Scientists disclosed another in a series of rapid advances toward solving the mystery of muscular dystrophy.    A 15-member team of researchers reported that a newly discovered muscle protein is either missing or is defective in muscular dystrophy patients. This bolsters the belief that a genetic defect discovered last year causes the disease and opens the way to determining how lack of the protein leads to the wasting away of muscles that characterizes muscular dystrophy.    Less than a year ago, some of these same scientists reportedly found the genetic defect that apparently causes muscular dystrophy. This led to the discovery of a protein involved in muscle contraction that the gene normally produces. The latest report confirms that the protein is, in fact, missing or inactive in muscular dystrophy patients.    Although the new research won't lead immediately to any new treatment for muscular dystrophy, it could provide a clue to future therapy. For example, finding out why lack of the protein doesn't produce any noticeable muscle weakness until a child is two or three years old might reveal a way to halt or prevent the progressive muscle deterioration of muscular dystrophy, scientists say.    The latest findings also suggest a new way to distinguish muscular dystrophy from other muscle-wasting diseases and could improve diagnostic accuracy, the researchers say. The new findings were reported in this week's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine by scientists representing seven major medical centers. The research team was headed by Louis M. Kunkel and Eric P. Hoffman at Children's Hospital in Boston, who are among the scientists who discovered the muscular dystrophy genetic defect.    Muscular dystrophy is one of the more common genetic diseases, afflicting about one in every 3,500 newborn males. In its most severe and most common form, called Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, a steadily progressive muscle weakness sets in before the age of five. The boys are usually confined to a wheelchair by age 12 and death from respiratory failure usually occurs before age 30. In a less common form, called Becker's muscular dystrophy, the progressive muscle weakness is less severe and less rapid.    In the latest research, the scientists checked samples of muscle tissue from 63 muscular dystrophy patients for presence of the protein, called dystrophin. They also checked muscle tissues of 40 people suffering a variety of other neuromuscular disorders.    The results matched what the genetic research in previous months predicted. That research had shown that sufferers of the severe Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy lack the gene for dystrophin while those with the milder Becker-type of dystrophy have the gene but it is defective.    The researchers detected little or no dystrophin in the tissues of 35 of 38 of the patients who had been diagnosed as suffering Duchenne's muscular dystrophy. Two other Duchenne-type patients had less than normal amounts of the protein.    In 18 patients diagnosed with the lesssevere Becker-type of muscular dystrophy, the researchers found dystrophin. But in 12 of these patients the dystrophin molecule was either larger or smaller than normal. This suggests that the dystrophin in this milder form of muscular dystrophy is defective and at least partially inactive.    In addition, seven patients whose symptoms were in between the two types of muscular dystrophy also had abnormal dystrophin tests.    Among the 40 patients diagnosed with a variety of other muscular disorders, 38 had normal levels of normal-sized dystrophin.    In total, 92% of the muscular dystrophy patients either lacked dystrophin or possessed a defective form of it, confirming the earlier genetic findings.    Strangely, however, in eight patients the dystrophin tests didn't match the diagnosis. In four patients diagnosed with Becker-type muscular dystrophy and one with Duchenne-type illness the dystrophin appeared to be normal, hinting that these patients actually may suffer some other muscle-destroying disease. Another patient, diagnosed with Becker's dystrophy, lacked any dystrophin, suggesting he actually may have the Duchenne-type of disorder. And two patients diagnosed with other types of muscle disease had abnormal dystrophin, suggesting they actually may suffer Becker muscular dystrophy.    Exactly why lack of dystrophin leads to muscular dystrophy isn't yet known. Drs. Kunkel and Hoffman and their colleagues in Boston have tracked the protein to the membranes of certain muscle cells involved in muscle contraction. It's suspected the protein may help control the cell's flow of calcium, which is necessary for muscle contraction.    The rapidly emerging picture of muscular dystrophy is a &quot;wonderful and an unbelievable change from the state of ignorance only a few years ago,&quot; declared Lewis P. Rowland of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York in an editorial commenting on the new findings.    Dr. Rowland, a neurologist, hailed the research as a &quot;triumph of 'reverse genetics.'&quot; He explained that, historically, scientists have first isolated a protein thought to be responsible for a disease and then have searched for the gene that produces the protein. In the case of muscular dystrophy, he noted, the genetic defect was discovered first and this led to the protein, the lack of which apparently causes the disease. </TEXT></DOC>