<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   HOWARD BAKER RESIGNED as White House chief of staff.    The 62-year-old former senator, who succeeded Donald Regan amid the Iran-Contra affair, said he would return to his home in Huntsville, Tenn., where his wife and stepmother are in poor health. Baker plans to step down July 1. Reagan accepted the resignation &quot;with deep regret,&quot; and named Baker's deputy, Kenneth Duberstein, to succeed him. Duberstein will be Reagan's fourth chief of staff. Baker, who has been mentioned as a possible running mate on the GOP ticket with Bush, is expected to join a Knoxville law firm.    The change at the White House, coming late in Reagan's final term, is expected to have little impact on either the policy or politics of the administration.    ---   Contra leaders held talks with Reagan administration officials about the failure last week of peace negotiations with Nicaragua's government and a possible renewal of U.S. military aid to the rebels. Shultz accused the Sandinistas of reneging on pledges to move toward democracy and of subjecting rebel negotiators to intimidation.    ---   Democrat Dukakis said he doesn't rule out the development of a new land-based nuclear missile, and pledged to improve conventional forces to defend Europe against a Soviet attack. The GOP's Bush proposed an annual $500 million program to reward improvements in schools that serve disadvantaged students.    ---   House Speaker Wright listed more people who bought bulk quantities of his book, including a life insurance company and Washington lobbyists. The Texas Democrat is under investigation by the House ethics panel, and the disclosure further buttresses suspicions that the book may have been a conduit for forbidden gifts.    ---   Israel's parliament defeated two proposed laws intended to &quot;maintain the purity&quot; of the Jewish people by changing the definition of a Jew and, in effect, limiting who could immigrate to Israel. The proposals, supported by Shamir, would have recognized only those converts who were brought into the faith by Orthodox rabbis.    The army ordered West Bank schools closed for two days in an attempt to thwart student protests during a general strike called for today by underground leaders of the Palestinian uprising. Meanwhile, emergency meetings were held across Israel to develop ways to fight a rash of fires that Israeli police blame on Arab activists.    ---   The Iran-Contra case judge rejected independent counsel Walsh's suggestion that North and Poindexter be tried in the same courtroom before two juries. He said the procedure could violate the rights of the defendants, who are charged with conspiring to defraud the government by diverting Iranian arms sales proceeds to the Contras.    ---   French President Mitterrand refused the resignation of Socialist Premier Rocard, saying he would ask him to head a minority government. Rocard submitted his resignation following Sunday's general elections, in which the the Socialist Party failed to win a majority in the 577-seat parliament.    ---   Protesters in Yerevan ended a general strike after receiving assurances of official support for uniting the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh enclave with Armenia. Azerbaijan, however, said it wouldn't yield control of the region. It is likely that the matter will go to Moscow, which already has rejected Armenia's demand for annexation.    ---   Former Korean President Chun said he never got kickbacks from Northrop related to the proposed sale of F-20 fighter planes to Seoul. A congressional panel is investigating whether $6.2 million that Northrop invested in a South Korean hotel venture was actually meant to persuade Seoul officials to buy the jets.    ---   A Harvard researcher told an AIDS parley in Stockholm that the body's paradoxical response to the AIDS virus &quot;raises serious problems&quot; for the use of CD4, an experimental approach to therapy. Separately, studies released at the forum show that most people infected with the virus will develop the disease.    ---   Meese ordered the deportation to Britain of an Irish Republican Army fugitive convicted of murdering a British soldier in 1981. Joseph Patrick Thomas Doherty, who escaped from a Belfast prison, had asked to be deported to Ireland. The attorney general, however, said such a move would be prejudicial to U.S. interests.    ---   Reagan met at the White House with Italian Prime Minister De Mita and praised Rome's willingness to accept U.S. fighter jets, saying the decision demonstrates Italy's commitment to NATO. In Rome, the Defense Ministry recommended that the 72 warplanes being evicted from Spain be stationed near the southern city of Crotone.    ---   Soccer fans fought at Duesseldorf's railway station during the European championship finals, causing serious damage, authorities said. Police wouldn't disclose how many of the English and West German fans were arrested or injured in the melee.    ---   An internal FBI report recommended disciplinary action against some bureau personnel involved in the investigation of domestic groups opposed to Reagan administration policies in Central America, government sources said. FBI Director Sessions has the recommendations under review.    ---   South Korean students staged a protest at the edge of the Demilitarized Zone dividing North and South and called for reunification of the peninsula. About 1,300 students, some shouting anti-American slogans, participated in the demonstration.    ---   Presbyterians overturned a committee's recommendation that favored a woman lay leader, and re-elected the Rev. James Andrews as a top denominational officer of the three million-member church. The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church also urged Israel to end its occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. </TEXT></DOC>