<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880606-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Democrats' Platform Chief Has the Tough Job Of Refereeing Demands of Dukakis and Jackson </HL><AUTHOR> Jeffrey H. Birnbaum (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> ANN ARBOR, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Gov. James Blanchard is restless. While other participants in a news conference here stand by patiently, the boyish Democrat edges past them to the podium to make an extra set of remarks.    One of those left standing on the sidelines, Rep. Carl Pursell, isn't surprised by the incident. &quot;He moves a lot, he's very aggressive, very competitive,&quot; the Republican congressman says of Mr. Blanchard. &quot;He likes {to take} command.&quot;    Mr. Blanchard's need for control is about to be tested on a national scale. As chairman of the committee charged with writing the Democratic Party's national platform, he will be forced to referee the competing demands of Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, the party's likely presidential nominee, and his chief rival, the Rev. Jesse Jackson.    So far the battle has been pretty quiet. But if past platform debates are any guide, a storm is on the horizon. Already, the staffs of both campaigns are drafting their own, differing versions of the document, which is the party's official statement of what it stands for. Mr. Blanchard refers to platform fights as the Democrats' &quot;51st primary&quot; -- the last forum in which candidates can vent their policy ambitions.    Despite signs of discord, Mr. Blanchard is working with Democratic National Chairman Paul Kirk to persuade the candidates and the convention delegates to accept a succinct, broadly worded document, free of the usual panoply of special-interest planks that have bloated the platforms of the past. The goal is to compose a 10-page platform that can be distributed as a promotion not just for the presidential ticket but for Democratic candidates at all levels of government.    That hasn't happened in recent memory. The 1984 platform was 54 pages long with detailed proposals on topics ranging from gay rights to utility rates. Even Mr. Blanchard admits: &quot;It remains to be seen if we can pull it off.&quot;    The odds favor a shorter than usual document, but that doesn't mean there won't be fights along the way. Mr. Dukakis seems to favor a plain-vanilla platform that, though substantive, won't get in the way of his campaign in the fall. Mr. Jackson wants a platform that would form an agenda for the next Democratic administration. He is expected to push for meaty provisions on at least a handful of issues, including military spending, taxes, drugs and South Africa. He also is likely to want planks dealing with day care and jobs for youths.    On the campaign trail, Mr. Jackson keeps prodding Mr. Dukakis to be more specific in his budget plans and on his anti-drug program -- requests the governor has deflected. Mr. Jackson also advocates raising taxes on the wealthy, a position Mr. Dukakis hasn't embraced. On South Africa, Mr. Jackson advocates branding Pretoria a terrorist state, a position Mr. Dukakis has appeared to move toward recently.    Aides to Mr. Dukakis say that at least some platform issues are likely to remain unresolved when the convention opens in Atlanta and that they wouldn't be averse to Mr. Jackson battling them out on the convention floor next month -- as long as it doesn't become acrimonious. Such disagreements could help position Mr. Dukakis as a &quot;moderate&quot; compared to the fiery Mr. Jackson.    Mr. Blanchard's background should be suited to his task; it is sprinkled with efforts to bring warring factions together. As a member of Congress, he helped steer $1 billion in loan guarantees for the then-ailing Chrysler Corp. through vigorous opposition. And as governor, he erased Michigan's huge budget deficit and helped revive its lagging economy through innovative programs that brought business, labor and government together in a &quot;partnership&quot; -- a concept he shares with his longtime friend Gov. Dukakis.    &quot;He's a progressive Democrat, but he's also a practical problem solver,&quot; says Sen. Donald Riegle (D., Mich.). Being platform committee chairman, he adds, &quot;leads into his strength of putting people together and finding balanced solutions.&quot;    For the platform committee, the 45-year-old Mr. Blanchard has assembled an experienced team. The panel's drafting chairman is Rep. William Gray of Pennsylvania, a Jackson backer whose skills at forging compromises, honed as chairman of the House Budget Committee, are likely to be pressed to the limits. Former John Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorensen, whose political contacts may be outdated but whose skills as a wordsmith are still strong, is charged with packaging the platform committee's product.    On a personal level, Mr. Blanchard reminds many people of a more amiable, though less savvy, Michael Dukakis. Both men are relatively short in height and big on public policy; they are technocrats who work long hours at their jobs. Their strong suit is economic development, and their claims to fame are the turnarounds of depressed state economies. Mr. Dukakis picked Mr. Blanchard as his successor as chairman of the association of Democratic governors.    Not everyone thinks so highly of Mr. Blanchard. His critics say he has inflated his accomplishments and has failed to give credit to others along the way -- a common weakness in ambitious politicians. &quot;The Blanchard administration in Michigan has been highlighted by symbolism and a marked absence of substance,&quot; charges the state senate's Republican leader, John Engler. &quot;He is the perfect person to mask the Democrats' intentions in their platform.&quot;    Others see him as a complete political animal whose drive to win can sometimes obscure his willingness to do the right thing. But even his detractors say Mr. Blanchard's political cunning has held him in good stead. &quot;He has good political instincts,&quot; Mr. Engler concedes.    Mr. Blanchard's instincts this time tell him to avoid appearing to pander to any interest group. In meetings with party regulars across the country, he says, he senses a growing distaste for special-interest pleaders -- and a strong urge for the appearance of unity -- especially in the wake of Vice President Walter Mondale's landslide loss to Ronald Reagan in 1984, a year in which the Democrats were labeled the party of the special interests.    Instead, Mr. Blanchard envisions a platform consisting mainly of broad themes. He expects it to advocate a government that is far more activist than the Reagan administration but to recognize that activism must be tempered by the reality of budget deficits. It also would promote more help for education and civil rights, but would shun specific policies that are being pushed by one interest group or another.    &quot;Platforms have been internal documents reflecting intraparty struggles and squabbles, not documents designed for external consumption,&quot; he says. As a result, he says, &quot;platforms were not taken seriously.&quot;    Mr. Blanchard knows firsthand the apathy with which past platforms have been greeted. Until he was appointed chairman of the committee this year, he says, he had never read one. </TEXT></DOC>