<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870504-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese Seek Role as Takeover Advisers---Banks, Brokers FocusOn Friendly Acquisitions---By Michael R. SesitStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Kokusai Motorcars Co.'s $319 million acquisition of the Hyatt Regency Maui last month illustrated something larger than just Japan's growing role in the Hawaiian real estate market.    The purchase showed the way Japanese financial institutions are edging into the takeover advisory business in the U.S., since Kokusai was represented by Sanwa Bank of Japan -- and not an American investment adviser.    As Japanese businesses step up their acquisition activity in the U.S., Japanese banks and brokers are seeking a bigger role in the lucrative merger advisory business as well. And though they're currently in no position to challenge U.S. giants, such as First Boston Corp. or Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., Japanese merger and acquisition teams are making their mark, focusing on friendly acquisitions, licensing arrangements, joint ventures and venture capital.    Leading the way are Japanese commercial banks, which are under pressure to generate additional fee income. &quot;Traditionally, we never charged for advice,&quot; says Shuhei Sato, head of Sanwa's merchant banking group in New York. &quot;But with squeezed margins in lending, we've had to expand into other areas and get compensated for our efforts.&quot;    Also seeking merger and acquisition work in the U.S. are Japan's big securities firms. They feel such steps are necessary to be regarded as full-service international investment bankers. But industry observers contend that Japanese commercial banks currently have an advantage over securities firms because of their traditional role as financiers and advisers to Japanese companies.    Last December, Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan advised Sumitomo Rubber Industries Ltd. when it bought 80% of Dunlop Tire Corp. for $240 million. In the same month, Long-Term Credit Bank also advised Mitsui andamp; Co. Finance Inc., a unit of Mitsui andamp; Co., on its $34 million buyout of American Acceptance Corp. from Fidelity Bank.    In November, Sanwa Bank advised Hitachi Zosen Corp. on a nearly $70 million purchase of a metal-forming press maker from U.S. Industries Inc., a subsidiary of Hanson Trust PLC.    Thus far, Japanese financial institutions have mostly represented other Japanese companies and none have been involved in any giant, U.S.-style hostile takeovers. Instead the Japanese approach to mergers and acquisitions is a gradual one, moving into markets in stages and concentrating on industries that they know well.    A few months ago, Nomura Securities Co. arranged a joint venture between T-Cell Sciences Inc., a Cambridge, Mass.-based developer of diagnostic products and Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co. Similarly, Daiwa Securities Co. arranged a joint venture between Nippon Steel Corp. and Holmdel, N.J.-based Concurrent Computer Co.    &quot;For Americans, Mandamp;A has become a kind of money game,&quot; notes Koji Hirao, general manager of Long-Term Credit's New York branch. He sees Japanese companies' objectives as being more strategic: gaining a foothold in the U.S., avoiding protectionism and diversifying away from old, unprofitable businesses.    &quot;It's becoming more and more important for Japanese companies to have strategic international alliances for technologies, marketing and management,&quot; Mr. Hirao adds. A major motivation, bankers say, is the slowing Japanese domestic economy and a strong yen that is stifling exports. Moreover, the yen's 80% rise against the dollar since March 1985, makes many potential U.S. acquisitions look inexpensive.    Until recently, most Japanese corporations preferred to build up overseas operations from scratch. That way, they could avoid becoming involved in situations they didn't understand, or in potential strife with organized labor. Japanese buyers also could avoid buying troubled companies that were overpriced, says James Nicholson, a senior vice president for Daiwa in New York.    Lately, though, Japanese management is becoming more comfortable with foreign subsidiaries and employees, bankers say. &quot;Many companies that in the past would only have considered building their own operations here from the ground up are more willing today to think of acquisition as a way of meeting their needs,&quot; says Corbin R. Miller, a vice president at IBJ Schroder Bank andamp; Trust Co., a unit of the Industrial Bank of Japan. &quot;They realize they have to have Americans who understand the U.S. market and have distribution systems in place.&quot;    The Kokusai-Hyatt Regency transaction -- the latest of several Hawaiian hotel purchases by Japanese investors -- illustrates the role relationships can play in helping Japanese institutions get merger business. Goldman Sachs had been marketing the Maui hotel to several potential buyers, one of which was a client of Sanwa Bank. When the client turned to Sanwa for advice, the bank said the hotel was too big an acquisition for a company its size.    But the bank was aware that Kokusai, another old client, wanted to expand into the leisure business. Bank officers had accompanied Kokusai executives on several site visits and previously counseled the company on the acquisition of an Australian hotel. Sanwa then brought in Sonnenblick-Goldman Corp. (which isn't related to Goldman Sachs) as Kokusai's real estate consultant. That was after a partner at the New York law firm of Shearman andamp; Sterling had introduced Mr. Sato of Sanwa to a Sonnenblick managing director over lunch.    Despite recent achievements in takeover advising, Japanese banks and brokers face some limitations. Most of their merger and acquisition units are less than four years old and consist of between 10 and 20 professionals internationally. That compares with 50 to 150 for big U.S. investment banks.    Even Yamaichi Securities Co., which is a large player by Japanese standards, says it hasn't done a cross-border transaction since 1984. Yamaichi has about 35 merger specialists, but only five outside Tokyo.    In fact, when Dainippon Ink andamp; Chemicals Inc. made a $550 million purchase of Sun Chemical Corp.'s graphics-arts materials group last November, it chose Dillon, Read andamp; Co. as its lead adviser, rather than a Japanese financial firm. That was the largest U.S. acquisition ever by a Japanese company.    Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., alone, has advised the Industrial Bank of Japan, Nippon Kokan K.K., Sanwa and Fuji Bank on six transactions valued at a total of $1.8 billion over the past few years. &quot;When Japanese companies come to the U.S., they tend to look for the market leaders (in takeover advisory services),&quot; concedes Steven M. Looney, a senior vice president at Nomura's New York unit. &quot;We have to demonstrate we have the expertise.&quot;    Mergers in Japan average about 1,000 a year compared with more than 3,000 in the U.S., but Japan's overwhelmingly involve rescuing small, troubled companies. Moreover, hostile takeovers are anathema to Japanese management. In fact, to avoid the belligerent image of American-style takeovers, Nomura named its merger unit the corporate strategy and services department.    &quot;Japanese managers have been trained to deal with people, not manage stock prices,&quot; says Sanwa's Mr. Sato. &quot;An aggressive takeover is inconceivable.&quot;    What's more, an acquisition in Japan is usually a slow, painstaking process. Launching a tender offer for a large company is considered nearly impossible because many shares are held by closely related parties. Takuro Isoda, chairman of Daiwa's U.S. unit, estimates that a two-month acquisition in the U.S. would take six months to complete in Japan.    Persuading Japanese companies to pay for advice was a struggle. &quot;Service in the Japanese language means free,&quot; says Mr. Sato. &quot;You ask for fees and they think you're nuts.&quot;    Nonetheless, &quot;We tend to be long-term oriented,&quot; he says. &quot;We don't mind doing $20 million-size deals, whereas many U.S. investment banks will turn their heads at a $20 million deal.&quot; Last year, Sanwa advised on four transactions that were valued at less than $10 million each.    Similarly, Nomura's Mr. Looney emphasizes the dedication and teamwork of Japanese firms, both of which better serve clients, he argues. &quot;A Japanese firm may refund its retainer fee; it feels a sense of failure because it couldn't achieve what a client wanted,&quot; he says.    As one Japanese investment banker notes, &quot;We don't have any 26-year-olds here making $1 million a year.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>