<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Verify, but Also Punish Violations---By Malcolm Wallop</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   A week before the summit, President Reagan submitted a report to Congress that detailed Soviet violations and probable violations of existing arms-control agreements. It confirmed that the Soviet Union is in violation of every major arms-control commitment it has. Contrary to the images conjured up through glasnost, the Soviet record and pattern over the past five years -- since the Reagan administration began documenting the violations -- has not improved. The report states that &quot;the Soviet Union has failed to correct its noncompliance activity or to provide explanations sufficient to alleviate our concerns.&quot;    The Soviet Union continues to violate the ABM Treaty, which many regard as the cornerstone of arms control. The report also identifies a new violation of that agreement -- ABM radars illegally moved to an illegal site. Meanwhile, the Soviets are in violation of the Biological Weapons Convention, the Limited Test Ban Treaty and the unratified SALT II Treaty.    Last week the U.S. and the Soviet Union signed a new arms-control agreement on intermediate-range nuclear weapons. This agreement contains, we are told, the most stringent verification provisions in the history of arms control. Indeed it should, since the challenge of verifying Soviet mobile missiles, such as the SS-20, is great. Ironically, the Soviets' acceptance of more intrusive verification measures may be a direct result of the Reagan administration's failure to hold them to their existing commitments. If violations go unpunished, there is little reason to fret over accepting stricter verification.    As a member of the Senate Arms Control Observers Group, I have asked administration officials, including the president himself, how they intend to confront extant Soviet violations. Their response continues to be that the U.S. will never sign an agreement that is not thoroughly verifiable. The president said in his recent interview with the network anchors: &quot;No treaty before has ever been based on as much verification and on-site inspection as this one.&quot; Given the egregious record of Soviet cheating, this response misses the mark. It is like arguing that AIDS testing is the solution to the AIDS epidemic.    The most verifiable agreement imaginable is meaningless if one party is allowed to violate international commitments with impunity. For example, in the 1920s, Allied on-site inspectors caught the Germans in numerous and well-documented violations of the arms provisions of the Versailles Treaty. The parallel is striking. Then, as now, the problem was not verification. It was the unwillingness of the Allies, vainly and passionately hoping for new arms-control agreements, to force Germany to abandon its rearmament program.    Anyone who is serious about arms control -- that is, anyone who wants arms control truly to contribute to U.S. national security, not just to popularity at home and abroad -- should be a stickler for compliance. As the president reiterated in the latest compliance report, &quot;In order for arms control to have meaning and credibly contribute to national security, it is essential that all parties to agreements fully comply with them.&quot; How hollow these words sound.    By signing a new treaty without having done a single thing to correct Soviet compliance or to ensure that violations -- existing and future -- will not be tolerated without penalty, do we not, in effect, sanction these violations? What conclusions will the Soviet leaders draw from this about U.S. resolve to confront their aggression?    The president said in his cover letter to the Compliance Report, &quot;No violations of a treaty can be considered to be a minor matter, nor can there be confidence in agreements if a country can pick and choose which provisions of an agreement it will comply with.&quot; If this is really what the president believes, can he then ask the Senate and the American people to have confidence in this latest arms-control treaty?    Critics of the administration's policy of coming clean with the American people on Soviet cheating have said all along that the administration was not serious about arms control. I along with many other senators defended the administration in part because the logic of continuing to negotiate new agreements while old ones were being violated made some sense if a condition of any new agreement was future compliance. The president's March 1986 Report to Congress on Soviet violations stated unequivocally that &quot;compliance with past arms-control commitments is an essential prerequisite for future arms-control agreements.&quot;    Now, one must conclude that the critics were right, and that the administration by signing this new agreement is not serious about genuine arms control. Its interest appears driven by the domestic political benefits of the arms-control process: glasnost, in the true Russian sense of &quot;publicity,&quot; has replaced sound policy.    In the coming weeks the Senate will debate this new agreement. Perhaps as one healthy result of this debate, the administration, working together with the Senate, will develop a compliance policy for past and future agreements -- going far to diffuse some of the strongest opposition to this agreement. In the absence of a sound and comprehensive compliance policy, I plan to offer a reservation to the INF Treaty that will force a reconsideration of our commitment to that agreement if the Soviet Union violates it. It may also require the president to certify that the Soviet Union has stopped cheating on existing agreements before it comes into force.    The SALT II Treaty was criticized for being a cosmetic agreement that did not place any real limitation on Soviet forces. The same charge can be leveled at the INF Treaty as it now stands. The president needs to develop and submit to the Senate a strong compliance policy in time for its ratification to avert a confrontation over this issue. The arms-control process needs such a policy; U.S. national security demands it.    ---   Sen. Wallop (R., Wyo.) is the author of &quot;The Arms Control Delusion&quot; (Institute for Contemporary Studies, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>