<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871208-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Can American Unions Rebound?---By Richard B. Freeman</HL><DD> 12/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   Big Business, Big Government, Big Labor. Big Labor? Not so very long ago -- the 1950s and 1960s -- trade unions seemed to be a stable and powerful part of the American economic scene. No longer.    Developments in the past two decades have greatly weakened unionism in the U.S. In 1986 just 14% of private-sector workers were represented by unions, compared with 39% in 1956, and the proportion seems likely to continue to fall.    About 100,000 workers were organized annually in National Labor Relations Board representation elections in the early 1980s -- a drop in the bucket in a labor force of more than 100 million people -- and many of those have been unable to obtain collective-bargaining contracts. Large segments of the business community currently seek to operate &quot;union free.&quot; While unions are prospering in the public sector, where the proportion of workers covered by collective-bargaining contracts continues to increase, the crisis facing American unionism is by far the most severe in the Free World.    What are the chances for unionism to stage a dramatic comeback in the near future?    Without changes in national labor law to limit the power of employers to oppose unions, massive social upheaval, or changes in the nature of unionism -- not very good. The magnitude of the problem facing unions is immense. To maintain the union share of the private-sector labor force at its current low level, unions must enroll perhaps half a million workers a year, offsetting increases in the labor force and the normal attrition of work forces at currently unionized sites. To increase the union share by one percentage point would require organizing an additional 800,000-plus workers. Such huge gains seem impossible in the foreseeable future in the face of:    --Virulent anti-union campaigns by many managements, ranging from aggressive but lawful efforts to convince/pressure workers to reject unions to an epidemic of law-breaking that includes firing of and discrimination against union activists. (Unfair practices by management have increased nearly fourfold since 1960 despite a decline in NLRB representation elections.)    --Adoption of union work conditions such as seniority in layoffs, grievance systems, job posting and bidding, pension and related fringe-benefit programs by some non-union companies (so-called positive labor relations).    Economic competition from overseas and from union and non-union domestic employers that limits the possible wage gains unions can win for new members even in a reasonably tight labor market.    Reduction of the resources unions devote to organizing as membership falls and as members see little chance for success in the current environment. While unions have had some successes of late, such as convincing Coors to remain neutral in the organizing process, the balance of power in the labor market has shifted toward management. Big labor is no more. Labor has become the underdog in America.    Such a role is far from foreign to American unions, and unions have rebounded in the past when purported experts thought they were on the verge of extinction. Unionism recovered in the 1940s thanks to New Deal labor laws, public support that sought to redress the balance of power at work places, and the loss of confidence in business leadership following the Depression.    More recently, unions have organized large numbers of white-collar workers in the historically non-union public sector, creating a potential base for appealing to office workers elsewhere. The air-traffic controllers have voted to unionize again. In a world where significant union activity is found in all free countries, the U.S. is unlikely to remain an extreme outlier forever. Workers need some form of employee organization -- a collective voice -- at many workplaces, and management needs to hear what its employees want in settings where even those without outside job offers in the offing feel free to say more than a perfunctory &quot;yes, boss, whatever you say.&quot;    But it will take substantial changes in labor law or in union and management behavior before unions rebound.    The clearest scenario for union resurgence is enactment of labor laws comparable to those in Canada, where provincial laws essentially impose neutrality on management in organizing drives. Restrict management opposition and union density in the U.S. will increase greatly.    Absent such legal changes, recovery of unionism depends on the ability of unions to develop new ways to advance workers' rights outside the &quot;bargain to contract/strike when at impasse&quot; mode that has been a hallmark of American labor relations. Unions that cannot win majority worker support in the face of management power will have to learn to represent workers not through traditional collective bargaining, but by meeting and conferring with management, through corporate campaigns, and by appealing to the broader public. Just as craft unions had to adjust to industrial unionism, today's unions will have to change their mode of operation to provide services for millions of workers in otherwise unorganizable settings.    The future of unionism in the country also depends on management actions. By campaigning aggressively against unions, employers may maintain power at work places and move closer to the union-free &quot;nirvana.&quot; The risk is a backlash of public sentiment, governmental interventions at the work place, and the loss of an opportunity to develop new labor-management relations with a union movement that currently seeks cooperation, not confrontation.    The answer to the question &quot;can unions rebound?&quot; goes, however, beyond the two parties at the work place. The citizenry as a whole must decide whether free and independent unionism, currently declining precipitously in the private sector, is an institution worth having in a free society.    ---   Mr. Freeman, a Harvard professor, is program director for labor studies at the National Bureau of Economic Research. </TEXT></DOC>