<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0053 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):After John Shad</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The White House has already heard from some legislators not known for their solicitude for the stock markets. John Shad's successor, they say, should march more hobnailed boots down Wall Street. Sen. William Proxmire (D., Wis.) wants someone &quot;very tough on crime.&quot; Howard Baker might be better advised, however, to search out candidates who understand that success at the Securities and Exchange Commission could also be measured by market efficiency, not just by the heads mounted on Rudy Giuliani's office wall.    The next chairman might well ask why some people have been evading SEC rules. Is it because Wall Street is chock-full of crooks, or partly because the massive tomes of securities regulations so often conflict with market efficiency, thus making illicit behavior remunerative?    It is conceivable that SEC regulations do more harm than good. One not entirely accidental side effect of the current crackdown will be a dampening of the merger and acquisition boom. Surely this restructuring and streamlining of American industry accounts for some of the stock market's vigor.    Each candidate for the chairmanship should be asked: What creates the market for stolen inside information and sharp trading practices? Full points for identifying the Williams Act, which, in effect, requires bidders for corporate control to stop buying at 5%, disclose their plans and depend on arbitragers for the needed boost toward effective control. Confidential information about a tender price can thus be worth billions. Before the Williams Act, takeovers could be accomplished in open-market trading.    Boyd Jefferies, who last week made a plea bargain with the government on two felony counts, was charged, among other things, with &quot;parking,&quot; which occurs when stock is purchased on behalf of another buyer who wants to conceal his identity. The law creates an incentive for such activity because of its restrictions on more forthright bids for control. Mr. Jefferies and his Jefferies Group have been big players in the takeover game.    Jefferies Group led the way to third-market, 24-hour, international stock trading. It's no secret that the SEC has been looking to rein in the Los Angeles-based brokers. Last year, the agency tried to get a federal judge to block the takeover of Allied Stores by Campeau Corp. on the grounds that the trading through Jefferies violated the tender-offer rules. Judge Pierre Laval instead upheld the open-market trading by finding that the Williams Act didn't apply.    SEC lawyers have poorly served the rule of law by refusing to define insider trading. This is a good time for a new SEC helmsman. One good candidate from Wall Street would be Dillon, Read Chairman and former New Jersey Sen. Nicholas Brady. New York Stock Exchange head John Phelan and Arthur Levitt Jr. of the American Exchange, who have been mentioned, are qualified but might favor exchanges at the expense of innovative over-the-counter trading.    We have three darker-horse candidates: Judge Frank Easterbrook of the Seventh Circuit has a reform program that would end abusive tactics such as greenmail while reducing the value of illicitly obtained inside information. As a University of Chicago law professor, he and colleague Daniel Fischel called for a &quot;passive&quot; reaction by target managements. If an acquirer is willing to pay a premium for all the shares, then the shareholders should be allowed to decide to accept the bid without interference from management. Defensive tactics would be outlawed, the cost of takeovers would fall and value-maximizing restructuring could proceed.    Henry Manne is anathema to the SEC's enforcement division, which is a good reason to give him a look. He has spent the past 25 years telling anyone who would listen that much of what the SEC calls insider trading is simply the beneficial transmission of valuable information to the market. Mr. Manne, dean of the George Mason Law School, says the Williams Act favors entrenched managers and should be repealed forthwith.    There is also a candidate already on the SEC payroll. Commissioner Joseph Grundfest is a lawyer and economist who, since joining the commission in 1985, has tried to persuade the other commissioners to let companies opt out of Williams Act tender-offer regulations. His point is that self-governance offers better protection for shareholders than SEC oversight.    Whoever succeeds Mr. Shad will have to fend off entrenched managers pleading for government protection from takeovers even at the cost of efficiency. This requires someone pledged to uphold not just legal rules, whatever they may be, but economic laws as well. </TEXT></DOC>