<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0026 </DOCNO><HL> White HouseTo Make ReviewOf Reagan Diary---Entries Deemed RelevantTo Iran-Contra ScandalTo Be Given to Panels---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The White House agreed to review three years of President Reagan's personal notes and make the parts judged relevant to the Iran-Contra affair available to congressional panels investigating the matter.    The review will cover entries in the president's diary dating back to January 1984 and a record will be made of any excerpts related to Iran or the war in Nicaragua. Mr. Reagan retains final discretion over the release of the information, but investigators said they were confident they would get full access to the entries.    The unusual agreement was set out in a two-page letter signed by the chairmen and ranking members of the two congressional panels and by White House counsel Arthur Culvahouse. President Reagan has authorized Mr. Culvahouse to conduct the review, which will be guided by reference points negotiated with the committees.    White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater described the plan as &quot;satisfactory to all parties.&quot; The agreement is also expected to govern the access given independent counsel Lawrence Walsh.    The review covers diary entries from Jan. 1, 1984 to last Dec. 19, and includes any references to Iran, hostages in Lebanon, Nicaragua, and &quot;aid or assistance of any kind . . . to the Nicaraguan Contras from any source,&quot; according to the letter.    The review will be broader than the one conducted by the Tower Commission and reflects the committees' focus on secret efforts within the administration to circumvent a two-year congressional ban on U.S. military support for the Nicaraguan insurgents. A private network was established to funnel weapons and money to the Contras, and this covert operation was under way before funds from U.S. weapon sales to Iran were allegedly diverted to assist the Contras in 1986.    A secret air resupply operation directed from within the White House National Security Council had begun in late 1985. To fund this effort, a Geneva financial services firm had begun moving money from Swiss accounts as early as November 1985, bank records show.    Cie. des Services Fiduciares, or CSF, is identified in the bank records as having transferred an estimated $450,000 from Switzerland through New York to a Panamanian bank used in the resupply operation. The payment, made in mid-November 1985, was among the first in a series of deposits totaling more than $1.5 million made through 1986 to finance the airlift.    The money -- moved by wire transfers -- appears to have come largely from Swiss accounts or companies for which CSF provides services. Several subsequent deposits in 1986 were made in the name of two Panamanian front companies, Albon Values Corp. and Udall Research Corp. Also, Swiss and Panama branches of Credit Suisse, a Swiss bank, are separately identified as originating some of the transfers.    The money was deposited in Banco de Iberoamerica, from which it was disbursed in the name of yet another Panamanian shell company, Amalgamated Commercial Enterprises.    Amalgamated, or ACE, had been purchased in late 1985 by Southern Air Transport, a Miami-based freight carrier linked to the operation. But the shell company's larger purpose appears to have been to act as a conduit for money.    After coming from Switzerland through New York to Panama, funds were transferred back through New York to banks in Canada and Pennsylvania, for example, to cover the cost of aircraft or the salaries of pilots.    Southern Air, which did provide some maintenance services for the airlift, appears increasingly to have been caught in the middle; investigators believe it took directions from a network of former Air Force officers linked to the operation.    Chief among these is retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, whose business partner, Albert Hakim, has had a longstanding association with CSF and one of CSF's principals, attorney Willard Zucker. CSF, which is at the heart of the private network used by Gen. Secord and Mr. Hakim to assist the Contras and later to implement U.S. arms sales to Tehran, refused to comment yesterday.    Within the White House, former NSC aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, oversaw both operations. At the same time, Col. North maintained ties to U.S. conservatives who, with Mr. Reagan's encouragement, were raising money for the Contras.    Tax deductible contributions were collected by the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty and funneled through the Cayman Islands to a Swiss account linked to Col. North and CSF, according to an internal report prepared for fund raiser Carl Spitz Channell.    Mr. Channell, who established the endowment in part to help Mr. Reagan's Central America policies, has repeatedly said he hadn't any intention to provide military aid. But this flow of money to Switzerland coincides roughly with the transfers back from Europe to Panama and ACE, and raises the question of whether private funds were used to cover at least the start-up costs for the arms airlift. </TEXT></DOC>