<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0086 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Needs Patience in Korea---By Karen Elliott House</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Somewhere between the image of an inexorable South Korean juggernaut invading America with Hyundai cars and the image of a precarious government threatened by internal upheaval and external invasion lies the reality of South Korea.    Mid-1987 finds Korea groping toward a peaceful political transition; fretting about rising protectionist sentiment in the U.S., its largest export market; and, above all, preparing to host the 1988 Olympic Games that Korea hopes will symbolize its graduation from Third World adolescence to international maturity and status.    The U.S. spotlight increasingly is shining on South Korea, highlighting both its strengths and its weaknesses. In many ways that is entirely appropriate: Economically and strategically, South Korea is a country that merits much more serious and sustained American attention than Washington -- distracted by Contra controversies and Persian Gulf melodramas -- is giving it.    What Korea doesn't deserve, however, is to have developments there viewed from Washington as some kind of &quot;Jaws II&quot; sequel to convulsions in the Philippines or Iran; to have its obvious political imperfections so highlighted that they blind us to the fundamental strengths of this society; or to have America, for whatever mix of motives, appoint itself stage director to a simplistic Korean morality play in which the &quot;good guys,&quot; represented by sundry opposition politicians, must be encouraged to unseat the &quot;bad guys,&quot; represented by various repressive generals.    Let it be said that there are few societies in the developing world -- or perhaps even in our own -- that don't deserve better political leadership than they have. Korea certainly is no exception. Led by one strong man after another, mostly military, for much of its recent history, Korea is now edging its way uneasily toward presidential elections at the end of this year. President Chun Doo Hwan, who took power seven years ago in a military coup following the assassination of Park Chung Hee, has promised to step down when his term ends next February. And that has set off a scramble for political succession.    In these uncharted political waters, apocalyptic predictions abound: The political opposition, pushed by radical student protesters, claims the election will be rigged and will seek change in the streets rather than at the polling booths. Right-wing military elements, already nervous about the government's talk of democracy, will seek cause to crack down in yet another military coup. Or, North Korea, determined to block the Olympics, will seize the moment to promote -- or precipitate -- instability. Some Washington policy makers, for their part, would like to seize the moment to somehow replicate the Philippine experience and, presto, see &quot;people power&quot; produce a new liberal democracy.    Yet, a week of talks in Seoul with Koreans of all stripes and stations -- leaders and opponents, businessmen and bureaucrats, students and clergy, generals and diplomats -- leaves a visitor impressed with this country's fundamental stability rather than its alleged fragility.    To begin with, this is one of the world's most dynamic economies, producing not simply products and trade surpluses, but also a rapidly rising standard of living, and a growing middle class that is sharing in the economic gains. While many in this middle class would surely like more of a say in political affairs, they don't want democracy at the expense of prosperity.    Second, while political leadership at the highest levels has often been unpopular, Korea increasingly is being administered not by some general at the top but rather by a layer of high-level technocrats, competent and uncorrupted, many of whom acquired their educations -- and their values -- in the U.S. Unlike so many Third World governments, South Korea's is neither venal nor incompetent. President Chun's housecleaning of his cabinet last month in the wake of the torture-death of a student demonstrator in police custody indicates that the government realizes it must be more accommodating to public sentiment.    Third, there is a strong and widespread sense of national pride and purpose in Korea that cuts across almost all classes and factions and that genuinely sees the coming Olympics as the symbol of Korea's coming-of-age. While the Olympics may offer some fringe elements an opportunity to cause trouble, it provides a greater incentive for most Koreans to subjugate their distaste for the government and stick with the status quo. Radical students, who despite their visibility on U.S. TV screens constitute only a small fraction of Korea's one million students, can foment riots, but probably not revolution.    Most important, perhaps, the political opposition is internally divided and devoid of anything approaching charismatic leadership. Neither Kim Dae Jung, who remains under house arrest, nor Kim Young Sam, who is publicly active, commands widespread respect or popularity -- a fact the opposition itself acknowledges while arguing that the government is even more unpopular. While Kim Dae Jung has some claim to legitimacy, having won a substantial minority vote in the early 1970s, much of his public support seems to have dissipated in the intervening years.    In conversations during the past year, neither of the two Kims seems capable of articulating a sense of purpose or policy, but rather merely a lust for power. Even Roman Catholic Church leaders, frequent critics of the government, lump the outs along with the ins and say that all the claimants should &quot;empty themselves of a desire for power.&quot;    For all these reasons, the odds are that if President Chun keeps his promise to step down next year, Korea can pull off a peaceful transition of power and his successor will be Roh Tae Woo, a retired general who tomorrow will be formally nominated as the presidential candidate of the ruling Democratic Justice Party.    Mr. Roh (pronounced &quot;No&quot;) doesn't fit the caricature of a Third World general. He comes across in an interview as low-key, straight-talking and modest, with a sensitivity to internal political frustrations, including the government's unpopularity, and with sophistication about Korea's troubled image abroad. If one encountered Mr. Roh and the Messrs. Kim without knowing who was who, one would be inclined to label Kim Dae Jung as the power-seeking general, Kim Young Sam as a slick and shallow politician, and Mr. Roh as an earnest and intelligent alternative to the present leadership, of which, in fact, he is a principal part.    To be sure, since Mr. Roh is one of the generals who staged the coup that brought President Chun to power, there remains room for some doubt about the depth of his commitment to democracy. However, Mr. Roh certainly says all the right things these days about the need for democratic change, and there is good reason to believe he believes it. By most accounts he is not the favorite son of the Korean military. In any case, the military men are so unpopular these days that Mr. Roh knows he must appeal way beyond them and their narrow interests if he is to gain broad public support and lift the lid on a restrictive political system without loosing the kind of political chaos that would, in turn, lead to a crackdown by military hardliners that could cost him his political future.    If there is cause to believe that stability is the most likely scenario, there remain two outside forces that have the potential to upset the kimchi cart -- North Korea, the implacable enemy, and America, the impatient friend.    There seems little logic in an outright North Korean assault on South Korea. For one thing, the balance of military power doesn't favor the North and both its allies, the Soviet Union and China, are believed to be urging restraint. But the North clearly has the inclination and ability to stir up trouble. South Korea can contain that -- if its military doesn't overreact.    The ultimate paradox is that Washington probably has a greater ability to destabilize South Korea than does Pyongyang. Few would argue with the proposition that the U.S., which has major military and economic interests in South Korea, has a significant stake in Korea's political evolution toward a government that is more democratic, more popular, and thus more stable, than the present one. Political upheaval in Korea could be more damaging for American interests than similar upheaval almost anywhere in the world other than, perhaps, Mexico and Saudi Arabia.    That said, however, Korea is Korea, not the Philippines -- or any place else. The fact that a corrupt and rotting Philippine dictatorship could be easily unseated by a combination of flower-power protests and American pressure, giving way to a kind of political Virgin Mary in the form of Corazon Aquino, doesn't mean that any of that could or should be repeated in Korea.    Korea has the misfortune to have its election coincide with the gathering momentum in the U.S. presidential campaign -- a period when U.S. politicians are even more likely than normal to play politics with foreign affairs and to propose simple, moralistic solutions that fit campaign positions rather than foreign conditions.    Over-eagerness among many U.S. politicians for instant democracy and a view of Kim Dae Jung as Corazon Aquino and Chun Doo Hwan as Ferdinand Marcos risk raising expectations -- and eruptions -- among students who could well provoke the kind of military brutality and repression that Korea has been evolving away from for the past several years. Quiet U.S. pressure has been in part responsible for Korea's tentative steps toward democracy. The right policy for America is to continue that private pressure, not to rush to moralistic judgment and thereby rush Korea into chaos.    ---   Ms. House, foreign editor of the Journal, visited South Korea last week. </TEXT></DOC>