<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0118 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Television:The New Miss Marple---By Martha Bayles</HL><DD> 11/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Lovely, azure-eyed Gwenda thinks she's going mad. Recently arrived in England from her native New Zealand, and settled into a picturesque country house in Devonshire, she starts having panic attacks, murderous nightmares and bouts of bloodstained deja vu. Giles, her handsome husband (also azure-eyed), squires her off to London for an evening at the theater. All is well until, during the play's death scene, she starts screaming her head off. A doctor is summoned, Gwenda is sedated and put to bed, but no one knows what to do next. It's starting to look as if she really is going nuts. Or, at the very least, receiving psychic messages.    Enter Giles's Aunt Jane, a sweet old maiden lady who has spent her entire life good-naturedly snooping after her neighbors in a bucolic hamlet called St. Mary Mead. Against the dark forces of insanity and death, to say nothing of the spirit world, Aunt Jane is the type who would recommend letting the tea brew a few minutes longer. She creeps into Gwenda's bedroom where, despite the sedative, the poor child's tears are still ruining her mascara, and sits down, no doubt smelling of lavender.    Then something wonderful occurs. Instead of the grotesque, supernatural horrors normally associated with light entertainment nowadays, Aunt Jane conjures reason. If Gwenda's mind is telling her that it knows, or recalls, that something terrible happened at that country house, then perhaps something did. Despite her belief that she has never been in England, perhaps she is now remembering an actual occasion when she was.    These suggestions have a salubrious effect. Gwenda gets a good night's sleep, freshens her makeup, and sallies forth with Giles in tow to solve the mystery of the &quot;Sleeping Murder&quot; -- with a little help from Aunt Jane Marple, of course. This is the third of four BBC-produced Miss Marple mysteries, beginning on Dec. 10 continuing through Jan. 28. (Now in their second season on &quot;Mystery!&quot; the tales, most more than one episode, air Thursdays, 9-10 p.m. EST, on PBS.)    I know what you're thinking. There is only one Miss Marple on film, and she is Margaret Rutherford, galloping around the Gallop Inn, squinting behind drapes and clambering under couches with her support hose showing, to the music of a feverish harpsichord. The other characters always regard her as a joke, and with good reason. Even when, through sheer idiotic bluster, she manages to solve a case, she remains a stout, cockeyed caricature in a rose-covered cottage that might as well have a sign on it saying &quot;Property of Pinewood Studios.&quot; From her facial expressions (reminiscent of a demented parrot) to her fetishes with wool hats, walking sticks and (naturally) umbrellas, she's a parody of old fussbudget England itself.    Now we must get serious for a moment, and ask whether this classic film version of Miss Marple is true to the original character as invented by Agatha Christie. It's hard to say, since that Miss Marple went through a few changes as she appeared in dozens of novels and stories between the 1930s and the 1970s. Not only did the 60-year-old sleuth age a mere 20 years during those four decades -- an accomplishment in itself -- she also, according to one biographer, changed from &quot;the image of a twittering old maid in black lace mittens and cap to that of a tall, elderly woman in a tweed coat and small felt hat.&quot; Obviously, neither of these much resembles Dame Rutherford.    Not that the original Miss Marple is the object of universal esteem. It is fashionable, in literary circles today, to dismiss the seeming &quot;mystery&quot; of the mystery novel as bogus, and to accuse the genre of denying life's real mysteries -- i.e. terror and death -- by having a murder &quot;put to rights&quot; by the power of reason. Dame Christie is frequently singled out as the prime example of a mystery writer who creates an illusory social order -- a fantasy England where stout yeomen still doff their caps to their betters -- only to threaten it with the irrational in the form of an unsolved homicide, and then restore the illusion by having the case solved. Reason triumphant, we can all settle back with a nice cup of tea.    What's interesting about the Dame Rutherford movies is that they beat the literati to this particular punch. Made in the 1960s, they manage, by mocking Miss Marple, to mock the whole social order she represents. Cozy, genteel England has rarely looked so absurd. The painstaking process of assembling clues gets reduced to another eccentricity rather than a demonstration of the powers of the mind. As for our comforting illusions being shaken up by murder, the tone of these films is so farcical that we chuckle at the bodies littering the landscape.    For these reasons, I am convinced that Dame Christie would greatly prefer the new Miss Marple. Played by the veteran stage actress Joan Hickson, she is a genuinely reassuring figure. First, although she is quite elderly -- Miss Hickson is well into her 80s -- she is, in all essential respects, undimmed by the years. Miss Hickson's face is not glamorous in the tucked-and-sculpted manner of Hollywood's octogenarians. But the intensity of its life and intelligence makes it one of the most beautiful faces of this or any other TV season.    Second, this Miss Marple is wise. She realizes and forgives the fact that most people take her to be a doddering old meddler. And -- true to the novels -- she also uses that fact. Unnoticed, dismissed, occasionally confided in precisely because she appears so harmless, she sees and hears twice as much as the police, even when they tolerate her help. The best moments in each of these four stories occur when someone, say a sharp police officer, suddenly recognizes how extraordinary this old lady is. She will flash him a sly look, and a brilliant light will break out behind the dowdy tweeds and the knitting needles.    Finally, the idea of social order is convincingly affirmed. Dame Christie was not without irony toward her own creation, as evidenced in one of her later stories called &quot;At Bertram's Hotel,&quot; dramatized in the fourth and last film of the coming series. Set in London right after the war, the story begins with Miss Marple enjoying the perfectly maintained traditions of a famous old hotel, only to grow uneasy that they should still exist after all the wartime upheavals. Eventually, she cracks the establishment's too-perfect facade, thereby affirming that it was just an imitation of something once real, if now departed. In the process, she also affirms herself as the embodiment of reason and good sense. And in her case, they're not too good to be true. </TEXT></DOC>