<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Ex-Jefferies Aide May Have Parked StockFor Hurwitz, Congressional Report Says---By Thomas E. Ricks and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JEFGSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A congressional report scheduled for release today says that Boyd L. Jefferies, former chairman of Jefferies Group Inc. who earlier this year admitted parking stock for Ivan Boesky, also appears to have parked stock for Houston investor Charles Hurwitz.    The report, part of a broad review by Congress of corporate takeovers and insider trading, also says that a New York Stock Exchange investigation found &quot;significant evidence&quot; of insider trading in connection with the 1985 acquisition of Pacific Lumber Co. by Maxxam Group Inc., which Mr. Hurwitz controls. The report doesn't accuse either Mr. Jefferies or Mr. Hurwitz of engaging in insider trading.    Relying on its own research and on a Big Board study obtained by subpoena, the House Energy and Commerce Committee's Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations says in its report that Jefferies Group's Jefferies andamp; Co. bought shares of Pacific Lumber in 1985 before Mr. Hurwitz's Maxxam Group began a tender offer for that company. Jefferies sold its shares to Maxxam just before the tender offer was announced, the report says.    Michael Barrett Jr., the subcommittee's chief counsel and staff director, said that Mr. Jefferies, through his lawyers, has cooperated with the subcommittee. The committee's staff hadn't spoken with Mr. Hurwitz.    The report, prepared for hearings beginning today on the Pacific Lumber takeover, says the subcommittee's staff &quot;believes there was an undisclosed arrangement with Jefferies andamp; Co. 'to park' the Pacific Lumber stock until such time as the tender offer would be announced.&quot; Such an arrangement could involve violations of federal margin rules, bookkeeping regulations, and other securities laws, the report says.    Parking occurs when one investor buys a stock, usually a large position, for another investor who doesn't want to be indentified as the owner. Because parking conceals true ownership of a stock, it can enable a corporate raider to secretly amass a large stock position, thus gaining an important strategic advantage over a takeover target.    A spokesman for Mr. Hurwitz said that Mr. Hurwitz denies violating any laws in the Pacific Lumber takeover. He said Mr. Hurwitz specifically denies parking stock to evade regulatory filings. The spokesman added that Mr. Hurwitz is unaware of any insider trading by his former associates, and noted that such trading would have been disadvantageous to him in that it would have increased the price of Pacific Lumber, and so could have threatened the completion of the transaction.    A lawyer for Mr. Jefferies declined to comment. The subcommittee report says Jefferies andamp; Co. advised New York Stock Exchange investigators that &quot;there were no prior agreements concerning the sale of this stock.&quot; A spokesman for the Los Angeles-based brokerage firm said Friday that &quot;to the extent that there may have been any problem with this transaction, it would have been included in the company's settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission,&quot; reached earlier this year.    Even if parking didn't occur, the report says, there is also &quot;significant evidence&quot; of another possible failure to comply with securities laws. The report quotes notes taken by an official of Irving Bank Corp., which provided some financing for the takeover, that appear to indicate that a Maxxam official consciously sought to evade government oversight under the Hart-Scott-Rodino antitrust act. That law requires investors who may have takeover plans to report to the government stock holdings of more than $15 million in a given company.    According to the report, the Irving Trust banker, which the report didn't identify, wrote in his notes of a conversation with Glen Kassan, then Maxxam's chief financial officer, that when a block of Pacific Lumber stock became available, &quot;could not buy since over 15MM HSR limit. So MCO&quot; -- a company related to Maxxam -- &quot;bought -- will be part of deal with Maxxam.&quot;    Irving Trust didn't have any immediate comment on the report, and Mr. Kassan, Maxxam's former chief financial officer, declined to comment. But Roger C. Jones, a former Irving Trust banker who said he took the notes, said in a telephone interview Friday: &quot;We made no such interpretation at the time that we were seeking to avoid requirements under the law. Those were just notes.&quot;    The subcommittee's hearings on the Pacific Lumber takeover are designed to explore recent corporate takeover activity in general. But, by initially focusing on Pacific Lumber, they appear to be seeking to put in a strongly negative light takeovers and those who carry them out. The Pacific Lumber case points not only to allegedly questionable aspects of the acquisition, but also to the subsequent impact on the company's operations.    As the subcommittee's report notes, Pacific Lumber, the single largest private holder of California redwood timberlands, before its acquisition had a reputation for balanced harvesting of its holdings. In mid-1986, by contrast, the acquired company announced plans to double its redwood harvest and, earlier this year, it was sued by a private California environmentalist group over the accelerated pace of its cutting operations.    As reported by this newspaper last November, Pacific Lumber was one of the 14 takeover-related stocks named by the SEC in subpoenas issued in connection with the Boesky insider-trading investigation. The stock also figures in the government's investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., according to people familiar with that investigation.    As reported, Mr. Boesky began buying stock in Pacific Lumber on Sept. 27, 1985. Three days later, Maxxam, a Drexel client, said it would begin a tender offer for the company.    The subcommittee report says that the Big Board's investigation uncovered several previously unreported instances of possible insider trading in connection with the Pacific Lumber takeover. The report says the investigation focused on pre-announcement trading by Transcontinental Services Group, a Netherlands Antilles company related to Maxxam by a 12% stake Maxxam then held in it and by the friendship between Mr. Hurwitz, the head of Maxxam, and Stanley Cohen, president and chief executive officer of Transcontinental.    The report says that on Sept. 24 and 25, 1985, before Maxxam's tender offer was announced, Transcontinental bought 15,000 Pacific Lumber shares. It adds that Mr. Cohen told subcommittee staff that at the time of that purchase he didn't know Mr. Hurwitz was considering making a tender offer. Both Mr. Cohen and Mr. Hurwitz are scheduled to testify at today's hearing.    A spokesman for Mr. Cohen and Transcontinental said that Transcontinental's trades &quot;were in full compliance with all securities laws, and weren't the product of inside information.&quot;    The report also says that, at the time, Mr. Cohen was a partner in Maxxam's takeover law firm of Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin andamp; Frankel. A spokesman for the firm disputed that assertion, saying that &quot;it isn't accurate&quot; to say Mr. Cohen was a partner. The spokesman added: &quot;Mr. Cohen performed no legal services whatsoever in connection with Maxxam's acquisition of Pacific Lumber. No one at Kramer Levin provided Mr. Cohen or anyone at Transcontinental Services Group with any confidential information as to this transaction.&quot;    The report says the Big Board recommended that the SEC investigate the trading by Transcontinental. Mr. Barrett, the subcommittee counsel, said the SEC has taken testimony in the matter. Gary Lynch, chief of the SEC's enforcement division, declined to comment. </TEXT></DOC>