<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880720-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Gone With the Windbags </HL><AUTHOR> Manuela Hoelterhoff </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>      Atlanta, Thursday morning:   Future and past, all in minutes. The new airport shuttle resonates with a Vader-like voice, and the front page of the local paper glows with a picture of a KKK imperial wizard in golden robes. &quot;Stone Mountain Names Park for Klansman,&quot; says the headline.    Years ago, the former poobah donated money for this verdant spot in Atlanta's outskirts. &quot;There's no need to wait till somebody dies to recognize them,&quot; explains a city manager. My black cabbie thinks it's funny. But not half as funny as several large men dressed as raisins puckering in 95-degree heat in front of Peachtree Towers. &quot;We're raisin' hell,&quot; says one plump, wrinkled grape, dripping buckets underneath a wintry purple felt cap, &quot;to get justice for janitors.&quot; The raisins want a raise for scrubbing buildings belonging to Portman Co.    We've arrived in the heart of downtown Atlanta and these fortress towers, stained the sickly beige you turn just before falling into a deep faint, are the centerpiece of John Portman's expanding empire. Over three decades, the developer-architect's youthful vision of a concrete Atlanta has become, well, concrete.    It so happens my next appointment is with Mr. Portman; seated in his very clean offices, he dismisses the rabble-rousing raisins. &quot;They're out to embarrass me during the convention.&quot; Mr. Portman prefers to talk about art, his art. There isn't a wall here without a masterwork from the master builder. What's his secret? &quot;Never use a brush,&quot; he says. With just the humblest of plastic kitchen spatulas, he gouges out dizzying swirls that look like the highway system in Atlanta. Or the trademark atriums of his three hotels here. You look up into the undulating concrete and want to lie down with an ice bag on your head.    Thursday afternoon:   Bill Russell, a local architect of more modest ambitions, takes me to see &quot;The Battle of Atlanta,&quot; a 50-foot-high cyclorama installed in a sepulchral temple at Grant Park. Sitting inside the cyclorama on a slowly spinning platform, you listen as a soundtrack details Atlanta's &quot;drama and destruction.&quot; Meanwhile, Sherman Jr. has wreaked some destruction of his own, perhaps with a Dale Murphy-autographed bat. Mr. Russell has to drive home without his side window and the briefcase he left on the back seat.    Friday morning:   A TV comic wearing a garbage pail on his head is exhorting Atlantans to be tidy. &quot;We're afraid the mad-dog press might say something ugly about our town. So that's why we're cleaning up. Do your part!&quot;    Drive anywhere in Atlanta and you can see $2.5 million worth of instant beautification battling years of billion-dollar uglification. As a contest, it's not quite the dead heat the election is supposed to be.    Friday afternoon:   Baked chicken hits the spot at Thelma's Kitchen on what remains of Luckie Street. Then, a fashion-show fund-raiser for Heart Strings, the local affiliate of the Design and Interior Furnishing Foundation for AIDS. Designers dead from AIDS don't keep Mayor Andy Young from looking on the bright side of things when he gets to the podium. The tireless booster gives a rousing little talk about economic development in Atlanta.    An old cabdriver takes me away to the modestly named World Congress Center (WCC), which looks like a truck dropped a whole mess of structural beams and concrete slabs on a parking lot late one night and let them fend for themselves. She drives for three minutes without getting lost! Streets disappear, names change. Driving here is a constant challenge, she says. She loves it.    Inside the WCC, the media holes up in pitiful booths stapled together out of tackboard and curtains, trying to squeeze words out of stone. Such is the noise from air conditioners, you might as well be sitting inside a jet engine. Across a lethal road where the traffic light never changes to WALK are two other sturdy buildings: the OMNI Coliseum -- a gymnasium transformed into the convention hall -- and Ted Turner's CNN headquarters.    My written request for a few words from the Mouth of the South has fallen on deaf ears. &quot;No, Mr. Turner will not have any time to see you,&quot; says his office belle. Not ever? &quot;No, not ever.&quot;    So I was walking in despair through miasmic air, looking for substitute copy, when this man approaches with a The South Will Rise Again button on his chest. &quot;I've got some information,&quot; he says. &quot;Information no one else has.&quot; Give it to me, I say casually.    &quot;Can I have $5?&quot; he asks.    This is what Ted Turner and an inhumanly boring convention will drive you to: a complete breach of journalistic conduct. Paying people to give you information.    &quot;Rats,&quot; he says, sticking the bill in his pocket. &quot;Big rats. Cat-sized rats, all over there. Every night at 2 a.m. at Five Points.&quot; This is a subway station near the convention site.    &quot;You think it's funny?&quot; he screams. &quot;You try to sleep there.&quot;    Maybe I will. My hotel is far away, past the Birmingham exit on Interstate 75. -   Friday evening:   The Fox Theater. Inside this lavish Moorish-style movie house, whose near demolition 10 years ago mobilized Atlanta's preservation movement, bored and broiling conventioneers are listening to jokester Mark Russell. He's a neighbor of mine out there on I75! &quot;I'm with the delegates from Guam,&quot; he says. &quot;I won't say that we're far away. But if you saw 'Gone With the Wind,' we are where the horses collapsed.&quot;    Later:   Dinner at the Buckhead Diner, quite the hangout in Atlanta's fanciest section. Watch Yuppies eat mozzarella. Then watch women dancing nude at Tattletales, a blue-collar strip joint down the road with trucks outside and a Welcome Democrats sign on the roof. What turns out to be Atlanta's most vibrant activity, as far as I can tell, are these discos filled with women jiggling nude on table tops. &quot;Perfect,&quot; says one of the men of Atlanta, staring at implants (surely!) the size of bowling balls. &quot;Perfect.&quot;    Saturday:   Braised bear, grilled gorilla, marinated mongoose -- I was looking forward to the Ford Motor Co. brunch at the Atlanta Zoo. This is the place that achieved national fame four years ago when an employee made sausage links and rabbit stew out of extra animals he literally took home to dinner.    But I guess those days are over. Ford offers Southern quiche and chicken, despite many delicious-looking potbellied piglets cavorting next door in a pen. Not to mention a really big mouthful: 2000-pound Scarlett O'Hara. The elephant is demonstrating her inborn cooling equipment by flapping her ears. Veins in the back of these ears bring down her body temperature. I want elephant ears!    Maybe I can grow them for the Republican convention next month in New Orleans. For now, there's an ice-cream truck parked in front of the neat wooden house on Auburn Street where Martin Luther King Jr. was born and probably never dreamed a dream about millionaire PAC men.    Around the block, I pick up campaign literature from the cheerfully painted storefront headquarters of Dr. Lenora B. Fulani, Afro-American Independent Candidate for president. Vote for her and you will be guaranteed a decent home. Maybe she can do something about the Rat Man. Come to think of it, maybe she can do something for me.    Late afternoon:   High Museum of Art by architect Richard Meier is a cooling sight -- all white, and no concrete! But nearby, the boarded-up boarding house where Margaret Mitchell wrote The Book looks like it will be gone with the next wind. Which is what the developer who wants to tear it down is hoping.    Then it's Piedmont Park. Thank heavens for Jesse Jackson. Were it not for this bubbling fountain of left-wing logorrhea, we'd all be on the grass snoring. Instead, he's keeping hundreds of us on our toes in 100-degree heat, pressing four deep against a fence waiting for the Rainbow Coalition buscapade scheduled to arrive hours ago. After we've sweated enough to irrigate Oklahoma, the man rolls in followed by six buses and replaces a gospel act on stage.    Sunday:   Where's Tawana? Bored photographers are taking pictures of each other waiting for another bus bringing the Rev. Al Sharpton shackled to Tawana Brawley and/or mother Glenda Brawley if we're lucky. Perhaps the reverend will finally after months let us know why he thinks the black teen-ager was raped by white racists in Wappinger Falls, N.Y.    Late-breaking news places the entourage at the Wheat Street Church with Mussolini Muslim Louis Farrakhan, who used to supply Jesse with fabulously tailored bodyguards. Getting inside the Kremlin is easier. A sister dressed in white boots, white robe and white hat inspects me with white gloves in a basement room. Smell it! she commands, checking my perfume bottle for deadly gases.    All this, and still no Tawana visible from the church balcony. Not that the experience is a total loss. The dapper brother who sold me two taped sermons by the minister promises to send me the name of his Harlem tailor. Something in white with sweat pads, I'm thinking.    Late afternoon:   House Speaker Jim Wright is feted with heaps of flowers and mountains of shrimp by Waste Management Inc., a garbage company. Maybe they'll get a contract to pulp the books Jim didn't sell to the Teamsters. We're at the Carter Presidential Center, a place regularly picketed by irate locals protesting the imperial expressway the peanut farmer hopes will soon rip through an Olmsted-designed park to the parking lot of his memorial. You can relive his goofy presidency by stepping into a copy of the Oval Office and playing president, just like Jimmy. That problem with Iran. What would you have done? Use military force? Negotiate? Pay ransom? Sanctions? Press a button and his voice comes on to tell you why your choice won't work. The alternative is to do nothing, just like Jimmy.    Evening:   Sunday before the convention starts is party night, and what party could possibly be more joyous than the Greek Festival in Peachtree Center. Bouzoukis, moussaka. That's what I thought, before finding myself far away from food and drink in a small corner reserved for lepers and the press. &quot;We don't want you people scaring anybody,&quot; smiles a Dukakis flack.    I take that to heart and catch the other parties on TV. Ted Turner's fete, for instance, in the atrium of his concrete CNN center. Another ostracized reporter seems to be having some trouble identifying the fat cats swaying on the floor. &quot;And there's Sam Nunn dancing presumably with his wife,&quot; she says, squinting hard from her distant perch.    &quot;I've got Georgia on my mind,&quot; says Zorba the Clerk, in another electrifying speech. So do I, as I lay me down to sleep. -   Monday:   Thousands of delegates and reporters start pouring into the OMNI, soon to be featured in a Japanese horror movie with large flying insects winging out of the pods where Dan Rather and Peter Jennings are fighting the battle of the bores. What's this? There's a witty woman on the podium delivering the keynote address -- Ann Richards, Texas state treasurer. Who would have guessed women and wit were part of the Democratic Party of 1988. &quot;George Bush was born with a silver foot in his mouth&quot; is the only memorable line to come out of this convention so far. Did Mike choose the wrong Texan? Mrs. Dukakis, asks a reporter, did you ever ask your husband about choosing a woman vice president? &quot;I can't remember,&quot; says Kitty, looking dim but slim.    Tuesday morning:   In the Red Cross tent on the parking lot reserved for protesters (animal rights, gay rights, Jim Wright), nurses are getting ready for another hot day. Cold packs and cots help revive the 50-odd people who weave off the bubbling asphalt every day.    Is this heat the beginning of the end? I ask a representative of the Sierra Club at a press briefing. &quot;Consider it a warning sign,&quot; she says, stuffing some doom-filled literature into my hands. In cooler quarters, delegates are surely poring over the platform to be presented tonight. Can't go on for too long. The platform is all of 4,000 words. Four thousand words! That's shorter than the lawn-mower manual I bought for my house in Wappinger Falls. It's on the market: $185,000, 3a., 3 bdr, riv.vu. Show solidarity with Tawana and buy my home.    ---   Ms. Hoelterhoff writes on cultural matters for the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>