<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881031-0190 </DOCNO><HL> Stifled Scholars: Japan's Scientists Find Pure Research Suffers Under Rigid Life Style --- They Discover the Job System And Pressures to Conform Prevent Big Discoveries --- Ph.D.s Scrubbing Fish Tanks </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Kreider Yoder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan's regimented society may be the secret to industrial triumph. But it seems to spell disaster in the science laboratory.    Listen to Yoshihide Tsujimoto, a molecular biologist. In 1979, at age 30, he joined a Japanese-government lab. Four years later, still an assistant on his boss's pet project -- silk worm genetics -- he asked to do independent work on human genes. &quot;No way&quot; came the reply. &quot;I couldn't do what I really wanted,&quot; he recalls. In Japan, doing what you want at 34 &quot;isn't allowed.&quot; And it would be years before seniority yielded a promotion that would allow it.    Today, Mr. Tsujimoto is in Philadelphia researching human chromosomes at the Wister Institute of Anatomy and Biology. Now 39, his output of scientific papers has tripled. He has been published in prestigious U.S. journals. Five researchers labor under his wing -- unthinkable authority for a young scientist in Japan. &quot;I have my own lab, my own grants and I can do whatever I want,&quot; he says. &quot;In Japan, I'd still be working under a full professor.&quot;    Mr. Tsujimoto's problem remains a familiar one among Japan's best and brightest young scientists. Many continue to find their creative urges stifled by a social fabric that seems to idolize seniority, loathe individualism and muffle debate. They say it is as if Japan simply won't let its youth do freewheeling science.    Now, more and more of Japan's upper echelons -- industrialists as well as science mandarins -- are worrying about how long that can go on. They are tormented by a fear that unless things change, their nation, which has catapulted itself to the top of a sophisticated high-tech world, could be headed for trouble.    The difficulty isn't any lack of innate inventiveness; anyone with a Walkman can see that. Japan files more patents world-wide than any other country. Labs here can do brilliant research when there is the faintest hint of profit -- in new drugs, new plastics or new superconductors.    The problem is with pure science -- the kind that solves nature's secrets and wins Nobel prizes. And that produces economic gain only later, if ever. As long as Japan continues to mooch off Western discoveries in pure science, some here suggest, it is sure to attract ever more anger from other advanced nations. (Specifically, only five Japanese scientists have ever won Nobel prizes, compared with more than a score of French scientists and well over 140 Americans.)    The emergence of high-temperature superconductors makes the case. Japanese companies boast of a big lead in applications for revolutionary materials that carry electricity with almost no resistance. But the seeds of the technology came from Western labs, not their own.    &quot;Japan's science is definitely inferior to America's in terms of real creativity,&quot; Nobel laureate Susumu Tonegawa told a Tokyo audience earlier this year. &quot;It's very clear that Japan is making money by taking and applying the fruits of science that the West creates at great expense.&quot;    Mr. Tonegawa heckles Japan a lot these days. To do original work, he says, &quot;talented scientists have no choice but to get out of Japan.&quot; A molecular-biology professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who won last year's Nobel prize in medicine, he hasn't worked in Japan since 1963. He claims he couldn't have done his ground-breaking work if he had stayed in his homeland.    Jabs like that don't just hurt, they are making an impression. Japan needs to create more pure science to feed future industries, warn industrialists such as Hisashi Shinto, chairman of Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp. The West won't continue supplying ideas free of charge in such vital areas as biotechnology and computer science, Ministry of International Trade and Industry planners say. So the planners are furiously dreaming up programs to foster &quot;originality&quot; and change the centuries-old parasitic habits in science.    But money and programs won't buy all the changes needed. The big culprits are deeply ingrained traditions, the same ones that made Japan an industrial powerhouse: acquiescence to authority, strict seniority, a stable but immobile work force and little debate.    Those customs often inspire loyalty among factory hands and teamwork among the engineers who whisk product ideas to market. But they also can stunt free-ranging thought in scientists soon after they leave the university.    Right off, a young scientist is expected to seek life-long employment. Japan lacks one of the West's big strengths -- the &quot;postdoctoral&quot; system of two-year or three-year supervised research stints for fresh Ph.D.s. Here, most posts are permanent.    Recently, a few postdoctoral posts have been financed by Japan's Ministry of Education, but the number is so small that one scientist calls the effort &quot;completely meaningless.&quot; If a new Ph.D. doesn't want to settle down, the best he can get is a postdoctoral term in the U.S. or Europe. In effect, Western labs train this eager breed of Japanese scientists because Japan can't.    The Japanese scientist's plight is worst in his 30s -- often the most productive years for an American who has completed a successful postdoctoral term and become an independent researcher. His Japanese counterpart may be treated like a factory hand, at the mercy of his boss and expected to keep his ideas to himself.    That is what Norimoto Murai says he found upon joining Japan's National Institute of Agro-Biological Resources in 1983. The lab was supposed to be a bastion of originality. Instead, the plant pathologist says, government bureaucrats ignored his grant proposals, especially those without practical applications. Petty travel rules often kept him from conferences.    Worse, he says, his output of original research papers -- the yardstick of a scientist's productivity -- fell drastically as he was burdened writing about new laboratory procedures. During an earlier tour in the U.S., he had published dozens of papers, including several in two leading journals, Science and the Procedures of the National Academy of Science. Back in Japan, he eked out one &quot;half-original&quot; paper, which went to an obscure journal.    Eventually, he concluded all he was expected to do was &quot;show up at 8:30 and stamp my card,&quot; the Japanese equivalent of punching a time clock. So in 1986, he quit for a spot at Louisiana State University, where, he says, &quot;I'm happier because I can do what I want to do.&quot;    Japanese industrial-style hierarchy extends to the &quot;koza,&quot; or chair, system in which professors and lab managers in their 40s and 50s grip absolute power. A koza manager may direct several subordinate scientists in their 30s. These underlings plug away patiently, building seniority toward lock-step advancement to better posts by their late 30s.    &quot;In the U.S., if you do well you can advance,&quot; says Gerald Rothberg, a Stevens Institute of Technology professor who recently was visiting professor at Tokyo's Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology. In Japan &quot;it's a matter of putting in time . . . they won't speed up the advancement of qualified people.&quot;    A frustrated scientist here can't easily move on, either. In other countries, mobility -- new people, a new place and new ideas -- can be a catalyst for scientific breakthroughs. In Japan, job-hoppers are mostly seen as pariahs. The notion of lifelong employment remains powerful, especially in government and academic fields, despite some erosion in industry.    &quot;Unless you're an Einstein, you can't be creative in a vacuum,&quot; says Kazuhiko Kinoshita, a biophysics scientist at the government's Institute of Physical and Chemical Research. Yet his boss and colleagues are aghast because he wants to change jobs. They wouldn't even consider it.    Job gridlock makes moving doubly difficult. Mr. Kinoshita has been stymied by a lack of attractive openings. &quot;There just aren't many positions because nobody else moves,&quot; the 41-year-old says.    Immobility can breed complacency. A scientist who sits tight and doesn't push controversial ideas usually has his job until retirement. So, some Japanese labs are full of deadwood. &quot;I'll never be fired,&quot; says one 38-year-old scientist. (Lifetime employment also prevents labs from hiring short-term help, so scientists divert research time to menial tasks that less-trained technicians do in the U.S. At one government marine research center, young Ph.D.s must climb into concrete fish tanks to scrub out the scum.)    Nor is there much tolerance for eccentrics in labs where people will probably spend entire careers together. &quot;That nips originality in the bud,&quot; claims Yoshifumi Nishimura, a 39-year-old chemist. &quot;There's no environment where you can do wacky things that end up being creative. . . . If you're different, you're a minus.&quot;    Learning to avoid boat-rocking serves many Japanese well when 123 million people must live together mostly in crammed cities. But it can also force Japanese scientists to eschew public argument and Western-style scientific debate.    &quot;It's the scientist's duty to argue, but the Japanese scientist lacks that sense of duty,&quot; says a 43-year-old government biologist. He recalls rising at a conference last December to challenge another scientist's findings, only to have the speaker freeze at the podium, unable to utter a sound.    At another conference, this biologist says he was dubious about some data in a paper. But this time in deference to the elderly, influential author, he and his colleagues agreed to keep quiet. The elder &quot;would have lost face and . . . I would have been indirectly punished some day when I filed an application&quot; for a grant, the biologist says. He declines to be named out of the same fear of ostracism.    Some scientists here live in mortal fear of offending elderly &quot;big bosses&quot; -- prominent professors who don't do much research anymore but advise bureaucrats on where to direct government grant money. U.S. agencies generally go by &quot;peer review&quot; -- 20 to 30 working scientists pore over applications to decide which projects merit funds. In Japan, as few as three &quot;big bosses&quot; may make such decisions.    &quot;A grant doesn't come to your track record,&quot; says Nagoya University professor Yasunori Machida. &quot;It comes to your position and to your title.&quot;    Picayune rules imposed by bureaucrats on some government scientists and professors can crimp freedom. Scientists must apply months ahead for government consent to leave Japan, even on vacation. Upon returning, they submit photocopies of their passports to prove they went only where they applied to go. To avoid hassles, many pay from their own pockets to attend important conferences. Others skip them.    &quot;The government doesn't trust us,&quot; maintains Masaru Taniguchi, an immunology professor at Chiba University who recently attended a U.S. conference. &quot;If I went to America and crossed the border to Mexico, I'd get into a lot of trouble.&quot;    Young scientists say there is little they can do to dislodge traditions that hamper them. &quot;It's culture,&quot; sighs Mr. Nishimura, the chemist; he likens it to the preservation of kabuki, a traditional art.    But some critics argue that even if the science system were revamped, Japan's regimented schools would still produce scholars who avoid risky research. Tohoku University professor Jun-ichi Nishizawa says his young students search Western journals to find research topics, a habit that ensures that they won't be out on a scientific limb. &quot;The young people always like to follow the Americans,&quot; he laments.    &quot;We don't understand in our hearts the joy of taking risks every step of the way,&quot; contends Tokyo University researcher Zenichiro Honda. &quot;That's because we don't think of science as our own. Our ancestors didn't create physics and mathematics. Science is a foreign language. . . . We see science as something you study, not something that comes out of our souls.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>