<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Victims of Violent Crimes Increasingly SueFor Damages -- and Many Win Big Awards---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After cardiologist Michael Halberstam was gunned down by a burglar in 1980, his widow was determined to strike back.    Seeking monetary damages, she filed an unusual civil suit against the convicted killer, Bernard Welch, whose rampage of break-ins had terrorized posh neighborhoods and yielded a fortune in furs, gold and jewelry. A federal appeals panel eventually upheld a $5.7 million award, ruling that even the woman who lived with Mr. Welch was partly liable.    Mrs. Halberstam still hasn't collected any money; the Internal Revenue Service seized Mr. Welch's loot before any other claimant could. Since the ground-breaking suit was filed in 1981, however, more and more victims of violent crime in the U.S. have resorted to such private suits. And judges and juries are increasingly approving huge damage awards that only a few years ago would have been unthinkable.    Those using the strategy include the former White House press secretary James Brady -- who was seriously wounded during John Hinckley's 1981 assassination attempt against President Reagan -- and scores of other shooting or rape victims.    Not long ago, a Hyattsville, Md., woman accepted a $1 million out-of-court settlement from her estranged husband -- who had shot her during an argument, leaving her partly paralyzed. In Texas last year, an 18-year-old woman won a $10 million suit against her adoptive father after detailing how she was sexually abused and mistreated by him for nearly 10 years.    Not only are the perpetrators of violent crimes being hit for damages. Increasingly, the owners and managers of properties where the crimes occur are also targets of civil actions for restitution.    &quot;There clearly is a growing, nationwide trend toward filing such private damage claims, because they have tremendous monetary and psychological value for victims,&quot; says Paul Kamenar, the executive legal director at the Washington (D.C.) Legal Foundation, a public-interest group. Even when damages can't be collected, Mr. Kamenar says, &quot;there still is the important therapeutic value for victims who feel they are regaining control of their lives by taking action . . . instead of passively sitting on the sidelines.&quot;    This increased emphasis on victims' rights, many law-enforcement officials and criminal-justice experts agree, is likely to prompt far-reaching changes in how courts operate and how they punish criminals.    The Justice Department is pushing a package of proposed changes, including model state legislation, intended to assist victims and enhance their clout in the judicial process. The proposals are backed by the American Bar Association and the National Association of Attorneys General.    The proposals call for, among other things, participation of victims in parole hearings, increased confidentiality for victims' addresses and certain of their statements, and more-stringent bail guidelines aimed at keeping dangerous defendants from returning to the streets. The administration also has proposed changes to protect children who testify in sexual-abuse cases, and it wants judges to pay more heed to the wishes of victims when the judges determine jail sentences.    &quot;For too long, the treatment of victims hasn't been a very high priority,&quot; says Lois Herrington, the former U.S. assistant attorney general who recently stepped down as the administration's chief advocate of victims' rights. Instead of treating victims &quot;with the dignity and compassion they deserve,&quot; Mrs. Herrington says, the judicial system frequently forces them to &quot;endure endless questioning, intimidation and harassment. . . . By the end of this process, (they) have felt more despair than justice.&quot;    The proposed programs would be in addition to a federal program that already spends more than $64 million a year to compensate crime victims. (The Reagan administration has failed to persuade Congress to make states and localities shoulder a larger share of such outlays.) More than 30 states also have compensation programs of their own.    Former New York City Police Commissioner Patrick Murphy, now a consultant for the U.S. Conference of Mayors, says improved treatment of victims is likely to result in more effective law enforcement. &quot;The answer isn't just more police on the beat,&quot; he has said. &quot;If citizens are treated with more respect and have better rapport with the police, (they) will be more likely to come forward with information that is the lifeblood&quot; of any investigation.    Many victims contend that private legal actions are the best -- and frequently the only -- way to strike back at those they consider responsible for their suffering. But such actions have uncertain outcomes and can drag on for years. In the Brady case, for example, Mr. Brady -- along with a Secret Service agent and a District of Columbia policeman who were also wounded -- filed a $54 million civil suit against Mr. Hinckley. Procedural wrangling over whether other defendants can be included has delayed trial of the case.    Civil suits are frequently aimed at third parties because the average criminal doesn't have the resources to pay damages; courts have been known to make multimillion-dollar awards. In early 1985, a Texas jury ordered Forth Worth Cab andamp; Baggage Co. to pay nearly $5 million to a woman who had been raped by one of its drivers while her three-year-old child was held at gunpoint in the same cab. The company, which denies charges that it was negligent in failing to discover the man's prior criminal record before hiring him, is appealing.    A Washington, D.C., jury recently delivered a $533,000 verdict against the owner of a Church's Fried Chicken franchise. The jury decided that a restaurant manager had failed to do enough to help an 18-year-old woman who had been abducted from the parking lot and raped. The defendant filed a notice of appeal but then settled the case for an undisclosed sum.    Even police agencies aren't immune to such damage suits. The city of Los Angeles was ordered in 1983 to pay $3 million to a 44-year-old resident who claimed that police officers had driven away after promising to protect him from an upset neighbor, who then had shot -- and permanently paralyzed -- him. The city eventually settled the suit for $1.25 million.    Some lawmakers and critics denounce the practice of victims' suing third parties with deep pockets. While encouraging suits against criminals themselves, the Reagan administration contends that suits against third parties frequently result in excessive awards. Rather than punishing criminals, these critics argue, such suits may punish innocent parties and unfairly stretch liabililty law, raising insurance rates for many types of businesses and encouraging the pursuit of weak or unfounded claims.    But crime victims' lawyers say their cases are based on longstanding legal theories and aren't intended to provide excessive compensation. And such advocates claim there has been, in recent years, a big shift of public opinion in their favor.    On the latter point, nobody disagrees. &quot;I went to law school 20 years ago and never heard the word 'victim,'&quot; Mrs. Herrington asserts. Today, she says, &quot;there is a broad constituency&quot; to protect victims and to get them involved &quot;at all critical points&quot; in the judicial process. She adds, &quot;This is not a trendy issue that will be embraced in fervor and then forgotten.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>