<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Solution --- Going on the Offense: U.S. Manufacturers Belatedly Take Steps To Protect Product Lines From Imitators </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> EDP PHA ELE </IN><DATELINE> AMERICA IS STILL No. 1  </DATELINE><TEXT>   in litigation, anyway. But is that a good thing? Ask Texas Instruments.    The semiconductor maker earned $191 million last year -- nearly half its pretax profit -- from successful patent-infringement litigation against nine rivals in Japan and South Korea. Other chip makers have followed Texas Instruments' lead and are suing the socks off of competitors at home and abroad. So are biotechnology companies, computers makers and software houses.    In turning loose their lawyers, American high-tech companies are exhibiting a stiffening resolve to protect their secrets. It is a resolve exhibited in other ways as well: in a new emphasis on physical security, and on the design of products that are far harder for competitors to copy with impunity.    More significantly, companies such as Hewlett-Packard are making painful, step-by-step overhauls of the way they design and manufacture products. Others are using computers in imaginative new ways, getting them to orchestrate production lines that can turn out many different variants of the same basic product. In this way, companies can blanket an entire general market with products aimed at specific classes of users.    The larger message here is that while much of American industry still hasn't responded forcefully to competition from Japan and other foreign nations, growing numbers of U.S. companies are now awake to it. At a time when Casey Stengel's famous question is beginning to haunt American business -- can't anybody play this here game? -- the good news is that some high-technology U.S. companies are beginning to play it pretty well.    The best of these have eschewed the usual American response -- the cosmetic fix, which generally involves hiring a consultant, adding a few robots and declaring yourself ready to compete. Stephen Cohen, a professor at the University of California at Berkeley and an international policy and strategy consultant, summarizes the prevailing attitude as, &quot;Do for my factory what Elizabeth Arden does for my wife.&quot;    The more-successful companies have instead spent years of grinding toil making a great number of nickel and dime improvements that, in the end, have greatly cut their costs and speeded their production. These companies include Hughes Aircraft, Timken Co., Deere andamp; Co., Ingersoll Milling Machine, Vought Corp. and Ford Motor Co.    Ford has computerized car-radio plants in Canada and Mexico, partly for cost, partly for quality, partly for speed. One improvement: Bar codes track everything going through the assembly line. The information feeds into a computer, giving managers the power to spot bottlenecks or other foulups immediately.    Perhaps no company has done more than Hewlett-Packard, Silicon Valley's biggest firm. Back in the early 1980s, it was touting its great expertise in factory-automation equipment -- at a time when it was under fierce attack from East Asian rivals, especially Taiwan.    At one point the company estimated that if the falloff in its computer-terminal business continued at the same rate, it would be selling no terminals at all by 1993. Something had to be done. One initial step: &quot;Rub your people's noses in it,&quot; says Harold Edmondson, vice president of manufacturing.    So H-P went on a world-wide search for cheaper parts. It also cut the number of parts by 30%. It reduced the number of workers on the line and cut its overall direct labor costs by two-thirds. As a result, volume soared, the computer-terminal division is well in the black, and H-P officials say market share has doubled in the past three years to 5% -- against a field of 40 competitors.    Says John Monroe, an H-P manager, &quot;Within a few years, an ugly duckling turned into a swan.&quot; H-P has applied the same step-by-step improvement to other plants and other products.    One of H-P's problems had been slowness. In another H-P electronics factory, in Roseville, Ca., an entire production cycle had taken 15 days; thanks to the improvements it made, production time was cut to 15 hours. Such drastic cuts in production time bring great benefits to companies that successfully achieve them; their need for large parts inventories is sharply reduced and they are able to fill customer orders much faster.    Cutting time has become a fixation among the best companies all over the world -- not only production time but the time needed for design to get into production and the time it takes to distribute the finished product. If American companies don't get a lot faster, experts believe they will be overrun by competitors in all quarters of the globe.    Japanese companies have for years had a fetish about reducing design time. According to Boston Consulting Group, the Japanese can develop projection-TV sets in one-third the time needed by America's remaining manufacturers. In plastic injection molding, the Japanese are three times faster and 30% cheaper.    Siemens, the West German electronics giant, recently opened a showcase minicomputer factory that requires only 10 days to manufacture a semi-custom machine and deliver it to a customer. This lightning speed is made possible by a completely computerized flow of information and parts.    Computers are also essential to another emerging strategy: competition based on tremendous variety. Using computers to keep track of thousands of different parts and to combine them in many ways, a manufacturer can run a tremendous variety of products off the same assembly line. The result is a product for every niche.    This strategy is being used already by companies in the U.S., Europe and Japan, including Stouffer's, a unit of Nestle, Benetton, the Italian apparel maker, and Compaq Computer in the U.S.    One of the most significant moves in this direction has been made by International Business Machines, which has introduced many variants of the PS/2 personal computer, each aimed at a different market niche. The Model 25, the Model 30, the Model 50, the Model 60, the Model 70, the Model 80 -- all these have appeared within 18 months.    The PS/2 also represents an attempt by IBM -- although a very risky one -- to throw competitors off balance by making radical changes in the machine's basic architecture, with different-sized floppy disks, more custom chips, more patented features. In short, IBM has brought out a machine that would be harder to clone.    The jury is still out on the PS/2. IBM calls it a success and has shipped more than 1.3 million units of the new machines. Yet there is the nagging question of whether IBM went too far, too fast.    In changing of the architecture of its basic product, IBM's clone-proofing amounts to a form of industrial protectionism, some say. Whether or not that's true, it is clearly a part of a larger movement toward more protection, more secrecy and more security.    And more litigation. The current proliferation of patent-infringement suits is due in large part to the gradual realization that U.S. courts seem to be more and more on the side of patent holders. This has been especially true since 1982, when Congress created a new court forum to adjudicate most patent litigation.    This court has since been dealing out stiff penalties to infringers, and companies have less hesitation now to file suits. &quot;It took us a long while to realize it,&quot; says Richard Agnich, senior vice president and general counsel at Texas Instruments, &quot;but in the 1980s, the environment changed.&quot;    The pharmaceutical fields, and especially the gene-splicing industries, have become hotbeds of litigation. Since the early 1980s, Genentech's legal team has grown from two people to over a dozen, plus more than a dozen outside law firms, due to large amounts of work. Genentech is involved in nine major patent lawsuits in the U.S., Europe and Japan.    On a related front, companies are doing more than ever to plug leaks of proprietary information. Shredding and more-careful disposal of trash have become more widespread at high-tech companies. Background checks are more extensive. Computer passwords are more sophisticated. Aping military security measures, companies are breaking information into pieces, so no single employee has enough to assemble something of value.    A few companies are hiring personnel from security companies, inserting them into the workforce as undercover agents to detect information leaks. Others are beefing up internal investigations, including SRI International, whose 70-person security force recently has turned up isolated incidents of employee drug use, but no major security problems.    Many companies, such as Martin Marietta, have adopted stiffer internal standards for the handling of proprietary information. About five years ago, Martin Marietta discovered that certain data had fallen into the hands of competitors, says Salvatore Gallo, manager of information security. Today, all valuable information is marked or guarded from inception. Engineers have to stamp everything &quot;for Martin Marietta use only.&quot;    Eastman Kodak went so far as to pressure the University of Rochester to prevent an employee of Fuji Photo Film from enrolling. Fuji is a Kodak rival, and Kodak has hundreds of employees taking courses at the school; a Kodak spokesman said the company feared that &quot;proprietary information&quot; might thus leak to the Fuji employee. (When the matter became public, the university agreed to admit the student, but the Fuji employee decided to enroll at M.I.T. instead.)    The concern over security has spread from executive offices and corporate laboratories to the halls of Congress. For example, Sen. Pete Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, has introduced a bill that would restrict the nearly unbridled flow of research information from national laboratories -- research that has been heavily used by foreign competitors, particularly the Japanese. The Defense Department has already restricted access to 28 papers presented at a meeting of the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers. And last July, the White House decided to bar non-Americans from a federal conference on superconductivity.    All this has created alarm in the scientific and academic communities. If we choke down the free-flowing channels of information, critics ask, won't we be damaging our own ability to compete in the long run?    Last April, the Association of American Universities published a report attacking the restrictiveness as &quot;utlimately self-defeating.&quot; The report said the restrictiveness is hurting research at a time when the U.S. should be using its natural inventiveness and open society as a competitve weapon.    &quot;There has been a pall cast over laboratories,&quot; Robert M. Rosenzweig, the association's president, said at the time. &quot;People are uncertain about what they can and cannot do, what visitors they can have, what meetings they can go to. Most of it is unnecessary and misguided.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>