<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871104-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Revives in Pennzoil Suit---Tradition of Judge Roy Bean---By Thomas Petzinger Jr. and Caleb SolomonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX PZLPETROLEUM (PET)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   More than a century after Judge Roy Bean established himself as &quot;the law west of the Pecos,&quot; the image of hang-'em-high justice still clings to the courts of Texas.    Just ask Texaco Inc. Without holding a hearing, the justices of the Texas Supreme Court refused Monday to review the $10.3 billion court judgment that threw the nation's eighth-largest company into bankruptcy proceedings.    Justice Texas-style extends beyond business. Last month, a state-court judge in Houston was charged with pulling a pistol on her neighbor in a dispute over a child's toy. And the case of Clarence Brandley, a black man sentenced to death row after a highly questionable murder trial, has drawn national attention.    For corporate defendants, the root of what many see as this state's judicial problems is big-money politics. Texas remains one of only nine states whose Supreme Court justices are elected through partisan campaigning.    &quot;The major problem,&quot; Chief Justice John Hill said in an interview yesterday, &quot;has been the excessive amounts of financial contributions . . . primarily from lawyers who practice in the court.&quot; The chief justice, who has announced plans to resign to campaign for judicial reform, says that among his fellow justices he is &quot;a majority of one&quot; who believes in scrapping the partisan political system. He refused to comment on the Texaco case or to say how he voted on whether to accept Texaco's appeal.    Even Texaco isn't alleging that the decision was bought with Supreme Court campaign contributions. But the decision, which in effect affirmed the record-breaking 1985 judgment won by Pennzoil Co. in a dispute over the ownership of Getty Oil Co., highlights the chief justice's remarks.    Lawyers representing Pennzoil contributed, from 1984 to early this year, more than $355,000 to the nine Supreme Court justices sitting today, according to a tally by this newspaper. One of those lawyers for Pennzoil had contributed $10,000 to the lower-court judge who later presided at the start of the state-court trial in Houston.    Lawyers representing Texaco have also been contributors, but they have given far less. They have also played the political-influence game in other ways.    What is most remarkable about the political contributions by personal-injury lawyers and other plaintiffs' attorneys in Texas is how routine they have become. Houston-based Pennzoil might very well have been victorious in another state, but the shadow that big-money politics has cast over the entire judiciary in Texas has, in the minds of many, tainted Pennzoil's unbroken string of victories in the Texas state courts.    If Texans were aware of the campaign-spending levels by lawyers for Pennzoil, &quot;I assure you that nine out of 10 would say Pennzoil would win -- without knowing the merits of the case,&quot; says Frank Tejeda, a lawyer who formerly headed the Texas House Committee on Judicial Affairs. &quot;All I'm saying is that the perception is there . . . . Public confidence is at an all-time low.&quot;    The swiftness of the ruling stunned Texaco. &quot;In all of our worst nightmares, none of us ever even conceived that the court wouldn't grant us oral arguments in a case of this magnitude,&quot; says James B. Sales, a lawyer for Texaco in Houston who is the president-elect of the Texas Bar Association. &quot;They have savaged Texaco.&quot;    Insurers and other business defendants, long on the losing end of many Texas Supreme Court decisions, are among those who fault the political nature of the courts. It can take $1 million to run a contested Supreme Court race. Says Richard Geiger, a lawyer who lobbies for the insurance industry in Texas, &quot;It kind of defies human nature to say they're not influenced&quot; by large donations.    The State Commission on Judicial Conduct is just beginning to respond to such complaints. In June it took the unprecedented step of rebuking two justices currently sitting on the court: Justice C.L. Ray was &quot;reprimanded&quot; for taking free airplane flights from attorneys with business before the court; public records show that one Pennzoil lawyer owned part of the aircraft involved. In addition, Justice William W. Kilgarlin was &quot;admonished&quot; -- a lesser rebuke -- because his law clerks had taken an all-expenses-paid junket to Las Vegas with a lawyer who had a case pending before the court. That lawyer isn't connected with Pennzoil or Texaco.    The commission's action is no reason to scrap Texas' highly democratic judicial-election system, says former Gov. Mark White. &quot;You've got federal judges that are in the penitentiary,&quot; he says. &quot;You don't throw away the whole federal system.&quot;    Nevertheless, in issuing the rebukes, the state commission's report said that &quot;a shadow was being cast upon the reputation of the Texas Supreme Court itself,&quot; adding that &quot;a severe challenge was being made to the personal integrity of several of the justices.&quot;    Among many Texaco partisans, it is an article of faith that Pennzoil has won its case all the way through the Texas courts largely on the back of its lawyers' reputations and influence. But Texaco's chief appellate lawyer in Texas, Russell McMains of Corpus Christi, said yesterday that he doubted that this factor controlled the outcome.    For one thing, the court rejects roughly 90% of all appeals, he points out. But beyond the statistics, he adds, &quot;there was probably a predisposition not to take the case,&quot; as suggested by the court's quick disposition of a dispute that had generated 25,000 pages of trial transcript and thousands of pages of briefs. The case was on the court's docket only four months.    &quot;The predisposition probably was political -- not necessarily in favor of someone,&quot; Mr. McMains says. &quot;I think it was just the inertia and impetus of the case -- and the politics of the court -- that no one wanted to take a stand, and the easiest way not to take a stand is not to take a case,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't think they saw anything to be gained professionally, juridically or politically by taking the case.&quot;    But there may have been something to lose. &quot;A judge whose rulings are adverse to the interests of litigants, to specific lawyers or to certain segments of the bar can expect those persons or groups to work against the judge's re-election,&quot; Anthony Champagne, a judiciary expert at the University of Texas at Dallas, said in a widely cited 1986 study of the Texas courts. And the plaintiffs' bar is by far the most generous &quot;segment.&quot;    The political tradition of the Texas courts was a reaction to the state's Reconstruction Constitution of 1869, in which the carpetbaggers had given the governor single-handed control of all appointments. When Texas finally bade farewell to the Yankees, the locals saw to it that every important public job in the state -- including every judge from the county level on up -- was controlled by the voters.    As the state's population swelled during the oil boom of the 1970s, running a statewide campaign became a big-money proposition, and state campaign-finance reports show that the state's most successful plaintiffs' lawyers helped fill the coffers. There began a period in which the Supreme Court vastly revised liability law in Texas, establishing precedents under which Texas lawsuits -- long before Pennzoil vs. Texaco -- began leading to some of the biggest judgments in the country.    One of the most generous contributors was Joseph D. Jamail Jr., a Houston personal-injury lawyer whose string of million-dollar judgments and settlements earned him the sobriquet &quot;the king of torts.&quot; Mr. Jamail, who now is Pennzoil's chief trial lawyer, once said, &quot;Those of us who are successful at the bar are called upon to do more.&quot;    One of Texaco's outside lawyers, William Edwards of Corpus Christi, certainly couldn't quarrel with that proposition. His contributions to Supreme Court candidates accounted for much of the $90,000 that lawyers for Texaco donated in the same period that Pennzoil's lawyers gave $355,000. Mr. Edwards, however, withdrew from his Texaco engagement before the appeal went to the Supreme Court. He couldn't be reached yesterday.    Last year the Judicial Conduct Commission, taking note of &quot;considerable notoriety&quot; surrounding the court, launched an investigation in which it interviewed 243 witnesses, including lawyers and law clerks. The commission found, among other things, that Justice Ray or members of his family took five trips valued at $350 an hour aboard a twin-engine Cessna aircraft owned by Longhorn Express Inc., a company whose principal stockholders, according to the commission's report, were &quot;Houston area attorneys who practice before the Supreme Court.&quot;    Records available in the Texas secretary of state's office show that one-quarter of the company was owned by W. James Kronzer, who about a year later joined the legal team that helped Pennzoil win the trial-court verdict and defend it in the appeals courts.    Mr. Kronzer couldn't be reached yesterday. Records available in the Texas secretary of state's office show that at an annual meeting in his law offices last year, he and his fellow shareholders of Longhorn Express voted to dissolve the corporation at roughly the time the state investigation was under way. There is no known connection between the dissolution and the investigation.    The commission's report also says that Justice Ray assured one lawyer -- who was unconnected with the Pennzoil case -- that &quot;if you don't win this one, the next one will be yours.&quot; It also alleged that he had ordered another case transferred from one lower-level court to another jurisdiction at the request of a lawyer who had also been a major donor, causing &quot;the appearance of partiality.&quot;    Justice Ray told the commission that there was absolutely nothing improper in any of his actions and that contributions had no bearing on his decisions. Yesterday his lawyer, Buck Wood, asserted that some of the commission's allegations were &quot;factually wrong&quot; and that others improperly applied the law. But he said that he couldn't immediately elaborate.    Justice Kilgarlin, whose law clerks took the Las Vegas junket, didn't find out about the trip until after they returned and was admonished only for not advising them about the ethical standards of the court. &quot;I simply disagree with the commission that there was any violation of ethical standards,&quot; says the justice's lawyer, Morris Atlas.    Questions about Pennzoil's relationship with the state judiciary began long before Texaco took the case to the Texas Supreme Court. Within days of being assigned the Pennzoil case, lower-court Judge Anthony J.P. Farris accepted a $10,000 contribution from Pennzoil's Mr. Jamail -- the judge's largest re-election contribution by far and an amount he described as a &quot;princely sum&quot; in a letter to another supporter. Texaco, for its part, had hired a member of the judge's re-election campaign committee, but that lawyer -- who happened to be a dear friend of Mr. Jamail's -- soon withdrew from the case.    Although Judge Farris was often harsh with Pennzoil's lawyers during the trial, his most important rulings from the bench favored Pennzoil. Mr. Jamail said he had planned the contribution before knowing the judge would preside over the trial.    Judge Farris, who died last year, was ailing during the trial and was replaced three-quarters of the way through by a visiting judge, Solomon Casseb Jr., who prepared the all-important jury instructions -- largely on the basis of a draft submitted by Pennzoil -- and who was the first judge to uphold the jury verdict. Mr. Jamail said in an interview last year that &quot;I've known Sol Casseb since I was a child almost,&quot; although one member of Texaco's legal team was also known to have a family acquaintance with the judge.    Campaign contributions have not preceded all of Pennzoil's victories in the case. In April, after its first glimpse at the case, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 9-0 to dissolve a federal-court injunction that had absolved Texaco from posting a multibillion-dollar appeals bond, as Texas law requires. It was a major victory for Pennzoil, although perhaps a pyrrhic one, as it thrust Texaco into seeking Chapter 11 protection from Pennzoil and other creditors.    Texaco now is counting on the U.S. Supreme Court to hear and reverse its appeal of the judgment itself. Even though Texaco fared poorly in its last appearance there, a Texaco employee says the company is comforted knowing that &quot;Pennzoil hasn't contributed a penny.&quot;    ---   Tony Cantu contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>