<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861217-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Urges Use of Limited ImmunityIn Senate Hearings on Iranian Scandal---By Jane Mayer and David RogersStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/17/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM WNEWSAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan, seeking to regain the initiative in the Iran arms-sale scandal, urged the Senate Intelligence Committee to grant limited immunity to witnesses, including former National Security Adviser John Poindexter and his one-time aide, Lt. Col. Oliver North.    The administration also waived a possible claim of executive privilege and sent Chief of Staff Donald Regan to testify before the panel.    The moves came as the Senate leadership named a select committee -- to be headed by Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii), a veteran of the Senate Watergate Committee more than a decade ago -- to take over the Senate's investigation of the administration's secret arms shipments to Iran and the diversion of some funds from those sales to Nicaraguan Contra rebels.    The formation of the special panel, combined with the possibility that a hasty grant of immunity might hinder future criminal prosecution, made it highly unlikely the Intelligence panel would heed the White House's call for immunity. Vice Adm. Poindexter and Lt. Col. North have refused to testify, citing their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.    Some committee members still hope Vice Adm. Poindexter will testify. In an unusually blunt statement last night, the panel's chairman, Minnesota Republican Sen. David Durenberger, sharply attacked Lt. Col. North for his alleged part in the diversion of funds from the Iranian arms sales to Nicaraguan guerrillas.    &quot;Poindexter didn't pull off the scam -- that's Ollie North's work,&quot; Sen. Durenberger said. &quot;On every lever was Ollie North's hand.&quot;    In a related development, two senior members of the National Security Council staff announced their resignations amid indications that the president's new national security adviser, Frank Carlucci, intends to overhaul the White House foreign policy apparatus. They were Howard Teicher, the director of politico-military affairs, and Rodney McDaniel, the executive director.    Mr. Teicher was Lt. Col. North's nominal superior at the NSC, but White House officials said Lt. Col. North reported to the national security adviser. Mr. Teicher helped develop the administration's secret 1985 plan to win the release of hostages in Lebanon and improve relations with Iran by supplying aid to Iran. Mr. McDaniel, a Navy commander, was responsible for the day-to-day operations of the NSC staff.    Under President Reagan's &quot;use immunity&quot; proposal, witnesses would be assured that any testimony they gave the committee couldn't be used against them in any criminal prosecution. Mr. Reagan, in a statement paraphrasing a letter he sent urging the Intelligence panel to grant immunity to Lt. Col. North and Mr. Adm. Poindexter, emphasized his &quot;desire to get the full story out.&quot; He stressed that immunity was &quot;not amnesty or clemency,&quot; and stated that it would &quot;not interfere with the duties and responsibilities of the independent counsel,&quot; who has yet to be named.    But some legal authorities -- such as former Watergate special prosecutor Archibald Cox -- disagreed, suggesting that the independent counsel should at least be involved in the decision.    Attorney General Edwin Meese III has described Lt. Col. North as the only person in the U.S. government with &quot;precise knowledge&quot; of how funds were diverted from Iranian arms sales to the Contras in Nicaragua. The attorney general has said Mr. Poindexter had limited knowledge of the affair.    In a 4 1/2-hour appearance before the Intelligence panel -- his first congressional testimony on the Iran-Contra imbroglio -- Mr. Regan said that he had no advance knowledge about the diversion of arms-sales funds to the Nicaraguan rebels.    One committee member, Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine), said Mr. Regan testified that President Reagan hadn't authorized in advance arms shipments by Israel to Iran in 1985. That contradicted statements by former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, who said the president approved these shipments in August 1985.    Mr. Regan's testimony on the Israeli arms sales followed a chronology Mr. Poindexter ordered Lt. Col. North to prepare after the arms sales to Iran were disclosed last month. In the chronology, which remains the administration's only written account of what happened, Mr. North asserted several times that the president never approved Israeli sales of U.S. arms to Iran. However, some officials now charge that the chronology is incomplete and even false in a few cases.    Committee members generally praised Mr. Regan's cooperation. &quot;To the extent that he had knowledge, he was very helpful,&quot; said Sen. Patrick Leahy, (D., Vt.). Sen. Dennis DeConcini, (D., Ariz.), who has been participating in the hearings as a future Intelligence Committee member, said Mr. Regan &quot;tells an unbelievable story in a believable manner.&quot; But he added, &quot;I have trouble believing that the chief of staff would not have greater knowledge.&quot;    Legislation authorizing formation of the 11-member select committee still must be enacted in January, but the appointments announced yesterday -- six Democrats and five Republicans -- give the panel a moderate to conservative tilt, which will make it difficult for the administration to dismiss as ideologically hostile.    Sens. Paul Sarbanes (D., Md.) and George Mitchell (D., Maine) are the only traditional liberals along with the moderate Sen. Inouye. Democratic leader Robert Byrd of West Virginia chose three conservatives -- Sam Nunn of Georgia, David Boren of Oklahoma and Howell Heflin of Alabama -- to fill the remaining Democratic slots.    Moderate Republicans on the panel will include Sen. Warren Rudman of New Hampshire, the panel's ranking GOP lawmaker, and Sen. Cohen of Maine. But GOP Senate leader Robert Dole of Kansas chose three conservatives to round out the committee's Republican side: James McClure of Idaho, Orrin Hatch of Utah and Paul Trible of Virginia.    Mr. Inouye, a consummate Senate insider, was the first chairman of the Intelligence Committee in the mid-1970s. He has maintained a voice in foreign policy as the top Democrat on the Appropriations Committee's foreign operations subcommittee. In recent years, he has opposed military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, but his style isn't confrontational and he enjoys bipartisan support.    Sen. Hatch, a close ally of Mr. Dole's, is likely to emerge as the administration's point man on the committee. Yesterday, he took on this role following a meeting with President Reagan, declaring the call for immunity an excellent idea.    The balance of power on the new Senate panel will be among moderates, such as Sen. Cohen, who is slated to become the ranking Republican on the Intelligence Committee next year. He is a veteran of the House Judiciary Committee, which voted to impeach President Richard Nixon more than 12 years ago.    The House leadership is scheduled to announce its own 15-member investigative committee today. Democratic leader Jim Wright of Texas is expected to name as chairman Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), the outgoing chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. Rep. Hamilton will have to contend with a top-heavy membership, including at least five other committee chairmen and the new majority leader, Rep. Thomas Foley of Washington.    Republican leader Robert Michel is expected to name such senior members as William Broomfield, the ranking Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee. But he also likely will balance GOP representation with younger, aggressive conservatives -- including Jim Courter of New Jersey, Bill McCollum of Florida, Henry Hyde of Illinois and Richard Cheney of Wyoming.    Besides hearing from Mr. Regan, the Senate Intelligence panel yesterday received testimony from Secretary of State George Shultz and Mr. Teicher, the departing National Security Council staffer. Mr. Teicher, who will leave his post March 31, pledged to cooperate with the investigation. He reportedly told the lawmakers that the administration began an interagency study of U.S. policy toward Iran in August 1984, a year before arms shipments to Tehran reportedly began.    Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger is expected to testify before the panel today. Attorney General Meese also is expected to appear this week, perhaps as early as today.    Yesterday, Mr. Regan said he saw &quot;no need for the president to testify,&quot; but White House spokesman Larry Speakes did not rule out the possibility. He pointed out that the president hadn't been asked to testify, and added, &quot;I'm certain that if it comes to that, we should certainly consider it, and give an appropriate answer.&quot;    The White House, in urging the Senate Intelligence Committee to grant immunity to certain witnesses, also didn't rule out the possibility of granting an executive pardon to Messrs. Poindexter and North should Congress refuse to grant immunity to them. Mr. Speakes said the president had &quot;no plans at the present&quot; to pardon any people involved in the operation, but said he hadn't ruled out the possibility.    ---   Also contributing to this article was Robert S. Greenberger. </TEXT></DOC>