<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880218-0046 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   GUNMEN KIDNAPPED a U.S. Marine officer in southern Lebanon.    Lt. Col. William Higgins, 43, chief of an observer group attached to a U.N. peace-keeping force in Lebanon, was abducted while traveling in a two-car convoy on a highway near the city of Tyre. Witnesses said three gunmen carried Higgins from his vehicle. Responsibility wasn't claimed. The site of the kidnapping is part of an area controlled by Justice Minister Nabih Berri's Shiite Amal militia. The influence of the Iranian-backed Hezbollah reportedly also has been growing in the region.    The U.S. warned against harming the Marine, and said that American troops would continue to participate in U.N.-backed operations in Lebanon.    ---   Bush and Dukakis turned their attention to the South following Tuesday's victories in the New Hampshire primaries. Dole, who finished second to Bush in the GOP race, vowed to counterattack unless the vice president stopped &quot;distorting&quot; his record. Democrat Babbitt is expected to withdraw from the campaign today.    ---   Israeli soldiers killed a Palestinian and wounded four others in rioting in the city of Hebron in the occupied West Bank. In Washington, former Israeli Foreign Minister Abba Eban met with Shultz to discuss a new U.S. initiative for Mideast peace talks, but cautioned against expecting too much from the American mediation effort.    ---   The Soviet Union plans to overhaul its education system. Yegor Ligachev, considered the second-highest Communist Party official, told the Central Committee that the Kremlin plans to increase distribution of computers throughout the school system and decentralize educational decision making.    ---   The Senate Labor panel cleared a bill requiring many employers to boost health-care benefits, providing minimum coverage for more than 20 million employees and their dependents who currently aren't insured. The measure mandates a set level of benefits, and the net cost is estimated at about $15 billion.    ---   Shultz will meet with Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov during his trip to Moscow this weekend in an effort to underline U.S. support for human rights. The State Department said the secretary of state and Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze would discuss arms-control issues and Moscow's planned withdrawal from Afghanistan.    ---   West German opposition leaders urged Bonn to follow Moscow's lead and scrap some intermediate-range missiles before a U.S.-Soviet treaty is ratified. East German newspapers, meanwhile, printed photos of dimantled Soviet missiles. In Washington, the U.S. said it intends to increase its shorter-range nuclear arsenal in Europe.    ---   The Iowa Supreme Court ruled that courts have the authority to order sterilization of the mentally retarded, but declined to issue guidelines for deciding when it would be appropriate. A state law providing for such action was repealed in 1977. The decision came in a case involving the parents of a mentally impaired 33-year-old woman.    ---   The Pentagon is asking Japan to guarantee U.S. aerospace companies 30% of the production work on the FSX, Japan's version of the Air Force's F-16. The request is part of an effort to ensure that Japan lives up to the spirit of an agreement calling for the FSX to be jointly produced by Japanese and U.S. companies.    ---   Financier Licio Gelli was extradited to Italy from Switzerland, and is expected to be questioned about his alleged role in the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano. Under terms of the extradition pact, the former head of the secret P-2 Masonic lodge can't be tried for other crimes in Italy, including right-wing terrorist bombings and extortion.    ---   Salvadoran rebels launched attacks on military bases and other targets across the country. The strikes occurred as the foreign ministers of five Central American nations gathered in San Salvador to evaluate the implementation of a regional peace plan. The rebels claimed scores of casualties.    ---   A Silicon Valley gunman is expected to be arraigned today in connection with Tuesday's shooting at a Sunnyvale, Calif., company in which seven people were killed and four others wounded. Richard Wade Farley, 39, who surrendered to police, had been dismissed from his job at ESL Inc., and was spurned by a woman co-worker.    ---   Laos and Thailand agreed to a cease-fire and disengagement of troops along a disrupted border area where hundreds of soldiers have died in a six-month conflict. The pact calls for a negotiated settlement over the ownership of the area.    ---   An Afghan guerrilla leader urged Pakistan to refrain from signing an accord to end the civil war in Afghanistan unless an opposition government is first established in Kabul. Islamabad has supported the rebels, and is negotiating details of a Soviet military withdrawal from Afghanistan.    ---   Died: Alain Savary, 69, former education minister of France. Additional details weren't disclosed. </TEXT></DOC>