<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0116 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Big Woes</HL><DD> 01/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> X FORGN LABORMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   We now see clearly just how far Big Steel and Big Labor have receded on the American economic landscape. A six-month strike against the nation's largest steelmaker by one of the country's pre-eminent unions has come and gone without raising a stir. Last weekend USX settled its bitter labor dispute with the United Steelworkers, and the biggest question seems to be just how far into the ground the domestic industry will be driven after USX brings its additional capacity to market. USX and other major steelmakers are paying the price for failing to adjust to the transformation of the world economy. The story of USX and the steelworkers is a cautionary tale for politicians beating protectionist tom-toms in Washington.    One doesn't need a long historical memory to recall steel's once-mighty role. The steel industry used to be considered a bellwether of the entire economy. So much so that when in 1962 U.S. Steel announced a $6-a-ton increase in the price of steel, President Kennedy, fearing a dramatic run-up in inflation, threatened antitrust investigations and even industrywide wage and price controls. U.S. Steel Chairman Roger Blough finally bowed to President Kennedy's &quot;jawboning.&quot; USX Chairman David Roderick probably wishes he had Roger Blough's problems.    Like the other major steelmakers, USX is now trying to compress two decades of downsizing into a few years. The process hasn't been painless. Steelmakers suffered a record $4 billion in losses last year, bringing the industry's total losses over the past five years to $11 billion. Over the same five-year period, several hundred steel mills around the country either reduced capacity or shut down. The number of steelworkers shrank to fewer than 150,000 from 400,000. Three major steelmakers have sought refuge in Chapter 11. Others may follow.    All this has come amid two decades of regular pleas from the steelmakers for protection from foreign competition. Those pleas were heeded. From 1968 to 1974, American steelmakers were protected by &quot;voluntary&quot; quotas on Japanese and European steel imports. In 1978, a trigger-price mechanism set a minimum price for steel imports. And in recent years, the domestic steel market has been protected by the Reagan administration's voluntary restraint agreements with foreign steel producers. All this has done little to stem the steel industry's decline.    If anything, protectionism may have made the steel industry's contraction even more excruciating by allowing the steelmakers to plod along in the recasting of their operations, rather than being forced to adjust quickly to changes in the industry. Indeed, this may be the hard lesson of the steel debacle: Protectionism makes a bad situation worse.    American businessmen and, more slowly, Washington politicians are learning that the U.S. can no longer be viewed mainly as a very big economy that does a bit of business with secondary economies around the world. Rather the U.S. is merely one, albeit large, economy that is part of an extremely competitive, integrated world economic system. To succeed, companies need great flexibility; they need to be able to change policies quickly as the world market creates new dangers and opportunities. Steel was virtually the antithesis of this modern model.    While USX and the other major steelmakers have managed marginal reductions in labor costs and increased productivity, they still have much ground to make up on foreign rivals. The situation is complicated by the oversupply of steel in the global market. Industry analysts say overall capacity must be reduced further if the steelmakers are ever to be profitable without protection.    Competition with foreign makers and domestic mini-mills will likely become more intense. But then out of this may emerge a new generation of American steel companies, with lower costs, smaller capacity and greater productivity, which will be able to compete globally while securing a niche in the U.S. domestic market.    This has been a difficult process, but the signs of trouble were identified long ago. On Sept. 7, 1961, President Kennedy wrote in a letter to the leaders of the steel industry that export prices for iron and steel in the mid-1950s had risen relative to those of foreign competitors, while the U.S. share of world exports had fallen. Some 25 years of protectionism later, the steel industry is staggering from bankruptcies to mill closings to big strikes and hardly anyone notices. Before Congress starts throwing up barriers around the country's other industries, its members have a responsibility to look squarely at the consequences of protectionism and make decisions that are in the long-term interests of their constituents. </TEXT></DOC>