<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870929-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Gen. Haig's Military Instincts Make Him UneasyWith the Political Arena's Doctrine of Persuasion---By Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   {This is the fifth in a series of personal profiles of 1988 presidential candidates.}    WASHINGTON -- When he was President Reagan's first secretary of state, Alexander Haig would meet on Saturday mornings with key staff aides to devise a strategy of military threats and diplomatic pressure to intimidate Cuban leader Fidel Castro, whom he considered the source of communist aggression in the hemisphere.    Then Secretary Haig took his plan to the White House. He insisted that the State Department must control the policy and even asked the president to order the Defense Department to supply personnel to help plan details. The idea was rejected.    Alexander Haig, a self-confident professional soldier, believes that commanders should command. But he has never understood that political leaders must persuade. Now, as a Republican presidential candidate, the 62-year-old former Army general emphasizes his government experience serving seven presidents. But his instincts as a military man -- to give or carry out orders through a clearly defined chain of command -- make him uncomfortable with the give and take of political life, where power is shared and authority is diffuse.    &quot;In the military, or in any appointed leadership position, you have the authority by the job you hold,&quot; he says. &quot;In politics, whether you're running for office, seeking a claim or approbation, you've got to deal with people whom you wouldn't tolerate for 30 seconds. You have to learn to tolerate fools.&quot;    Gen. Haig's search for structure stems from a traumatic event of his youth: the death of his father, a successful Philadelphia lawyer, when Al Haig was nine years old. Suddenly, the silver spoon was wrenched from his mouth, shattering an orderly world in which it was assumed he would follow his father's path into law practice.    His brother Frank, who is now a Jesuit priest, says the loss forced Alexander Haig to become self-reliant and make decisions on his own. It spurred his ambition. But it also left a void. &quot;He had to grow up alone; he was the older brother,&quot; says Frank Haig. &quot;He didn't have anybody to go to to check his judgment against.&quot;    Alexander Haig filled that void with the certainty of the military chain of command. Initially, he resisted the structure imposed on him at West Point. His roommate, Homer Perry Gainey, recalling that Mr. Haig had several minor scrapes with authority, says &quot;he was accustomed to being very independent because his father was dead, and at West Point he was fitted with a tight disciplinary glove.&quot;    But soon he became a spit-and-polish soldier who, when he returned to West Point as deputy commandant in 1968 insisted that cadets march by the rules -- with their fingers cocked squarely at the second knuckle, thumbs pointing stiffly toward the ground. And as a staff aide he immersed himself in the personalities of the powerful authority figures he served -- Gen. Douglas MacArthur, Henry Kissinger, Richard Nixon -- anticipating their needs, exercising sound judgment and carrying out their instructions flawlessly.    Even his Catholicism is an extension of this broader search for &quot;conservative anchors,&quot; he says. &quot;I would have difficulty in any discipline where the departure from some time-proven principles was too radical. I accept the frailty of the human species and the need to have rules, regulations and guideposts.&quot;    When he moved from these cloistered settings onto more ambiguous ground as secretary of state, where his authority wasn't clearly defined, his demeanor changed radically. From his first days at Foggy Bottom, he was consumed by vicious turf battles with other officials. At staff meetings, aides recall, he would fly into a rage, berating Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, whom he considered incompetent, and ridiculing President Reagan as &quot;that poor old man.&quot; One former State Department official remembers a session when Mr. Haig lambasted Robert McFarlane, then on his staff, for a minor offense with a volley of profanity as aides sat by in embarrassed silence and Mr. McFarlane lowered his head and bit his lip.    This performance was in sharp contrast to the wide praise Mr. Haig won from critics and supporters for his performance under fire as White House chief of staff during the dark months of the unraveling of the Nixon administration. Thus, the transformation was a double shock.    &quot;When I saw those stories about him as secretary of state, they puzzled me. That wasn't the Al Haig I had known,&quot; says Raymond Price, a speech writer in the Nixon White House.    These outbursts spawned theories about &quot;the operation,&quot; the bypass heart surgery Mr. Haig underwent in 1980, after he had retired from the military and joined United Technologies Corp. as president. Former associates assert that it altered his personality. Indeed, the story gained such credence that when Richard Allen, President Reagan's first national security adviser, made a trip to New York early in the administration to give former President Nixon a foreign-policy briefing, Mr. Nixon asked what was wrong with Al Haig and was it true that the surgery had changed him a great deal.    Mr. Haig scoffs at these stories, insisting that they are part of the guerrilla attacks on him by White House staff members, including Mr. Allen, who were determined to undermine his authority. &quot;So the impression is that I'm some kind of a nut. A lot of people were very busy creating that kind of an image,&quot; he says.    Many of those without a political ax to grind praise Mr. Haig's performance in government. &quot;He's bright and incredibly energetic,&quot; says Joseph Califano, whom Mr. Haig served as an aide in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations.    But Mr. Haig's behavior at the State Department contributed to the darker image. Often his decisions were correct -- indeed, in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal his demands that he be in control of the administration's foreign policy seem prescient -- but their execution was at times bizarre.    The most enduring image of Mr. Haig as secretary of state is of the former Army general standing in front of the television cameras at the White House the day President Reagan was shot, reassuring the public that &quot;I am in control here.&quot; Mr. Haig had rushed to the press room after learning that Mr. Weinberger raised the alert status of U.S. forces, sending the Soviets an ambiguous signal, and hearing White House spokesman Larry Speakes express uncertainty about who was in charge. Mr. Haig says he needed to relay the message that the government was functioning and that he was the senior cabinet officer on the scene awaiting the return to Washington of the vice president. But the TV image of Gen. Haig, sweating and shaking, haunts him to this day.    Of the powerful figures Mr. Haig served during his 40-year career, Henry Kissinger appears to have influenced him greatly. He had been an aide on Mr. Kissinger's National Security Council staff during the Nixon administration, and when Mr. Haig served at Foggy Bottom he brought with him many aides from that period.    Indeed, Secretary of State Haig's first act in office -- to prepare a memo for the president on Inauguration Day outlining his own role as the chief spokesman on foreign policy -- was a carbon-copy of what Mr. Kissinger had done in 1969. But there was one significant difference: Mr. Kissinger had first cleared the plan with the president he would be serving; Mr. Haig surprised the White House staff with his memo, earning their enmity from day one.    Mr. Haig's identification with Mr. Kissinger is a natural one, given his all-consuming interest in geopolitics. On the campaign trail, Mr. Haig addresses domestic issues, such as the need to gradually reduce the budget deficit without squeezing vital programs, but his real passion is foreign affairs. The richly paneled library of his suburban Washington home is filled with history, political-science and military books. Mr. Haig's idea of relaxation -- other than playing tennis -- is reading a foreign-policy book while listening to music. He also talks regularly with former President Nixon, whom aides describe as a close adviser.    But Mr. Haig doesn't appear to seek advice from many of the people he has known in his 40-year public career. When asked for the names of some close friends, his staff supplies names of several people who are associated with his current campaign. One of them, Dominic Saraceno, a Boston real estate developer, says he has known Mr. Haig two years. Mr. Saraceno says that in personal conversations Mr. Haig talks about Presidents Kennedy and Eisenhower as men he admires &quot;because of the people they brought in around them.&quot;    Mr. Haig has little regard for the people who were around him during his time in the Reagan administration. Indeed, when asked why he wants to be president, he pauses for a moment and says, &quot;I think my last experience in government left me convinced that I could do it better.&quot;    ---   IN BRIEF   Alexander Haig   -- 62 years old   --Married 37 years, three children    -- U.S. Military Academy   -- Republican of Virginia   U.S. Army 1947 to 1979; served on President Nixon's National Security Council 1969 to 1973; White House chief of staff 1973 to 1974; NATO supreme commander 1974 to 1979; president and chief operating officer of United Technologies Corp. 1979 to 1981; secretary of state 1981 to 1982.    Greatest influences on his political thinking: John Locke and Edmund Burke    U.S. political system's greatest failure in his lifetime: &quot;The collapse of a partnership of responsibility between the executive branch and the legislature, particularly in foreign policy.&quot;    Other than politics, the job he'd like to be doing right now: &quot;Paul Newman's stand-in.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>