<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0056 </DOCNO><HL> White House Case Against Boland AmendmentAttempts End Run Around Charges of Violation---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Its basic clause contained just 63 words. Written 2 1/2 years ago, it was buried deep in an appropriations bill and wasn't even a criminal statute.    It was the Boland amendment, the law by which Congress for a time restricted military aid to Nicaragua's Contra rebels. Assertions that President Reagan may have ignored its terms represent the most pressing problem to arise for the White House so far from the Iran-Contra congressional hearings.    In an abrupt change from its previous tactic of carefully denying that the president violated the statute, the White House has begun asserting that the act didn't even apply to him. &quot;It so happens it doesn't legally apply to me, but I have never done anything that encroaches upon it or violates it,&quot; Mr. Reagan said over the weekend.    In recent days, the White House has attacked the Boland amendment, which lapsed last fall, as a vague, narrow and shifting statute that couldn't restrict the president's constitutional authority to conduct foreign policy. The administration now argues that the amendment, which prohibited any agency involved in &quot;intelligence activities&quot; from militarily aiding the Contras, didn't apply to the president himself or his National Security Council staff.    The White House has adopted this aggressive new strategy largely for political reasons; White House aides feared a &quot;perception&quot; was building that Mr. Reagan had done something sneaky or illegal. And by simply denying that he had broken the law, the aides felt, Mr. Reagan was beginning to appear weak or ignorant.    But the tough new line isn't going to end the mushrooming legal debate over whether the Boland amendment could prevent the president from engaging in such activities as soliciting private funds for the Contras or calling the leader of a Central American country to expedite an airlift of privately financed arms for them.    Disputing the administration's view of the law, Rep. Dante Fascell (D., Fla.), chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, asserted yesterday on ABC-TV's &quot;This Week with David Brinkley&quot; that, &quot;You can stop him from doing almost anything,&quot; under law.    Beyond the narrow legal arguments, the White House faces political challenges over whether the president and his aides ignored at least the spirit of the Boland amendment. &quot;They're playing games&quot; with legal arguments, asserts Stanley Brand, a former counsel to the House.    &quot;Congress made absolutely clear what it was talking about,&quot; says Mr. Brand, who now is a private lawyer. &quot;It's been shown these guys ignored it, including the president.&quot;    The debate over the Boland amendment is crucial for two reasons. Although few observers think President Reagan himself will be charged with any criminal violation involving the act, some of his top aides could be prosecuted for ignoring the amendment. More broadly, questions about the administration's adherence to the amendment are stirring a debate over Congress's right to influence foreign policy decisions -- a debate with implications stretching far beyond the Iran-Contra scandal.    The matter is further complicated because there isn't simply one Boland amendment. By White House count, there were five different versions of the provision, named for Rep. Edward Boland (D., Mass.), its sponsor. Passed at various times from 1982 through 1986, the amendment's provisions shifted as Congress first tightened restrictions on aid to the Contras and then began loosening them.    The key 63-word clause, first put into effect in late 1984, banned the use of funds &quot;available&quot; to any government office involved in intelligence activities for &quot;directly or indirectly&quot; arming the Contras. The provision specifically named the Central Intelligence Agency and the Defense Department. Later, language was added specifically approving some &quot;humanitarian&quot; aid to the Contras.    Though the amendment isn't a criminal statute, prosecutors could charge suspected violators under a federal conspiracy law that makes it a crime to conspire to &quot;commit any offense against the United States.&quot;    In its new strategy, the White House is attacking the amendment on two fronts. First, White House attorneys argue in internal briefing papers that the Boland amendment didn't purport to limit &quot;the Constitutional and historical power of the President&quot; to personally carry out foreign policy and conduct conversations with foreign leaders as he sees fit.    And second, the White House says the the words of the Boland amendment applied only to expenditures of money from government coffers; thus, White House aides say, while a diversion of funds obtained from selling American arms to Iran might represent a violation of the amendment, efforts to encourage private contributions don't.    &quot;The Boland amendment is tightly specific and it applies only to particular agencies,&quot; White House chief of staff Howard Baker said yesterday on NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press.&quot; He added: &quot;All I can tell you is it doesn't apply to the president.&quot;    President Reagan denies he was involved in either the diversion of Iran arms-sales profits or efforts to solicit money to provide arms to the Contras.    But in the spring of 1985, when a shipment of privately financed arms for the Contras was seized in transit by officials of a Central American country, Mr. Reagan called the country's leader and persuaded him to allow the arms to be delivered to the Contras. The country is believed to be Honduras.    Some legal experts argue that, because the president is involved in intelligence work and his salary and phone bills are paid from government funds, he was covered by the Boland amendment. By this reasoning, Mr. Reagan's telephone call constituted use of government resources to provide prohibited &quot;indirect&quot; military aid. In support of that argument, congressional aides point out that during the congressional debate on the amendment, Rep. Boland specifically said that government salaries were included in the &quot;funds&quot; that weren't to be used to aid the Contras.    Similarly, the question of whether the president or other top aides solicited funds from countries like Saudi Arabia and Taiwan also is awkward for the White House. If such funds were solicited by an official from a government office &quot;involved in intelligence activities,&quot; or if the money ever passed through U.S. government hands, prosecutors could argue that the amendment was violated.    Much of the administration's Iran and Contra initiatives were carried out from within the National Security Council. Congressional aides say there are legal precedents for considering the NSC, of which the president is a statutory member, an agency involved in intelligence work. They acknowledge, though, that it would be far easier to claim the Boland amendment applied to NSC staff members than to the president, whose personal powers are established in the Constitution.    The White House's legal view of the Boland amendment is undercut by the fact that it apparently failed to analyze systematically what the law meant. Former White House counsel Fred Fielding, who left the administration in 1986, says his office never was asked to analyze the amendment, and administration officials say Attorney General Edwin Meese didn't undertake a formal review of the amendment until after the Iran-Contra scandal broke.    The president's Intelligence Oversight Board did produce one legal memorandum saying the amendment's reference to agencies involved in intelligence activities didn't cover the NSC. But even that memorandum said a military officer on the NSC staff -- such as Lt. Col. Oliver North -- might be covered because the armed services are involved in intelligence work.    The president and his men are going to step up their sniping at the amendment anyway. &quot;You know, I think the Pulitzer Prize for this whole thing ought to go to the person who looks into the Boland amendment and reports what it is,&quot; says White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater. </TEXT></DOC>