<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Dole Captures South Dakota, Minnesota While Gephardt, Dukakis Split Contests </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Sen. Robert Dole won impressive and important victories in South Dakota and Minnesota, while Rep. Richard Gephardt and Gov. Michael Dukakis split the contests on the Democratic side.    It was an embarrassing night for Vice President George Bush, who finished fourth in the Minnesota caucuses, according to NBC News projections, and was trailing Pat Robertson in a tight race for second place in the South Dakota primary. Sen. Dole, meanwhile, won a landslide victory in South Dakota, capturing about 56% of the votes in the Republican primary.    Even though Mr. Bush played down the importance of yesterday's results in the two states, his poor showing clearly slows the momentum he built with his victory last week in New Hampshire. In the half-dozen political tests so far this year, Mr. Bush has won clear victories in only two. One of the victories, at the Michigan GOP convention, required a deal with Rep. Jack Kemp -- a performance that indicates weakness in a front-runner.    Mr. Gephardt fashioned a convincing victory over Gov. Dukakis in South Dakota, with the four other Democratic contenders far behind. But combined with Gov. Dukakis's win in the Minnesota caucuses, yesterday's results tended to buttress the notion that the Democratic race is becoming a two-man struggle between the Massachusetts governor and the Missouri congressman.    It was a disappointing night for Mr. Kemp, whose campaign is in jeopardy and who was hoping for a boost last night.    Among the Democrats, Sen. Paul Simon's failure to win in Minnesota was a major setback to his sputtering campaign. In South Dakota, Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee led the bottom of the Democratic pack with less than 9% of the votes. Former Sen. Gary Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Sen. Simon each finished with about 5%.    Mr. Gore has a chance to capture the momentum in two weeks, when the Southern states vote on Super Tuesday. But yesterday's results make that a tougher task. Mr. Gore still hasn't demonstrated an ability to attract votes anywhere. Moreover, the perception of a Gephardt-Dukakis race, with Mr. Jackson perhaps holding the balance, is sure to injure Mr. Gore when the campaign comes to his native region.    Mr. Dole's victories in South Dakota and Minnesota came after a bitter disappointment in New Hampshire, where his strategists believed he was moving ahead of the vice president. Exit polls taken in South Dakota yesterday by NBC News showed that voters considered Mr. Dole a much stronger leader than Mr. Bush as well as more caring and compassionate than his rival.    As the prospect of a protracted Dole-Bush fight heightens, the Republican campaign is taking on strong regional overtones, with the Kansan performing well in the Midwest and the vice president showing strength in the East and perhaps the South.    Hidden in Mr. Dole's substantial victory is a potential problem as the campaign turns South and encounters ever more conservative voters. NBC found that Mr. Dole, who placed fifth among the five candidates in New Hampshire in capturing the votes of those who consider themselves very conservative, won only one in five of those voters in South Dakota, where Mr. Robertson captured the very conservative vote. New York Rep. Kemp, who contested Mr. Robertson for the conservative vote, finished with about 5% overall in South Dakota.    For the second week in a row, Mr. Robertson didn't carry the vote of those who consider themselves &quot;born again.&quot; The NBC survey showed that Mr. Dole defeated the former Christian broadcaster among born-again Protestants, who make up about one-third of the Republican electorate in South Dakota.    Mr. Bush discovered that President Reagan's coattails, which helped him to victory in New Hampshire, were very short in South Dakota. The NBC survey showed, moreover, that Mr. Bush did poorly even among those who support President Reagan.    On the Democratic side, Mr. Gephardt performed well among the voters who consider themselves conservative, with Mr. Dukakis coming in second. Among liberals, the NBC survey showed, the vote was splintered.    Mr. Gephardt's strong position on trade paid dividends in South Dakota, where by a 5-to-1 margin, the state's Democrats think his trade retaliation amendment would help rather than hurt the U.S. economy. Mr. Gephardt was viewed favorably by seven out of 10 South Dakota Democratic voters, according to the survey.    But Gov. Dukakis ran well among those who consider themselves strong Democrats and was seen as the eventual winner of the party's nomination, even among Gephardt voters.    As voters trooped to the polls and caucus locations in the Northern Plains, Mr. Robertson accused Vice President Bush's campaign of playing a part in the disclosures about the sex life of television evangelist Jimmy Swaggart. Mr. Robertson presented no evidence, but noted that the disclosures came only two weeks before Super Tuesday and said that the Bush campaign was planning to &quot;attack my religious beliefs and practices, and I'm going to call them before it happens.&quot;    Mr. Bush denied both accusations. &quot;If the charge is made,&quot; Mr. Bush answered, &quot;you should prove it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>