<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880119-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Services Corp.'s Attacks on Banks </HL><AUTHOR> William F. Harvey </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BNK FIN </IN><TEXT>   The reason the cost of consumer banking is going up in many areas of the country is due in part to the efforts of taxpayer-funded attorneys. More than 25 legal services groups that receive grants from the taxpayer-financed Legal Services Corp. have involved themselves in a nascent activist phenomenon: protesting financial-institution mergers and branch expansions by using the Community Reinvestment Act.    The Community Reinvestment Act was enacted in 1977 to encourage the banking industry to participate actively in economic development activities at the community level. The act and its implementing regulations make provision for groups or individuals to protest mergers, acquisitions, branch expansions and geographic relocations by financial institutions, ostensibly to ensure that CRA guidelines are met. While such protests almost never result in an application being denied approval, they are designed to create a waiting period.    If the protesters' grievances are only rarely upheld, why bother to protest? Financial institutions often accede to the protesters' demands rather than risk a protracted protest that could delay approval of important revenue-generating endeavors. It's often more cost effective simply to give in. Demands usually include an assorted menu of below-market interest-rate loans, specific geographical and dollar-amount lending targets, minority business loan emphasis, and outright cash grants to the protesting coalition. Such demands benefit specific interest groups, to the detriment of the community as a whole.    Perhaps the most insidious facet of all this is the involvement of attorneys from groups funded by the Legal Services Corp. These taxpayer-funded attorneys not only represent protest coalitions in many CRA cases, but sometimes bring the protests themselves. Like many other actions brought by legal services attorneys in the name of &quot;social justice,&quot; these protests often amount to nothing more than straight transfers of wealth from a productive sector to a non-productive set of individuals. In most cases, the end product actually inflicts economic harm on the poor, who can ill afford the higher cost of banking.    Major consumer activist groups have recognized CRA as a potential gold mine. They have established nationwide networks offering training, advice and technical assistance to the would-be CRA protester. In November, a CRA protest-training meeting was held in Chicago, sponsored by several of the largest liberal activist groups in the country. One speaker at the conference proclaimed that CRA is a catalyst that will build activist coalitions in communities where coalition-building had proved impossible in the past.    An example might be a case in Philadelphia where Fidelcor's merger with Inter-Valley Bank was protested in early 1986 by a coalition composed of former rival groups of blacks, Hispanics and whites, as well as church activist groups and a legal services attorney. The power wielded by the unification of these groups was sufficient to obtain lavish concessions. It seems that the bank went so far as to pay activists' air fares to Chicago to attend the conference where they would learn how to become more proficient in wresting concessions from banks in CRA protests.    To date, the banking community largely has capitulated to the protesters' demands. Perhaps banks reason that the concessions they make will be more than offset by the income they will earn if the CRA protest is withdrawn. If so, such logic is shortsighted. According to Federal Reserve Board statistics, the number of CRA protests filed in 1987 was more than 10 times the number of all protests lodged in 1984. Extrapolation of such a trend makes it clear that the banking industry can expect to find itself under siege in the near future.    Participation in CRA protests by Legal Services Corp. grantees shows an increase in 1987 of 200% over 1986. Indeed, part of the larger strategy for successful CRA protests involves active participation by legal services lawyers, who represent the protesting groups and often negotiate directly with bank management on terms of agreement.    In October, representatives from legal services groups in several states met with officials from the Federal Reserve at the Federal Reserve Bank in Atlanta. The meeting was held at the request of legal services groups, which wished to acquaint themselves further with the protest opportunities and mechanisms afforded under CRA. The meeting serves as a harbinger of increased interest and participation in CRA political-economic protests by legal services groups.    During the Reagan years, the Legal Services Corp., which is private, has received almost $2.5 billion in direct congressional appropriations. It and its grantees should engage in the activities mandated by its charter -- namely, providing legal aid to the poor -- and stop its quixotic attacks on the free-enterprise system and the American banking industry.    ---   Mr. Harvey, a professor at Indiana University's School of Law, was chairman of Legal Service Corp.'s board in 1982. </TEXT></DOC>