<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870811-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A U.S. NAVY JET FIRED two missiles Saturday at an Iranian warplane.    Administration officials said the Iranian jet, which had been judged &quot;hostile,&quot; veered out of the path of the missiles and didn't return any fire. The encounter near the Strait of Hormuz, however, brought the U.S. and Iran closer to combat than at any time since the U.S. began escorting Kuwaiti tankers in the Persian Gulf last month. The disclosure came as a Texaco-owned supertanker, reportedly carrying Iranian oil, struck a mine while it was approaching an anchorage in the Gulf of Oman. The vessel's hull was damaged and it spilled a considerable amount of oil.    Iraqi jets bombed Iranian targets in the gulf region. Baghdad said Tehran had violated last month's call by the U.N. for a truce in the gulf war.    ---   UNION LEADERS SAID as many as 340,000 South African workers joined a strike.    The walkout for higher wages and improved benefits at coal and gold mines has been marked by scattered violent clashes since it began Sunday night. At least 16 miners and three security officers were reportedly injured in the National Union of Mineworkers strike, considered the largest contract-related work stoppage in South Africa's history. Union officials said the strike could spread beyond the country's coal and gold mines.    Mine owners reportedly had been building stockpiles in anticipation of the strike, and Pretoria is planning legislation to curb the power of black unions.    ---   The White House sidestepped a blanket endorsement of a peace plan proposed last week by five Central American leaders in Guatemala. A spokesman refused to commit the president to withhold for 90 days an aid request for the Nicaraguan rebels, saying Reagan would &quot;wait and see&quot; what progress has been made before discussing new aid.    ---   A Soviet arms official said Moscow won't make further concessions toward a nuclear arms accord. Viktor Karpov insisted during a CBS-TV interview that any pact include 72 West German missiles whose warheads are controlled by the U.S. In Geneva, Soviet delegates accepted a U.S. proposal to visit a chemical weapons depot in Utah.    ---   A car bomb exploded near a bus carrying U.S. Air Force personnel in suburban Athens, injuring all nine Americans aboard the vehicle and the Greek driver, police said. The explosives apparently were detonated by remote control. There wasn't any immediate claim of responsibility.    ---   Justice Brennan is undergoing tests at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota for an enlarged prostate that may require surgery. A spokesman for the Supreme Court said doctors in Washington don't believe the problem is one of prostate cancer. Brennan, 81, a liberal, said he expects to participate in the court's next term, which opens Oct. 5.    Supreme Court nominee Bork disclosed that he belonged until 1985 to a club that barred women as members. He also reported that he has hired few women and no blacks or other minorities for his staff since becoming a federal judge in 1982.    ---   Riot police clashed with hundreds of striking coal miners in South Korea's eastern mining region as labor unrest spread throughout the country. Tens of thousands of workers staged walkouts to demand higher pay and better working conditions. The Labor Ministry in Seoul said work stoppages were reported at 85 companies.    ---   Sri Lanka released 667 more Tamil prisoners under a peace accord aimed at ending the island nation's ethnic strife. Colombo has freed a total of 958 of its estimated 5,000 Tamil prisoners, most of them held without trial. Some prisoners said they had been tortured and abused by security forces.    ---   Presidential envoy Vessey returned to the U.S. to brief Reagan on three days of talks last week in Vietnam and said Hanoi suggested that some Americans still missing in action may be elsewhere in Southeast Asia. In Laos, a U.S. delegation met with government officials to begin talks on more than 500 MIAs still listed in that country.    ---   Haitian high school students boycotted final exams in an anti-government protest. In a show of support, public transportation workers stayed off the job and most businesses in Port-au-Prince were closed.    ---   Israeli helicopters raided a Shiite Moslem village in southern Lebanon, killing at least one person, a Beirut radio station reported. The assault reportedly came after guerrillas fired rockets into the Galilee region. In a separate clash, six Israeli soldiers were wounded in a skirmish with guerrillas near the border with Lebanon.    ---   The U.S. Customs Service said an undercover operation has led to the arrest of five European traders who tried to export embargoed products through a dummy company run by U.S. agents. The Customs Service alleged that the suspects made plans to ship the products in violation of export laws and the Trading with the Enemy Act.    ---   Died: I.W. Abel, 78, a founder and ex-president of the United Steelworkers union, in Malvern, Ohio, of cancer. . . . Cardinal Patrick O'Boyle, 91, first Roman Catholic archbishop of Washington, D.C., in Washington, following surgery for a broken leg. </TEXT></DOC>