<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0164 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:President Aquino Risks FritteringAway Philippine Democracy---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MANILA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Jaime Ongpin doesn't look like someone who's just been fired as a finance minister. &quot;I'm a free man,&quot; he says, as he strolls into the private dining room of a restaurant in this dusty, tropical city. Over a plate of pasta and prawns, he talks about his toils in the cabinet during the first 19 months of Corazon Aquino's government. The good cheer fades quickly as he tells his tale. Combined with insights gleaned from other sources here, his story leaves a reporter with no doubt that the Philippines is in deep trouble.    Democracy in this country rests on frail support from the economic recovery and the army's willingness to serve Mrs. Aquino's government. Mr. Ongpin talks mainly about the economy. But he describes the same fever of frustration that runs high among the armed forces -- and that broke out into revolt in last month's coup attempt. Mrs. Aquino is failing to act.    Back when Mrs. Aquino named Mr. Ongpin to her cabinet, on her second day in office, he had bold hopes. His aim was to junk the feudal economy bequeathed by Ferdinand Marcos and rely mainly on free-market forces for development. Mr. Ongpin enjoyed early support from Mrs. Aquino. He kicked off reforms to lower taxes and trade barriers, and a program to privatize some 100 state corporations and hundreds of nonperforming assets. But then Mrs. Aquino lost either her nerve or her wisdom, and Mr. Ongpin and his reforms were sacrificed to shortsighted politicians. Mrs. Aquino has also recently fired Mr. Ongpin's chief political nemesis -- her executive secretary, Joker Arroyo. But that comes a bit late for Mr. Ongpin, who describes the latter half of his cabinet job as a process of &quot;banging my head against the wall.&quot;    By early this year the cabinet was thick with quarrels, even as the Philippine economy climbed out of depression and began growing at an annual 5.5%. Mr. Ongpin negotiated a new repayment package with foreign bankers only to draw criticism at home for insisting that his country honor its more than $28 billion in foreign debts. The Philippine Congress and Mrs. Aquino are talking about reneging on part of the repayment package -- despite Mr. Ongpin's warnings. Another serious problem is that Mr. Ongpin's privatization program has been blocked for months. The Asset Privatization Trust, set up early this year to sell off state holdings, has sold only about a dozen of its some 500 assets. The Philippine National Oil Co. was yanked off the for-sale list after Mrs. Aquino bought the idea that PNOC was a &quot;strategic&quot; company. Although PNOC makes money, state companies altogether eat up more than a quarter of the national budget.    Meantime, a new problem has emerged -- the Presidential Commission on Good Government set up last year by Mrs. Aquino. Its mandate was to hunt down, seize and return to the people any ill-gotten gains of Mr. Marcos and his cronies. So far, a lot's been seized, but almost nothing has been returned to the people. So PCGG has become a cruel joke. &quot;A Frankenstein,&quot; a leading Manila banker calls it.    The &quot;Frankenstein&quot; will look benign when compared with the land-reform program due this fall. It was signed into law by Mrs. Aquino in July; legislators are working out details. Even Mr. Ongpin backs land reform, arguing it's needed to funnel resources to the countryside. But the so-called reform amounts to a plan to spend $3 billion that the country doesn't have, so that the government can buy up rural properties on its own terms and parcel them out in small plots to landless farm workers who would then be ruled by government bureaucrats.    Land reform supposedly is needed to stop more rural poor from joining up with the growing communist insurgency of the New People's Army, now more than 24,000 strong. But it could create its own dangerous backlash. On islands such as Mindanao and Negros, some big landowners are warning that if the government tries to seize their land, they will raise private armies. Gen. Rodolfo G. Biazon, commander of the marines, says this could &quot;become another front for the military.&quot;    The Philippine military already has more than enough problems. Since last month alone, more than 60 people have died at the hands of the communist NPA guerrillas. Since the beginning of the year, at least 50 policemen and military officers have been killed by NPA &quot;sparrow&quot; assassination squads. In August a cabinet minister, Jaime Ferrer, was gunned down in Manila. This month a left-wing politician, Leandro Alejandro, was murdered. The left is threatening reprisals. The communists now operate in at least 68 of the 73 provinces.    Philippine troops sent out to face them are underequipped and demoralized. The military has watched Mrs. Aquino's government offer amnesty and rehabilitation to repentant communists, while the soldiers get low pay, bad rations and a human-rights panel to look into their activities. One Western military expert, based in Manila, says there is no organized procurement process for equipment. What few radios the combat units get don't work well at night. Transport vehicles are in desperately short supply.    Such problems are partly responsible for the coup attempt on Aug. 28, led by Col. Gregorio &quot;Gringo&quot; Honasan. Some soldiers see Col. Honasan -- who is still at large -- as a hero for demanding better treatment of the military and a strategy for defeating the insurgents. These concerns were underscored recently by the vice president, Salvador Laurel. He toured more than a dozen military camps after the August coup attempt. He then resigned &quot;irrevocably&quot; from his cabinet job as foreign minister, retaining only his elected post. Mr. Laurel's chief complaint was that Mrs. Aquino has been too soft on the communists and too hard on the military. Similar charges have often been made by Juan Ponce Enrile, whom Mrs. Aquino fired as defense minister last November in the aftermath of another coup attempt.    Mrs. Aquino still has five years to serve as president. Should she fall from power before her term expires, the results could be horrible. The Philippines would have lost its newly won democracy. In such an event, the U.S. has threatened to cut off all aid, both humanitarian and military. That could help pave the way for a communist takeover, threatening the rest of East Asia and changing the strategic balance in Southeast Asia and the Pacific.    Solutions are still at hand. In a good first move, Mrs. Aquino has asked her Congress to appropriate higher pay for the Philippine military. But, as the 49-year-old Mr. Ongpin points out over a scoop of coffee ice cream, &quot;the money has to come from somewhere.&quot; It's urgent that Mrs. Aquino stop frittering away her mandate, pull together her new cabinet and demand of herself and her advisers the same kind of resolve that served to evict Mr. Marcos. &quot;It's a worrisome time, but it's also a time to start fresh,&quot; says Mr. Ongpin. &quot;They don't have a choice.&quot;    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>