<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   McFARLANE SAID Reagan was briefed regularly about Contra activities.    The former national security adviser told the House and Senate panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair that he &quot;frequently&quot; discussed the Nicaraguan rebels' situation with the president after Congress banned military aid. While insisting that Reagan never asked him to do anything illegal, he said the president adhered to a &quot;far more liberal interpretation&quot; of what was allowed under the 1984 ban.    Reagan confirmed that his diary indicates he talked with King Fahd in 1985 about increased Saudi aid to the Contras, but denied soliciting funds.    ---   PERES CALLED for the resignation of Shamir, who rejected the demand.    The Israeli foreign minister also urged new elections after the divided coalition reached a deadlock on a proposed international peace conference on the Mideast. The prime minister rebuffed the call. Both leaders summoned their parties to emergency meetings. Peres's plan seeks Israeli negotiations with Jordan under the umbrella of an international parley. Shamir favors direct discussions.    Peres openly defied Shamir by announcing that he would proceed with a visit to the U.S. to seek support from officials for his peace initiative.    ---   ALFONSIN SOUGHT to effectively end rights cases against the military.    The Argentine president presented a bill to Parliament that would end prosecution of hundreds of armed-forces members charged with human-rights atrocities during seven years of military rule. Alfonsin said he was taking the unprecedented step because three failed military rebellions last month showed Argentina &quot;was on the edge of a civil war.&quot; The mutineers had demanded the dropping of the cases.    The legislation, likely to be approved in both the lower house and Senate, met criticism from both opposition politicians and human-rights groups.    ---   Klaus Barbie refused to appear at any more sessions of his trial in Lyon on charges of crimes against humanity, declaring that he was extradited to France from Bolivia illegally. The former Gestapo chief, known as the &quot;Butcher of Lyon,&quot; made his complaint after two hours of questioning. He was permitted to return to his prison cell.    ---   Norway's government is conducting an inquiry into its export-licensing procedures. The move is an effort to soften U.S. anger over a Norwegian company teaming up with a Japanese firm to sell Moscow sensitive technology for making vastly quieter submarine propellers.    ---   Ian Smith resigned as the leader of Zimbabwe's white opposition party, effectively ending his 39-year career in African politics. The former prime minister of Rhodesia, which became independent Zimbabwe under black rule, was suspended from Parliament last month after he traveled to South Africa and expressed opposition to sanctions.    ---   Guatemala's President Cerezo met with Reagan, who told the Central American official that the U.S. is willing to cooperate &quot;in any process&quot; that brings democracy to Nicaragua through peaceful means. Reagan, however, said the U.S. would continue to support the Contras, whose leaders elected a slate of directors at a meeting in Miami.    ---   Reagan submitted to Congress a report concluding that certain lasers and other weapons might be tested in space without violating the 1972 ABM treaty with the Soviets. A White House spokesman stressed that Reagan hasn't decided to authorize the tests for a space-based antimissile system.    ---   India's government arrested 175 suspected Sikh extremists in Punjab, less than 48 hours after New Delhi took control of the northern state. Gandhi, who Monday suspended the state's Sikh government and imposed direct federal rule, is expected to open talks with leaders in Punjab in an effort to reach a political settlement.    ---   Police in Manila said they foiled an apparent plot to set fire to an election commission building. The building is located near where former Philippine Defense Minister Enrile addressed a rally to protest the apparent victory in Monday's balloting of many Aquino-backed congressional candidates. Enrile called the election a fraud.    ---   Fiji's armed forces staged a coup d'etat, the Information Ministry said. Witnesses in Suva said soldiers kidnapped the premier and his cabinet. The action came nearly a month after the election of the south Pacific nation's first Indian-majority government.    ---   NASA scientists have found new evidence showing that Pluto is surrounded by a significant atmosphere, a finding that may dispel suggestions by some astronomers that the planet should be given asteroid status.    ---   Egypt has ordered Iran to close its diplomatic mission in Cairo and is expelling its two Iranian staff members for engaging &quot;in activities that went beyond the limits of accepted diplomatic norms,&quot; a Foreign Ministry official said. Sources disclosed that one of the diplomats was suspected of having ties to underground Islamic groups.    ---   Rep. Harold Ford (D., Tenn.) pleaded innocent to 19 federal charges of selling his political influence in return for loans from the banks of Jake and C.H. Butcher Jr., who have pleaded guilty to fraud. A magistrate in Knoxville set a Nov. 9 trial date.    ---   Students in South Korea clashed with police during violent anti-government protests across the country. Nearly 10,000 students reportedly took part in demonstrations at 21 universities, demanding that President Chun allow the direct election of his successor. </TEXT></DOC>