<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0029 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   JARUZELSKI SAID he hopes to call a referendum on a Polish austerity plan.    The Warsaw leader, in an interview, said he is determined to impose new economic policies by Jan. 1 that would &quot;eliminate&quot; the present &quot;centralistic&quot; model. Jaruzelski said the referendum is still only his &quot;thought&quot; and isn't a formal proposal. Such a vote would be unprecedented in a Communist country. While the referendum wouldn't be binding, it might make it impossible for Poland's government to impose a policy rejected by the public.    Jaruzelski complained about what he called U.S. efforts to block rescheduling of Warsaw's debt and said U.S. markets haven't been opened to Polish goods.    ---   MEESE SAID it was &quot;pure accident&quot; that some Iran-Contra notes weren't taken.    The attorney general, in his second day of testimony before the congressional panels investigating the affair, denied there was any strategy behind his decision to interview high-level administration officials without keeping a written record. Meese's testimony came as the panels released evidence that the Justice Department's criminal division had unsuccessfully pressed for an early role in Meese's inquiry.    Meese contradicted North, saying he believed that former CIA chief Casey didn't know of the diversion of Iran arms-sales profits to the Contras.    ---   THE U.S. PLANS to send eight mine-sweeping helicopters to the Persian Gulf.    Officials said the Navy escorts of reflagged Kuwaiti oil tankers could be halted as long as two weeks as the helicopters are transferred to the gulf and used to clear the underwater explosives. With criticism of the program already being expressed on Capitol Hill, a halt to the convoy operation would expose the Pentagon to charges that it rushed into the gulf region less than fully prepared.    As France ordered an aircraft carrier group to head toward the Indian Ocean, West Germany rejected a U.S. request to help search for gulf mines.    ---   A Soviet court near Kiev convicted three officials in charge of the Chernobyl nuclear plant of gross criminal negligence in the April 1986 reactor explosion. They were sentenced to 10 years' hard labor. Three subordinates received lesser sentences. The explosion and fire left at least 31 people dead and about 237 others hospitalized.    ---   The Soviet Union offered a new arms-control proposal linking cuts in long-range nuclear missile arsenals to strict limits on research for a U.S. space-based anti-missile system. The State Department said the plan, presented in Geneva, was disappointing and didn't appear to reflect any change in Moscow's longstanding position.    ---   Reagan underwent what the White House called a &quot;common procedure&quot; to have a small lesion removed from his nose. The White House didn't indicate whether the lesion was cancerous, but said the tissue would be tested. Reagan had cancerous cells removed from his nose twice in 1985.    ---   India and Sri Lanka signed an accord aimed at ending an ethnic war by Tamil separatists. Sinhalese opponents of the pact rioted, and officials said at least 15 people were killed. Under the agreement, signed in Colombo by Sri Lankan President Jayewardene and India's Premier Gandhi, a ceasefire is to begin tomorrow.    ---   Italy's new government was inaugurated, ending a five-month political deadlock. The five-party coalition's 30-member cabinet is expected to win votes of confidence in both houses of Parliament by next week. The coalition was formed by Christian Democrat Giovanni Goria, 44, who became Italy's youngest-ever prime minister.    ---   Soldiers in Haiti killed at least eight people and wounded 16 others in Port-au-Prince during a march condemning the Tonton Macoutes, the Duvalier dictatorship's private army that went into hiding last year. Earlier this month, troops killed 23 people during an anti-government general strike.    ---   Tanaka's conviction was upheld by Tokyo's High Court, but the ruling isn't expected to affect Toyko's political scene since the ex-premier's faction in parliament was dissolved July 4. Tanaka was convicted in 1983 for taking bribes from Lockheed Corp. and sentenced to four years in prison.    ---   South African postal workers staged a strike over disciplinary procedures and wages. About 20,000 mail carriers joined almost 14,000 other black workers in seven separate walkouts. Meanwhile, leaders of the mineworkers union met with metalworkers officials to consider a strike.    ---   Died: John A. Mayer, 77, former chairman of Mellon Bank Corp., near Pittsburgh, of a cerebral hemorrhage. </TEXT></DOC>