<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0035 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Sugar Prices Slide for Sixth Session As Increased World Output Is Forecast </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PCS FIN BON PET </IN><G> TRE </G><TEXT>   Sugar prices ended lower for the sixth consecutive session in volatile trading triggered by a forecast of increased world production, particularly in the Soviet Union.    The March-delivery contract settled at 8.76 cents a pound, down 0.18 cent from Monday and 1.71 cents from Jan. 25, when the current downturn began.    The March contract yesterday never rose above Monday's close. After trading at a high of 8.93 cents shortly after the opening, the price plunged to 8.52 cents before rebounding toward the close.    Analysts and trade sources noted that the decline stopped at the long-term support level of 8.5 to 8.55 cents that was established in late August and early September. They said prolonged speculative selling created an oversold condition, which sparked the late recovery.    F.O. Licht, the West German sugar statistical firm, in its second estimate for the season that began Sept. 1, forecast world sugar production at slightly more than 104 million metric tons, up from almost 102.7 million tons in its first estimate in October. Global output in the 1986-87 season was 103.8 million tons.    The focus of market attention, however, was a million-ton increase in the estimate of Soviet production from last year and an even greater upward revision from Licht's October forecast.    Licht placed Soviet output at 9.7 million tons, up from 8.7 million tons in the 1986-87 season and, more significantly, up from the eight million to 8.1 million tons it estimated four months ago.    The earlier estimate was in line with general expectations because the Soviet crop had reportedly been hurt by adverse weather. Based on this estimate, it was anticipated that the Soviets would buy a huge quantity of sugar, which helped buoy the world sugar market. At least some of this support now appears to have been lost, analysts said.    Licht's Soviet forecast &quot;wasn't a surprise,&quot; said Joseph Busichio, vice president of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. &quot;The increase became known last week. Today's report only served to confirm it.&quot;    Nevertheless, there was still some skepticism, particularly among those who deal in actual sugar. One dealer said such a revision in the Soviet crop estimate was surprising in view of weather problems it was known to have suffered.    &quot;The Soviet Union is buying grains,&quot; he said. &quot;Both grains and sugar are grown in the same region, the Ukraine. How could one crop have survived so well and not the other?&quot;    Separately, the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange reported record monthly trading volume in January, led by world sugar trading, and record high daily trading volume on Feb. 1.    A total of 888,256 contracts traded in January, up 54% from January 1987 and topping the previous record of 709,273 contracts in April 1986. Sugar options trading also set a monthly record in January. Record one-day volume occurred Monday with total trading of 68,457 futures and options contracts, topping the record 60,286 contracts on Oct. 10, 1987.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   PRECIOUS METALS: Gold prices fell slightly to a new four-month low, $453.90 an ounce, down 20 cents, on the Commodity Exchange in New York, after a brief rally spurred by overseas buying fizzled. But analysts said that after Friday's $12.30-an-ounce plunge, this week's relative steadiness is encouraging. &quot;The market had a bad spill on Friday, and normally when that happens they absolutely kill it on Monday,&quot; said Bernard Savaiko, senior precious metals analyst for PaineWebber Inc., New York. Since that didn't happen, &quot;it's a sign of at least a near-term bottom.&quot; Platinum recaptured its customary premium over gold that it briefly lost on Friday, a good sign for precious metals in general, analysts said. When platinum's price slips below gold's, it suggests industrial demand -- platinum has many industrial uses -- is dropping.    INTEREST RATES: Prices of Treasury-bond futures rallied sharply based on a strong response to yesterday's auction of three-year Treasury notes and to the move by most major banks to cut their prime lending rate to 8.5% from 8.75%. Bellwether Treasury bond futures for March settlement gained just over a point to close at 94 7/8 in active trading. &quot;My pension-fund clients are saying, 'The first time there's a pullback in bond prices, I'm a buyer,'&quot; said Jeffrey Priest, head of fixed income trading for Miller, Tabak, Hirsch andamp; Co., New York. Mr. Priest and other traders said yesterday's rally bodes well for the 10-year and 30-year portions of the Treasury's quarterly auction taking place today and tomorrow, respectively. But it is too early to tell whether the Federal Reserve Board will ease its grip on the economy's credit reins by cutting the discount rate -- currently 6% -- that it charges member banks for overnight borrowing, Mr. Priest said. He estimated that the Fed will wait until March and a fresh batch of economic data before deciding whether to cut the discount rate.    ENERGY: Despite another price-supporting statement from the president of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, oil prices were mostly unchanged in the quietest New York trading session since last summer. Crude oil for current delivery settled at $16.94 a barrel, up 12 cents, on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Analysts said the Nymex's annual &quot;international oil dinner&quot; tonight for 1,400 members of the industry has, like last year, made trading grind to a halt, because many of the country's top traders are en route to New York. The OPEC president's statement -- that prices would rise to at least $18 a barrel if the cartel's avowed production-restraint continues -- &quot;scared the market up a little bit&quot; briefly, said Geldermann Inc.'s Eric T. Bolling, before traders grew disinterested again.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean-futures prices sank amid rising expectations over the size of the approaching soybean harvest of the U.S.'s biggest rival, Brazil. Some analysts are boosting their estimate of Brazil's crop by 4% to a record 20 million metric tons. Favorable rains in recent weeks have created &quot;optimal&quot; growing conditions in the major soybean producing states, said Richard Loewy, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. The harvest outlook signals stiff competition with Brazil during the next few months as its crop enters the international market. However, some analysts expect futures prices to be strengthened by signs that the amount of U.S. farmland planted to soybeans will increase slightly this year, which could lead to a tight stock situation. Traders are interpreting this from the direction a House subcommittee debate over soybean acreage is taking. An Agriculture Department official told the panel yesterday that it wouldn't support a proposal to let corn farmers plant soybeans on acreage they are required to idle in order to qualify for government aid. The American Soybean Association, a farmer trade group, also testified against the proposal, saying it would depress prices. </TEXT></DOC>