<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870213-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Network of Ex-Officers Tied to Iran-Contra AffairHad Role in Other Secret Operations, Sources Say---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The network of former military officers involved in the Iran-Contra affair has played a role in clandestine operations going far beyond shipping arms to anti-Sandinista guerrillas in Nicaragua.    Operating as contractors to the U.S. government, the officers have served in recent years as middlemen, facilitating arms transfers and providing aircraft for separate secret activities sanctioned by the Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency. Examples cited by intelligence sources include extensive logistics support for the military's elite Delta Force commandos and more short-term endeavors such as providing a helicopter used in the Caribbean in connection with an intelligence mission before the Grenada invasion in 1983.    The officers' sensitive role raises new questions about the degree to which the private Contra supply operation was known to the Reagan administration and at least indirectly sustained by the government at a time when Congress had banned U.S. arms assistance to the insurgents. More broadly, it has provoked debate among military and intelligence officials over the intermingling of different clandestine operations and the use of private contractors not under the full control of the government.    Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and his frequent ally in the Contra supply operation, former Lt. Col. Richard Gadd, are most prominent in this network. Both men have been associated with a suburban Washington company, American National Management Corp., which was incorporated shortly after Gen. Secord retired from the military in 1983 and which began receiving classified government contracts soon after.    From federal records and company literature, ANMC emerges as an unusual amalgam of a Washington marketing firm and a clandestine operator. Early marketing and service clients include Southern Air Transport and Stanford Technology Trading Group, both of which have since been linked to the Iran-Contra affair. An ANMC document prepared in 1984 boasts of top-secret clearances held by its principal personnel, and the company claimed a major part of a nearly $2.3 million classified contract in support of military special operations.    Sometimes using Southern Air Transport, ANMC has provided logistical assistance for the Delta Force, according to intelligence sources, and the company's promotional description of the classified contract corresponds to the special needs of training or operational missions for such a quick-reaction force. &quot;Tasks include . . . support services at major operating areas and remote sites in the United States and abroad,&quot; reads the ANMC document. &quot;Special procedures and system methodology have been developed for discreet and expedited services which transcend military disciplines.&quot;    Federal records show ANMC held at least three subsequent Army contracts totaling more than $600,000 in fiscal 1984 under which the company made available planes and civilian crews for special operations. These ranged from providing a twin-engine turboprop used in a training-related mission among islands in the Caribbean after the Grenada invasion to a more obscure agreement under which ANMC was paid an estimated $308,900 to keep a Gulfstream II and a Lear jet transport on standby for unspecified use outside the U.S. in the summer of 1984. Because of the covert nature of these missions, full details aren't available on what services the contractor performed.    A second company, identified only as SOME Aviation, was also used by Gen. Secord in clandestine activities, according to intelligence sources. Though the full scope of their role remains unclear, Gen. Secord and Col. Gadd offered a private airlift capability that the military was then unable or unwilling to provide for covert U.S. operations.    &quot;You had a commercial enterprise filling a vacuum and trying to make a profit,&quot; says one special-operations source. &quot;The lesson to be learned is whether that is appropriate or we ought to keep this in house.&quot;    Gen. Secord is generally described by military and intelligence sources as the lead figure, though Col. Gadd is more prominent as the listed owner for ANMC and a series of associate companies, including Eagle Aviation Services andamp; Technology Inc. and Airmach Inc. Delaware corporate records show that beginning with ANMC in July 1983, the companies were set up by Col. Gadd over a period of months after Gen. Secord retired from the Pentagon in May of that year. ANMC literature prepared the following year lists the general prominently among its personnel, and he has used office space in the same suburban complex in Virginia.    ANMC personnel and support staff have included numerous military veterans of special operations, and Gen. Secord maintains contacts at Hurlburt Field in Florida, home of the Air Force's First Special Operations Wing, which falls under the 23rd Air Force in Illinois. After three years as deputy chief of operations at the 23rd, Col. Robert Dutton retired last April and joined his friend Gen. Secord as a business associate.    Though a relative newcomer, Col. Dutton soon was linked to the covert airlift operation that had begun in 1985 and served to ferry arms to the Contras from bases outside Nicaragua. Telephone records from a house used in El Salvador and the statements of crew members in published interviews indicate all three officers played a role in administering the operation, which ended abruptly last fall when a transport plane was shot down by Nicaraguan forces.    Gen. Secord and Col. Dutton have since invoked their Fifth Amendment rights in refusing to testify before congressional committees. While denying any wrongdoing, through their attorneys, they and Col. Gadd have refused to comment.    Col. Gadd, 46 years old, never reached the rank of his two associates, but he personifies the mix of a marketing and military background that characterizes the new clandestine contractors. The son of a colonel and brother of another, he matched his Trinity College education with master's degrees in business and public administration that contrast with his unconventional warfare training in special operations. From Pentagon records, his tour in Vietnam in the mid-1960s appears to have been relatively uneventful, as he flew numerous missions as a pilot of the same C-123 type transports used in the Nicaraguan operation.    Of the three men -- who knew one another well in the Pentagon -- Col. Gadd was the first to retire, joining Vinnell Corp., a large Pentagon contractor, in August 1982. Even before leaving the company in October 1983, he began establishing ANMC and Eagle Aviation, and he incorporated Airmach that December, according to Delaware records. Clarence Lewis Stearns, a retired Army colonel with long experience in special operations, is listed in the annual filing for 1984 as an officer in ANMC and Eagle, but Col. Stearns says he left the companies in late 1985 and denies any role in the Contra operation.    Delaware records show ANMC and Eagle reporting gross assets of more than $1 million by the end of 1985, and apart from its classified work, ANMC enjoyed rapid growth as a jack-of-all-trades geared to the growing number of service contracts awarded by the military. In fiscal 1986, which coincided most directly with the buildup of the Contra airlift operation, ANMC won more than $1.8 million in contracts from the Military Airlift Command and the Air Force, according to records compiled by MAC and the Federal Procurement Data Center.    Chief among these were the repair and maintenance of different types of transient aircraft that pass through military bases. ANMC also captured contracts to provide such localized services as operating a mailroom at an air base in Montana and providing landscape work at another base in Maine. A report by the Small Business Administration subsequently upheld ANMC's claim to the special status allowed small businesses under Pentagon bidding procedures. But among competing contractors, Col. Gadd's connections with Gen. Secord continued to prompt complaints that he was operating on behalf of larger interests than his own.    Col. Dutton, through his attorney John Dowd, denied any knowledge or role in any Air Force contracts awarded to ANMC. But Gen. Secord's and Col. Gadd's quick success as private contractors for clandestine services illustrates the small world of special operations. Their contacts with Southern Air, a Miami-based freight carrier once owned by the CIA, are an extension of the same network, and ANMC literature describes an early cost-plus-fixed-fee contract under which ANMC would assist the carrier in marketing and seeking government contracts.    Southern Air planes were used by Gen. Secord to ship U.S. weapons to Israel for later shipment to Iran and, through a Panamanian front, the carrier facilitated the purchase and maintenance of planes used in the covert airlift into Nicaragua.    ---   John Walcott contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>