<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880624-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Soviet Bureaucracy Resisting Gorbachev --- Next Week's Party Congress Is Crucial to His Reforms </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Gumbel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Close your eyes and it sounds like vintage Ronald Reagan ranting against Washington bureaucrats. Instead, it's Mikhail Gorbachev ranting against entrenched bureaucrats in Moscow.    Soviet newspapers these days are filled with tales of reform efforts gone awry. The culprit: the 18 million bureaucrats who run the ministries that oversee the factories that fail to produce what Soviet society needs. Beginning next month, the specially stocked shops that cater to this privileged elite will be closed. Many bureaucrats will lose their official cars. Souvenir stores even sell posters declaring, &quot;Bureaucrats are the enemies of perestroika.&quot;    It's all part of the Soviet leader's escalating war on bureaucrats, whom he blames for blocking his perestroika program of economic and social reform. Some in the West say the real culprit is Mr. Gorbachev's timidity. He has sought to make the Soviet Union's centrally planned economy work better by loosening the bureaucracy's hold on factory managers, but so far has been unwilling to change the system in any fundamental way.    Regardless, at next week's historic Communist Party conference, Mr. Gorbachev will try again to bring the bureaucracy to heel with, of all things, a dose of Soviet-style democracy. He is proposing limited terms and elections by secret ballot for party and state officials -- the worst economic meddlers -- to make them more accountable, and he wants to strengthen the right to challenge bureaucratic decisions. If he succeeds, he will have unleashed a major change in the functioning of the Soviet Union.    Not everyone is confident he'll get his way at the party conference, the first such gathering of the party's membership in 47 years. While Mr. Gorbachev has called the conference to strengthen support for his reform program, his long battle with the bureaucracy shows just how difficult it is to translate words into deeds.    &quot;Almost nothing has changed in the basic economic rules and operations of managers,&quot; complains Valery Makarov, a top Soviet economist who helped devise changes intended to free factories from stifling supervision by ministries. He likens the bureaucracy to a flock of crows perched on a bell: &quot;When the bell rings, the crows make a huge din and fly off. But when it falls silent, they come back as if nothing had happened.&quot;    Mr. Makarov has seen it happen. The reforms he helped draft were meant to give factory directors greater autonomy and reward increased productivity. Instead of having to obey orders from bureaucrats, factory managers and workers were supposed to make many of their own business decisions, including how much to pay workers and where to invest profits.    But he cites the case of a profitable chemical plant in Siberia whose director was planning to increase capacity and expand staff amenities. Instead, the local ministry decided to subsidize loss-making factories in the area and arbitrarily cut by 50% the amount available for the director's capital spending, not only killing the expansion but also forcing him to shut existing child-care facilities.    &quot;This is the absolute opposite of the idea of economic reform,&quot; Mr. Makarov says bitterly.    Efforts to reduce the number of bureaucrats have been equally futile. Those who lose their jobs in one ministry often find employment in another or spring up as consultants to the departments they just left. One ministry in charge of household appliances was shut down in March and its operations dispersed. But the former minister was put in charge of a new 20-man department created for him to oversee the now far-flung parts of his old empire.    The Foreign Trade Ministry reacted similarly when it was merged with another agency. Ivan Ivanov, the second-ranking foreign trade official, says most of the 5,000 ministry staffers who lost their jobs found jobs in other ministries or in foreign-trade organizations that have sprouted like mushrooms. &quot;We aren't bureaucrats,&quot; Mr. Ivanov sniffs, &quot;We're specialists.&quot;    Halting such maneuvering is difficult. &quot;We've tried to set up a barrier against such people,&quot; says an official at one institute that has been flooded with applications. &quot;But . . . people have connections.&quot;    Rescinding special privileges can be tough in a country where they are the main reward for public service. Authorities in Kazakhstan confiscated luxurious country houses used by local officials and turned them into much-needed apartments or clinics. Within months, according to a local newspaper, the families and patients who had moved in had been moved out and the sumptuous furnishings returned.    The ministries and central economic agencies that used to tell factories what to do should now, in theory, just give guidance. But in practice, factories can't yet determine some key factors such as where they get their supplies, and most if not all of their production is still planned by the center. Moreover, the bureaucrats are still held responsible by Moscow for failure. So while they have orders not to interfere, the temptation is irresistible.    The most blatant examples of reform-twisting concern the system of &quot;state orders&quot; that determines how much of its output a factory must sell to the state. In the old days, the state ordered and bought everything. But under the reforms, ministries are supposed to take only a few major products of strategic importance, leaving factories to choose what they want to produce. Instead, ministries quickly learned they need only declare something strategic to keep it under their control.    &quot;Explain to me why the production of pear-shaped rubber parts for sinks is planned as a state order,&quot; the bemused director of a rubber factory asked a public discussion group recently. &quot;What have they got to do with the economic independence of our country?&quot;    While the level of state orders is supposed to decline over the next few years for most products, several ministries and agencies recently requested increased procurements for 1989. Pravda reported that the labor-union movement wanted to include sandals and children's coats, the Railway Ministry asked for sleepers, and the Ministry of Light Industry wanted to add cotton balls.    Mr. Gorbachev's policy of &quot;glasnost,&quot; or greater openness, has so far played a major role in bashing bureaucrats. The huge industrial conglomerate, Uralmash, recently gave the first clue as to how the Soviet leader's &quot;democracy&quot; policy might help overcome some of the problems: It defied the authorities and won.    Uralmash's workers in December rejected the 1988 production plan of the Ministry of Heavy and Transport Machine Industry and the State Planning Committee, saying it was dictatorial and unprofitable. Most important, they claimed that Mr. Gorbachev's reforms gave them the right to refuse it. They argued that some of the products they were being told to make weren't even needed.    Ignoring pleas and threats, they stood firm for months. Finally, the authorities gave way -- after first trying in vain to stop an investigative reporter from Izvestia from writing about the case -- and transfered some of the products allocated to Uralmash to other plants.    A second precedent for democracy was set last month by the Supreme Soviet, the country's parliament that used to be just a rubber-stamp body. The assembly threw out taxation provisions that would have virtually confiscated any individual's earnings above $1,100 per month. The steep taxes, imposed by the Finance Ministry, were viewed by reform economists as derailing the entire legislation.    Apart from the democracy campaign, the party conference is unlikely to take specific action to curb some of the bureaucratic abuses, though several of the country's more overbearing organizations such as the State Planning Committee and the huge agricultural bureaucracy are bracing for a tongue-lashing and perhaps another shake-up. But the conference is likely to set the tone for other moves under consideration, including a new law on state orders and a strengthened system of state arbitration to cover disputes between factories and ministries.    If all the efforts come to nothing, factory directors probably will have to continue to put up with the sort of treatment dished out to the Elektra appliance factory in the Lithuanian town of Kaunas. It refused to accept orders from its local ministry for a major output increase because it had reached capacity. It, too, said it was allowed to manage its own affairs under Mr. Gorbachev's reforms.    But authorities cut supplies of raw materials, and when the factory director protested, he was told: &quot;Rights are rights but the plan is the plan.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>