<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870806-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Dividing the Spoils:Taft Broadcasting Co.Faces Being Split UpAmong 3 Rival Owners---How a Raid by Robert BassBrought Chaos to Firm,Profits to Him and Others---The Lindner Name in Lights?---By Constance Mitchell and George AndersStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TFB AFINP FMIFTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><DATELINE> CINCINNATI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As tuxedo-clad waiters poured champagne and served filet mignon, executives at Taft Broadcasting Co.'s hilltop headquarters toasted the new year of 1985 and what they envisioned was a move into broadcasting's big leagues.    They were certain Taft's $760 million bid to acquire a dozen radio and television stations from Gulf Broadcasting Co. would help turn Taft into a top entertainment conglomerate. But instead of catapulting Taft into the big time, the Gulf purchase sent Taft's share price tumbling. That brought on an aggressive new shareholder -- Texas investor Robert Bass -- two takeover bids, and a lengthy struggle for control of the company.    Now, 2 1/2 years later, the Taft empire is about to be dismantled. On June 3, Taft's board approved a $1.4 billion acquisition of the company by a partnership made up of three former rivals -- Mr. Bass, Taft Vice Chairman Dudley S. Taft and Ohio financier Carl Lindner -- each of whom has a distinctly different idea of what the company should be.    Over the next year, insiders say, Taft properties will be split up among the three parties. Pressed for comment, Taft Chairman Charles Mechem will only say: &quot;The world changes.&quot;    The Taft saga illustrates why the elusive Mr. Bass has become one of America's top investors. He and his investors stand to make a tidy $160 million profit on their Taft pick. Taft stockholders reaped a bonanza, too; takeover speculation drove Taft's stock from a low of $52 in 1985 to more than $150.    The turmoil at Taft also shows how a company's culture and structure are radically altered when warring investors arrive. In the process of reaching the unusual truce, many Taft managers quit or were ousted, and the company's mix of businesses was substantially changed.    Before Taft became a takeover target, it was &quot;an exciting company in which to work,&quot; says Terry Connelly, a former Taft executive and now the general manager of a Cincinnati TV station. &quot;We were aggressively expanding into new markets, and there was a powerful esprit de corps. Now everyone is preoccupied, trying to figure out what's going to happen next.&quot;    The Bass family likes to spot undervalued companies in turmoil, buy a hefty stake and push for change. Mr. Bass won't discuss the Taft situation, and Taft's top executives refused repeated requests to comment. But interviews with associates of Mr. Bass, current and former Taft employees, and Wall Street investment bankers reveal that Taft was easy prey.    For all its attractive assets, Taft's overhead was high, it had several marginal units, and its earnings per share were declining from their peak in fiscal 1984. While other broadcasting stocks soared in 1985, Taft fell as low as $52 a share, from $70. Moreover, as stiff competition and falling ad revenue began to hurt some broadcast operators, Wall Street analysts thought Taft had overpaid for the Gulf stations.    Taft's push into movie making and TV production was troubled. Although children shows such as &quot;Punky Brewster&quot; and &quot;The Smurfs&quot; were successful, many prime-time shows fizzled. A recent film, &quot;Light of Day,&quot; flopped despite box-office draw Michael J. Fox, and the entertainment group drew criticism for huge cost overruns. &quot;We used to refer to the entertainment group's West Coast operation as a sinkhole,&quot; said a former manager in Taft's broadcast group.    In addition, there were widespread reports of conflict among managers throughout the company.    &quot;When the Basses see something like that, they want to be right in the middle,&quot; says an associate of Mr. Bass. In the summer of 1985, Mr. Bass, along with some of his aides and longtime business associates, established a new partnership just for the Taft investment. Mr. Bass's private holdings financed the bulk of the capital. The group decided to buy all the Taft stock it could, at prices as low as $72.06 a share.    Mr. Bass's capital is enormous. Along with his brothers Sid, Edward and Lee, he inherited an oil fortune in the 1960s, which has increased more than 50-fold through shrewd investing. Last year, Forbes magazine estimated the four Bass brothers' net worth at $3.2 billion. Many believe it is even higher.    But Robert Bass, third-oldest of the siblings, has often been overshadowed by oldest brother Sid, who ran the family's business until it was liquidated in 1985 and divided among the brothers. For example, the family's investments in Walt Disney Co. in 1984, which reaped about $850 million, were largely orchestrated by Sid Bass. Associates suggest that the Taft investment was a chance for Robert Bass to show that he, too, could hunt for big game in the investment world -- and win.    Mr. Bass, a slender 39-year-old who wears wire-rim glasses and conservative suits, hardly fits the stereotype of the flamboyant Texas oil tycoon. In his 31st-floor Fort Worth office, only a small stenciled nameplate on a glass partition identifies his spartan office from that of colleagues. Still, by setting his sights on Taft, he was sure to draw attention.    In Ohio, the Tafts have been involved in politics and the media for a century. The broadcasting company was founded 1939 by Hulbert Taft Jr., a relative of William Howard Taft, the 27th president of the U.S. In 1967, when Hulbert Taft Jr. was killed in a bomb-shelter explosion -- and his son, Dudley, was only 26 years old -- the family picked local attorney Charles Mechem to run the company.    However, the aura of the old-line Tafts didn't extend to Texas. By July 1985, the Bass group had acquired 8% of Taft's outstanding common, approaching the 12% owned by the Taft family. For the next several months, the Bass group's technique of quietly -- but quickly -- accumulating shares unnerved some Taft executives.    Dudley Taft, the 46-year-old president, began planning how to fight the Bass group. However, Mr. Mechem, Taft's chairman, &quot;leaned over backwards, maybe too far, to be fair to the new shareholders,&quot; says a longtime friend of Mr. Mechem's. &quot;That hurt Dudley, who thought Mechem should have supported the family interest.&quot;    Eventually, Taft managers agreed they needed to meet with their big new shareholders. But even deciding on a meeting site proved difficult. Taft management wouldn't go to Fort Worth. The Bass team didn't want to come to Cincinnati. Finally they found neutral ground: a broadcast convention in Phoenix, Ariz. The meeting included Taft's top management and Mr. Bass's top lieutenants. Mr. Bass stayed home.    In Phoenix, Mr. Taft sharply rebuffed the Bass group's recommendations for strategic changes. Afterward, he remained in Phoenix for the convention. Mr. Mechem, however, went home in the Taft corporate jet and offered Bass aide David Bonderman a ride to Fort Worth. The two men found a rapport and went on to hold a series of meetings over the next year.    At one of those sessions, a witness recalls, Mr. Bonderman was laying out his view of how Taft should streamline, when Mr. Mechem pulled out a yellow pad and said: &quot;For 10 years, I've been thinking we needed to make these kinds of changes.&quot;    Mr. Mechem, who held little Taft stock, had never been an aggressive chairman. But he had his own long-hidden agenda for the company -- and it bore a surprising similarity to what the Bass team wanted. In May 1986, Mr. Mechem invited four Bass representatives onto the Taft board, and the Bass team began to engineer a reorganization.    &quot;They made some very good suggestions,&quot; recalls one of Taft's outside directors. &quot;But it was obvious that their primary concern was to boost the value of their investment,&quot; rather than look out for the long-term health of the company, the director says.    While some directors balked, the Bass/Mechem team garnered enough support to begin shedding assets -- including several of those Gulf stations so proudly acquired a year earlier. The Bass group pressed Taft to sell its independent TV stations in Philadelphia, Washington, Miami, Houston and Dallas, and supported a plan to shed the entire entertainment division. Also shorn was Taft's 47% interest in the Philadelphia Phillies baseball team. Subsequently, a Bass/Taft partnership made a $625 million acquisition in cable television, an industry that Mr. Bass has consistently favored.    The Bass team, working mainly with Mr. Mechem, maneuvered key management changes as well. Television programming was an early target. Taft's operating margins on its stations were far lower than the industry average. On weekends some stations aired costly college football games, rather than cheap, older movies that could draw nearly the same ratings and ad revenue. Many of Taft's own programs drew dismal ratings.    The proposed remedy was coldly efficient: fire Ro Grignon, Taft's head of television programming. Mr. Grignon resigned soon thereafter, citing &quot;philosophical differences&quot; with management.    Also under fire was Dudley Taft, who was blamed -- some say unfairly -- for bungling several transactions. For example, sources say he was faulted for swapping a Buffalo network-affiliated television station plus about $100 million for an independent station near Miami. Only after the deal was completed did Taft fully realize the Miami station was too far from affluent suburbs to draw lucrative advertisers.    In July 1986, as Mr. Taft's opposition to the Bass-sponsored changes grew, he was stripped of operating duties, reportedly at Mr. Mechem's request. Mr. Taft was given a less vital job as vice chairman and replaced by George Castrucci, the company's chief financial officer. Soon, Mr. Taft began contemplating how he might resign and take some of the company's operations with him.    Initially, he set out to buy just WGPH-TV, Taft's High Point, N.C., station. But soon he raised his sights and decided to go after the five independent TV stations. When that deal fizzled (his bid was about $30 million lower than the winning $230 million bid from a Virginia Beach, Va., broadcasting concern), he then sought all of Taft.    On March 6, Mr. Taft -- backed by Narragansett Capital Corp., a closely held investment concern, and some Taft family members -- proposed to take Taft private at $145 a share, through a leveraged buyout. Taft's board rejected that bid as inadequate. But to investors, Mr. Taft's move clearly put the company up for auction.    Attention turned to Cincinnati financier Carl Lindner, who bought 5% of Taft in August 1986 and kept increasing his stake. Mr. Lindner had his own ideas for Taft, believing the company should keep its entertainment division and grow, rather than shrink. On March 9, just after Mr. Taft's bid, Mr. Lindner said he, too, was considering making an offer to acquire Taft.    All the jockeying divided Taft managers into warring factions. They complained that day-to-day decisions weren't made. Morale sank and many managers left. &quot;It's been difficult for employees to function with all the uncertainties,&quot; says John Chapman, who recently resigned his post as a senior vice president to join a media consulting firm. The situation became &quot;total chaos,&quot; adds a New York investment banker who worked closely with the board. &quot;You can't run a company smoothly when you've got three different shareholder groups, each with a different view of the world.&quot;    The remedy came into focus in late March. All three parties -- Messrs. Taft, Bass and Lindner -- would bid for the company together, then divide it among themselves. Bidding as a partnership provided tax benefits for all three groups. On April 14, the three bidders, who collectively held 42% of Taft, united with a $155-a-share offer for Taft, valuing the company at $1.43 billion. Class-action suits were filed, charging the bid wasn't high enough, and the offer was raised to $157 a share. On June 3, Taft's board approved the acquisition.    For Mr. Taft, leaving his family company is bittersweet. Though he loses control of a half-billion-dollar empire, he will retain the company name and one of its stronger television stations. And he will end up at least $10 million richer, as he is expected to trade his Taft shares to Mr. Lindner for cash.    A Washington, D.C., public-advocacy law firm recently petitioned the Federal Communications Commission to stop the transfer of Taft's stations to Mr. Lindner, asking that the FCC investigate his &quot;character&quot; to determine whether he will make a suitable broadcaster. Despite the challenge, observers expect FCC approval by year's end.    If that approval is granted, Mr. Lindner, who already heads three billion-dollar companies, will keep Taft's core businesses. He also gains a bit of prestige in his hometown for rescuing a local institution from the tough Texans and gets a chance to put his name in lights; there is talk that Taft's core businesses will be renamed Lindner Broadcasting. Mr. Mechem is expected to remain with the surviving company.    Mr. Bass and his aides, who are expected to sell their stake to Mr. Lindner, bow out with an investment profit of about $160 million and an option on the cable-TV interests. But that might not be enough.    As the last loose ends of the Taft purchase were being tied, Bass aides were reported to be gulping Diet Cokes, huddled around speaker phones, looking for the next deal. And late this spring, a Bass partnership said it agreed to help acquire Spectradyne Inc., a pay-TV company, for $452 million. </TEXT></DOC>