<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0106 </DOCNO><HL> SEC Now Is on Target---By Gregg Jarrell and John Pound</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The &quot;hobnail boots&quot; of John Shad, outgoing chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and his enforcement chief Gary Lynch have kicked over a truly phenomenal Wall Street scandal. Dennis Levine has agreed to pay a $12 million penalty and cooperate with the SEC's ongoing investigation; Ivan Boesky has settled for an astounding $100 million and is also cooperating; and subsequently several major investment-banking figures were arrested. The net appears to be widening with no end in sight. Yet despite these successes, a curious disquiet surrounds the agency.    The immediate response to the recent developments -- particularly the Boesky bust -- was glowing praise. Chairman Shad was referred to in the press as &quot;public hero number one&quot; for delivering Wall Street's top arbitrager. But there followed a dizzying shift of public sentiment; early praise has given way to criticism of the agency from all sides. Much of the outcry has its roots in the infamous &quot;Boesky sell-off.&quot; Within days of the Boesky settlement on Nov. 14, Wall Street sources revealed that the SEC had permitted a fund managed by Boesky to sell at least $440 million of stocks (mostly in companies subject to takeover speculation) shortly before the public announcement of the settlement. The secrecy greatly benefited Boesky's fund, which otherwise would have had to take substantial losses on takeover-related stocks that declined in price significantly after the announcement of the settlement. Was not the SEC condoning a huge inside trade, critics demanded, with the purpose being to reward Boesky for his cooperation?    It is undeniable that the agency sacrificed short-run political capital in allowing the sell-off. In addition, there may be grounds to question the equity inherent in allowing Boesky to sell, and thereby transfer his losses to other arbitragers. It may be that the agency was motivated by fear of a &quot;chain-reaction&quot; response to the Boesky revelations, in which many highly leveraged arbitragers attempted to dump stock held on margin.    But such concerns are unwarranted given the breadth and depth of modern American capital markets, which have been demonstrated to be remarkably stable with respect to fast-breaking, major news. Further, given that the buyers were doubtless other highly margined arbitragers, the sell-off is unlikely to have reduced net margin exposure. Rather, it merely changed the names on the margin accounts. While a final verdict on the effects of the sell-off awaits further disclosures, it does seem contrary to the SEC's longstanding concern with equity and its often imaginative schemes for compensating victims of insider trading.    However, despite these concerns, the SEC's position throughout the Boesky affair and the more recent revelations should please those concerned with stock-market efficiency. Both the foundations of the recent cases and the endorsement of the sell-off show a marked move toward an economically defensible definition of insider trading. The focus has been on transactions based on information that is stolen outright, and particularly on tips used or spread in violation of fiduciary duties.    For a number of years the definition of insider trading has been the subject of a wide and sometimes disturbing debate within Congress, the SEC, and the legal and corporate communities. On one end of the spectrum are the advocates of an equity-based definition of inside activity, sometimes known as the &quot;equal-information&quot; theory. In this view, anyone making a trade based on superior information is in effect &quot;stealing&quot; from other market participants by acting before all other stockholders. In this view, the Boesky sell-off constituted a major inside-trading violation. For several years the SEC showed signs of attempting to codify the equal-information theory as law, as evidenced in its prosecution of the Dirks/Equity Trading Fund case.    Economists have questioned -- indeed fought against -- the equal-information theory from its inception. They have argued that superior information, legally obtained, is fundamental to trading activity and efficiency in the stock market. If trading on superior information -- which might be seen as simply different information or even different opinions than those held by other market participants -- constitutes inside trading, then virtually every active market participant is at one time or another an inside trader. In this view, inside trading only applies to trades based on information that is stolen from other market participants. Of particular concern are abuses involving violation of fiduciary relationships, in which one party engaged to act as financial agent or intermediary for another violates the terms of the contract.    By these criteria, the SEC's prosecution of the recent rash of inside-trading cases, and the agency's explanation of the Boesky sell-off, are encouraging signals. The agency is going after market participants not because they possessed superior information about takeover targets or the progress of takeover deals, but because they have stolen information from employers or business associates. Boesky, Siegal, Levine and the others in the recent scandals have all been engaged in conduct that most agree should be prosecuted by some authority.    These cases are a far cry from the Dirks case, and no doubt reflect the sophisticated perspective of the current SEC commissioners and staff and their concern for financial-market efficiency. Seen in the same light, the SEC's approval of the Boesky sell-off also demonstrates vividly that the agency is currently less concerned with superior information -- which is all that Boesky had in ordering the sell-off -- than with stolen information. The sell-off is an important signal, despite its political fallout, in that it demonstrates a rejection by the agency of the old equal-information theory.    Some have misread the economic view as arguing that even by the strict &quot;stolen-information&quot; criterion, inside-trading investigations such as that which led to Boesky and Levine are not desirable, because they decrease the efficiency of the market, and particularly the incentives for takeover activity by making it more difficult for bidders to share information legally with other market participants. It is true that economists have been concerned that misguided prosecutions, such as Dirks, would make it difficult for bidders voluntarily to share information. But it is a mistake to think that this view endorses theft of information from bidders by arbitragers and investment bankers.    Further, while there will doubtless be some chilling effect on voluntary information-sharing stemming from the current scandal, the free-market view probably exaggerates the potential harm from these prosecutions because that view is based on a false premise. The truth is that as a general rule, leaked information and secret sharing agreements among intermediaries actually harm the efficiency of the takeover market by making it more expensive for a potential acquirer to gain controlling interest in a target firm. Bidders must already contend with expensive and time-consuming disclosure laws, and with considerable market anticipation of bids and significant run-ups in price. Formal agreements between bidding firms and business partners generally mandate strict confidentiality on the part of intermediaries. Thus, while it is certainly true that bidders should be able to share information more freely than they can under current law, the relevance of this concern to the insider-trading issue is probably overstated.    So overall, from an economic standpoint, the SEC's handling of the Boesksy Crabb and Levine cases sends important, salutary signals. The agency appears to be narrowing the definition of insider trading to one that is economically meaningful. The only danger is that the Wall Street scandal will give new courage to those in Congress who would use insider trading as a convenient lever for imposing new restrictions on efficient stock-market activity, and particularly on the market for takeovers. One can only trust that such misguided grandstanding will not be successful.    ---   Mr. Jarrell, until recently the SEC's chief economist, is a fellow at the University of Rochester's business school. Mr. Pound is co-director of the Investor Behavior Project at Yale, and formerly was the SEC's senior financial economist. </TEXT></DOC>