<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871009-0073 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:The Sandinistas Are the Worst Kind of Indian Givers---By Marc Rangel</HL><DD> 10/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   With President Reagan pushed to the ropes by congressional opponents of his Central American policy, the Nicaraguan Sandinista leadership has decided to go for the old one-two by crippling the anti-Marxist guerrilla forces.    Looking for the weakest link in the chain of the resistance movement, the Sandinistas zeroed in on the political orphans of the six-year war against their regime: the Anglo-Indian Miskitos of the Atlantic coast. Since President Daniel Ortega signed the five-nation Arias peace plan in Guatemala City on Aug. 7, his government has been wooing individual Miskito and other Indian guerrilla commanders with offers of amnesty. Last weekend the Sandinistas appeared to have made an important breakthrough.    On Saturday, Interior Minister Tomas Borge, the comandante who controls East Nicaragua, flew to the north port of Puerto Cabezas for a meeting with rebel leader Uriel Vanegas. The 23-year-old Miskito guerrilla commander claims to have led a force of some 400 Indian fighters. Standing on a platform before a crowd of local spectators and some foreign reporters, Mr. Borge announced the signing of a truce agreement that incorporated the Indian rebels into the Sandinista army to fight against other rebel groups and the &quot;imperialist aggression.&quot; Said Mr. Borge, &quot;This is a definitive blow to armed activity on the Atlantic coast.&quot;    But was it?    Immediately after Mr. Borge's speech, the young Miskito guerrilla leader addressed the crowd, and seemed to contradict the comandante. Denying that he and his group planned to join with the Sandinista army against the rebels, Mr. Vanegas told the Associated Press: &quot;We don't support the Sandinistas. . . . This is a gentlemen's agreement. The Sandinistas have their project, with the Soviets or Cubans, or whatever. This is a war of interests.&quot; He also pointedly added that if the American government and the U.S. Congress &quot;had understood us, we could have fought the Sandinistas until the bitter end.&quot;    Armstrong Wiggins, the Miskito-Sumo-Rama Indian representative in Washington, supports Mr. Vanegas's interpretation of the agreement. &quot;Uriel Vanegas is a regional commander for YATAMA,&quot; Mr. Wiggins told me in a telephone interview this week, &quot;and we understand his position. The problem on the Atlantic coast is that we have about 40,000 refugees in Honduras and Costa Rica, and they want to go home. Now, with all the talk of peace generated by the Arias plan, they are pressing their leaders to do something to get them home. The Sandinistas know this, and they have been offering concessions to some of the regional guerrilla commanders.&quot;    YATAMA means &quot;the motherland of a united nation&quot; and is the name given to the coalition of three former Indian guerrilla organizations -- MISURASATA, headed by Brooklyn Rivera; MISURA, headed by Steadman Fagoth; and KISAN, headed by Wycliffe Diego. This long overdue unification took place in June, at a tribal assembly held in the village of Rus Rus, in Honduras's La Mosquitia region. The assembly was attended by 114 delegates from 257 Indian communities in East Nicaragua. After five days of intense and often emotional debate, the leaders of the three rival guerrilla groups agreed to forget their differences and combine their forces.    YATAMA was designed to include not only the Indians of the three original groups, but all the various ethnic groups that are native to the coast -- which means the Creoles, blacks, Chinese and Spanish. &quot;Within the context of the Arias plan,&quot; says Mr. Wiggins, &quot;it is our aim to re-enter East Nicaragua and to campaign for Indian rights, and for the rights of all the other ethnic groups.&quot;    According to individuals within the resistance movement who requested anonymity, YATAMA began indirect, third-party negotiations with the Sandinistas soon after its creation. At that time, President Ortega referred local mediators to Interior Minister Borge, who then offered to allow the Indian refugees and guerrillas to return to their homeland on four conditions: 1) that they should agree to negotiate a peace agreement outside of the Arias plan; 2) that they should accept the modified autonomy plan offered by the Sandinistas (which falls far short of the rights they held under the 1905 Harrison-Altamirano Autonomy Treaty); 3) that they should lay down their weapons; 4) that they should denounce the anti-Sandinista resistance movement of their West Nicaraguan compatriots.    Instead, YATAMA presented its own agenda. Besides the right to organize the regional opposition groups, Mr. Wiggins says: &quot;We want the government to return the Indian radio stations that it confiscated after the revolution, especially Radio VER -- our Miskito educational station -- and the Creole station, Radio Zelaya. We also want them to stop drafting our coastal children into their national army.    &quot;Our aim,&quot; he continues, &quot;is to open up the Atlantic coast to the outside world, so that human-rights groups, the Red Cross and other international humanitarian groups can see the real situation in our homeland for themselves. Peace commissions set up by the Sandinistas mean nothing to us, because Managua is not the coast. These are the serious matters we have to discuss with the Sandinistas.&quot;    The Indians do not trust the Sandinistas, and they abhor Marxism. But with the U.S. Congress wittingly or unwittingly running interference for Managua, and the White House so heavily committed to the Spanish-speaking resistance fighters of West Nicaragua, the Indians believe they have no choice but to try and work out an honorable arrangement with the enemy government that will ensure their ethnic survival. However, as the only native American people who avoided conquest by the 16th-century European invaders and who are proud of their 500 years of tribal independence, the Miskitos and their Sumo and Rama brethren have no intention of rolling over and playing dead for the Marxists in Managua.    Given the Indians' tradition of independence, chances are that should the Sandinistas renege on their promise to respect the Indians' cultural uniqueness within Nicaraguan society, the Miskitos will once more choose the path of guerrilla warfare.    ---   Mr. Rangel is editor of Rangel's Reports, a New York-based information service, and of MNMN, a newsletter for East Nicaraguans in the U.S. </TEXT></DOC>