<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870402-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Vietnam Vets' View on 'Platoon'</HL><DD> 04/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   I take strong exception to James P. Sterba's conclusion in his Feb. 27 editorial-page article that &quot;too many&quot; non-line troops who served in Vietnam don't merit having the film &quot;Platoon&quot; dedicated to them.    Line troops took the brunt of deaths and casualties, and they deserve every accolade we can give them. But hundreds of thousands of others were at risk. I served as a staff officer in Vietnam in 1966-67 with many other non-combat troops. Many were shot, mortared, bombed and ambushed. There was no &quot;front&quot; in Vietnam. People were at risk at fire bases, holding areas, depots and in the cities.    A number of my non-line comrades were killed by enemy action. I am confident that neither the VC who killed them nor the family and friends who survived them would be very interested in learning from Mr. Sterba that the death of a line trooper has more value than that of a staff soldier. In my view, and I believe that of most Americans, the death of each American in Vietnam diminished us all.    Col. Ernest Auerbach   New York   ---   Congratulations, Mr. Sterba. Your article was right on target. Oliver Stone's &quot;Platoon&quot; was &quot;my war.&quot; The Iadrang Valley, Pleiku, Dak To, Tet, Hill 875, C rations, jungle rot, malaria, fatigue, boredom and R andamp; R were all part of my combat experiences.    Perhaps your article will upset many Vietnam vets who were on the periphery of that war, but this II Bravo and my fellow grunts who returned to the world from the 1st Squad, 2nd Platoon, Company B, 1st Battalion, 8th Infantry, 4th Infantry Division know where your words are coming from. Thank you.    John J. Farruggio   Newtown, Pa.   ---   At last some criticism of the much-touted &quot;Platoon.&quot; I applaud Mr. Sterba's article. As a retired Marine who served as a platoon commander in Vietnam, I was not impressed by the film. I recently viewed it with two other retired Marine officers who also served as infantrymen in Vietnam. Although we agreed that there was much realism shown in terrain, uniforms, equipment, as well as heart-stopping battle action scenes, the movie was disappointing.    We adamantly object to the perception with which the average viewer will leave the film: that the platoon portrayed in the film typifies the average rifle platoon in combat. That every platoon perpetrated atrocities against civilians, participated in drug/alcoholic orgies between combat operations; exhibited cowardly and unprofessional behavior, and showed little or no compassion toward the Vietnamese.    Although the war was a tragic page in U.S. history it certainly shouldn't be remembered as the chain-saw Hollywood horror story this movie makes it. To protray the Vietnam veteran as a dope-smoking, disobedient malcontent is a travesty. There were such people, but every war has had its share. We must not forget that there have always been an even greater number who demonstrated skill, professionalism and courage.    Bryan J. Lash   Lawrenceville, Ga.   ---   Should my legs feel bad because they do not digest food or think? Of course not; I am one person with many components, each contributing to the whole. The army is the same; it has multiple needs. It needs to be fed and clothed, rearmed and medicated. All wars require supplies and reports. All soldiers need to be housed, equipped and paid.    Very few soldiers pick their units or their Military Occupational Specialty. The reasons for any individual's assignment are military need, personal qualifications and chance.    My year (1966-67) in Vietnam was spent serving with the 2/7 (Gary Owen), 1st Air Cavalry as a platoon leader and then brigade staff officer (MOS 1542, Infantry Officer). During that time I earned the Combat Infantry Badge and other decorations. I am still proud of my service.    I, for one, would like to thank:    --The typist who filled out the request for replacement sights for our company's mortars;    -- The typist whose reports ensured the continued gas andoil for our vehicles;   --The typist who kept the clinical records in the field hospital when I was wounded;    -- The typist who maintained the intelligence reports onenemy troop movements;   --The typist who completed the personnel records to keep our unit up to strength;    -- The typist who kept the payroll records so I and othersoldiers and their families could receive their payrollallocations;   --The typist who kept the weather reports so we could know the best time for our operations, and,    -- The typist who prepared the records on those of mycomrades who were wounded or who died for their country,those names listed on the Vietnam memorial.   Each of these soldiers contributed at the highest level to his country and I, who carried an M-16, am proud to stand in their company, for without them I, and many of my friends, might not be alive today.    To fully understand the combat-to-support-staff ratio, we have to remember that America was supplying not only the U.S. forces but much of the needs of the Vietnamese, and we also were helping the civilian population. Consider that South Vietnam had been at war for more than 30 years. Then consider that the supply lines reached halfway around the world and it is clear that the support requirements were extraordinary.    George J. Polli   Western Springs, Ill.   ---   Mr. Sterba has effectively expressed a very valid viewpoint. There has been far too much emphasis on the trying conditions of the Vietnam conflict and their psychological impact on the participating U.S. servicemen.    I am a WWII veteran of jungle warfare in North Burma with the British force known as Wingate's Chindits. We operated behind enemy lines under extremely hazardous conditions in the same area as the U.S. Army's Merrill's Marauders.    To my knowledge, there has never been any post-WWII public outcry by these jungle veterans on the harmful effects of their service. In most cases, they have adjusted to normal lives without any disrupting psychological stresses or syndromes. Why can't the Vietnam veterans do likewise?    Tom Kelly   Fountain Valley, Calif.   ---   Of those who served in Vietnam only a minority bore the full brunt. What tragedy it is that they continued to be exploited by politicians, ideologues, opportunists and the media. Nonetheless, each man and woman who served there and survived has left irretrievably something of himself or herself together with the bodies of those comrades who lie in the soil of that betrayed and stricken land. They, in the words of Simonides's epitaph to the fallen of Thermopylae, call out:    &quot;Go tell the Spartans, you who pass by,    That here, obedient to their laws, we lie.&quot;   C.L. Malaney   Port Angeles, Wash.</TEXT></DOC>