<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870305-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN ACKNOWLEDGED that the U.S. swapped arms for hostages.    In a televised address, the president concluded that the initiative &quot;was a mistake.&quot; He assumed responsibility for his failed policies but stopped short of conceding that he had committed errors. He didn't offer an apology. The president denied knowing that proceeds for the arms sales had been diverted to Nicaraguan rebels, and blamed his staff for acting without his knowledge. He also continued to insist that the arms sales were an attempt to foster a strategic opening to Iran.    Reagan, at a White House photo session, condemned as &quot;despicable fiction&quot; reports that his wife was involved in making governmental decisions.    ---   IRANIANS MAY HAVE RECEIVED kickbacks from U.S. arms sales.    Independent counsel Lawrence Walsh is pursuing evidence indicating that senior Iranian officials agreed to pay inflated prices for U.S.-made weapons in return for substantial kickbacks, according to law-enforcement officials. Investigators for Walsh believe that a kickback plot was an integral part of the covert arms transactions with Tehran since the sales began in the summer of 1985, and that the payments continued into 1986.    Contra leader Adolfo Calero appeared before a federal grand jury investigating the finances of his rebel army as part of the panel's Iran-Contra inquiry.    ---   POLLARD WAS SENTENCED to life imprisonment for espionage.    The former Navy employee pleaded guilty last June to passing secret military data to Israel. Pollard claimed he was acting out of concern for Israel's safety and the belief that the U.S. was withholding intelligence from Israel. Prosecutors said the case was one of the most serious breaches of security in U.S. history. Pollard's wife, who pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy, received a five-year prison term.    The White House told Israel that American officials will shun an Israeli air force general who has been charged with espionage in the U.S.    ---   U.S. arms negotiators offered a draft treaty in Geneva for removing midrange missiles from Europe and challenged the Soviets to agree on eliminating such weapons world-wide. A spokesman said the pact embodies tentative accords reached at the U.S.ISoviet summit in Iceland, including a 100-warhead limit for each side.    ---   Italy's Socialist Party indicated that it wouldn't support Christian Democrat Giulio Andreotti to succeed Prime Minister Craxi, who resigned Tuesday after 3 1/2 years in office. A Socialist official said party leaders plan to urge President Cossiga to name someone other than Andreotti, Italy's foreign minister and a five-time premier.    ---   A U.S. judge in Mobile banned the use in nearly all Alabama public school classrooms of 31 textbooks cited for illegally promoting &quot;the religion of secular humanism.&quot; The judge said use of the textbooks by the state violates the Constitution's ban against the establishment of a religion by a state.    ---   Turkish warplanes bombed Kurdish rebel camps and ammunition depots in northern Iraq in retaliation for recent rebel attacks on civilians, a military spokesman in Ankara said. An unconfirmed report said as many as 100 people were killed.    ---   Carlucci plans to urge the White House to devise ways to lessen dependence on imported oil, congressmen said. The national security adviser is expected to seek a presidential directive ordering the NSC to develop a &quot;policy to deal with the national security threat posed by the high levels of imported oil.&quot;    ---   A Soviet literary official said the Kremlin will allow publication of two banned works by Alexander Solzhenitsyn on the life of dissidents in the Soviet Union. The chief editor of the Soviet literary journal Novy Mir said the novel &quot;Cancer Ward&quot; would be issued soon and &quot;The Gulag Archipelago&quot; would be published sometime in the future.    ---   Britain announced that it gave clearance to Wellcome PLC to begin marketing its medicine for treating AIDS. The clearance is the first in the world for the British drug firm's Retrovir; previously, U.S. and European regulators allowed Wellcome only to give it away in trials.    ---   Federal researchers found that the common practice of feeding antibiotics to cattle is helping to create a strain of salmonella that can infect humans and resist medicines. The Centers for Disease Control scientists were able to link food poisoning resulting from the bacteria to dairy farms using a certain antibiotic on their herds.    ---   A twin-engine plane crashed and caught fire while landing at a Detroit airport, killing at least nine people and injuring 20 others, including 10 people on the ground, authorities said. The commuter aircraft, en route to Detroit from Mansfield, Ohio, was carrying 19 people, officials said.    ---   Communist guerrillas accused Philippine President Aquino of &quot;demagoguery and hypocrisy,&quot; saying her peace program was aimed at &quot;enhancing her popularity.&quot; Meanwhile, as a dissident rebel group said it would welcome renewed peace talks, the banned Communist Party called for stepped-up attacks against the government.    ---   Israel's Defense Ministry said officials are examining alternatives to building and marketing the Lavi fighter jet, which opponents contend will exceed a government-imposed budget ceiling. The Jerusalem Post reported that defense officials have told Defense Minister Rabin that they oppose continuing with the project.    ---   Two gunmen critically wounded a Turkish Embassy employee in West Beirut, police said. Details weren't disclosed. Separately, a Christian leader said five kidnapped foreigners, including three Americans and Anglican envoy Terry Waite, were being held by Syrian troops in Lebanon. </TEXT></DOC>