<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880229-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. IS DIVIDED on efforts to escalate pressure to oust Panama's Noriega.    Senior administration officials said the State Department is facing Pentagon resistance over a plan to step up economic and diplomatic pressure on Panama in an attempt to force Noriega from power. The differences are likely to be tested during inter-agency discussions this week that will focus in part on possible trade sanctions. In Panama City, Delvalle remained in hiding after his ouster Friday as president. The move, orchestrated by Noriega, followed Delvalle's attempt Thursday to dismiss the military leader.    As Noriega's opponents prepared for a nationwide general strike today, Catholic priests in Panama's churches read a communique faulting &quot;corruption.&quot;    ---   SHULTZ COMPLETED a first round of talks aimed at a Mideast peace pact.    The secretary of state held a three-hour meeting in Cairo with Egyptian President Mubarak, who reportedly doesn't have any difficulty with the latest U.S. peace initiative. Mubarak, however, didn't formally endorse the plan to end the unrest in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Shultz, who had discussions Saturday in Jordan and Syria, returned to Israel following the meeting in Egypt. While Shultz called the plan &quot;promising,&quot; most participants suggested that the effort was living up to its low expectations.    The Israeli army will court-martial three soldiers for burying alive four Palestinians in the West Bank earlier this month. The Arabs were later rescued.    ---   A Soviet prosecutor said at least two people had been killed during recent unrest in the neighboring republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan. While Moscow Radio reported Saturday that leaders of demonstrations for the redrawing of regional boundaries had suspended the protests for a month, sporadic rallies reportedly were continuing.    ---   Bush's campaign claimed victory in Maine's Republican presidential caucuses. The GOP returns placed Robertson second to the vice president. Dukakis won the Democratic caucuses. Jackson placed second in the state. The caucuses are held to pick delegates to each party's state convention, where national delegates are chosen.    ---   Demonstrators in Bangladesh exploded bombs and set vehicles ablaze to protest parliamentary elections scheduled for Thursday. An opposition official said three people were killed. Anti-government leaders have called for a boycott of the voting, which they contend can't be conducted fairly while President Ershad remains in office.    ---   Anglican Archbishop Tutu called for a sweeping campaign of defiance against South Africa's new restrictions on anti-apartheid groups. Tutu was joined by other religious leaders in urging opposition to the curbs, which prohibit all political activities by the black-led United Democratic Front and other organizations and individuals.    ---   Iraqi jets attacked two Iranian towns in retaliation for Tehran's bombing of a petrochemical plant in Basra and on several border cities. Iran asserted that Iraqi jets killed 21 people Saturday in a raid on a northwestern Kurdish town. Diplomats in Baghdad said they feared a full-scale resumption of attacks on civilian targets by both nations.    ---   Romania has renounced its special U.S. trade benefits rather than accede to demands to liberalize its emigration policies, the State Department said. By giving up its most-favored-nation status, making its exports eligible for the lowest U.S. duties, Romania could lose as much as 32% of its $775 million in annual shipments to the U.S.    ---   Israel's navy sank a boat carrying Palestinian guerrillas who reportedly were planning to attack a coastal town in northern Israel, police in Lebanon said. Two Arabs aboard the vessel were killed, and three others were captured after the boat was intercepted by an Israeli patrol vessel off the southern Lebanese port city of Tyre.    ---   Philippine troops launched a massive &quot;search and destroy&quot; operation in the Bicol region of Luzon following a Saturday attack by communist rebels in which 13 anti-guerrilla troops were killed. The casualties were the highest in a single incident this year, military officials in Manila said.    ---   Opposition candidates accused Senegal President Diouf's Socialist Party of fraud in elections for the presidency and 120-seat National Assembly. Diouf is expected to win a second five-year term. Six people were reported injured during fighting between supporters of rival political parties.    ---   The Olympic Games ended in Calgary, Alberta. Athletes from the Soviet Union won 29 medals, including 11 gold, to become the biggest winners at the 15th Winter Games. The U.S. team captured six of the 288 medals awarded in Canada.    ---   Died: Carl E. Wynn, 92, former chairman of Wynn's International Inc., Friday, in South Laguna, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>