<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870119-0021 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Powerful '386' Personal ComputersShow Promise, but Software Lags---By Paul Duke Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MSFT CPQ INTC IBMCOMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   A powerful and versatile generation of personal computers is beginning to hit the market -- but there are a couple of catches for people thinking of buying one now.    The computers are based on Intel Corp.'s potent new 80386 microchip -- &quot;386,&quot; for short -- the sliver of silicon that performs the computer's operations. This mighty mite not only is faster than anything before it, but it also can perform more than one task at a time.    That means a user could browse through a batch of electronic mail, for example, while the computer recalculates a 100-column ledger sheet. Huge databases -- stockholder or subscriber lists, say -- that once required a small mainframe computer will be manageable in a desktop model. And the vastly increased power will give software writers the freedom to make the programs much easier to use than present versions.    &quot;These new models are the most important computer products in years,&quot; says Seymour Merrin, a vice president in charge of personal-computer research at the Gartner Group in Stamford, Conn.    But there's a major drawback: Software that takes full advantage of the machines' extra power doesn't exist yet, and probably won't for as many as three years. Another consideration is that, as usual with new technologies, the 386s are more expensive than previous advanced models -- and more expensive than 386s will probably be in only a few months. Finally, International Business Machines Corp. hasn't unveiled its 386 model yet; that could make potential buyers uneasy, since the industry giant usually shakes up any market it enters.    Still, the new machines do offer one immediate advantage: speed. They run the same software currently used in millions of personal computers at three to four million instructions a second -- two to three times faster than their speediest predecessors. David L. Lee, manager of the information center at M.W. Kellogg, an engineering and construction company in Houston, says the company is already using 386-based personal computers to do computations it previously reserved for minicomputers.    Beyond speed, the 386 also has more power than has ever been available in a personal computer. The chips in the most advanced personal computers until now, the IBM PC AT and its imitators, can potentially &quot;address&quot; up to 16 million bytes or pieces of information. That means the computer can directly handle databases or texts with up to 16 million characters. The 386 chip can directly address four billion bytes. In addition, the 386 can perform a more sophisticated form of &quot;multitasking&quot; -- computer jargon for the ability to do a number of tasks simultaneously -- than previous chips.    Together, the 386's prodigious abilities should for the first time make complicated artificial intelligence, engineering and design programs truly workable on personal computers.    But not soon. Microsoft Corp., the big software company that is writing an operating system for the 386, may not be finished before the end of 1988. (For one thing, Microsoft coders are still working on an operating system for the IBM AT, which uses Intel's older 286 chip.) Other operating systems that tap some but not all of the 386's talents will be available earlier.    In any case, applications software that takes full advantage of the 386's new abilities must fit &quot;on top&quot; of the operating system, so writers can't begin work in earnest until the operating system is ready. The upshot, according to Ed Esber, chairman of Ashton-Tate, the software company known for dBase electronic filing programs, is that it could be two to three years before software specifically aimed at the 386 machines is available in quantity. Until then 386s are just fast at running current software.    Fast and expensive. Compaq Computer Corp., the largest manufacturer so far to have brought out a 386-based computer, sells its Model 40, with a 40-megabyte hard disk, for $6,499. With a monitor and other essential accessories, the price is close to $8,000 -- 40% to perhaps 100% higher (compared with low-priced &quot;clones&quot; of IBM's models) than the next step down in performance, the AT-class machines.    If past is prologue, however, the market is sure to be flooded soon with clones of Compaq's 386 machine at lower prices. Scores of manufacturers claim they are developing computers built around the 386 chip.    For example, Multitech Electronics Inc., in Sunnyvale, Calif., says it will begin shipping in March a copy of Compaq's Model 40 at about a 40% lower price. PC's Limited, a clone-maker in Austin, Texas, says it will ship this quarter a 386 computer that is faster than Compaq's at a price slightly higher than the Multitech machine.    But even a wide choice of inexpensive and dependable clones wouldn't resolve the biggest uncertainty for consumers: IBM. In the past five years, personal-computer manufacturers have let IBM make the risky first moves, then scrambled to copy IBM's models at a far lower price. Consumers knew they were buying the IBM standard even if they weren't buying IBM.    Without an IBM 386 machine to copy, companies like Compaq are betting that the industry standard won't change significantly when IBM brings out its machine; so any software that is eventually developed for the IBM machine will also run on the new crop of 386 computers. IBM isn't saying when it will enter the market; speculation runs anywhere from this month to mid-year and beyond. Anyway, &quot;the standard now exists independently of IBM,&quot; suggests Rod Canion, Compaq president.    As these companies see it, the IBM PC line of computers is by now so entrenched and so much software has been written for it, that even if IBM were to stop making computers tomorrow others would pick up the IBM standard. David Carnevale, director of microsystems research at market researcher InfoCorp., notes that &quot;IBM sold lots of ATs simply because they were four times as fast as the PC. Since the 386 runs all the software for previous models it will still be useful as an even-faster AT.&quot; Compaq said in November it had shipped 10,000 386-based computers (which were introduced in September) to dealers.    Also, some of the most important companies in the computer industry -- Microsoft, for instance -- are supporting Compaq in its move. &quot;I don't see any great risk that buyers will be left behind,&quot; says Judy Mertz, manager of the Moore Business Center retail computer outlet in Dallas.    But, IBM could -- and probably will -- throw a few curve balls into its 386 machine. Kirk Roden, sales manager at the MicroAge store in Berkeley, Calif., says industry rumors have IBM altering the keyboard, the graphics and perhaps the basic operations of the 386 chip, which might require a different operating system. IBM might make these proprietary features hard to duplicate, if only because it has taken a beating from low-priced clones that copied its PC line.    IBM won't talk about any of this. But once IBM does produce a contender, it could be six months or more before other computer makers incorporate any IBM modifications. Of course it's also possible the market will reject IBM's changes.    In the meantime, Mr. Roden says he recommends the 386-based machines only to so-called &quot;power-users,&quot; whose big data bases or fancy graphics jobs overburden 286-based personal computers. </TEXT></DOC>