<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870901-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Market Outperforms FAA as Air-Safety Enforcer---By Andrew Chalk</HL><DD> 09/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AIRLINES (AIR)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><TEXT>   In the wake of last month's crash of Northwest Flight 255 in Detroit, statistics are being produced that bear out the old saying that it is more dangerous to drive to the airport than to fly to another country.    Two arguments are generally invoked. The first is that the regulation of airlines and aircraft manufacturers by the Federal Aviation Administration is the principal mechanism that ensures safety. In an unregulated market, it is claimed, airlines and manufacturers would skimp on safety precautions to reduce costs. For obvious reasons, proponents of this &quot;market-failure&quot; view of air safety generally favor more regulation and more stringent enforcement.    The second argument holds that although consumers lack the technical expertise to measure the inputs to safety provision, they can measure the output: fewer accidents. If consumers are informed about accidents for which an airline or an aircraft manufacturer is considered culpable, they can avoid riskier airlines and aircraft and choose safer ones. The crucial point is that airlines and aircraft manufacturers, anticipating the effect of such substitutions on the bottom line, take safety precautions. This is the &quot;market-response&quot; view.    Without a doubt, the market-failure view of air safety has far more support in Congress, at the FAA, and among journalists and legal scholars than the market-response view. But is there any justification for its widespread and deeply ingrained support? An extensive search of the literature from Congress, the FAA and individual commentators yielded an astonishing finding: Proponents of the market-failure view have cited remarkably little hard evidence to support their claim that the FAA, not the market, deserves credit for being the principal source of the high incidence of safety in commercial air travel.    To assess how well regulation has worked, I studied the FAA's rule-making, enforcement and certification activities to see whether I could demonstrate that the agency has a major impact on safety.    Rule making is the FAA's principal regulatory activity. A surprising finding was a pattern of systematic overcompliance with the Federal Air Regulations (FARs) that set minimum standards for large jet aircraft. The airlines regard them as &quot;bare bones&quot; requirements and typically exceed the FARs on instrumentation and navigation equipment and on maintenance, training, data recording and flying procedures.    Likewise, aircraft manufacturers have pushed the technological frontier years ahead of FAR standards. The Boeing 747 and all of the third-generation airliners, including the McDonnell Douglas MD-80, the Boeing 757 and the Boeing 767, exceed the FAA's fire-prevention standards, which were established in 1952.    Although the airlines generally overcomply with the FAA's regulations on equipment and procedures, it is possible that without a central agency as an enforcer, their day-to-day operations would slip below legal standards. In practice, however, the agency's enforcement isn't very stringent. The FAA rules that affect air carriers, for instance, are enforced by about 210 inspectors. They are responsible for monitoring the work of 50,000 mechanics employed by more than 100 airlines that operate 3,000 aircraft.    A more complete picture of the FAA's impact can be obtained by analyzing its output. That is, when it discovers a safety violation, does it levy penalties sufficient to prevent the repetition of the practice? The principal penalty through which the FAA attempts to ensure compliance with its rule by air carriers is fines. But the FAA's deterence policy falls short of being economically rational; the maximum fine the agency can levy is $1,000, the amount that was established in 1938. Even though it cumulates fines as if an offense had occurred each day, the low ceiling, coupled with the minimal inspection forces, severely blunts the effectiveness of its sanctions. Earlier this year, Eastern Airlines received record fines totaling $9.5 million for 78,000 maintenance violations.    Besides imposing low fines, the agency indicts very few airlines and imposes very few fines.    Although it is widely known that every new type of aircraft must be certified by the FAA, few people know exactly what the process involves. It is widely believed that the FAA rechecks every detail of an aircraft's design and reenacts the thousands of engineering tests performed by the manufacturer, but that is not so. The FAA does test fly a plane immediately before commercial production, but during the design stage the agency is involved only at arm's length. The hundreds of systems on an aircraft are checked by employees of the manufacturer known as designated engineering representatives. They operate under a kind of honor system, and their approval constitutes official certification, although the FAA can reject a design at a later date. Likewise, the manufacturer performs all of the engineering tests and submits the results to the FAA.    The evidence on rule making, enforcement and certification presents a puzzle: If the FAA's regulatory activities are too ineffective to explain the safety precautions taken by airlines and aircraft manufacturers, why is the safety record of air travel so impressive? The answer lies elsewhere -- in the workings of the market.    A number of market mechanisms play important roles in producing air safety. Liability and aircraft-hull insurance brokers impose higher premium costs on firms with worse safety records. The role of insurance in inducing precautions has been thoroughly documented. In addition, the monitoring of safety investments by flight crews substitutes for consumer monitoring to some extent.    Much less appreciated is the role that the reputation of an aircraft or an airline plays in producing safety. Consumers may know very little about a company's maintenance procedures, equipment and other air-safety measures, but they react very strongly to events such as crashes, particularly if there has been a series of incidents involving the same airline or aircraft.    The best proxy for market discipline in this area is likely to be stock prices. Taking as a sample all 72 crashes in the U.S. from 1966 to 1979 that involved fatalities on aircraft produced by the three major manufacturers (Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and Lockheed), I tested for a stock-market response to air travelers' safety worries. The data indicate that when a crash was perceived to be unrelated to the design of an aircraft, there was no change in the manufacturer's share price. But when press reports indicated that the design of a plane may have been a cause, the manufacturer's share price decreased and did not recover. In such cases, the share prices dropped an average 3.8%. That difference in the share-price response is striking evidence that the loss of reputation that follows a fatal crash for which the manufacturer appears culpable imposes large costs on the firm. (It is too soon to judge the effect, if any, on Northwest and other airlines that have been the subject of recent safety concerns.)    The implications for policy of the information cited above are twofold. First, the FAA should give more serious consideration to the role of market mechanisms and revise its rule-making process accordingly. It might enhance those mechanisms by helping to increase the free flow of information to consumers. Second, the FAA should concentrate its enforcement efforts in areas in which consumer information is least available and the market is least likely to function smoothly.    ---   Mr. Chalk is an assistant professor of finance at Southern Methodist University's Cox School of Business. This is adapted from an article in Cato Policy Report. </TEXT></DOC>