<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Islam on the Move -- Mosque and State:As Moslem Zeal Rises,Egypt Under MubarakAvoids Confrontation---It Counts on Its DemocracyTo Deflect the DemandsFor Islamic Government---In the Other Hand, a Stick---By Youssef M. IbrahimStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   Egypt, the only Arab nation with the size and power to balance Iran's militant Moslem theocracy, faces a shift toward Islamic fundamentalism among its own people. This article assesses the vulnerability of U.S. ally Hosni Mubarak's government. Another article looks at how successive Egyptian regimes have co-opted Al Azhar university, the seat of moderate Islam. {See related story: &quot;Prestigious Al Azhar Is a Force for Moderation&quot; -- WSJ Aug. 10, 1987}    CAIRO, Egypt -- Only 27 years old, his worn brown trousers and yellowing shirt drooping on his slight frame, &quot;Hashem&quot; doesn't look like a terrorist on the run.    But hardened by three years in jail and twice that long underground, he has risen to become a leader of Egypt's hounded Islamic organization Al Jihad, or the Struggle. His colleagues carried out the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in 1981, the subsequent slaughter of 150 Egyptian policemen in the Nile city of Asyut and several attempts on the lives of government officials.    An anemic-looking man, he strokes a sparse auburn beard, keeping an eye on the crowd milling about a fenced garden. He chose the place for this clandestine meeting to speak about his cause: Islamic revolution in Egypt.    &quot;Every day we are presenting martyrs in the struggle against this atheist regime,&quot; he says. &quot;And every day, despite the torture and the killing, we get dozens of new recruits. It's a matter of time. The regime is broken. It will lose.&quot; When the interview ends, he disappears into the shimmering heat of a Cairo summer, leaving behind a fake name and no telephone number.    A mile away, Ma'moun al-Hodeibi doesn't use an alias. The graying editor of Al Dawaa, the newspaper of the Moslem Brotherhood, meets an outsider at its busy downtown headquarters.    The Moslem Brotherhood has survived waves of persecution since it began in Egypt in the 1920s. Though still officially banned, it was allowed to run candidates for Egypt's parliament this year, and Mr. al-Hodeibi won a seat. A former fugitive and a former political prisoner, he shares the same yearning for Islamic government as &quot;Hashem.&quot; But unlike Al Jihad, the Brotherhood thinks Egypt can be won over by persuasion.    &quot;Our plan is to educate people in Islamic ways, and we see success all around,&quot; Mr. al-Hodeibi says. &quot;Women are wearing the veil in increasing numbers. The high-society set of cocktail parties and nightclubs has been shamed into hiding. Islamic businesses are overflowing with money. It is clear the majority of the people of Egypt want Islam.&quot;    The shifting mood in Egypt is being watched with fascination and apprehension in Western and Arab capitals. Well over a third of the world's Arabs live within its borders, and historically Egypt has set the Arab cultural and political agenda. Its peace with Israel may have been condemned by other Mideast nations, but it transformed their situation and made another war all but impossible. With a population of 50 million, roughly equal to Iran's, Egypt stands as the only regional power that can balance the ayatollah's militant throngs.    But in the past two years, an Islamic revival has taken root throughout Egypt, too. It has gained momentum this year as the country reeled from the effects of the sharp fall in oil prices, which only recently began to recover. New adherents to Islamic fundamentalism come from the universities, the professional middle class and the bureaucracies. Businessmen and oldline politicians are among them.    Egyptian governments once suppressed Moslem fundamentalists with a combination of force and appeals to secularism. Today, Egypt confronts the movement with few constraints and little opposing ideology.    Citizens who had to whisper political thoughts 20 years ago now are free to choose from among more than 50 opposition newspapers and magazines, hundreds of new political books a year and at least six political parties. They are free to choose, too, from a tidal wave of cassettes of sermons by self-anointed religious leaders.    It is a freedom President Hosni Mubarak is counting on to contain the fundamentalist resurgence.    Hundreds of tapes from a prayer leader named Sheik Kishk are available at streetside kiosks. &quot;You simply ask for the one about Mrs. Sadat or the one about the Copts or the one about President Sadat and so on,&quot; says Farag Ali Foda, a consulting engineer and leading proponent of secular government. Every political party except the Communists and Socialists has started an Islamic publication, even the governing National Democratic Party.    Adding to the fundamentalists' pressure are the millions flowing into their programs. An important source is investment companies set up to handle deposits from Moslems in accordance with Islamic law.    The contributions help create what is in effect a parallel social-welfare system independent of the state. It includes Islamic hospitals, schools and day-care centers where believers receive services superior to what the exhausted Egyptian economy can offer. In Suez, for instance, Sheik Hafez Salameh uses his Islamic Guidance Corp. to operate health-care centers and three schools. Many of those who benefit are won for the fundamentalist cause.    Fundamentalist sympathizers in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates contribute millions as well. Sheik Salameh says his group has received donations from &quot;kings, princes and rulers.&quot; Mr. Foda, a man the Islamic movement identifies as an enemy, says, &quot;All gulf money coming here is coming attached to Saudi values, like the veil, the beards, the Islamic propaganda. We are in the petro-Islam era.&quot;    With so much activity, says Fahmy Howeidi, a writer close to fundamentalist circles, &quot;The Islamic body has grown beyond the scope of one movement or even that of specific organizations. It is outside of organized (state) religion, outside of religious institutions and parceled out among several wings of civilians everywhere, who reinforce each other, contradict each other or compete with one another.&quot;    To try to stop it, he adds, the government would have to jail hundreds of thousands. A wiser course, most opponents say, is to let the debate continue in the open.    For the moment, only those Moslem leaders who advocate force against the government face the harsh side of Mr. Mubarak's regime. That side is an Emergency Law that permits holding suspects for two months without charge. It tends to make converts of people who hadn't been so extreme.    Youssef Saqr, a 51-year-old lawyer who has defended many Jihad members, was arrested in front of his wife and children on May 11, following an attempt on the life of a former cabinet minister. The government contends the Jihad was behind the attack. Mr. Saqr says he was put in Cairo's Abu Zaabal prison and locked up with two others for 12 hours at a stretch in a windowless cell so tiny they had to take turns lying down. During his 10-day detention he claims to have seen inmates beaten, prodded with electric rods and suspended from hands tied behind their backs.    &quot;Violence breeds violence,&quot; he says, and a xenophobic, anti-Western attitude. &quot;The West has been diligently telling Egypt to watch out that it doesn't become another Iran.&quot;    Egypt, Mr. Saqr complains, &quot;is dotted with spots of corruption and rot, these tourist attractions we are putting up for those Westerners, like Magawish (a Club Med resort on the Red Sea) where women are naked. . . . We are governed by thugs in the employ of the Zionists and the West.&quot; In fact, Egypt doesn't allow nude bathing at tourist resorts.    Islamic fundamentalists, moderates as well as extremists, resent the government's and the West's hostility to Iran. In their minds, Khomeini is fighting both Western and Communist influences for the sake of Islam.    Beyond that, most Egyptian Moslems are annoyed that Islam has a negative image in the West, observers here say. S. Abdullah Schleifer, an American who converted to Islam and has lived in the Mideast for years, says he sees in many Westerners an &quot;irrational fear&quot; of all things Islamic and an attempt to impose Western values on a different society.    &quot;The West must accept that Egypt can only draw its moral strength from its own heritage,&quot; says Mr. Schleifer, a former NBC Mideast bureau chief and now a professor at the American University in Cairo. &quot;People here want technology from America, not anguished existential thoughts and sexually liberated values. What they like about America are old-fashioned values, like hard work and clean living.&quot;    In the lively religious-secular debate absorbing Egypt today, fundamentalists capitalize on the economic distortions left by President Gamal Abdel Nasser's state socialism and President Sadat's corrupting Western-style consumerism. These and the burden remaining from three wars with Israel combine with the fall in oil revenue to sap Mr. Mubarak's heroic efforts to reform Egypt's economy.    His government faces nearly $4 billion a year in interest costs on its foreign debt and an annual food-subsidy bill of $6 billion to feed the poor. It is hobbled by a hopelessly corrupt bureaucracy and one of the world's fastest-growing populations. The U.S. sends some $3 billion a year in grants and loans, but, says a senior adviser to the prime minister, &quot;it isn't enough and is capriciously dispensed.&quot;    Against these national problems, as well as personal burdens like unaffordable housing and unemployment in spite of education, fundamentalists appeal to a tired people with a simple slogan: &quot;Islam is the solution.&quot;    As &quot;Hashem&quot; puts it, Islam would replace democracy, &quot;the rule of man by man,&quot; with Sharia, &quot;the rule of man by God.&quot; Sharia, Islamic law, prescribes rules for everything in life, from dress to economic management.    An increasing number of harassed, financially hard-pressed people, particularly of the middle class, are convinced Sharia would be a panacea. It would put an end to interest payments, they say; Sharia forbids them. It would stop corruption and loose morals, they argue; under Sharia, a thief's hand is cut off, a drinker is flogged, an adulterer is stoned. Even clothing would be cheaper, as there would be no pursuit of fashion.    Two years ago, fundamentalist pilots of Egyptair, the national airline, announced they would no longer fly planes serving liquor. Some employees of the tax-free shop at Cairo's airport joined in by refusing to handle liquor. Egyptair sued and won, yet it can't apply the court's ruling uniformly because of resistance among employees.    Fundamentalists have taken over several public gardens in Cairo and other cities to build mosques. Some censors in Egypt's national television have taken it upon themselves to snip scenes of kissing and drinking out of movies. A civil judge, Mahmoud Abdelhamid Ghorab, issues judgments that conform with Sharia, including ordering the severing of thieves' hands. While his sentences haven't been carried out, neither has he been removed from office.    &quot;The problem in this country is that we have a government that doesn't dare to say no to people who break the law,&quot; contends Mr. Foda, the proponent of secular government. He believes the fundamentalists &quot;are eating away at public order.&quot;    In the midst of this storm stands President Mubarak, who as vice president saw his predecessor riddled by Jihad bullets as the two men reviewed a military parade. Despite taunting from the fundamentalists, the president sticks with democracy, backed by a formidable government machine, a 500,000-man army, a police force of 300,000 -- and the powers of the Emergency Law. Also working in his favor is a strong margin of support in parliament and widespread admiration among Egyptians for his integrity.    Many Egyptians and foreign diplomats in Cairo believe that if the Islamic fundamentalist assassination attempts continue -- there were three in one month this summer -- Mr. Mubarak will unleash his repressive machine to liquidate all opposition. &quot;I think if it came to that, there is no question half of the Islamic movement would land in jail,&quot; says Mr. Howeidi.    But the president would take such a step with great reluctance. &quot;He thinks Sadat stood as an oak in the face of this wave, where if he had been a reed it would have passed,&quot; says a long-serving Western diplomat. &quot;He knows the best thing to do with a wave isn't to try to push it back -- just hang on.&quot;    Adds the prime minister's adviser: &quot;We can take the assassination attempts. They are a small wound.&quot;    President Sadat wouldn't tolerate dissent from his visionary views and insisted on imperial treatment, but Mr. Mubarak has a modest manner and looks to technocrats for solutions. &quot;Most Egyptians like him, because they think it's high time we had a president who put Egypt first before his imperial dreams,&quot; says Laila Takla, a professor and member of parliament.    Those who know the president say he is betting that the entry of the fundamentalists into the democratic process, such as the parliament this year, will be their undoing.    &quot;The question facing the fundamentalists,&quot; says the prime minister's adviser, &quot;is to show Egypt how they propose to solve our problems. Can they get us money from international banks or other countries without interest? Can they cancel the peace accord with Israel and throw this country back to war? Can they shut down the tourist income by imposing their liquor and dress rules? Can Egypt take it? I don't think so, and people will see that for themselves. The support will melt away.&quot;    &quot;Hashem&quot; doesn't see it this way. He says the Islamic underground has already infiltrated the army and the police. &quot;We have penetrated them and they have penetrated us, but we are ahead,&quot; he says. &quot;This army and this police will be shamed into backing away from confrontation.&quot;    To this day, he says, Jihad is led from a prison cell by Aboud al-Zumr, a colonel serving a long term for organizing the Sadat assassination. &quot;He has smuggled three cassettes, and letters and instructions go back and forth all the time,&quot; says the revolutionary, who adds that two assistants run Jihad cells in the south of Egypt and the Delta region, also from inside prison. They are Nageh Ibrahim Abdullah and Kamal al-Said.    &quot;Hashem&quot; says the Jihad cells now total several thousand young men. &quot;These are hardened cadres, many of which have security officers to ensure against police infiltration,&quot; he says. &quot;Many have been to jail and tortured. We aren't amateurs anymore.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>