<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0040 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Stock-Index Prices Decline on ConcernAbout Weakening Bond Prices, Dollar---By Robert L. RoseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FRESTCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PETROLEUM (PET)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN><TEXT>   Stock-index futures prices tumbled in late trading as traders and investors succumbed to worries about falling bond prices and the weak dollar.    Meanwhile, interest-rate futures again declined on fears that the dollar's slide will reignite inflation. Those fears helped lift precious metal futures, though.    Many market participants were hoping that index futures and stocks could march to their own tune, unaffected by the recent sharp decline in bonds and the dollar, analysts and traders said. And, in fact, the futures and stocks performed relatively well Friday and early yesterday.    However, as bonds failed to rebound from the sharp declines Thursday and Friday, many stock-index futures traders gave in and sold their positions late yesterday.    &quot;It's all offers right now, all offers,&quot; said J.R. Fredericks as the futures contract on Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index skidded in late trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. With many traders offering to sell stock-index futures, there was almost no buying interest, said Mr. Fredericks, himself an analyst and trader.    &quot;It was as panicky as I've ever seen it over here,&quot; he said after the market closed.    In the cash market, the Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 51.71 to 2287.07.    As the stock market fell, portfolio insurance strategies called for selling stock-index futures as a hedge, said John Andrea, program trader at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. The selling, though, narrowed premiums of the Sandamp;P-index futures over the index itself and led to programs to sell stocks and buy back futures.    Noting index futures prices still closed at sharp discounts to the indexes themselves, Mr. Andrea said selling pressure could continue this morning.    The only large orders to buy the futures in late trading came from arbitrage traders buying back futures positions as they were selling stocks, said Leigh Stevens, stock-index futures analyst at PaineWebber Inc. in New York. He estimated that as many as 30 such futures-related programs took place.    Although the late selling involved arbitrage-related program trading, the news background was not good.    The dollar's slide has ignited fears about inflation and tighter monetary conditions. The Commodity Research Bureau's futures price index, a measure of inflation expectations, rose 1.20 to 215.33 yesterday.    Gold, silver and platinum futures rose for the seventh time in the past nine sessions amid continued strong speculator demand, analysts and traders said. &quot;There's a wider base of investor interest in precious metals now than we've seen for at least five years,&quot; said Dennis Suskind, partner in charge of metals at J. Aron andamp; Co. in New York. Also, &quot;when the dollar fell below 145 yen, the metals were considered an especially good play,&quot; a New York trader said.    Gold for April delivery on the Commodity Exchange in New York rose $4.10 an ounce, to $437.10; May silver surged six cents an ounce to $6.865. Meanwhile, on the New York Mercantile Exchange, April platinum climbed $8.40 an ounce to $584.50.    Participants in the financial futures markets are expected to react quickly to this morning's report on the merchandise trade deficit for February. A figure considered bearish for the dollar could hurt interest-rate futures and put further pressure on index futures. A bullish figure could help calm the jittery markets.    Michael Ballow, currency futures analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago, said a trade deficit that is more than $15 billion would be considered bearish for the dollar, while any figure less than $12 billion would lend it support.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices briefly slipped below $18 a barrel for the first time in a month amid concerns about slight overproduction by the oil cartel. However, most oil futures recovered later in the day to post modest gains. Traders said some selling early in the session stemmed from a news service report that quoted a Kuwaiti newspaper that said the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries recently exceeded its output quota. The Al-Qabas Daily said total OPEC output last week averaged 1.4 million barrels a day above the cartel's 15.8 million barrel ceiling. Some traders and analysts scoffed at the report, suggesting that it may be a political ploy by the Kuwaitis to mask their own overproduction within the cartel. &quot;The numbers seem totally preposterous,&quot; said a New York trader. Still, the choppy trading highlighted the current uncertainty in the market. &quot;Traders are a little jittery; this is a delicate time for the market,&quot; said John Hill, head of energy research at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc. in New York. Short covering, or buying contracts to offset those sold earlier, led to price gains late in the day, traders said. Crude oil for May delivery on the New York Merc closed down 10 cents a barrel to $18.01, while June crude closed one cent higher at $17.71. Heating oil and unleaded gasoline futures also closed slightly higher. Texaco's filing for Chapter 11 protection had little effect on prices, analysts said.    COTTON: Futures advanced strongly after rising their two-cent-a-pound daily limit Friday. On the New York Cotton Exchange, the May contract rose 1.77 cents a pound to settle at 60.95 cents a pound. The July contract rose the daily limit during the session but fell back slightly, and other contracts generally settled just slightly under their highest levels of the day. Buying continued to be stimulated by the U.S. government's reduced estimate of Chinese cotton supplies, which had been perceived as burdensome, analysts said. According to the U.S. April report, world cotton supplies for the 1986-87 season, which began Aug. 1, were cut to about 45.9 million bales from 48.1 million estimated in the March report. Mill use, or consumption, was put at 80.7 million bales, compared with about 77.1 million estimated in the previous report. The greater consumption would reduce July 31 year-end stocks to 34.2 million bales, compared with almost 40 million estimated in the March report, analysts said. The estimate of Chinese supplies at the start of the current year was reduced to 16 million bales in the April report, compared with 18.3 million bales estimated in March. Chinese year-end supplies, according to the latest report, will be a little more than nine million bales, compared with 14.6 million forecast in the March report. The expected reduction is tied to the greater Chinese mill use estimated in the current report, which forecasts consumption of 21 million bales, compared with 17.5 million in the March report. Also bolstering the market was an Agriculture Department export-sales report that estimated net sales for the week ended April 2 at 60,200 bales, almost double the 31,900 bales sold the previous week. Traders had expected the latest report would be little changed from the previous one, analysts said.    COFFEE: Futures again rose, mostly because of technical considerations. On the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange in New York, the May contract rose 3.73 cents a pound to close at $1.0997. Friday the contract failed to exceed $1.08, regarded as a key resistance level, but during yesterday's session it climbed past $1.10 to the contract's highest level in a month. The futures market has remained firm after declining to around $1 a pound recently, and traders who had sold short bought back contracts yesterday. Also, some believe most of the price-depressing news, particularly the bearish supply situation, has been absorbed by traders. More restrained selling by producing countries also has supported futures prices, analysts said. Some analysts and industry executives, though, caution that the weight of recent purchases will be felt when the coffee starts arriving in the U.S.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Nearer-term contracts for pork bellies continued to gain after advancing the daily limit Friday. A combination of good demand and tight supplies of deliverable bellies boosted prices of the contracts, analysts said. Charles Levitt, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers in Chicago, estimated that the supply of bellies in cold storage as of April 1 was down about 36% from yearearlier levels. &quot;The market has been looking at this tremendous decline,&quot; Mr. Levitt said, &quot;and pondering whether increased hog numbers by later this summer will make up the difference.&quot; Most hog and cattle futures prices were lower on profit-taking following last week's gains. </TEXT></DOC>