<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Decide States Can Deny BenefitsTo Women Leaving Jobs for Pregnancy---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR JCP IPENVIRONMENT (ENV)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled unanimously that federal law permits states to deny unemployment compensation to women who give up their jobs because of pregnancy.    The high court upheld a Missouri law that denies unemployment benefits to all employees who leave work for reasons that aren't caused by the job itself. Under Missouri law, for example, layoffs or illness caused by a job would be considered work-related; pregnancy isn't viewed as a job-related reason for leaving.    By an 8-0 vote, the high court ruled that a federal law passed in 1976 says pregnant women can't be singled out for less-favorable treatment than other workers who seek jobless benefits. The law doesn't say pregnant women must be treated better, the court said in an opinion written by Justice Sandra O'Connor.    Estimates of the number of states with laws similar to Missouri's vary. The Supreme Court mentioned Oklahoma and Vermont, while the lawyer for the woman challenging the Missouri law listed Vermont, Minnesota, North Dakota and the District of Columbia.    The ruling involves different federal and state laws from last week's 6-3 decision that states may require employers to give disability leave and to guarantee job reinstatement to pregnant women.    Last week's ruling said that federal civil rights law didn't bar the states from requiring that pregnant women be given disability leave, while the decision yesterday involves the federal unemployment law and whether it requires states to provide jobless benefits to pregnant women who leave work. The court yesterday made no mention at all of the decision last week.    Last week, the justices went out of their way to say that the California law didn't really require preferential treatment for women; the law simply made women equal in the work place. In yesterday's ruling, however, the court said that interpreting federal law to require unemployment benefits for pregnant women would discriminate against other unemployed persons for whom benefits aren't required.    The lawsuit was filed by Linda Wimberly, a J.C. Penney Co. cashier who took a leave of absence to have a baby in 1980. Missouri law doesn't require reinstatement, and when she wanted to return to work one month after her baby was born, the company said there was no job available. Her unemployment claim was rejected by the state, and the Missouri Supreme Court upheld the denial of benefits.    The high court's ruling upheld the Reagan administration's interpretation of the federal law.    Justice Harry Blackmun didn't participate in the case and gave no explanation.    Water-Pollution Suits   The justices ruled 9-0 that a company that is located in one state and pollutes interstate waters can be sued in the courts of another state affected by the pollution. But the lawsuit must be decided based on the laws of the state from which the pollution came, rather than based on the affected state's law, the court said in a 5-4 vote.    The opinion written by Justice Lewis Powell said that applying one state's pollution laws to a polluting company in another state would interfere with federal water-pollution standards and enforcement.    The ruling came in a lawsuit filed by Vermont and some of its residents in state court in Vermont. The suit alleged that an International Paper Co. mill on the New York side of Lake Champlain was discharging waste into the lake, polluting interstate waters.    The Supreme Court rejected the company's argument that only federal law should apply to the case, and rejected the state's claim that Vermont law should apply. As a result of the ruling, Vermont may continue the lawsuit, but New York law will govern the case.    Justices William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall, Harry Blackmun and John Stevens agreed that some state lawsuits are allowed under the federal law, but disagreed that New York law must be applied.    Annexing Voting Areas   The justices ruled 6-3 that a city's refusal to annex a largely black neighborhood when it does annex a white neighborhood may violate the federal voting rights law. The court upheld a federal court's refusal to approve a proposed annexation by the city of Pleasant Grove, Ala. The Justice Department had also refused to approve the city's plan.    The voting rights law requires some cities and states to obtain the department's approval before making any changes that affect voting rights. The city argued that proposed annexations during the 1970s of a white area and an unoccupied area that the city intended for white housing didn't change voting rights of minorities because the city had an all-white population at the time.    But the Supreme Court, giving broad meaning to the law, said the annexations of white areas could be seen as an effort to minimize the likely impact of future black voters, which is &quot;as impermissible a purpose as the dilution of present black voting strength.&quot;    Justices Powell, O'Connor and Chief Justice William Rehnquist dissented. </TEXT></DOC>