<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH TESTIFIED that Casey was a driving force in Iran-Contra operations.    The Marine officer and former White House aide, in his second day of public testimony before congressional Iran-Contra panels, said the late CIA director embraced the plan to divert arms-sale proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels when it was first proposed in January 1986. North said a secret White House fund he used was set up at Casey's urging, and that Casey instructed him to destroy a Contra disbursement ledger when the operation began unraveling. North's account contradicts statements by Casey.    A House panel voted to override Meese and subpoena U.S. prosecutors to testify whether administration aides backed drug traffic to aid the Contras.    ---   THE HOUSE VOTED to delay for 90 days U.S. escorts of 11 Kuwaiti oil tankers.    The Senate, however, is resisting and is likely to clear the measure only in non-binding form. The escort plan, due to start in mid-July, calls for one ship to shuttle oil through the Persian Gulf to others outside. The White House denied any dispute with Kuwait over the plan's scope, as Rep. Aspin (D., Wis.) had charged, but said Kuwait wanted to charter two more U.S. oil ships.    Iraq said its warplanes attacked Iran's main gulf oil terminal at Kharg Island for the second day in a row. It also fired on a ship off Iran's coast.    ---   Marcos was barred from leaving Hawaii and warned against engaging in a plot to destabilize President Aquino's government. The warning was delivered by State Department legal adviser Sofaer, and a U.S. official said the suspicions of a plot were raised by a taped discussion between the former Philippine president and an arms dealer.    ---   Hindus retaliated for terrorist attacks by Sikh separatists by killing seven Sikhs, injuring 21 and burning shops in several northern India states. Sikh rebels killed 74 Hindu bus passengers in three raids this week. Prime Minister Gandhi held an emergency meeting of government and opposition leaders and called for an end to the violence.    ---   Bork's hearings will begin Sept. 15, Senate Judiciary Committee Democrats said. The starting date for confirmation hearings on Reagan's nominee to the Supreme Court virtually assures that the court will open its new term with only eight members.    William Wilkins has emerged as a front-runner to become the new FBI chief, White House and congressional officials said. He is a U.S. judge.    ---   The Reagan administration said Nicaraguan exiles in the U.S., numbering as many as 200,000, will be allowed to remain under a liberalized immigration policy. The order was signed by Attorney General Meese. In May, the U.S. rejected a plea from El Salvador's president for a similar order covering refugees from that country.    ---   Seoul released 357 political prisoners, bringing to 534 the number freed in South Korea this week, and ordered civil rights restored for 2,335 dissidents, including opposition leader Kim Dae Jung. The government also prohibited a massive funeral march planned by students to honor a comrade who died following a recent demonstration.    ---   The House Energy panel approved a measure boosting to $7 billion the nuclear industry's liability in the event of a catastrophic accident, and the Senate is considering similar legislation. The law setting the current limit of $700 million expires Aug. 1. The industry said it would reluctantly accept the new limit.    ---   Waldheim was invited to visit West Germany by President Weizsaecker, Austria's foreign minister said. The meeting will be unofficial, but the invitation is the first by a Western leader since the Austrian president was accused of complicity in Nazi war crimes. Bonn said Soviet leader Gorbachev also is expected to visit soon.    ---   West German police revised the death toll to four in Tuesday's crash of a gasoline truck and subsequent explosions in Herborn. Police said earlier reports of at least 30 dead resulted from people suffering from shock wandering away from the scene and being listed as casualties.    ---   The U.S. protested an Israeli policy of requiring Arab-American visitors to post cash bonds and, in some cases, denying them entrance without explanation. A U.S. Consulate spokesman said the practices amount to discrimination. Israel said the policy is needed for security reasons and to prevent the visitors from settling there illegally.    ---   Athens refused to allow two U.S. nuclear-missile submarines to enter Greek waters. A Greek newspaper with ties to the government said the decision was made because of U.S. allegations that Greece held talks with Palestinian terrorists.    ---   Gunmen kidnapped three American teachers and a British nurse working for a relief organization in southern Sudan. The gunmen claimed to be members of the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army.    ---   Haitians ended a general strike, the country's longest, during which 24 people were killed in violent protests. Opposition leaders said they would continue to press for the ouster of the military-civilian government.    ---   A Panamanian envoy accused the U.S. of interfering in his country's affairs and said U.S. support of opposition figures would be the &quot;kiss of death.&quot; The envoy was sent to Washington following the damaging of the U.S. Embassy during recent pro-government demonstrations and, though promising reparations, refused to apologize.    ---   Egyptian President Mubarak arrived in Geneva, Switzerland, and Western diplomats said he will meet with Israeli Foreign Minister Peres today to try to set up an Arab-Israeli peace conference this year. </TEXT></DOC>