<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0004 </DOCNO><HL> The Frankensteining of Bork---By L. Gordon Crovitz</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   Last July, the 45 groups plotting strategy against Judge Bork assigned one member the task of spending $40,000 on an opinion poll. The Los Angeles Times reports that the survey by the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees found several issues that could be exploited. The best prospects for stoking apprehensions were civil rights, aimed at Southerners fearful of &quot;reopening old wounds,&quot; and privacy rights, which the anti-Bork forces dubbed the Yuppie strategy. The campaign to defeat Judge Bork immediately became a campaign to distort his record to fit these public fears.    The special interests may not consider themselves bound to honest debate, but the Judiciary Committee senators who echoed the groups' distortions are in a bind. Judge Bork's refusal to die a death of a thousand libels means they will have to explain on the Senate floor the stark contrast between their claims and his testimony.    Civil Rights. In his summary, Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) issued a tirade raising the specter of Jim Crow laws. Judge Bork angrily replied, &quot;If those charges were not so serious, the discrepancy between the evidence and what you say would be highly amusing.&quot;    Judge Bork did write a magazine article in 1963 making the libertarian argument against coerced desegregation of private establishments, but he rejected this view years ago. He cited his record, &quot;I have upheld laws that outlaw racial discrimination. I have consistently supported Brown v. Board of Education.&quot; Indeed, Judge Bork called this decision desegregating schools &quot;perhaps the greatest moral achievement of our constitutional law.&quot;    Does Judge Bork favor forced sterilization? This shocking claim was based on his unanimous ruling in Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers International v. American Cyanamid. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration requires employers to prevent risks to fetuses. A pigmentation plant discovered lead levels in the air that could damage fetuses, but that could not possibly be reduced to safe levels. &quot;Everybody conceded that the company could have said women of child-bearing age are hereby fired,&quot; Judge Bork said. &quot;What the company did was give women a choice: You can be transferred to another department at a lower paying job, or if you want to, surgical sterilization is available.&quot;    Judge Bork said, &quot;I think that is not a pro-sterilization opinion.&quot; Instead, &quot;it was a sad choice these women employees had to make. It was very distressing. The only question was, should they be given a choice? And is giving them a choice a hazard? We did not think it was under the act.&quot; His ruling suggested the women instead sue for unfair labor practices or sex discrimination. The case was eventually settled on these grounds.    Equal Protection. Several senators grilled Judge Bork on the 14th Amendment, which prohibits states from denying &quot;any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.&quot; Sens. Biden, Kennedy and Metzenbaum insisted that he did not think the equal-protection clause applied to women.    Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Penn.) engaged Judge Bork on the issue. Judge Bork said that the amendment &quot;applies to all persons, so that I would think that no group could be excluded.&quot; Sen. Specter then asked how much protection he would give women. Judge Bork's analysis turns out to be much more helpful to women than the current court approach.    Judge Bork criticized the Supreme Court for using different levels of scrutiny depending on the plaintiff. He prefers Justice John Paul Stevens's test that simply asks whether the law makes a reasonable distinction between classes of people. He said he knew of only one situation where discrimination by race was reasonable, a case of a prison warden who after a race riot segregated the inmates by race.    Judge Bork said this reasonable-basis test would better protect women. He disparaged a 1948 opinion upholding a law denying bartender licenses to women unless they were wives or daughters of male bar owners. &quot;Distinctions that we made between genders in the 19th century and which we assumed to be reasonable then,&quot; Judge Bork said, &quot;no longer seem to anybody to be reasonable.&quot; The only two Judge Bork could cite as reasonable were Congress's prohibition on women in combat and the practice of public restrooms marked Gentlemen and Ladies.    What about the sex-discrimination case? The National Women's Law Center said Vinson v. Taylor made Judge Bork a sexist. The group claimed that he wrote that sexual harassment couldn't have occurred if the woman subordinate consented. Actually, Judge Bork ruled only that as a procedural matter, the employer could introduce evidence of an office romance. &quot;While hardly determinative,&quot; Judge Bork wrote that Title VII discrimination law required introduction of such evidence. The Supreme Court agreed.    Privacy. According to Sen. Alan Cranston (D., Calif.), &quot;When he said before the committee that he found no right to privacy in the Constitution, that did him in.&quot; In fact, Judge Bork said privacy was a major preoccupation of the Constitution and a basic requirement for a government of limited powers. &quot;No civilized person wants to live in a society without a lot of privacy in it,&quot; he said. He cited several privacy rights. The First Amendment protects exercise of religion and free speech; the Fourth Amendment protects homes and offices from unreasonable searches and seizures; and the Fifth Amendment protects against self-incrimination.    What about Griswold v. Connecticut? Justice William Douglas reasoned from &quot;penumbras formed by emanations&quot; of the Bill of Rights to invalidate a law against using contraceptives. This phrase represents an imaginative reach of the Warren Court, but one entirely unhinged from constitutional text or original intent.    Judge Bork said the 1879 law against using contraceptives was &quot;utterly silly,&quot; but pointed out that the law had never been enforced. This was a frivolous case, not because it didn't raise a philosophical issue, but because the law was not being enforced and there was no prospect of its being enforced. The case was brought by Yale law professors who wanted to give the court a chance for a wide-ranging holding. Planned Parenthood's New Haven branch conspired with a politically friendly prosecutor to get a case brought against it for &quot;aiding and abetting.&quot;    Judge Bork denied there could be any absolute privacy right. Is there a right to incest, wife beating or price-fixing if done in private? he asked. He said there were respectable grounds for deciding the case. The Fourth Amendment means no police would ever barge into bedrooms to check if a married couple was using contraceptives because no prosecutor would ever ask for, or a judge issue, a warrant. If a prosecutor did bring a case, Judge Bork said it would be dismissed because of &quot;desuetude.&quot; There was no fair warning of enforcement of an antique law that &quot;is just so out of date that it has gone into limbo.&quot;    First Amendment. The critics claim Judge Bork has a crabbed view of free speech. He testified that while he thought the Founders' main purpose was to protect political speech, other speech is also covered. He said &quot;everybody, including the Supreme Court, starts from the political speech core, and that is the most strongly protected. . . . Moral speech and scientific speech, into fiction and so forth&quot; are also protected. &quot;Speech or print which is purely for sexual gratification, pornography or obscenity,&quot; has less protection.    What about school prayer? The Senate opponents cited a Washington Post report about a speech he gave in 1985 at the Brookings Institution. Judge Bork denied ever endorsing school prayer and cited a letter to the editor from Rabbi Joshua Haberman. &quot;Your reporter was not present at the meeting. I was,&quot; Rabbi Haberman wrote. &quot;I would have been greatly alarmed if Judge Bork had expressed any tendency to move away from our constitutional guarantee of religious freedom and equality. I heard nothing of the sort.&quot;    Pro-Business Bias. Several interest groups, including Ralph Nader's Public Citizen, published studies purporting to show that Judge Bork favors business litigants. He called these studies &quot;very strange,&quot; noting that in a case in which he upheld a labor union against the federal labor relations agency, &quot;they said, well, a labor union is really a business.&quot; That case, NTEU v. FLRA, held that a union didn't have to provide lawyers to represent nonunion members to the same extent it provided counsel to members. Judge Bork testified that &quot;if you look at my decisions on race, on women, on labor unions, on individuals vs. the government, you will find no . . . political line along which these decisions line up. They line up only according to legal reasoning.&quot;    In retrospect, there was a twisted logic to the distortion campaign. Judge Bork was first called an extremist, a right-wing ideologue. Then the flaw was that he failed to meet the critics' portrayal of him. They said he changed his views too often (he was a Marxist in his youth!) and his opinions were unpredictable because they were based on legal, not political, principles. Perhaps it's the critics' inconsistency that causes senators now to say his problem is simply that he became &quot;divisive.&quot;    Judge Bork's alleged extremism and divisiveness are due to intentional distortions that made him appear what he is not and has never been. There is still time for senators to reconsider whether the brazen purveyors of disinformation deserve the reward of Judge Bork's scalp.    ---   Mr. Crovitz is assistant editor of the Journal's editorial page. </TEXT></DOC>