<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SOUTH KOREA'S ROH OFFERED concessions in a bid to end civil unrest.    In an address on state television, the head of the ruling Democratic Justice Party said he would urge President Chun to accept opposition demands for direct presidential elections, amnesty for dissident Kim Dae Jung and the immediate release of most political prisoners. Roh also said he would resign as the party's chairman and as its presidential candidate if Chun rejected the proposals. Roh's comments followed three weeks of anti-government street demonstrations.    Domestic and foreign businessmen are beginning to worry about the turmoil throughout South Korea, though it hasn't yet hurt the nation's economy.    ---   GORBACHEV ISSUED a manifesto calling for changes in the Soviet economy.    The document, detailing a plan to wrest basic economic authority away from Moscow's central planning organs, was issued despite resistance at last week's meeting of the Communist Party leadership. The Soviet leader also won appointments of three likely supporters to the ruling Politburo, but didn't manage to remove any of the five Politburo oligarchs who held seats before he took control in March 1985.    A draft law on state enterprises, the centerpiece of Gorbachev's legislative program, is expected to be adopted by the country's parliament today.    ---   REAGAN FACES a challenge in selecting a Supreme Court successor to Powell.    White House aides are expected today to give the president a list of five candidates to succeed the moderate, generally pro-business justice who resigned Friday. Senate Judiciary panel Democrats warned against a conservative court shift, saying they would scrutinize this nomination more closely than previous ones. The front-runner is U.S. Appeals Court Robert Bork, a former Nixon aide.    The High Court ruled 5-4 that landowners must be compensated if state and local governments attach certain conditions to building permits.    ---   Iran is preparing for the possibility of a Persian Gulf shipping shutdown with an emergency plan to ship oil through two overland pipelines, one being built and the other to be converted from gas to oil, with a total capacity of two million barrels a day, senior Iran government and foreign oil industry sources said.    Senior Navy officials said they expect court-martial proceedings to be initiated against the skipper of the USS Stark following an Iraqi missile attack in which 37 crewmen were killed last month. The Stark left Bahrain for the U.S. yesterday as two Scandinavian oil tankers damaged in weekend attacks by Iran arrived for repairs.    ---   Congressional investigators are pursuing evidence that North destroyed classified documents after being interrogated about the Iran-Contra initiative by Attorney General Meese last November. Meanwhile, the grand jury investigating the affair heard testimony that Meese approved North's actions, the Associated Press reported.    ----   A U.S. appeals court ordered the FCC to reconsider its decision last year to scrap guidelines on the number of advertisements on children's TV shows. The court said the agency never explained its view that the marketplace protects children from commercial exploitation.    ---   Weinberger urged Japanese officials to purchase its next generation of fighter planes from the U.S. or allow American participation in developing the aircraft, according to news reports in Tokyo. The defense secretary arrived Saturday in Japan.    ---   Philippine Airlines officials said flight recorders recovered from a plane that crashed Friday, killing all 50 aboard, were damaged beyond use. The officials said the plane, on a flight to Baguio City from Manila, possibly had as many as 12 U.S. citizens on board.    ---   South Africa relaxed regulations under which emergency detainees are held. The new rules, decreed by President Botha in response to allegations of police abuse, mandate medical examinations for detainees after arrest and before release. Also, police now have 14 days to either send detainees to a regular prison or release them.    ---   Papandreou said there would be no new agreement on U.S. military bases unless Washington withdrew allegations that Greece made a secret deal with terrorists to prevent attacks in that country. The Greek prime minister's statement came as talks were about to start on replacing the pact, which is due to expire next year.    ---   Panama recalled its ambassador to Washington for consultations, citing &quot;interference&quot; in its affairs by the U.S. Senate, which Friday approved a resolution calling for democracy and an independent inquiry into charges of military corruption.    ---   The Reagan administration has ruled out the distribution of condoms to federal prisoners to stop the spread of AIDS and may call for separate prisons for victims of the disease, the assistant surgeon general in charge of AIDS testing for prisoners said.    ---   A Justice Department unit said the Northeast was the least crime-prone region in the U.S. last year, with 19% of households affected, while households in the West were the most likely to be touched by crime, with 30% affected. In both the South and Midwest, 25% of households were affected.    ---   Died: Arthur F. Burns, 83, ex-chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and former U.S. ambassador to West Germany, Friday, in Baltimore, of coronary disease. </TEXT></DOC>