<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Honda Is Expected to Announce PlansFor Second U.S. Auto Asembly Plant---By John BusseyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> HMCAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Honda Motor Co. is expected to announce plans to build a second U.S. assembly plant in Ohio, escalating its already aggressive expansion strategy in the U.S.    Honda, which was the first Japanese auto maker to build its own cars in the U.S., already has a car assembly plant in Marysville, Ohio, where it also builds motorcycles. Earlier this year, the company announced a big expansion of capacity at its engine plant in Anna, Ohio and said it would start making transmissions, suspension assemblies and brakes there, making it the first Japanese auto maker to build all the major parts for its cars in the U.S.    The announcement of the new plant is expected to be made at a news conference scheduled for tomorrow in Columbus, Ohio. Individuals familiar with the announcement say the second assembly plant would be able to build Honda's Accord and Civic models. It also would be able to produce the company's Acura luxury cars, which currently are made only in Japan. The capacity of the plant couldn't be learned. It is expected to be located near the Marysville facility.    As an incentive to get Honda to build its second plant in Ohio, the state offered to sell to Honda all or part of its Technical Research Center, an automotive proving, research and development facility. The 7,500-acre center, governed by a state-appointed board and operated by Ohio State University, has been used by all the domestic auto makers and nearly all the foreign car companies, including Honda. It includes a 7.5-mile test track and handling grounds.    One source familiar with the negotiations was uncertain how much of the center would ultimately be acquired by Honda. Ohio, along with other midwestern and mid-southern states, has been competing intensely for new auto business. One estimate indicates that Honda's second plant will bring between 2,000 and 2,500 jobs to the state.    Honda also is expected to announce additional actions affecting its operations in the U.S., though the company wouldn't comment on this or any other part of the pending announcement. The auto maker will be represented at the news conference by its top executive, President Tadashi Kume.    Honda's rapid expansion in the U.S. -- eclipsing the far larger and more conservative Toyota Motor Corp., which is still constructing its first independent plant in Georgetown, Ky. -- has both economic and political motives. Since 1985, the Japanese yen has appreciated substantially compared with the U.S. dollar, making it relatively less expensive for the Japanese to build vehicles in the U.S. David Healy, analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., estimates that it now costs the Japanese about as much to build their vehicles in Japan and ship them to the U.S. as it does to build them here.    Honda is also keenly aware of growing protectionist sentiment in Congress and has repeatedly stated its goal to build vehicles in the markets it serves. A second plant and expanded operations in the U.S. will help the company's argument. Honda says U.S. parts and labor currently account for a little more than 50% of the content of vehicles it builds here, a figure the company hopes to increase to 66% by 1990.    Clearly, there is demand for Honda's cars -- at least for the moment. During the first eight months of this year, Honda sold 463,865 cars in the U.S., up 11% from the year-earlier period, despite five separate price increases since the beginning of 1986. Honda currently has on hand only an eight-day supply of its domestically made cars and a 10-day supply of imported vehicles, while 60 to 65 days is considered normal.    But Honda will be expanding its operations here at a time when some auto makers in the U.S. are worried about a capacity glut. Several Japanese car companies, including Toyota, Mitsubishi Motors Corp. and Isuzu Motors Co., are either expanding or building new capacity here. Mazda Motor Corp. recently started production at its new plant in Flat Rock, Mich.    In contrast, Ford Motor Co., which lately has reported record profits, is deriving much of its strength from having trimmed excess capacity in recent years.    But Honda is nonetheless counting on the U.S. market for much of its growth. The company already sells more cars here than in Japan. In 1987, it expects to sell 750,000 vehicles here compared with 550,000 in Japan. Honda is forecasting that about 100,000 of those U.S. sales will be from its Acura division, up from 52,869 in 1986 when it introduced the luxury line. It also forecasts yearly sales of 300,000 Acura cars within the next few years, which, if the target is achieved, could dictate the need for the additional U.S. capacity.    The company also just started selling Acuras in Canada. Its Canadian plant currently assembles Accord models.    Honda expects annual production at its Marysville plant, where it makes Accord and Civic models, to be 320,000 in 1987 and to rise to 360,000 next year. </TEXT></DOC>