<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880113-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Philip Anderson Has A Feeling He Knows What's in the Cards --- Device Gave Him a Leg Up At Westward Ho Casino; Playing Blackjack to Win </HL><AUTHOR> Ken Wells (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CNO </IN><DATELINE> LAS VEGAS, Nev.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Many entrepreneurs have gambled on big payoffs from the computer revolution. But few of their stories are as strange as Philip Preston Anderson's.    In August 1985, Mr. Anderson was at a blackjack table at the Westward Ho casino here when he was arrested by security guards for exhibiting &quot;suspicious body movements.&quot; An investigation proved revealing: Mr. Anderson was wearing &quot;computer shoes,&quot; a tiny card-counting microcomputer strapped to his calf under his clothing and controlled by switches he manipulated with his feet.    Tapping his toes, Mr. Anderson was able to tell the computer which cards from the blackjack deck had been played. The computer, calculating the cards remaining in the deck, sent back messages advising him, based on mathematical probability, how best to play his hand. Mr. Anderson got this electronic help in an equally novel way: via a wire that delivered coded signals -- little electric shocks -- from the computer to the rear strap of his athletic supporter.    &quot;It was ingenious,&quot; says James Tufteland, the chief deputy district attorney for Clark County. It also was illegal. Mr. Anderson, a Californian, thus became the first person to be charged under a 1985 Nevada statute that makes using such devices a felony punishable by up to 10 years in prison.    Now, by suing to overturn the statute, Mr. Anderson has dragged the state into a struggle between the casino industry and professional gamblers who assert the right to use computers to improve their odds at the blackjack table. The stakes could be in the millions.    Mr. Anderson believes weighty civil-rights issues are involved here.    In early 1986, he persuaded a Las Vegas district court judge to declare the statute unconstitutionally vague. But in December, the Nevada Supreme Court reinstated the law. So Mr. Anderson will plead not guilty in state court and is already contemplating a federal appeal. Through his lawyer, Andrew Blumen, Mr. Anderson argues that the law violates both the First and 14th Amendments, by barring transmission of information between him and his computer and by interfering with the practice of his profession.    &quot;Impeding the transfer of information from his toes to his buttocks&quot; hardly rates as a &quot;First Amendment impingement,&quot; replies Rodney Jean, an attorney for the Nevada Resort Association. The association, a casino lobby group, understandably supported the computer-shoes law and has joined the state in opposing Mr. Anderson's attack on the statute.    Crude versions of computer shoes began to show up in Nevada casinos as early as 1976. Though not illegal, they were used clandestinely even in those early days because the gambling houses, using trespass statutes that have been upheld by Nevada courts, routinely evicted anybody suspected of using any kind of card-counting system.    Industry annoyance turned to alarm, and lobbying for a law, after a 1984 casino-sponsored investigation. Results suggested that hundreds or even several thousand devices -- sold by a dozen or so California computer hobbyists -- had fallen into the hands of professional blackjack players. And the computers were getting more and more sophisticated.    Computer shoes, which can cost as much as $10,000, obviously don't guarantee that the user will win. Mr. Anderson himself was behind $1,600 when he was accosted by security people at the Westward Ho. But, used skillfully, the devices can shift the advantage enjoyed by the house to a gambler's favor, and with spectacular results.    Blackjack lends itself to computer calculations because it is one game of chance whose outcome isn't purely random. Face cards each count 10, aces one or 11, number cards their face value. Typically, each player is first dealt two cards face up, and additional cards at his request. The dealer gets one up and one face down. The object is to come closer to 21 than the dealer without going over. Cards are discarded after each hand, meaning that a player who can keep track of the changing composition of the deck can tell when the odds of winning are best, and bet accordingly. In casinos, sometimes two or more 52-card decks are used at a time.    The house enjoys a slight advantage because players must decide whether to draw additional cards before the dealer takes more cards for his own hand. Thus, all players who bust, by going over 21, lose to the house.    The casinos already had proof of how effective card-counting could be for a player, even a player without a computer other than the one in his head: The late Kenneth Uston, using theories developed by Edward Thorpe, a 1960s mathematics professor, won more than $3 million over a five-year period before most of the world's casinos banished him in 1979.    &quot;With a big enough bankroll, over a long enough period,&quot; just a few undetected computer-shoe users could wreak havoc on casino profits, says Gary Armentrout, the assistant security director of Holiday Casino, a Las Vegas unit of Harrah's, the Reno-based casino and hotel company.    &quot;This is simply part of an ongoing war by Nevada casinos against good players,&quot; asserts Mr. Blumen, Mr. Anderson's attorney. &quot;The casinos are happy to have drunks sit at the table and lose,&quot; he says, but when talented players attempt to apply technology to their art, they are attacked &quot;as criminals.&quot;    Though no one knows for certain, plenty of computer shoes are believed to be in use surreptitiously. Until the Nevada Supreme Court decision in December, the state's Gaming Control Board had stopped making arrests, though a user, once found out, was still persona non grata in casinos.    And computer shoes, though unwelcome, aren't yet illegal in Atlantic City, the nation's other center of legalized gambling. The New Jersey legislature recently rejected as overly broad a law similar to Nevada's, though the state's casino lobby is expected to continue to push for legislation.    Yet even in Atlantic City, computer-shoe users have had to keep the devices concealed because state law does allow the city's casinos to take certain steps, such as gathering up cards and reshuffling after each hand, if they suspect that card-counters or computer users are operating at the table.    The computer-shoe industry, which once brazenly advertised in gambling trade magazines, has now gone underground. One purported manufacturer declined to discuss sales -- or even to admit that he made any such machines -- and others didn't return phone calls.    &quot;They're still out there . . . but the Nevada law set a bad precedent for everyone,&quot; says Thomas Hyland, a professional Atlantic City gambler who owns one of the computers. Mr. Hyland says he hasn't used his device since he took it into a Bahamian casino shortly after the Nevada law was adopted and quickly won $100,000. But upon discovering his computer, Bahamian authorities -- citing the Nevada law since they don't have one of their own -- forced him, he says, to rebate to the casino most of his winnings. The rest went for legal fees to get him out of a Bahamian jail, he says.    Some casino officials have come to grudgingly admire computer-shoe users even while deploring them. &quot;On the one hand, this is a story of good old American ingenuity,&quot; says Sam McMullen, a vice president of Harrah's. He adds quickly: &quot;Our objection is that blackjack has always been a 'bet a hunch, win a bunch' game of chance. The computer changes that by introducing a new element.&quot;    Some also worry that computer shoes have begun to encourage other forms of high-tech cheating. Nevada gaming officials say they recently seized one gambler's tiny video camera which, worn on a belt buckle, was often able to sneak a peek at a blackjack dealer's hole card as it was dealt face down off the deck. (The image was relayed to an accomplice with a TV monitor in a van who, in turn, told the player via a tiny radio receiver in his ear.)    Casinos say they also have apprehended and tossed out players who were training lasers on a &quot;big wheel,&quot; a carnival-type spinning device in which payoffs are made on bets that the wheel will land on a certain number. The theory: The lasers might reveal whether the wheel has idiosyncrasies favoring particular numbers.    &quot;It takes a certain kind of person to use these things,&quot; says Walter Ramey of the Gaming Control Board. But in gambling, he adds, &quot;Everybody's trying to get an edge.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>