<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters --Satisfied Heirs:Ways to MakeSecret Bequests---By Alexandra PeersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   It isn't always easy for people to take secrets to their graves. Especially if they have a lot of money to leave behind.    But people who worry that their bequests may generate unpleasant surprises for some heirs -- and perhaps prompt them to contest the will -- can find legal means to conceal certain gifts.    The stereotype of the wealthy philanderer and his paramour isn't the only situation that motivates people to be secretive, estate-planning lawyers say. A business executive may want to leave substantial sums to charity without making his or her children feel slighted, or to a first spouse without angering a second. A mother may wish to provide secretly for a child estranged from the family or to conceal the extent of her savings from her husband.    Requests for such covert arrangements come up occasionally, though not often, lawyers say, because they are such a touchy subject.    &quot;Sometimes a man will come in and say, 'I'd like to provide for my mistress,' and that puts the attorney in a ticklish position,&quot; says W. Bailey Smith, an estate-planning lawyer in Newport Beach, Calif. This type of request, he says, raises the question of whether the lawyer represents the individual client or the whole family.    Lawyers caution that no type of covert estate planning is foolproof and that state laws on distributing assets vary widely. &quot;It's difficult to be both surreptitious and eminently legal,&quot; says Jeffrey Brinck, a partner with the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley andamp; McCloy.    But lawyers say even imperfect legal means are preferable to what some suspect their clients of doing instead: using illegal tricks involving tax avoidance, joint ownership and Swiss bank accounts to accomplish the same ends.    The safest way to be generous secretly, Mr. Brinck says, is to bypass the will and make outright cash gifts while alive of up to $10,000 annually to a beneficiary. Gifts of that amount aren't subject to tax and don't have to be reported to the IRS.    For a bigger nest egg, the recipient can use the money to buy insurance on the benefactor's life. When the benefactor dies, the beneficiary only has to present the death certificate to make a claim on the policy. As long as the benefactor has no direct ties to the policy, it doesn't have to be disclosed when the estate is settled.    In one case in a California court, however, a widow who discovered that her husband had bought such a policy for his mistress sued for half the proceeds, according to Mr. Smith. In California, where all assets acquired after marriage are community property, she won her case on the grounds that the money used to purchase the policy was half hers.    Trusts are another way to keep legacies secret. An irrevocable, unamendable trust needn't be included in the benefactor's taxable estate, if structured correctly: Annual contributions to it can't exceed $10,000, the beneficiary must have the right to withdraw money before the benefactor's death and the benefactor must surrender all control over the trust, Mr. Brinck says. That means the benefactor can't reclaim any assets from it.    A person writing a will can also set up a simple trust for a secret beneficiary. So long as the spouse doesn't act as executor of the will and his or her share meets state requirements -- often one-third to one-half of the total estate -- the spouse usually has no claim on assets in other trusts. Lawyers caution, however, that leaving a spouse a percentage share of the estate, rather than a set dollar amount, would give him or her grounds to get information about other trusts -- and could lead the spouse to the identity of secret beneficiaries.    Moreover, while state laws generally don't require that details of trusts be disclosed before a will is probated, there is a strong preference in New York State Surrogate Courts, among others, that no elements of a will remain secret, says Mr. Brinck. In general, he says, states afford greater secrecy to trusts established during the benefactor's lifetime than to trusts created in a will.    Finally, the benefactor can include a clause in the will directing its executor to distribute a sum of money among the benefactor's friends as the executor sees fit. A letter, not legally part of the will, can be sent separately to the executor detailing the benefactor's wishes. However, the executor isn't bound by the letter. </TEXT></DOC>