<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871103-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The stock market's crash has caused a sudden reversal in interest rates and changed the economic outlook for businesses and consumers.    Before Oct. 19, interest rates were rising, and the Federal Reserve was keeping a tight grip on credit. But the day after the crash, the Fed signaled a change in its policy, and interest rates began to tumble. In the credit markets, rates fell 1 1/2 percentage points.    Why did this happen, and what is the outlook for interest rates in the weeks ahead? No one can say for certain. But the following questions and answers, based on interviews with Fed policy makers and other economists and market specialists, may help explain the current turmoil.    Why did the Fed tighten credit in September?    Fed officials say they were responding to market fears that inflation was rising. When the Fed tightens credit, that tends to boost interest rates, slow the economy, and reduce the risk of inflation.    Was inflation rising?    Government statistics didn't indicate that inflation was speeding up from an annual pace of about 4% or 5%. But Fed officials, led by new Chairman Alan Greenspan, felt they had to demonstrate to financial markets that Paul Volcker's departure as Fed chairman wouldn't mean less determination in fighting inflation.    Why did the Fed change policies after the market's crash?    The sharp drop in stock prices turned the markets' fears of inflation into fears of recession. Rising inflation usually occurs in an economy that is &quot;overheating.&quot; The market crash, however, wiped out a half-trillion dollars of consumer wealth, and, thus, will probably reduce consumer demand. So instead of fears of overheating, the big worry now is that the economy may sputter to a halt.    Was the Fed's decision to ease credit the only reason interest rates fell?    No. A lot of people were taking their money out of the world's stock markets and putting it into Treasury securities, which are always considered a safe investment during times of crisis. That flood of money probably would have pushed interest rates down some, even if the Fed hadn't changed policy.    Will the Fed's easy-money policy continue?    The Fed isn't likely to push rates back to where they were before Oct. 19. But just how &quot;loose&quot; the Fed will be depends on how pessimistic the members of the Fed's policy committee feel about the economic outlook. If the members of that panel believe recession is a serious threat, they are likely to continue to pour money into the economy. The panel, known as the Federal Open Market Committee, meets today to assess the situation.    The Fed's most immediate goal is to relieve stress in the financial system. If the markets calm down and the threat of recession subsides, the Fed is likely to return to a policy designed to protect its recent gains against inflation.    What are the chances of a recession?    No one knows for sure. The economy is in uncharted waters right now, and months may pass before we have clear signs of what the effects of the stock market's collapse will be on such things as consumer spending and business investment.    Since interest rates would have fallen even if the Fed hadn't eased credit, does that mean rates may rise, even if the Fed doesn't tighten credit?    Possibly. If the stock market calms down, some of those investors who flocked into Treasury bills after the crash may pull out and return to stocks. That could push interest rates up.    So what will happen to consumer interest rates in the coming months?    Changes in consumer rates often lag changes in credit-market rates. That suggests the drop in credit-market rates during the past two weeks will probably translate into lower rates on car loans and home mortgages. But just how far those rates fall depends on the Fed, and on what happens to the economy. For example, if the economy were to slip into a recession, rates would fall further than otherwise.    What does the dollar have to do with all of this?    The drop in the dollar's exchange value during the past two years, relative to other currencies, contributed to the fears of inflation. A lower dollar means that imports are becoming more costly, and that can push other prices up as well.    How does the Fed keep the dollar from falling?    In the short term, it can support the dollar by joining with foreign central banks to buy up dollars with other currencies. In the long run, however, the only way to stop a dollar drop is to raise interest rates. Higher rates will lure foreign investors to put money in dollar investments, such as Treasury bills. That, in turn, will boost the dollar's value.    But wouldn't higher interest rates raise the risk of a recession?    That's the dilemma of central bankers. That's also why some economists are telling the Fed to ignore the dollar and concentrate on saving the economy.    Are there risks in ignoring the dollar?    Possibly. If foreign investors think the Fed is no longer willing to support the dollar, then they may fear that the dollar is going to fall sharply. If that happens, they will lose a lot of money on their investments in the U.S. So they may decide temporarily to stop investing here.    What happens then?    If foreigners pull their money out of the U.S., interest rates will start to rise anyway, even if the Fed doesn't tighten credit. The nation's heavy dependence on foreign money has left the central bank between a rock and a hard place. If it holds up interest rates to defend the dollar, it increases the risk of recession. But if it ignores the dollar, the flight of foreign investors could force up rates anyway.    Why does cutting the budget deficit help?    The budget deficit has to be financed by Treasury borrowing, and that increases U.S. dependence on foreign investors. Cutting the deficit would reduce the need for money from abroad, and ease the Fed's dilemma.    How does the Fed &quot;tighten&quot; and &quot;ease&quot; its credit policies?    The Fed can influence the amount of money in the system by buying and selling treasury securities, a practice it calls &quot;open market&quot; operations. If it wants to &quot;ease&quot; policy, it buys up securities from banks. That puts more money into the banking system and allows banks to make more loans. If the Fed wants to &quot;tighten&quot; policy, it sells securities back to the banks, thus draining money from the system. The Fed can also signal a tighter policy by increasing its discount rate, the rate it charges on loans made directly to banks. </TEXT></DOC>