<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0130 </DOCNO><HL> ProstitutionIsn't 'Victimless'With AIDS Here---By Mark A.R. Kleiman</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Our grandchildren, looking back at their grandparents' failure to control the AIDS epidemic while it was still controllable, will be puzzled and outraged by several things. Their historians will ask, among other questions, &quot;Why didn't they do anything sensible about prostitution?&quot;    Between 1,000 and 10,000 American men will become infected with the AIDS virus this year by having sex with female prostitutes. Most of these men will not fall into any other risk group. They will continue to have other sexual relations, putting their partners (and their partners' partners and children) at risk. The thousands of infections resulting directly from prostitution will lead to additional thousands of secondary and tertiary infections. And the spread of HIV, the AIDS virus, among the &quot;general&quot; population complicates efforts to control the epidemic.    Thus it is urgent to control the spread of the virus via prostitution, by reducing (1) the number of sexual contacts between prostitutes and customers, (2) the riskiness (to the customer) of each individual sex act, or (3) the proportion of working prostitutes infected with the virus.    Both publicity and law enforcement can contribute to reducing the number of sexual acts between prostitutes and customers. The prostitution trade won't shrink by itself. Despite all the attention given AIDS to date, prostitution still flourishes. Public health authorities blame it for a recent upsurge in syphilis cases in some metropolitan areas.    As long as purchased sex posed no health risk that antibiotics couldn't control, persuading customers to change their habits or prostitutes to change their professions seemed extremely difficult and only marginally worthwhile. Nor did enforcing the laws against selling and buying sexual favors deserve high priority for overworked police, prosecutors and correctional facilities. AIDS changes all that; no longer can practicing prostitution or patronizing prostitutes be called a victimless crime. Yet enforcement practices have not noticeably changed.    Enforcement efforts against prostitution could include more arrests and stronger penalties, particularly for repeat offenders. Instead of concentrating on streetwalkers, police could target &quot;massage parlors,&quot; &quot;escort services&quot; and other prostitution fronts: high-volume businesses where, according to a recent study by Laurie Clarke of Harvard's Kennedy School, high-risk sex acts are more common, and condom use less common, than they are among streetwalkers. Arresting customers may do more to discourage the trade than arresting prostitutes, particularly if names are publicized in a way that links the crackdown on prostitution to the control of AIDS.    The other way to reduce the number of sexual acts with prostitutes is to reduce demand through &quot;negative advertising,&quot; based on serious market research. Who are prostitutes' customers? What do they know? What do they fear? Would it help to convince them that &quot;real men&quot; do not visit prostitutes? Reducing the risks involves introducing condoms or educating customers and prostitutes about the relative dangers of various sexual acts.    Condoms are a long way from perfect protection against AIDS transmission, but they are much better than nothing. They act both as a barrier against the virus itself and as protection from other sexually transmitted diseases, whose lesions may serve as entryways for the virus. There is some evidence from New York that condom use is becoming more common. Here enforcement has little contribution to make (aside from ending the confiscation of condoms carried by arrested prostitutes); the main task is to educate prostitutes and their customers.    The proportion of working prostitutes who carry the virus depends on (1) how many prostitutes are infected by needle-sharing; (2) how many of them are infected by customers; and (3) whether infected prostitutes are forced to leave the trade. The first two are hard to influence; the third presents real opportunities.    If prostitution were legal, frequent testing and license revocation could keep the infection rate among prostitutes to a small fraction of 1%. Customers would be on notice that contact with unlicensed prostitutes was particularly risky.    As long as prostitution is illegal, testing will have to be less frequent and more sporadic. Still, prostitutes, particularly the drug-dependent prostitutes who are most likely to be infected, are arrested rather frequently. If those convicted of prostitution or narcotics possession were routinely tested for the virus, a large proportion of infected prostitutes would be identified over the course of a year. Practicing prostitution after testing positive could subject the offender to more serious criminal sanctions or to isolation ordered by the public-health authorities.    These policies all have costs and complexities. All require more careful analysis than anyone has yet given them. Some require new legislation. Some will interfere with each other. Telling customers &quot;Don't visit prostitutes, but when you do, use condoms&quot; is tricky. So is appealing to prostitutes to keep their partners and themselves safe while trying to put them out of business. Some steps, such as legalizing prostitution or advising customers about safe sex acts and the use of condoms are likely to raise moralistic objections. Any proposal has to overcome what George Bush has called the &quot;giggle factor,&quot; the sense that subjects of locker-room humor can't really be serious matters for public action.    We first must acknowledge that the AIDS epidemic makes prostitution policy important, that the main goal of such policy should be preventing the spread of disease, and that, where prostitution is involved, public health takes precedence over private morality and sexual privacy. Beyond that, let us hope that, before the epidemic is utterly uncontrollable, our elected officials will stop giggling.    ---   Mr. Kleiman teaches public policy at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. </TEXT></DOC>