<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881004-0022 </DOCNO><HL> Law: Justices to Define Scope of Permitted Antitrust Suits --- Validity of Fees Tied To Pipeline Safety Will Also Be Decided </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT LABOR MEA LUK TWA CRR DJ MDA AXP CAG GMT </CO><IN> BNK FND UTI BON CMD SCR MKT TRA AIR CON LNG FIN CNO PUB </IN><G> SUP JUS CNG EXE CFT TRN </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether to allow persons who suffer indirect financial losses as a result of state antitrust violations to sue the violators.    Such suits usually are filed against manufacturers by those who purchase their goods from retailers or wholesalers, rather than directly. They typically allege that the manufacturer engaged in a price-fixing conspiracy that inflated the prices charged by middlemen who weren't part of the scheme. The suits can give consumers a tool to attack practices of manufacturers, and they give state attorneys general a way to file antitrust actions against manufacturers on behalf of consumers.    In 1977, the high court ruled that federal antitrust law only permits suits for damages by direct purchasers. Since then, 14 states have stepped in to fill the void, allowing indirect purchasers to file suits against violators of state antitrust law.    In May 1987, a federal appeals court in San Francisco ruled that state laws permitting indirect-purchaser suits clashed with federal antitrust law and were barred. The appeals court based its decision on the 1977 Supreme Court ruling.    Four states -- California, Minnesota, Alabama and Arizona -- appealed to the high court, backed by 20 other states and by the Reagan administration in friend-of-the-court briefs.    The case arose when cement manufacturers created a fund of more than $32 million to settle price-fixing suits filed by numerous direct purchasers and by several states that were indirect purchasers themselves or were acting on behalf of local governments which were indirect purchasers.    In 1984, when a federal judge in Arizona began hearings on distributing the settlement fund, ARC America Corp. and other direct purchasers objected to payments to indirect cement purchasers. The district and appeals courts ruled that indirect purchasers couldn't receive any settlement funds.    The case will be decided by only a seven-member court. Justices John Stevens and Sandra O'Connor, without explanation, said they won't participate in it. (California vs. ARC America Corp.)    The antitrust case was one of 20 the high court agreed on the first day of its new term to hear. The justices refused to hear arguments in about a thousand cases.    Pipeline Safety Fees   The justices will decide whether Congress delegated too much authority when it told the secretary of transportation in 1985 to set up a system of fees to pay for a natural-gas pipeline safety program. Last February, a federal district judge in Tulsa, Okla., ruled that the fees amounted to taxation, and declared the program unconstitutional because only Congress has the power to set taxes.    The appeal was filed by the Reagan administration. The fees were first challenged by Mid-America Pipeline Co., a Mapco Inc. unit.    The case is significant because it is the latest in a line of Supreme Court appeals raising questions about the separation of power under the Constitution. The principle that Congress can't delegate its authority to the executive branch or to other agencies is arising with increased frequency in suits, such as the one challenging the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction law last year. There are few modern court precedents on delegation of power. (Burnley vs. Mid-America Pipeline Co.)    FSLIC Authority   The high court also will decide when the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. may go to federal court to recover damages from former directors of state-chartered thrifts that the FSLIC insures.    The case involves an appeal filed by the FSLIC, which was appointed by the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in 1983 to act as receiver for Manning Savings andamp; Loan Association, an Illinois thrift.    The FSLIC had sued the former directors and stockholders for damages for issuing two dividends that allegedly violated state and federal law. A federal appeals court in Chicago ruled that when the FSLIC sues on behalf of a failed thrift, over claims based primarily on state law, the case must be handled in state, not federal court.    FSLIC warned that if the appeals court ruling is upheld, many FSLIC actions may be thrown out of federal court. In many of these cases, it is too late to file the lawsuits in state court. (FSLIC vs. Ticktin)   Retirement Funds   In an appeal by Mead Corp., the justices will decide when a company may keep surplus retirement funds after it terminates a pension plan either due to sale of assets, merger or other reasons. A federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., ruled last year that Mead, which sold its Lynchburg Foundry Co. in 1983 and terminated its pension plan, must pay early retirement benefits to six Lynchburg employees who had worked a sufficient number of years to qualify for benefits when the plan was stopped, but who hadn't reached the required age 62. The ruling may effect a large number of employee retirement plans. (Mead Corp. vs. Tilley)   WPPSS Appeals   The justices refused to become entangled in legal battles over the $2.25 billion default of the Washington Public Power Supply System in 1983. The high court turned down appeals by WPPSS bondholders who were contesting a ruling last October by the Washington state supreme court on one of several state securities-law issues. The court's action doesn't directly affect a federal class-action suit by most of the same 24,000 WPPSS bond buyers, which is the focus of a trial in federal court in Tucson, Ariz. (American Express Travel Related Services vs. WPPSS; Haberman vs. WPPSS; Wood Dawson Smith andamp; Hellman vs. Haberman)   CFTC Rules   The justices let stand Commodity Futures Trading Commission rules that require commodity-exchange members to submit to arbitration when customers request it to settle disputes. The court refused appeals by the Chicago Board of Trade and by Geldermann Inc., a ConAgra Inc. brokerage unit. (Geldermann Inc. vs. CFTC; Chicago Board of Trade vs. CFTC)   Leucadia National Case   The high court let stand the dismissal of a suit accusing Leucadia National Corp. and other companies of securities fraud in a 1986 bid for GATX Corp. The suit alleged that investors were misled into believing that Leucadia planned to merge with GATX. It charged that Leucadia officers were merely trying to drive up GATX stock. Lower federal courts dismissed the case because it didn't spell out any misrepresentation by company officials. (Stern vs. Leucadia National Corp.)    TWA Victory   The high court left intact a court award of $49.9 million in damages and interest that Summa Corp., a Hughes holding company, has already paid Trans World Airlines Inc. The damages were awarded in 1986 by a Delaware court, which concluded that the late Howard Hughes and the Hughes Tool Co. he controlled practiced self-dealing and breached a fiduciary duty owed TWA in the late 1950s. (Summa Corp. vs. TWA Inc.)    Blinder Robinson Sanctions   The justices turned down an appeal by Blinder, Robinson andamp; Co. and its founder, Meyer Blinder, challenging the Securities and Exchange Commission's authority to impose sanctions while suing a brokerage. In 1986, the SEC suspended the brokerage for 45 days and barred it from underwriting for two years. The SEC barred Mr. Blinder from the business, but said he could seek reinstatement after two years.    In January, a federal appeals court in Washington said the SEC must reconsider the sanctions because of an SEC error. But it rejected arguments that it is unconstitutional for the commission both to sue a broker in court and to discipline brokers administratively. (Blinder, Robinson andamp; Co. vs. SEC)   Lottery Ads   The justices agreed to decide whether the Postal Service may effectively ban newspaper advertising of privately run lotteries and newspaper publication of lists of prizes and winners. The Postal Service bans the mailing of such material, and since many newspapers send mail subscriptions, the effect is to ban their dissemination of private lottery advertising and results altogether. (The Postal Service ban doesn't apply to state lotteries.) A federal district court in Minnesota ruled that the ban on publishing winners' lists violates the First Amendment, but upheld the advertising ban. (Minnesota Newspaper Association vs. Frank; Frank vs. Minnesota Newspaper Association)   Railroad, Airline Drug Tests   The high court which is ready set to rule on the constitutionality of the government-ordered employee drug testing, agreed to decide whether railroads and airlines must bargain with workers over including drug tests in routine physical exams. A federal appeals court in Philadelphia ordered Consolidated Rail Corp. to bargain with workers over drug testing. (Consolidated Rail Corp. vs. Railway Labor Exec' Association)   Liberty Lobby Suit   The justices refused to hear arguments by Liberty Lobby Inc. that former Judge Robert Bork should have disqualified himself from a case. In the case, the federal appeals court in Washington ruled last February that the organization wasn't libeled by The Wall Street Journal. The lawyers argued that Judge Bork shouldn't have participated, because one focus of the lawsuit was a column by then-editorial writer Suzanne Garment, whose husband is a good friend of Mr. Bork's. (Liberty Lobby Inc. vs Dow Jones Co.)    Sabbath Work   The justices will review Illinois' refusal to pay unemployment benefits to a man who turned down a job because he refused to work on Sunday, even though his refusal wasn't based on any organized religion's tenets. (Frazee vs. Illinois Department of Employent Security)   Prosecuting Employers   The justices will decide whether states may prosecute employers who refuse to carry out promised payment o wages or benefits to employees, such as reimbursements for unused vacation time. The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ruled that federal pension and benefit law preempts state criminal prosecutions. (Massachusetts vs. Morash)</TEXT></DOC>