<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880714-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Demolition Derby Is Running in Court Over Used-Car Deal --- Hertz, Rhode Island Dealer Fight Over an Agreement To Buy Back Mitsubishis </HL><AUTHOR> Sanford L. Jacobs (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN AUT </IN><DATELINE> NEWARK, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   You don't stay on top in the rough-and-tumble rental-car business by being a cream puff. And anybody who thinks No. 1 Hertz Corp. is a pushover should speak to Paul Hauke. Hertz hasn't found him very easy to deal with, either.    Both Hertz and Mr. Hauke can play hardball when they think someone is trying to take unfair advantage. Mr. Hauke has a limp and an arrest record to remind him.    Mr. Hauke is general sales manager of Century Mitsubishi, a Warwick, R.I., car dealership that went after a piece of the rental-car market two years ago. His brother, Richard, Century's vice president and general manager, approached Hertz, which agreed in November 1986 to pay Century $29 million for a fleet of 3,300 new 1987 Mitsubishi Mirages and Galants. Hertz negotiated a price $10 per car above dealer cost. Factory incentives added about $100 a car to Century's profit.    Hertz took delivery at various East Coast locations. And the Haukes, as part of the deal, agreed to buy the cars back after Hertz was finished with them in a year or less, at a price determined by depreciation and damage to the cars.    The brothers soon learned that selling cars to Hertz was the easy part of the bargain. The trouble started when Hertz asked them to buy its used cars, and the Haukes rejected as &quot;commercially unacceptable&quot; many of the cars Hertz wanted to sell back. The ensuing dispute got very nasty. Hertz ultimately had Paul Hauke and several of his employees thrown in jail briefly on a theft charge. Hertz and the car dealer are suing each other for breach of contract in state courts.    Buy-back guarantees are the heart of many purchase agreements rental-car companies negotiate with manufacturers. Dealers, on the other hand, don't normally get involved in buy-backs. The deals protect rental companies against the vagaries of the used-car market when they sell off their cars, thousands of them each year, some no more than five months old. Hungry for sales, U.S. car manufacturers often agree to buy-back arrangements as an inducement to the rental companies. &quot;The rental-car companies are switching the onus onto the factory, rather than take it themselves,&quot; says Morris Belzberg, the chairman of Budget Rent a Car Corp.    Eager to land some of Hertz's business, Century Mitsubishi agreed to repurchase the cars at Hertz's purchase price, reduced by 1.7% for each month Hertz had them. The price was to be reduced further by the cost of repairing damage. For a $10,000 automobile after 12 months, Century would pay $7,960, minus repair costs.    Under the agreement, Century had 10 days in which to inspect the cars, appraise their condition and list estimated repair costs on forms provided by Hertz. Century could reject vehicles that were &quot;commercially unacceptable,&quot; which is to say, cars that had cracked engine blocks or damaged frames or that needed more than $500 in repairs.    The Haukes discovered that buying back cars rented in Florida and the Carolinas is one thing. But buying back cars driven in New York is something else.    When Paul Hauke saw the first New York-area used cars at Hertz's huge facility at Port Newark, N.J., &quot;It was like night and day between the Newark cars and the ones in the South. There were lots of burnt seats, poor repairs, torn bumpers.&quot; Of the 44 Galants Hertz wanted to sell, Century bought just 12, rejecting the rest.    Disagreements over used cars are as common as dents on hubcaps. Manufacturers expect pressure and gamesmanship from car rental companies on buy-backs, says Dennis Dooley, the manager of fleet financing and leasing at General Motors Acceptance Corp. &quot;I don't perceive that as anything other than normal buyer-seller relationship. Obviously, Hertz is going to hammer you down to accept all the dogs.&quot;    Car makers can afford to take a beating on buy-backs to please a big customer like Hertz and charge it off to marketing. But a dealer can't. Which is why few obligate themselves to buy back cars as Century did. &quot;It is not an everyday occurrence,&quot; says Paul Tschirhart, senior vice president and general counsel at Hertz. &quot;We prefer to have buy-backs with a manufacturer. We never had a problem with a manufacturer.&quot;    A problem developed for Century with the first batch of Newark cars it wholesaled to other dealers. Some of them developed electrical troubles because of short circuits in patched wiring behind the radios. Hertz had patched the wires when stolen radios were replaced. Paul Hauke hadn't spotted the patches, though Hertz told him that radios had been replaced.    The contract calls for Hertz to maintain the cars &quot;in accordance with standard Mitsubishi service requirements,&quot; and Mr. Hauke didn't feel that had been done in the case of the wiring.    During the next Newark inspection some weeks later, he removed every radio to look for patching. Hertz people &quot;said we were wasting their time,&quot; he recalls. Contention over wiring deepened distrust on both sides.    Mr. Hauke further alleges that, to fix burns in car seats, Hertz took fibers from inconspicuous areas of velour upholstery and glued them into the burn holes. Mr. Hauke says he discovered that in Philadelphia when he smelled glue in a car and later found fresh glue and fibers sticking to his pants. The proper repair is to replace the upholstery, he says.    Hertz managers, for their part, felt Mr. Hauke was asking for more expensive repairs than were warranted and looking for excuses to reject cars.    A Hertz spokesman says, &quot;There is no basis to what Hauke is saying about the wiring . . . and the seats. They are absolutely standard repairs, acceptable anywhere in the industry.&quot; Century wanted to inflate repair estimates to reduce its repurchase obligation, the spokesman, Joseph Russo, says. Mr. Hauke &quot;is looking for a much more costly repair that is nonstandard and would knock the price beyond the the {$500} limit for a buy-back.&quot;    Late in November, both sides, with their attorneys, met at Hertz offices in New York to try to iron out their differences. Hertz is owned by Park Ridge Corp., created by Hertz executives and their backers, to acquire the rental business from Allegis Corp. (now known as UAL Corp.) last year for $1.3 billion. Ford Motor Co. provided $500 million for an 80% interest in Park Ridge. Last month, Swedish auto maker AB Volvo agreed to buy a 20% stake in Park Ridge from Ford for $100 million.    Century agreed at the meeting to buy 2,200 of the used Mitsubishis over a period of several months. In addition, Hertz bought 950 new 1988 cars from Century for $7.6 million, with no buy-back obligation, and agreed that Century could keep $845,000 of factory &quot;rebate/incentive moneys&quot; Mitsubishi was paying -- $1,000 per car in December, $700 in January. Hertz says it normally would have insisted on credit for the rebates. But Century needed a financial boost because it claimed to be losing money buying back the cars, says Mr. Tschirhart. Mr. Tschirhart says Century is losing about $1,000 a car because the market for used Mitsubishis isn't what Mr. Hauke had anticipated.    Not so, Richard Hauke says: &quot;We would have no problem except {for the fact that} the cars were coming back in much worse condition than we ever imagined. I don't think anyone could afford to buy back cars in such condition.&quot;    In any event, the parties soon found themselves doing battle again, this time over the four-part forms Hertz supplied Century's inspectors when they came to assess the condition of the cars. They filled out a form for each car, listing damage and the estimated cost of repair. The procedure, says Paul Hauke, was for him to sign the forms as Century completed inspecting each car, keeping the completed forms until the inspections were done. Then he submitted signed forms to a Hertz manager for signature, which signified that Hertz agreed with the damage estimate. &quot;I never had a problem where they wouldn't sign,&quot; he says. &quot;I got them signed and left a copy.&quot;    But on March 31, after looking over 86 cars in Philadelphia and finding only 19 acceptable, Paul Hauke got into an argument with the local manager who refused to sign the forms. He insisted that Mr. Hauke go over the cars with him again or leave the forms; he would decide later whether to sign them.    Tempers had flared on both sides during the day. Hertz employees following Century's inspectors around called them &quot;thieves&quot; and &quot;frauds,&quot; according to an affidavit Century filed in a civil action Hertz brought two months later in a Rhode Island federal court. Hertz asked the U.S. District Court to order Century to accept the appointment of independent appraisers to evaluate the accuracy of Century's damage assessments, but when it failed to win a summary judgment without trial, Hertz withdrew the suit.    Back in Philadelphia in March, Mr. Hauke offered to leave a copy of the forms, but that was rejected; the manager wanted the original and all copies, Mr. Hauke recalls. &quot;He wanted me to have no paper work for what went on all day. I said, no way.&quot; Mr. Hauke said if the man wasn't going to sign for the cars Century wanted to buy, then he was leaving with the paper. He says he reminded the Hertz manager that the contract allowed Century 30 days to decide if it would buy the cars. He says the manager threatened to lock him in the facility overnight to reconsider the cars he had rejected.    Mr. Hauke says he threatened to sue Hertz if he were detained against his will, whereupon the manager relented, signing the forms for the cars Century wanted to buy. Mr. Hauke says he was allowed to leave. Mr. Tschirhart says that the Philadelphia incident was a factor in Hertz's decision three months later to call the Newark police when Mr. Hauke was arrested: &quot;We didn't want our people taking matters into their own hands. On advice of counsel, they called in the police to do what the police are supposed to do: keep the peace.&quot;    Mr. Tschirhart says Hertz wanted the forms so it could compare Century's assessments with those of independent appraisers. It wanted to be able to show that Century was overstating damage to avoid buying back cars as promised. (Mr. Hauke says he would have been glad to leave photocopies, but Hertz didn't suggest that.) &quot;The damages were getting higher and higher as the value of these used Mitsubishis was going down in the marketplace,&quot; the Hertz general counsel says. &quot;Even when they bought back cars, we felt we were getting ripped off, because, in reviewing the damage reports later, we saw they had $400 of damages when we found only $100,&quot; Mr. Tschirhart says. In other words Century paid $300 less for a car than Hertz believes it should have.    For Hertz to accuse someone of inflating damage estimates is ironic, Century suggests. In a written response to Hertz's suit the dealership filed in U.S. District Court in Rhode Island, Century maintains that &quot;Hertz has already admitted the identical misconduct which it now alleges Century has committed.&quot; A Century exhibit includes copies of news accounts of Hertz's admitting to &quot;overcharging customers and insurance companies by $13 million for auto repairs by using phony damage claims, altered documents and inflated repair bills.&quot; Hertz says such practices stopped in 1985 when top management learned of them and fired executives in charge of accident damage claims.    After relations between Century and Hertz deteriorated further, Paul Hauke made a videotape of an inspection of several hundred cars in Newark in March. The tape, which is in the possession of Century's lawyers, shows cars with missing hubcaps, burned seats, body repairs, flat tires and cracked windows. Bad tires and damaged glass violate the contract, which calls for Hertz to take care of such things before offering a car for repurchase, Century notes. At one point in the videotape, a Hertz manager tries to convince Mr. Hauke that scratches on hoods, roofs and trunks were &quot;ordinary wear and tear,&quot; caused by Hertz car-washing equipment.    Both sides were on edge when Paul Hauke and three co-workers showed up June 3 in Port Newark to inspect 201 cars; they eventually found 138 acceptable for repurchase.    Hertz says Mr. Hauke brought with him a 6-foot, 5-inch employee to &quot;intimidate&quot; Hertz. Mr. Tschirhart says the employee, Peter Slota, who was arrested with Mr. Hauke that day, wore a T-shirt that added to the impression. &quot;It said, 'Kiss My Ass, I'm on Vacation,'&quot; Hertz's lawyer says. While Mr. Slota is big, he is gentle, Mr. Hauke says, and he wasn't present to intimidate anyone; besides, he had made other inspection trips.    Mr. Hauke and two employees went to the Hertz office at Port Newark to get manager Stephen Linsteadt to sign condition reports on the 138 accepted cars. But Mr. Linsteadt refused, saying an executive who had to sign wouldn't be back until the following Monday.    What happened after that is in dispute. Paul Hauke says Mr. Linsteadt said something like this: &quot;Why don't you leave the forms here?&quot; Mr. Hauke says he responded that he was coming back Monday to inspect other cars and would bring the paper work back then. &quot;He didn't make a big deal about us leaving {the forms},&quot; Paul Hauke says.    Hertz's version is that Mr. Linsteadt made it clear he wanted the forms. &quot;We demanded copies, and they {the Hauke inspectors} went running out,&quot; Mr. Tschirhart says. &quot;They had carefully planned not to give us copies of the reports and to go off in the night.&quot;    While Mr. Hauke and Mr. Linsteadt were talking, it turns out, other Hertz employes had called the Newark police to report &quot;suspicious people on the property,&quot; according to the police report. The two policemen dispatched were told when they arrived that Hertz was expecting a business visit from four Mitsubishi representatives and that there was &quot;reason to believe these four individuals were going to use violent tactics to remove legal documents from the premises,&quot; the report added. The patrolmen later decided they had been called to intervene in a &quot;civil matter.&quot;    &quot;We had no other recourse,&quot; Hertz's attorney says. &quot;These are valuable documents. They had the only evidence, and they were walking off our property with that evidence.&quot;    As Mr. Hauke and his co-workers walked across the parking lot in the rain, Mr. Hauke says, a group of Hertz employees started yelling: &quot;There they are! There they are!'&quot; He and his two colleagues starting running for their car, where Mr. Slota was waiting for them.    The Newark patrolmen ran after them. One of them filed a report in which he said he took Mr. Hauke into custody after a short chase. Meanwhile, his partner shouted for the car to halt as the Century people began to drive away.    According to Mr. Hauke, the police drew their guns, handcuffed him and told him to sit on the wet ground. He refused. &quot;I didn't want to get all wet,&quot; he says. The policeman then kicked Mr. Hauke's legs out from under him, Mr. Hauke says. According to the police report, the first patrolman ordered Mr. Hauke to sit down, so the officer could assist his partner with Mr. Hauke's associates, who had locked themselves in the car.    Mr. Hauke stood up at one point, he says, and one of the policemen kicked him in the legs again. The patrolman's report doesn't mention that. But a Newark Police Department spokesman says police records confirm that Mr. Hauke was taken to the emergency room of University Hospital before being locked up in the Newark jail. And Mr. Hauke walks with a decided limp now, the result, he says, of being kicked by the police.    At 4:30 the next morning, a judge freed the four Century employees on their own recognizance. The initial charge signed by Hertz accused them of theft of movable property -- the 196 car condition reports Mr. Hauke had brought to Hertz's office. On June 23, in Newark municipal court, a charge of resisting arrest was added and a hearing was set for early August.    Now Hertz is suing Century Mitsubishi and Paul Hagen, a director and principal owner, in a New Jersey state court for breach of contract, seeking unspecified damages. The dealership has filed its own breach of contract suit, also in a New Jersey. Century claims Hertz failed to maintain the cars adequately and attempted to have the same rejected cars inspected more than once after making cosmetic repairs.    Richard Hauke says he isn't sure whether he would again attempt such a big fleet sale to a rental-car outfit, unless &quot;the terms were right and you had a lot clearer understanding up front. When you deal with a big company, you tend to rely on their image. This has been a real shock.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>