<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870818-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Red Medicine:Soviet Health System,Despite Early Claims,Is Riddled by Failures---As Life Expectancy Falls OffAnd a Crisis Is Perceived,Gorbachev Seeks Changes---Stories of Bribes in Hospitals---By mark D'anastasioStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Soviet central planners set norms for health care just as they do for everything else.    At the neighborhood clinics where 80% of all patients are treated, the norms call for physicians to see eight patients an hour. That is 7.5 minutes per visit, and Soviet studies show that five minutes of each visit is spent on paper work, a task complicated by chronic short supplies of preprinted forms and the absence of computers.    &quot;Our heads spin from rushing,&quot; says Pavel, the silver-haired chief of traumatology at a Moscow clinic, who, like some other Russians interviewed for this article, won't give his last name. A dozen patients with splints and slings sit in a dark corridor awaiting their turn at a 1950s-vintage fluoroscope. &quot;We wind up seeing the same patients several times over,&quot; the doctor goes on, &quot;when one thorough examination could have solved the problem if we had the time.&quot;    Soviet officials have long touted their supposedly free and comprehensive health care -- along with full employment, low-cost housing and cheap basic-food prices -- as evidence of the superiority of the Soviet way. But now Mikhail Gorbachev has ordered an end to the drumbeating. Shattering past pretenses, he is exposing the health system's failures and has put an overhaul of health care at the top of his agenda. A plan for the overhaul, with emphasis on preventive medicine, was announced Friday.    &quot;Revolutionary transformations are necessary in the field of health care,&quot; Yevgeny Chazov said during a televised speech last March shortly after Mr. Gorbachev appointed him to lead the overhaul as the minister of health. &quot;The number of unsolved problems that have piled up in this sphere is larger than in any other sphere of Soviet society.&quot;    Western specialists say that what Dr. Chazov, a 58-year-old cardiologist, calls &quot;unsolved problems&quot; actually amount to a health crisis on a scale unknown in any other industrialized country.    Life expectancy has declined, and mortality rates both for infants and for the total population are climbing. &quot;No other industrialized country in the postwar period has experienced a sustained falloff in even one of these indicators,&quot; says Murray Feshbach, an expert on the Soviet Union at the Georgetown University Center for Population Research, in Washington.    Reporter Leonid Zagalsky of Literaturnaya Gazeta recently wrote that many health facilities appeared to be &quot;from the previous century.&quot; For example, 35% of rural hospitals have no hot water, 27% no sewer systems, 17% no running water.    Dr. Chazov has disclosed that 12 of 33 maternity hospitals in Moscow don't meet basic sanitation standards. Pravda reports that negligence and lack of sanitation in many maternity wards have led to a rise in toxemia and septicemia infections, killing so many mothers and infants that administrators have been trying to hide their institutions' mortality rates. Chronic shortages of sterile bandages and the virtual absence of disposable needles, Pravda says, have made hospital infections commonplace.    &quot;We escaped with our lives,&quot; says 33-year-old Anna, who gave birth to her first son at Moscow's Maternity Hospital No. 25. &quot;There's no attention to hygiene. They write the infants' names on their arms with a ball-point and swaddle them in unsanitary cloth because there's a diaper shortage.&quot;    For years, Soviet officials kept the damning health statistics secret while boasting of world records for total number of doctors (1.2 million) and number of hospital beds (3.3 million). Now, as he has in other fields, Mr. Gorbachev has unleashed glasnost -- best translated as publicity, or public airing -- to wake up medical bureaucrats.    After a 14-year hiatus, data for male life expectancy were published this year by the U.S.S.R. Central Statistical Board. They show a drop from a peak of 66 years in the mid-1960s to 62 years in 1979. (Last year male life expectancy regained its 1972 level of 64 years, compared with 71.5 years for the U.S.) Female life expectancy also declined -- but to a lesser extent. Soviet death rates rose from a 1964 low of 6.9 per 1,000 to 10.6 in 1985. The infant-mortality rate, kept secret since 1974, recently was revealed to have risen from a low of 22.9 in 1971 to 26.0 in 1985. That is 2.5 times higher than the U.S. rate and ranks the U.S.S.R. 50th in the world, just behind Barbados.    Soviet commentators are bemoaning problems like the direct financial losses that result from the population's declining health. The 18th Congress of Soviet Trade Unions said improved medical services could save the state 90 billion rubles ($145 billion) a year in lost man-hours. Soviet military leaders are concerned about a less healthy manpower pool. Pravda complains that 12 of every 100 conscripts can't pass medical induction exams.    What's more, Soviet sources say that many who are inducted aren't fit for service. Moscow's Gagarin District military medical board had approved 18-year-old David for service in the tank forces when his mother, Nelli, put her foot down. &quot;They didn't care about the curve in his spine and a hump on his back that have been worsening for three years,&quot; she says, displaying a diagnosis from Moscow Clinical Hospital No. 59. Shortly before David was to leave for boot camp, doctors found he has spinal osteochondrosis, a bone disease. He now wears a 30-pound canvas-and-steel corset.    Opening the health crisis to public view has made it easier for Mr. Gorbachev's supporters to remove incompetents and other opponents of change. In response to a request for official comment on health statistics, the Health Ministry's chief spokesman, Andrei Petukhov, indicated that a broad purge was in progress in the medical bureaucracy. &quot;New people are being assigned to all the problems you mention,&quot; he said. &quot;No one is ready to talk to the press.&quot;    Dr. Chazov's predecessor as health minister, Sergei Burenkov, was sacked last March. Two deputy health ministers and the president of the Academy of Medical Sciences soon followed. Officially Mr. Burenkov was fired for failing to institute a promised industrywide wage increase. Medical personnel are among the nation's lowest-paid workers. They are also among the most corrupt, as they have turned to padding their earnings by extorting bribes from patients and by black-marketeering in scarce medicines.    Echoing a common complaint about the &quot;free&quot; health service, Yelena, a 38-year-old English teacher who recently had a kidney operation, says, &quot;A ruble to the nurse gets you a thermometer, another gets the sheets changed, another the toilet cleaned.&quot; Sipping a cup of tea in her bookfilled one-room flat, she adds: &quot;The surgeon gets a hundred or you'll just wait in bed. The chief physician already took a hundred to admit you to a clean ward.&quot;    Dr. Chazov said in his holiday speech on Soviet Medical Workers' Day last June 21, &quot;Our health system must be remade anew.&quot; This, he said, will mean shifting the industry from quantitative to qualitative norms and freeing physicians from the burdens of useless production targets like patients served per hour and hospital beds built per year.    As a first step, an experiment will begin Jan. 1 in Leningrad and three other places to develop new criteria. Patients taking part in the experiment will be able to choose their own doctors. &quot;Naturally, the physician who is deluged with patients -- and I hope there will be quite a few such physicians -- will have correspondingly greater earnings,&quot; Dr. Chazov said during a recent television appearance.    Surgeons and other specialists in the government health system got raises last year to 170 rubles ($274) a month from 140. Beginning physicians make 110 rubles but will get raises to 140 in November. Against the national average monthly salary of 200 rubles, these salaries don't look good. But the raises are welcome, of course. &quot;The government is showing they care more about us,&quot; says Semyon Konilovsky, an obstetrician who teachs at Moscow Medical Institute No. 1 and heads the institute's Konsomol (Communist Youth League) committee. &quot;So we're showing we care more about patients.&quot;    However, Soviet doctors aren't rushing to take advantage of another Chazov initiative that would let them increase their earnings: He encourages them to treat patients for pay in their free time. In Moscow's Gagarin District, for one, this hasn't caught on.    &quot;We have a long list of specialists we need to assist in our polyclinics. So far you can count the takers on one hand,&quot; says the chief of the district health department, Svetlana Bogolyubskaya. One obstacle is that doctors already routinely practice privately in exchange for unreported gifts -- and they would rather continue this illegal trade than register under a new law permitting private labor and pay a 12% tax.    Many doctors don't want to treat any patients, privately or in public clinics. Because of the low pay and poor working conditions, they prefer cushier jobs in the huge health bureaucracy and a network of 333 research institutes. Some 100 of these institutions, Dr. Chazov says, could be closed &quot;perfectly quietly and painlessly and neither public health nor the people would feel their absence.&quot;    A key problem remains the 1917 Bolshevik abolition of the Hippocratic Oath as part of an effort to do away with the &quot;bourgeois&quot; approach of patient-centered medicine.    It wasn't until 1971 that a Soviet doctor's oath was legislated, but it obligates the physician to submit to the state's interest first and the patient's only secondarily. &quot;The state is overwhelmingly focused on the health of the individual as contributor to the economic functions of the country, rather than on the individual per se,&quot; Mr. Feshbach of Georgetown has written.    Dr. Chazov recently spoke of the inattentiveness and brusque treatment that have become the hallmark of Soviet medical personnel. What Soviet doctors lack most, the minister said, &quot;is humanity.&quot;    But some patients are more equal than others. Far from being one egalitarian system, health care is divided into subsystems providing services of differing quality. A nationwide network of hundreds of clinics serves only elite patients from the Communist Party, the government and other privileged groups such as the military and KGB security police. These clinics siphon off a disproportionate share of resources. So far, Dr. Chazov has said nothing about changing this.    Valery Rutgaizer, the head of the State Planning Commission's social-welfare department, complained in the newspaper Sovietskaya Kultura that the quality of care is two to three times higher in the special clinics. &quot;This is the heart of social injustice,&quot; he said. While Dr. Chazov is known in the West as a Nobel Peace Prize co-winner (he and an American doctor received the 1985 award on behalf of the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War), he is known here as the former chief bureaucrat in the organization that maintains the network of special clinics.    As the Gorbachev administration struggles to improve health care, it must confront one major problem common around the world -- a shortage of funds.    According to Western experts, a drop in the share of the Soviet state budget assigned to health, from a high of 6.6% in 1965 to 3.9% for the current year -- as the Soviet economy came under increased strain in the 1960s and 1970s -- directly parallels the decline in the nation's health.    Dr. Chazov says plans call for doubling health's share of national spending by the year 2000. In addition, extrabudgetary sources are being considered, such as a state health lottery, government health bonds and direct contributions from the public. But concerned Soviet officials say that no change in financing policy has yet been seen.    Victor Mironenko, the head of the 42-million-member Communist youth organization, recently proposed to a government commission that medical instructors be assigned to all schools to combat what he calls the health and hygiene &quot;illiteracy&quot; of Soviet children. &quot;It's a very sharp and pressing basic problem,&quot; he said in an interview in the Kremlin's St. George Hall. &quot;But they answered no to our proposal. They said they just don't have money for everything.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>