<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871127-0047 </DOCNO><HL> With the Death of Chicago Mayor Washington,Political Factions Begin Maneuvering for Power---By Robert Johnson and Bill RichardsStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With the death of Harold Washington, the city's first black mayor, a delicate political and racial balance forged over the last five years is fractured, putting power up for grabs.    Politicians in the nation's third-largest city began maneuvering within hours after Mr. Washington died from a heart attack Wednesday. Neighborhood factions, often split along racial lines, are jockeying behind the scenes, and some are calling for a special election. Many of Mr. Washington's allies fear the choice of the council because his enemies there are plentiful.    For the moment, Vice Mayor David Orr, a white supporter of Mr. Washington's who is known to colleagues as &quot;Mr. Goody Two-Shoes,&quot; is in charge. That won't last long. The 50-member City Council is expected to name an acting mayor on Tuesday to serve until the next scheduled election in April 1989.    Speculation about Mr. Washington's successor includes a rumor that the Rev. Jesse Jackson might become a candidate; his staff denies it. Some political consultants say U.S. Rep. Dan Rostenkowski is pushing for his district's alderman, Terry Gabinski, a 49-year-old white man whose candidacy would be fought by many blacks. Another possibility is state attorney Richard M. Daley, son of former Mayor Richard J. Daley and a symbol of the Democratic machine that Mr. Washington promised to change.    The changes wrought by Mr. Washington have been largely symbolic, many critics and supporters of the late mayor say. Although patronage -- jobs given to people with political connections -- have been somewhat reduced, the city's other problems loom larger than ever.    Many public services are in disarray. Earlier this month, Education Secretary William J. Bennett branded Chicago's schools the worst in the nation. And Mr. Washington's critics say he was slow to help settle the recent 19-day teachers' strike -- the city's longest.    The city narrowly averted a recent attempt by federal officials to take over its public housing projects, where 144,000 people -- most of them supporters of Mr. Washington -- live with broken elevators and other maintenance problems.    Mr. Washington, who eschewed exercise, vacations and doctor's exams, suffered a heart attack at City Hall during a morning meeting with his press secretary, Alton Miller. The 65-year-old former congressman was pronounced dead two-and-a-half hours after being taken to hospital.    The mayor, who had quit smoking in recent years, was about 100 pounds overweight, doctors estimated. He had occasionally tried to diet on soup at lunch but had confessed to associates that he lacked willpower.    Political power was his specialty. In recent months he assembled the majority votes in City Council that he had sought since first being elected in 1983. He won office on a small majority, promising to dismantle Chicago's notorious political machine. Instead, he became the soul of his own new machine -- a political boss whose power was on the verge of exceeding even that of Mayor Daley, who died in 1976, local politicians say.    He seemed destined to be influential in the Democrats' nomination of a presidential candidate next year. He was backing Mr. Jackson, whose strategists were planning to meet with Mr. Washington next week to set campaign goals. Jerry Austin, Mr. Jackson's campaign manager, said Mr. Washington is a proven vote-getter who would have been an especially big factor in the March 15 Illinois primary.    An aide to presidential candidate Paul Simon said the Illinois senator also had hoped to win Mr. Washington's support if Mr. Jackson stumbled in the primaries or was passed over at the Democratic Party convention.    Such king-making notions, however, are taking a backseat to Chicago's backroom politics. The immediate issue is which city council member will be selected acting mayor by his colleagues. Alderman Orr, the interim mayor, said yesterday that he doesn't expect to be a candidate.    Although Mr. Washington won re-election easily last April, his city council power rested on a shaky coalition. Only 18 of the 50 council members are black. He forged an alliance between them, three Hispanics and four or five whites -- usually so-called &quot;lakefront liberals&quot; from the city's yuppified Northside neighborhoods -- to form a majority. But for the first three years of his administration, an opposition majority created a stalemate on everything Mr. Washington proposed. The &quot;council wars&quot; were fought over budgets, public works projects and city appointments.    Edward Vrdolyak, the alderman who led the opposition, was defeated by Mr. Washington while running as a third-party candidate for mayor last April. Mr. Washington's supporters say he was about to make great strides toward improving city services when he died.    Others were disillusioned. &quot;I don't think he did very much at all, to be blunt,&quot; said Quentin Young, Mr. Washington's former advisor on health. Such critics say Mr. Washington enjoyed the political infighting but was essentially bored with the day-to-day routine of governing.    &quot;It was a sloppy administration,&quot; says Salim Muwakkil, a black activist and associate editor of In These Times, a Chicago tabloid that focuses on social issues. The city's infant mortality rate continued to rise under Mr. Washington, &quot;and not much was done about it,&quot; he said. But Mr. Muwakkil said that Mr. Washington's opposition is partly to blame for such lingering problems.    Business leaders say Mr. Washington could have accomplished more by building links to the corporate community. &quot;It helps to have the sort of kitchen cabinet that many politicians create. But he never developed close ties with the white business community,&quot; says Thomas Roeser, president of the City Club of Chicago, whose 600 members are mainly business leaders.    Mr. Washington grew up in Chicago politics. As a teen-ager he distributed leaflets for his father, Roy, a precinct worker on the South Side. After serving as an Army sergeant on Guam during World War II, he earned a law degree from Northwestern University. His marriage to his high school sweetheart ended in divorce in 1951. But he advanced through a series of Democratic patronage jobs to election to the state Legislature and finally to Congress in 1980.    His career was almost wrecked in 1972 when he pleaded no contest to charges of failing to file federal-income tax returns for three years and served a month in Cook County jail. But his supporters dismiss the incident as mere carelessness.    &quot;He was a charming guy with a twinkling civility,&quot; says Mr. Roeser. &quot;But he was a mediocre mayor at best who showed masterly inattention to detail.&quot;    But even critics concede Mr. Washington became a folk hero to the city's minorities. He increased the number of blacks and women running government agencies, paved streets in neighborhoods that had been ignored for decades and enlisted legions of new voters to register with his rousing oratory.    He so involved blacks in politics that the old, largely white Democratic machine can't expect to easily reclaim power. Moreover, the political palates of Mr. Washington's followers crave another high-profile candidate, political observers here say.    Thus, if the City Council compromises on a caretaker acting mayor -- even a black -- it could set the stage for Mr. Jackson or another newcomer in the 1989 election. &quot;I think Jesse Jackson would see this as something he always wanted -- a forum from which he can wield national influence,&quot; says Mr. Roeser. &quot;You can only run for president so many times and you become a joke.&quot;    Mr. Jackson lives in Chicago and his national campaign headquarters is here, too; he was en route home yesterday after cutting short a trip to the Middle East to attend the mayor's funeral, which is scheduled for Monday.    The council contains several potential, compromise mayoral candidates who are black. But they're a bland bunch, unlikely to inspire the following among minorities that Mr. Washington had, political observers say. &quot;I think Jesse Jackson alone could command the kind of enthusiasm and numbers to put together a successful campaign,&quot; says David Axelrod, a consultant to Sen. Simon.    Other possible candidates mentioned in political circles here include Rep. Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and former Mayor Jane Byrne. Mr. Rostenkowski couldn't be reached yesterday, but political sources say he has expressed interest in the mayoral job in the past. Ms. Byrne declined to comment on her plans.    Another likely candidate is Mr. Vrdolyak, who got 42% of the vote while losing to Mr. Washington last April and recently became a Republican. The former alderman was Mr. Washington's best-known critic. Mr. Washington's death ends Mr. Vrdolyak's main campaign issue and maybe his political career, Mr. Axelrod said. &quot;I'm sure if Washington knew he had to go, there's no one he would rather take with him than Vrdolyak.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>