<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880122-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE CONTRAS REJECTED a bid by Managua for immediate peace talks.    Cease-fire negotiations between the rebels and the Sandinista government weren't due to begin until next week, but a Nicaraguan delegation arrived unexpectedly in Costa Rica and asked to meet immediately. Contra leaders attending a meeting with mediator Cardinal Obando said the group did not consist of high-level officials and accused Managua of trying to scuttle the first direct Contra-Sandinista talks.    Managua agreed to hold the talks next Thursday and said it would allow an international panel to ensure rebels' political rights after a cease-fire.    ---   AQUINO NAMED Gen. Fidel Ramos to be defense secretary of the Philippines.    The armed forces chief of staff succeeds Rafael Ileto, who resigned yesterday after expressing dissatisfaction with his role in government, the military hierarchy and the fight against communist rebels. Ramos was succeeded by a protege, Gen. Renato de Villa, as armed forces chief. The shake-up had been expected since a near-successful military coup in August and widens the role of the military in the government.    The post will allow Ramos to pick successors for more than 40 generals due to retire soon and gives him a platform for a possible presidential bid.    ---   Israel eased curfews in four Gaza Strip refugee camps, allowing thousands of Palestinians to return to work for the first time in 12 days. Troops also reinforced a coastal road after an unsuccessful firebomb attack on a school bus. Meanwhile, Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze urged the U.N. to sponsor a Mideast peace conference.    ---   Bonn's Foreign Minister Genscher urged Reagan to press ahead on talks with Moscow on reducing short-range nuclear weapons in Europe. Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze called for such cuts in a recent visit to West Germany. Shevardnadze, now in Spain, criticized France for tightening defense links with West Germany.    ---   The Transportation Department proposed a new auto-safety standard designed to give better protection to occupants in cars when they are struck from the side. The proposal would be one of the few significant auto-safety standards advanced by the department under Reagan.    ---   The State Department lodged a strong protest with Haiti's military-led government over the arrest of an opposition leader. He was charged with disturbing the peace, inciting disorder and violence. Meanwhile, Leslie Manigat, apparent winner of Sunday's boycotted presidential elections, urged international acceptance of the vote.    ---   Armand Hammer said he will build a $30 million museum for his extensive art collection at one of the busiest intersections in Los Angeles. Hammer had long promised to give the collection to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.    ---   Reagan plans to address drug-abuse and education themes in his State of the Union speech Monday, along with repeating calls for fiscal and social conservatism. Separately, the Justice Department said that more than half the men arrested for serious crimes in a dozen U.S. cities tested positive for illegal drug use.    ---   The FAA urged airlines not to team inexperienced pilots in the cockpit, citing concern over the experience level of pilots involved in the November crash of a Continental Airlines jet in Denver. The agency also announced tighter maintenance restrictions and said there was a 26% rise in reports of near-collisions in 1987.    ---   Pravda said that about 16 million Soviet workers will be laid off by the year 2000 under Soviet leader Gorbachev's drive for labor efficiency and discipline. Soviet unemployment officially was supposed to have ended in the 1930s, but a new law forces state plants to pay their own way and allows managers to trim employment rolls.    ---   Argentina's military appears to be united against further trials for officers suspected of human rights abuses during the 1970s &quot;dirty war,&quot; and many in Argentina believe the military will demand amnesty. Troops loyal to the government this week put down a rebellion by a former officer seeking an end to the trials.    ---   Vietnam's Communist Party chief said Vietnamese troops could leave Cambodia by 1990, barring a deterioration in the security situation. In France, Premier Hun Sen of Phnom Penh's Vietnamese-backed government proposed the two-year timetable for withdrawal at peace talks with Cambodian resistance leader Prince Sihanouk.    ---   Reagan approved a policy change that will permit U.S. firms to send up satellites that can take highly magnified pictures of Earth. The ban on satellites that can take pictures of objects smaller than 10 meters across had been imposed because of fears that military secrets would be revealed.    ---   Arizona's police chief told a state House panel considering the impeachment of Gov. Mecham that the governor attempted to interfere with a 1987 investigation of an alleged death threat. The official was the first witness at the impeachment hearings.    ---   A Trident missile was destroyed when it developed a problem after being launched from Cape Canaveral. It was the first failure in nine test launchings of the Navy's new submarine-based nuclear missile.    ---   Tibetan police released 59 people detained for taking part in two anti-Chinese protests in Lhasa last fall, the official Chinese news agency Xinhua said. More than 80 people were detained in the protests, in which an estimated 14 people were killed. </TEXT></DOC>