<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Nuclear NATO: A Moment of Truth---By Irving Kristol</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><TEXT>   One of the more pernicious phrases that has gained currency in recent years is &quot;the arms-control process.&quot; Note that word &quot;process.&quot; There seems to be an overwhelming consensus, both in the U.S. and Western Europe, that whatever the difficulties encountered in specific arms-control negotiations, such negotiations are an integral part of some metaphysical process and that it is terribly important this process continue. Toward what end?    Well, the unstated -- or at least rarely stated -- hope is that arms-control negotiations in and of themselves will lead to &quot;better understanding,&quot; a climate of greater civility, a dispelling of mutual suspicions, and eventually a radical reduction in the risk of war. This is, of course, a wishful fantasy. We have had a century of experience with arms-control negotiations and they have done absolutely nothing to avoid or even mitigate conflicts among nations. Such conflicts arise from a clash of strategic interests, nationalist ambitions or aggressive ideologies. Nations will not accept -- or at least not accept for long -- a level of armaments that hinders the pursuit of goals they deem important.    If there is no such thing as an arms-control process, there is, however, such a thing as substantive arms-control negotiations. Such negotiations do not diminish the risks of war, but they may, if successfully concluded, establish a definition of &quot;civilized&quot; warfare, involving the non-use of various kinds of weapons. Thus we have had successful arms-control negotiations on bacterial warfare and certain kinds of chemical warfare, with treaties preventing their first use. It is important to realize, nevertheless, that such treaties are not self-enforcing. In all cases, the parties to the treaty are free to arm themselves with a minimum of such weapons, so as to preserve a second-strike capability should a violation occur. It is this second-strike capability that serves as a deterrent, not the treaty itself. And it is the first use of those weapons that is prohibited, not the existence of the weapons themselves -- this latter prohibition being regarded as unrealistic because it is unenforceable.    In short, an arms-control negotiation makes sense when it focuses on the first use of a particular weapon or category of weapons. Efforts to define relative numercal limits may be useful in that context, but they are of secondary, not primary, importance. It is the failure to perceive this distinction and to take it seriously that is creating such extraordinary confusion around our current negotiations with the Soviets over the partial &quot;de-nuclearization&quot; of both the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Soviet forces in Europe.    Most proponents of that mythical arms-control process are naturally pleased with the progress of such negotiations, since they are convinced that the removal of intermediate-range missiles from the European front, followed perhaps by a further reduction (or even removal) of shorter-range missiles, would lessen the probability not only of nuclear war, but of war itself. They may well be right on the first point, but are certainly utopian about the second. Indeed, it is this very prospect of a shift in probabilities from nuclear to conventional warfare that is giving rise to so much alarm and controversy.    One need have little sympathy with the anxiety of our Western European allies over the fact that Mr. Gorbachev has suddenly become &quot;reasonable&quot; about arms-control negotiations at the nuclear level. These countries are the ones that have placed the greatest emphasis on the arms-control process, and have even intermittently insinuated that the Reagan administration was not as enthusiastic about this process as it should have been. They are the ones, too, that made the original commitment to withdraw NATO's medium-range missiles if the Soviets would do likewise. Now they are very uncomfortable as they face, more nakedly, the massive Soviet superiority at the conventional level. But, in politics as in personal affairs, there are times when one has to take &quot;yes&quot; for an answer.    The same is true, one has to note sadly, for those American conservative strategists who, properly suspicious of the arms-control process, are equally suspicious of any agreement that emerges out of this process. They, too, note that any step toward denuclearizing NATO serves only to emphasize conventional-level Soviet superiority. Unfortunately, after publicly insisting for a decade that we had to install those medium-range missiles in order to get the Soviets to remove theirs, they cannot suddenly insist that, in retrospect, the installation of those missiles was a good idea in its own right, and that we should not remove our missiles until the Soviets reduce their conventional forces -- which the Soviets clearly have no intention of doing. Here, again, it is a case of having to take &quot;yes&quot; for an answer.    But is it such a bad thing, in this instance, to have to take &quot;yes&quot; for an answer? In the end, it all depends on one's view of the role of nuclear weapons in modern warfare, and particularly their role in the defense of Western Europe.    Would we make such a commitment today? One very much doubts it. The situation has changed, after all. The Soviets are now our equal (at the least) in nuclear weaponry, so we would be committing ourselves to mutual assured destruction -- in other words, to national suicide. As Charles de Gaulle tartly observed when France refused to join NATO, nations never do commit suicide for the sake of other nations. The American nuclear &quot;umbrella&quot; is now more fictional than real. It is really unthinkable that we should precipitate a nuclear exchange with the Soviets -- or an exchange at any level, since escalation is so inherently likely -- because of anything they do outside the Western Hemisphere.    It is not even clear the European members of NATO would allow us to use such weapons in response to a Soviet conventional thrust. Theory is one thing, reality is another, and while the nations of Western Europe wish to resist a Soviet occupation, they also shy away from becoming a radioactive battlefield. And who can blame them, especially when they harbor the suspicion that, after a nuclear exchange in Europe, the U.S. and the Soviets would prudently decide to spare each other? That suspicion is so reasonable as to be ineradicable.    Which leaves us with the oft-heard argument that, fictional as the American nuclear umbrella may be and implausible as a Western European nuclear response to a conventional attack might be, there is still enough uncertainty in this situation so that NATO's nuclear weapons do constitute a &quot;deterrent.&quot; True enough -- but one can assume that, some time or other in the future, the Soviets will explore this zone of uncertainty. They might, for instance, find occasion to occupy a &quot;troubled&quot; frontier area of Turkey or Norway, both members of NATO. And how would NATO respond? With sound and fury, no doubt, but signifying nothing. Can one envisage NATO forces attacking East Germany in response to a Soviet provocation in Turkey? Would any West German government allow it? No.    Actually, the Soviets are not likely to clash with Turkey, and there is a lesson to be learned here. The Turks have the largest army in NATO and they will offer fierce, determined and implacable resistance to any Soviet aggression. The Soviet regime is really in no position to contemplate such a costly and bloody adventure, no matter how preponderant its power. A strong military establishment (conventional) and an unambiguous will to fight in defense of one's nation are still the most authentic -- because they are the most credible -- deterrents.    So why can't West Germany be like Turkey? Because its national will has been corrupted by a reliance on NATO's nuclear &quot;deterrent.&quot; The idea that Germany, with its powerful military traditions, should be as defenseless as NATO's commanders now assure us it is -- four days to a Soviet victory, they say! -- is preposterous. Something is wrong, and what is wrong is NATO's reliance on nuclear weapons, which permits the West German government (and others, as well) to avoid the military expenditures and strategy that would make a conventional defense plausible. Plausible enough, at any rate, to make a Soviet thrust into Europe an unattractive option.    The current crisis in NATO does not result from Mr. Gorbachev's cunning but rather from a reluctance to confront the issue of the role of nuclear weapons in the defense of Europe. Obviously, NATO -- even a purely European NATO -- would need a sufficiency of such weapons (just as it now needs a sufficiency of chemical weapons) to deter a Soviet first use of them, regardless of any arms-control treaties that might be signed. But reserving those weapons for this purpose would mean that Western Europe would finally have to face its moment of truth: the recognition that to deter the Soviets it would have to develop its conventional forces, and convincingly assert the will to use them. An American presence in Europe, supposedly representing a nuclear &quot;trigger,&quot; is no longer a substitute for that strength, that will.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>