<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870519-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Temps Now Take a Turn at Executive Jobs---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 05/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A small suburban San Francisco bank not long ago called William Crandall, who runs a company called The Corporate Staff, and asked for help. The bank badly needed someone for one of its most important jobs, senior credit officer.    So Mr. Crandall sent over Gilbert Zoeller, a 40-year bank-management veteran. The only thing unusual about this story is that Mr. Crandall isn't a management headhunter but a supplier of temporary help, or temps. His specialty, still relatively undeveloped, is to provide companies with people competent to fill managerial or professional slots on a short-term basis. His clients pay up to the hourly equivalent of $100,000 a year for this high-priced help.    Mr. Zoeller's stint as a temporary senior bank official is but the ultimate expression of the big change that is taking place in American work habits as more and more people at all levels of experience choose to free-lance rather than make a full-time commitment to a single employer. They come in all shapes and sizes: early retirees, corporate dropouts, job losers and recent college grads. Temps now represent some one-quarter of the work force, according to the Conference Board, and their numbers grow rapidly as employers turn to them as part of efforts to raise productivity by cutting back wasted staff effort.    Andrea Martin, who runs her own public-relations firm but also works for Mr. Crandall part time as an &quot;associate,&quot; describes the new employer-employee relationship as &quot;less of a marriage and more of a liaison.&quot; The change has enormous social implications, she says. &quot;Job security is the basis of a mortgage, sending kids to college, long-term security.&quot; The new style of work offers less security, emotional as well as financial. &quot;It's more of a hustle.&quot; That could mean changes in other familiar institutions. It probably already has contributed to a drift in life patterns away from the traditional path of college, corporate employment, marriage, children, home ownership and education of children -- with the new generation repeating the pattern its parents set. Temps are more like entrepreneurs. They do not depend on an organization for a sense of identity but rather on their own interests and skills.    Mr. Crandall has lined up some 350 &quot;associates&quot; with impressive resumes. He himself struck out on his own less than three years ago after working for such blue chips as Wells Fargo and Bechtel Corp. His revenues in the first quarter this year exceeded all of last year, he says.    The great purge of middle and upper-level managers in corporate America -- now estimated to have displaced a half-million executives in five years -- has done two things for Mr. Crandall. It has provided him with potential associates from among the displaced and it has yielded him clients from among the companies that have pared back their work forces. Staff jobs have been especially hard hit, but even the most budget-conscious companies don't mind hiring a planner or a human-relations specialist, for example, on a temporary basis for a special assignment.    Moreover, a good many managers thinned from the corporate ranks have started up businesses of their own, or in some cases have taken over a former division of a corporate giant by means of a leveraged buyout. They often seek temporary help in professional or technical fields outside their expertise. Small businesses, vulnerable to business swings because of their limited access to capital, have a special need for flexibility in employment.    Mr. Crandall makes heavy use of temps in running his own business. Elizabeth H. Curtis, an associate who works part time for The Corporate Staff, also puts in some hours running an educational foundation. Her Corporate Staff assignment is doing community relations for the Environmental Protection Agency's toxic-waste superfund program. Clebern E. Best works full time as assistant to the controller at Bechtel, but is an adviser to Mr. Crandall.    Mr. Best observes that the fast rate of change in business today accounts for the demand for higher-level temps. &quot;We get companies in start-up situations who need experienced help to get their companies off the ground. Or maybe a company has had an unusual expansion of demand in a department but isn't sure the demand will continue. A bank may ask us to assist a borrower who is in trouble by sending in an experienced manager temporarily. Or a company may have an illness in a key spot and need temporary help.&quot;    Mr. Crandall says he sells &quot;completed assignments.&quot; Other temporary-help agencies supply people with specific job titles, such as civil engineers, but he works with the client to define a project and provide the person or persons to carry it out. This discipline of defining what needs to be done is one source of savings in the use of temporary help, he says.    Clients pay the agency a flat hourly fee keyed to the going market rate, including benefits, for an employee of that caliber. Associates are paid by The Corporate Staff but are independent contractors, responsible for their own taxes and benefits. The rate is lower, usually, than what a company would pay a management consultant but somewhat higher than most temporary agencies would charge.    &quot;Some companies now staff for the bottom of a business cycle, rather than the top,&quot; says Mr. Crandall. &quot;We speculate about the day when everyone will think of jobs as temporary. Companies will have a hard core of leaders and professionals and contract out for staff.&quot;    It's an interesting thought, but it cannot be certain whether temping is some fundamental change or merely the product of an industrial realignment made necessary by the economic climate of the 1980s. Inflation had softened cost controls in the 1970s, causing companies to overstaff. Then the ending of inflation brought many companies under cost pressures once more -- as did the increased globalization of markets -- necessitating greater productivity. A new round of inflation could produce a new round of staffing, with corporations inducing temps to become permanent employees. If economic growth continues at its present rate, the 1990s could see a shortage of qualified workers that would induce them to seek permanent staff.    Moreover, some corporations aren't sure they like temps. That very lack of identification with the corporation and its aims and the absence of loyalty to the corporation and fellow workers is seen as a business handicap. Even the best-qualified managers or professionals are challenged by a new environment, although Mr. Crandall says there has been surprisingly little trouble with that.    On the other hand, the temp trend may not be temporary. A lot of skilled people like the freedom and mobility temping offers. There is a new thirst for entrepreneurship, as reflected in the large risks so many young Americans are taking to start small businesses. Some Americans who have taken early retirement from corporate management say they are far happier doing consulting or volunteer work than they were in their previous jobs.    Bill Crandall, Clebe Best, Betty Curtis and Andrea Martin may be in the vanguard of a major change in the way Americans work and live. If so, it is going to have a lot of spinoffs elsewhere in our society. </TEXT></DOC>