<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0109 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Warming Up, Keeping Warm </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Calgary, Alberta  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pierre de Coubertin, founder of the modern Olympic movement, disliked the Winter Games because they lacked universality. In other words, many lucky nations didn't possess the frosty climate needed to compete effectively. Avery Brundage, the curmudgeon who headed the International Olympic Committee in the 1950s and '60s, didn't like 'em either, because he believed the commercial ties of Alpine skiing, figure skating and hockey were antithetical to the Olympics' amateur tenets.    Here in this cowboy-hatted metropolis, however, those -- and other -- issues are of little moment. Far more important is getting the chuck wagons geared up to dispense free flapjack breakfasts on the streets downtown during the Games, which begin tomorrow. I guess it goes to show you can swallow anything with enough butter and syrup on it. Even Old Ave would be pleased -- the chefs'll be amateurs.    Calgary is going all out to make a roaring success of these Winter Olympics, the first ever in the big ice sheet to our north, and even a last-minute batch of cancellations that defrosted the hotel-room situation hereabouts probably won't spoil the party. OCO '88, the organizing committee whose initials stand for &quot;Olympiques&quot; Calgary Olympics, a redundancy that's &quot;de rigueur&quot; in this bilingual land, is in the happy position of being assured of a profit on the show before it starts.    That's thanks largely to the &quot;largesse&quot; of ABC-TV, whose pre-emptive $309 million television-rights bid produced cheers here and Pepto-Bismol all around at 1330 Avenue of the Americas in New York, the network's home base. OCO also owes its guaranteed success to the pioneering work of Peter Ueberroth, czar of the 1984 Summer Games in Los Angeles, who hit on the idea of getting free labor from volunteers in return for colorful uniforms and badges. Some 9,400 people signed on here.    Whether ABC will make money on the deal depends on how Joe and Joan Fan back home respond to the 94 1/2 hours of Olympic programs it will air during the event's 16-day run. If the past is a guide, the network will do about as well as the American team. A couple of early losses by the U.S. hockey squad at the 1984 Games in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, iced TV ratings -- and ad rates -- for the duration.    Three hundred nine million dollars buys some clout, which enabled the network to arrange for the Yank puck chasers to open here against Austria, a putative pushover. That could help, but it might take more than a few U.S. hockey victories to save ABC's bacon. Winter games feature sports that many Americans wouldn't cross the street to watch, especially an icy street.    Moreover, the kind of direct competition that is most satisfying to athlete and spectator alike will be almost absent here. In just about every event, athletes will vie singly or in pairs against a clock or tape, or to please a panel of judges. The drama won't be so much in the performance as in the measurement.    And this being the Olympics, the action on the ice and snow will have to compete with the bureaucratic maneuverings that form the backdrop to every international sports extravaganza. The U.S. already has supplied one by unilaterally banning Kerry Lynch, a medal contender in Nordic combined (ski jumping and cross-country skiing), for &quot;blood doping&quot; -- freezing his blood to increase oxygen-carrying red cells -- during the 1987 world championships. Another case involves charges that the Soviet Union's Nikolai Gulyaev, perhaps responding to a glasnostian thaw toward private enterprise in his homeland, tried to sell steroids to a Norwegian speed skater. His fate is being decided by the sport's governing body.    A flap of a different nature arose when the Soviets, spying direct phone lines to Canadian immigration officials at various Olympic venues, accused their hosts of setting up &quot;defection hot lines.&quot; The Canadians retorted that the phones were there merely to help slice red tape over any athlete's visa problems.    Other side issues that might arise are weather and security. Calgarians like to tout the warm chinook winds that bring periodic respite from the winter cold, but the high temperature here one day last week was minus 8 degrees Fahrenheit, and one had to be a schnook to venture outdoors. Similarly, the Canadian press portrays Olympic venues here as virtual police strongholds, but no one who visited cop-every-50-feet Moscow during the Goodwill Games in 1986 will be impressed.    If all goes well, though, attention will focus where it belongs -- on the sports of these Games. Space precludes a complete event-by-event rundown, but here are are descriptions of a few:   ALPINE SKIING: Competitors ski down the mountain as fast as they can so the TV cameras at the bottom can give maximum exposure to the sponsor patches with which they are plastered. The Swiss are favored to win the most medals, because they grow up with skis on the ends of their legs. The U.S. did well at Sarajevo, but its fortunes have gone downhill since.    BIATHLON: This event, no doubt inspired by the Russo-Finnish war, combines cross-country skiing with rifle shooting. The sport's governing body is said to be mulling the inclusion of a third component -- the destruction of an armored car with a hand grenade. Medal winners have been offered roles as villains in the next James Bond movie.    LUGE: Competitors, called &quot;sliders,&quot; hurtle feet-first down an ice-covered track at 80 mph on flimsy-looking metal sleds that lack brakes. They spend most of the race staring up, probably because they are afraid to look ahead.    FIGURE SKATING: This is one of the most beautiful events in all Olympia, featuring music and balletlike routines on silvery ice. Contestants sport dazzling smiles, innovative hair styles, slim waists and sequined costumes. And those are just the men! So enjoy. </TEXT></DOC>