<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880216-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Single-Source Ad Research Heralds Detailed Look at Household Habits </HL><AUTHOR> Joanne Lipman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> IRIC DNB CDA </CO><IN> MKT </IN><TEXT>   Information Resources Inc. knows what Paxton Blackwell of Williamsport, Pa., eats for breakfast. It monitors the television shows he watches. It tracks the coupons he uses, where he shops, the brands he buys. It even knows which newspapers he reads.    Mr. Blackwell doesn't mind the Big Brother-style surveillance -- not the meters on the family TV sets or the surveys he answers on reading habits and brand preferences. &quot;I'm crazy about surveys anyway,&quot; he says. &quot;I always wanted to be a Nielsen family.&quot;    In fact, Mr. Blackwell's stint as an Orwellian guinea pig makes the A.C. Nielsen Co. television ratings system look about as sophisticated as an abacus in a computer store. He is part of a fledgling science called single-source research, which could revolutionize the advertising business. It goes far beyond mere TV ratings to track exactly what ads people see and how that affects what they buy. If perfected, single-source systems will do something no research has done before: show how -- indeed, if -- advertising works.    Of course, ad agencies may not want to know. Not only could the research prove that some ad campaigns are flops, but it may show that some companies advertise too much. That's a frightening thought for ad agencies, which work on commission.    &quot;I would expect many advertising budgets are beyond the saturation point,&quot; says Edward Dittus, a marketing director for SAMI/Burke Inc., a research firm developing a single-source system. A recent Information Resources analysis found, for example, that only seven of 20 brands' sales were affected at all by the level of TV advertising.    But single-source efforts are riddled with problems. One example: figuring out how to analyze all the information derived from following a person's TV, reading and shopping habits. &quot;We're going to get truckloads of data,&quot; says Bob Warrens, a senior vice president with ad agency J. Walter Thompson Co. and a member of an Advertising Research Foundation panel studying how to analyze the data. &quot;The computer-analysis systems that can make this stuff very useful to us simply don't exist. There's nothing sophisticated enough.&quot;    Another hitch is cost. Right now, single-source research costs advertisers hundreds of thousands of dollars a year per brand. Moreover, it tracks purchases only at grocery stores and drugstores.    Yet for all its problems, advertising executives say it will become widespread within five years, and the race to be first and best in supplying single-source data is fierce. Chicago-based Information Resources, Dun andamp; Bradstreet Corp.'s Nielsen unit, and Control Data Corp.'s Arbitron Ratings Co. and SAMI/Burke units all are developing single-source systems, and others may follow. None of the systems is complete; each has substantial drawbacks. But each firm insists its system is best and will prevail.    &quot;It's the wave of the future, and we want to be the first one out there with the best product,&quot; says Andrew Tarshis, president of NPD/Nielsen Inc., a joint venture of Nielsen and NPD Group, a Port Washington, N.Y., market-research firm.    The basics of single-source research are straightforward, although the companies' methods and technology differ. After recruiting a test panel of households -- which receive small payments or inducements like coupons -- the research firm meters each home's TV sets and quizzes family members periodically on what they read. Their grocery purchases also are tracked, with electronic scanners that read the universal product code on packages. For background, most systems also track retail data, like product sales.    By sifting that information, researchers can find out if, for example, people exposed to 50 Twinkie ads will buy more Twinkies than people exposed to 25 Twinkie ads -- and if so, how many more. They also can pinpoint television shows that attract very specific audience segments -- a show with an above-average proportion of viewers who buy Twinkies, say, or one with a below-average proportion of Twinkie buyers but promising demographics.    A Campbell Soup Co. single-source experiment with its V-8 juice shows how the system works. Using an index of 100 for the average household's V-8 consumption, Campbell found that demographically similar TV audiences can consume vastly different amounts of V-8. In early 1987, for example, &quot;General Hospital&quot; had a below-average 80 index, while &quot;Guiding Light&quot; had an above-average 120 index. The results were surprising, because &quot;General Hospital&quot; actually had a slightly higher percentage of women 25 to 54 years old -- the demographic group most predisposed to buy V-8-and so would ordinarily have been expected to be a better advertising forum to reach V-8 drinkers.    The Information Resources data that Campbell used isn't representative of all U.S. homes, and so isn't yet meaningful enough to act on. But when reliable information becomes available, Campbell will be able to rearrange its ad schedule to raise the average index. Thus, the advertising would reach more of the right people, says George Mahrlig, director of media services, &quot;and hopefully it would translate into sales.&quot; As the data and analysis improve, he adds, &quot;we should be able to analyze and find out how many commercials it takes to change a household's buying pattern.&quot;    Some industry executives are skeptical, however, that advertisers ever will use single-source data to buy TV ad time on a show-by-show basis. Currently, agencies buy packages of ad time that include a number of shows. &quot;It becomes prohibitively expensive&quot; to buy specific programs, says Thompson's Mr. Warrens. He says single-source data should be used more broadly -- for example, to test whether a candy bar usually pitched to mothers in prime time will sell even better to teen-agers on weekday afternoons.    Single-source data has come in for criticism for other reasons, too. In a new Thompson study, Mr. Warrens concludes that it may encourage short-term promotions, like coupons, that have readily measurable effects. Other industry executives say that the impact of advertising is cumulative, and that monthly or quarterly single-source data would lead advertisers to emphasize the short term.    The various single-source firms, meanwhile, are arguing over whose system is best. At this point, many industry officials say, Information Resources is the most advanced, with 12,000 households wired in 10 markets across the country. Participants have identification cards that they present to cashiers at participating stores; details of their transactions are stored electronically by household.    But the firm's participants don't constitute a representative national sample, in part because its system requires cable-TV hookups.    Nielsen, on the other hand, which is testing its single-source services in 1,500 homes and promises to be in 15,000 by year end, is criticized for its product scanner. Unlike Information Resources participants, Nielsen families must scan their products with hand-held electronic &quot;wands&quot; at home, keying in information about coupons and sometimes even prices.    &quot;Our research indicates that no more than about 5% of the population is willing to scan their products at home,&quot; says Gian Fulgoni, president of Information Resources. Campbell's Mr. Mahrlig adds, &quot;The more passive the better. Anything you get people that involved in is going to create some kind of effect on them, and you don't know what it is.&quot; Nielsen counters that its system is better because it allows tracking of purchases from a wider range of stores.    The rivalry between Information Resources and Nielsen is all the more intense because Nielsen last fall tried to acquire Information Resources. The Federal Trade Commission blocked the sale.    Arbitron and SAMI/Burke, meanwhile, have 600 Denver-area homes wired. But their system doesn't track product prices. In any case, they won't decide until April what to do with their program, says Arbitron's president, A.J. &quot;Rick&quot; Aurichio.    Still, Mr. Aurichio says researchers have just begun to tap the potential of single-source systems and ultimately could go far beyond supermarket and drugstore purchases. With the people meter, he says, &quot;we have the technology to ask further questions right on the TV screen. We could even find out whether you've used fast- food or bought a new car.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>