<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880902-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   AFGHAN REBELS ATTACKED the capital as Kabul's forces bombed Pakistan.    According to Western diplomats, the Moslem guerrillas launched rockets at Kabul and its airport and inflicted &quot;massive damage&quot; on the city. Depots and transport aircraft also were damaged. In Islamabad, Pakistani officials said seven Afghan fighter-bombers struck deep inside Pakistani territory, killing at least one person. It was considered one of the most violent days in Afghanistan's 10-year-old civil war.    The U.S. condemned the attack on Pakistan, terming it a violation of Geneva peace accords. The White House plans to raise the issue at the U.N.    ---   POLISH WORKERS ENDED strikes at Gdansk's Lenin shipyard and elsewhere.    At least 3,000 strikers ended their occupation of the big shipyard following Walesa's talks Wednesday with Warsaw officials. The government pledged to discuss the outlawed Solidarity union and other issues in an effort to end 17 days of labor unrest. Workers also ended strikes at other shipyards and at the Stalowa Wola steel mill in southern Poland. Dock workers and miners in two cities remained on strike.    The strikes, considered the worst labor turmoil in seven years, began Aug. 16 and at their height had idled 20 sites employing about 100,000 people.    ---   A federal air-safety official said a cockpit tape recording recovered from the wreckage of a Delta jetliner in Texas showed that pilots discussed an engine problem seconds before the plane crashed Wednesday, killing 13 people. Investigators at the Dallas-Fort Worth airport scrutinized the rear engine of the Boeing 727 jetliner.    ---   President Pinochet announced that all exiles, including members of the Marxist government he toppled in a 1973 coup, could return to Chile. The daughter of former President Salvador Allende, who died in the takeover, became the first of an estimated 500 exiles to re-enter the country.    ---   Burma's president rejected demands by protesters for an immediate end to the autocratic regime that has ruled the country for 26 years. In his first public statement in more than a week, Maung Maung offered little hope for a quick end to weeks of unrest. Rumors of an impending coup continued to sweep Rangoon.    ---   Iran ordered its frontline troops to retaliate against any Iraqi violations of a cease-fire that began Aug. 20 in the Persian Gulf war. In Geneva, Perez de Cuellar named Sweden's U.N. ambassador as his special representative to the Iran-Iraq peace talks, which have been deadlocked for a week.    ---   Bush traveled to Massachusetts and accused his Democratic opponent of fighting efforts to clean up Boston harbor. Dukakis, campaigning in California, criticized the GOP presidential nominee's claims on education, saying Bush was &quot;playing hooky&quot; when the Reagan administration cut teacher training and remedial courses.    ---   FBI Director Sessions approved a five-year affirmative action program to hire and promote more minority employees. Sessions vowed to eliminate any racism or discrimination at the bureau, which is the target of pending legal actions by a group of Hispanic FBI agents and a black agent.    ---   The Soviet Union would dismantle the equipment at a disputed radar complex in Siberia if the U.S. agrees to extend the ABM treaty by as long as 10 years, Moscow's chief arms negotiator said at talks in Geneva. He denied that the Krasnoyark radar violated the 1972 pact and said U.S. radars in Greenland and Britain were a violation.    ---   Mexican opposition lawmakers disrupted President de la Madrid's final state of the union address with chants condemning alleged fraud in the country's July 6 national elections. The president vowed that he wouldn't allow protests over the balloting to turn Mexico into a &quot;splintered nation.&quot;    ---   A bomb exploded at a hotel in Windhoek, Namibia, killing at least two people and wounding about a dozen others, police said. And a mine exploded on a railway line about a mile from the hotel. The blasts occurred as guerrillas fighting South African rule agreed to observe a cease-fire.    ---   China and the Soviet Union failed to resolve their differences during five days of talks aimed at ending the conflict in Cambodia. An official in Beijing also said that normalization of relations between the two communist powers &quot;has yet to be materialized.&quot; The talks had been seen as a step toward the first Sino-Soviet summit in 29 years.    ---   The U.S. began removing its intermediate-range missiles from Western Europe in accordance with a treaty signed by Reagan and Gorbachev last December. A truck convoy hauled nine Pershing II missiles from a base near Stuttgart to be prepared for destruction. The remaining 420 missiles are to be eliminated within 36 months.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci said the Pentagon's recent contract fraud affair should lead to changes in the procurement system by Congress, rather than the Defense Department. But Carlucci criticized proposals to remove the military from weapons purchasing by the creation of an independent U.S. arms acquisition agency.    ---   Died: Luis W. Alvarez, 77, Nobel Prize-winning physicist, Wednesday, in Berkeley, Calif., of complications from surgery to treat cancer of the esophagus. </TEXT></DOC>