<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880223-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Bolstering Antitrust Law </HL><SO> </SO><IN> RET </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   In arguing against legislation that would codify the prohibition against resale price maintenance (&quot;An Antitrust 'Bill of Goods,'&quot; editorial page, Feb. 5), Assistant Attorney General Charles Rule is correct in stating that with &quot;barely a peep of opposition&quot; Congress is on the verge of passing this much-needed bill. The reason for such unusual unanimity among Democrats and Republicans alike is precisely the reason that Mr. Rule fails to discern: the great benefit to American consumers of having the widest possible selection of goods and services at the lowest prices.    Strangely absent from Mr. Rule's analysis is any recognition of the role that retail competition has had in our vibrant, free-market system. The &quot;Freedom From Vertical Price Fixing Act&quot; is a congressional pledge that the free market will not be jeopardized by price-fixing conspiracies aimed, in particular, at discount retailers that have a vital place in that system.    The legislation does two things: It ensures that retailers victimized by unlawful price-fixing conspiracies can continue to seek redress in the courts, and it ensures that the law forbidding such conspiracies will remain viable. When a competitive harm is suffered by a business or a consumer, the antitrust laws permit redress through either public enforcement (the Justice Department or the Federal Trade Commission) or private enforcement (by the parties directly injured).    While Congress cannot compel the executive branch to bring actions against price fixers, Congress can take steps to ensure that private suits with merit are not foreclosed from going to court. This act would provide such assurance and, in the process, reaffirm Congress's commitment to the 75-year-old principle that resale price maintenance is per se illegal under federal antitrust laws.    Why is competition among retailers so important? Retailers always have competed through innovative marketing methods, enchanced services and, most important, by offering lower prices. If a manufacturer sets a retail price, it will be pressured to do so at a level that allows all or most of its retailers to continue selling at a profit. The result is that the lower-cost retailer is denied any ability to compete based on price. The consumer, in turn, ends up subsidizing the least efficient retailer.    A law or enforcement policy that allows for the elimination of price competition at the retail level is thus directly harmful to consumers and contrary to basic tenets of our free-enterpise system. Competition should exist at all levels of our economy, not simply at the manufacturer's level.    Mr. Rule erroneously suggests that the legislation will undercut a manufacturer's ability to choose its distributors or to maintain quality standards within the distribution system. In fact, this legislation recognizes that there may be legitimate nonprice reasons why a manufacturer may want to terminate a business relationship with a particular retail outlet. The manufacturer retains the right to refuse to deal with anyone so long as this refusal is not a part of a price-related conspiracy. Moreover, the manufacturer may, by contract, reward those distributors that meet minimum service standards and terminate those that do not. What it may not do is to use a dealer network to squelch price competition by low-cost retailers.    We agree with Mr. Rule that discounters have increased their market share tremendously in the past 25 years. But why is that development a source of concern if the consumer's interest is paramount? That a new breed of innovative retailers has entered the marketplace, intent on attracting customers to quality goods at lower prices, is precisely the secret of American competitive success. The &quot;Freedom From Vertical Price Fixing Act&quot; will ensure that vigorous retail competition continues. It deserves the strong support of every American committed to the free-enterprise system.    Rep. Peter W. Rodino Jr. (D., N.J.)    Rep. Henry J. Hyde (R., Ill.)    Washington   ---   At stake in the legislation is the practice of price competition. Vertical price fixing, or resale price maintenance, occurs all the time. It is inefficient and, I am confident, repugnant to the vast majority of Americans. It is also automatically illegal under the antitrust laws. The pending legislation merely would restore a victim's right to reach a jury in appropriate cases and codify the long-standing rule of automatic illegality.    Jonathan W. Cuneo   General Counsel   Committee to Support the Antitrust Laws   Washington</TEXT></DOC>