<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A U.S. NAVY SHIP WAS HIT in the Persian Gulf in an Iraqi air attack.    The Pentagon said the USS Stark, a guided-missile frigate, was struck by an air-launched missile. &quot;There is no indication of hostile intent on the part of the Iraqis,&quot; a Pentagon spokesman said. &quot;It appears to be an inadvertent incident.&quot; The official cited reports of a fire aboard the ship, which was proceeding to Bahrain. Secretary of State Shultz, in a speech, said there were &quot;serious casualties,&quot; and that the Stark was &quot;dead in the water.&quot;    A Soviet oil tanker, believed leased to Kuwait by Moscow, struck a mine and was damaged off the coast of Kuwait, Moscow and shipping executives said. The explosion didn't cause any deaths.    ---   BAKER SAID Reagan didn't break any laws in supporting the Contras.    The White House staff chief's remarks on NBC-TV reemphasized the president's statement Saturday that he hadn't violated a congressional ban on military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels. Reagan said he doesn't believe the measure, the Boland amendment, applied to him. Assertions that he may have ignored its terms represent the White House's most pressing problem so far in the Iran-Contra scandal.    The congressional panels probing the affair will hear this week from rebel leader Adolfo Calero, who was involved in financing and arming the Contras.    ---   WESTERN ARMS-CONTROL POLICY is falling deeper into disarray.    New differences broke into the open, clouding prospects for a U.S.-Soviet agreement to reduce nuclear missiles in Europe. The discord within NATO is deeper than at any time since the Soviets raised hopes for an accord by proposing to remove all U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles from the Continent.    NATO's defense policy also is split on other fronts, including how to answer recent Soviet shifts in talks on conventional forces and chemical weapons.    ---   Shultz expressed cautious support for an international conference on Mideast peace. The secretary of state, following a series of meetings with Israeli Foreign Minister Peres, said such backing hinged on the divided Israeli government uniting behind the idea. Earlier, Peres said diplomats might have to seek alternatives to such a forum.    ---   NASA took its first major step toward ending its heavy reliance on the space shuttle as a launch vehicle, saying it planned to launch five satellites and space probes by unmanned rockets by 1992. Separately, Moscow said it launched Friday a powerful, new-generation rocket designed to carry shuttles into orbit.    ---   Reagan will notify Congress of a plan to sell between 12 and 15 F-15 fighter jets to Saudi Arabia, a State Department spokeswoman said. The planned sale is certain to be controversial, and lobbyists for Israel in Washington intend to fight it. The sale will go through unless Congress rejects it.    ---   Japan is tightening controls on the export of strategic goods, following Western criticism of companies' unauthorized shipments of computerized machine tools to the Soviet Union. Tokyo signaled its tougher stance by temporarily limiting activities by a Toshiba unit and the Itoh trading house with the Soviet bloc and China.    ---   Communist rebels admitted that Philippine President Aquino's apparent electoral triumph proves communist ideas haven't won over most Filipinos and that insurgents must redouble efforts to gain public support. The lopsided victory by Aquino's candidates, however, also signals a sharp decline in her political power.    ---   Kohl's Christian Democrats suffered setbacks in two important state elections. Analysts cited party disunity over Soviet missile proposals. The Social Democratic Party won a majority in Hamburg, while the Christian Democrats failed to win an absolute majority in Rhineland-Palatinate for the first time in 40 years.    ---   Supreme Court Justice Brennan urged lawyers to lead the way in providing justice and equality for the nation's poor, underprivileged and minorities. At Ohio State University's law school commencement, he said every lawyer &quot;must contribute to the elimination of inequities now under such vehement attack by the disaffected.&quot;    ---   Fiji's governor general swore in the leader of a military coup as head of state, a Suva official told the BBC. The report wasn't confirmed. Reserve soldiers were asked to report for duty as the military prepared for more protests. Fiji's judiciary, vowing to uphold the constitution, declared the administration &quot;illegal and invalid.&quot;    ---   Turkey's Parliament approved a package of constitutional changes, subject to presidential approval, that include a referendum on lifting the ban on former politicians. Two ex-prime ministers are banned from party politics until 1992 after being blamed, along with others, for the violence and anarchy that prompted the 1980 military coup.    ---   Brazil's President Jose Sarney faces the prospect that a presidential election next year is almost inevitable, after fraud involving contracts for part of the construction of the $2.4 billion North-South railroad was disclosed last week.    ---   Seoul riot police clashed with about 500 anti-government students after a service commemorating the bloody 1980 civil rebellion in Kwangju, witnesses said. South Korea has been hit by a weeklong wave of protests as opposition groups marked the uprising and demanded the removal of President Chun Doo Hwan's government.    ---   Three car bombs exploded in Madrid, killing one person and injuring at least seven, police said. Responsibility wasn't immediately claimed, but police said they suspected the Basque separatist group ETA. The bombs exploded within five minutes of each other outside the navy, air force and paramilitary civil-guard headquarters.    ---   Died: Gunnar Myrdal, 88, Nobel Prize-winning economist, in Sweden. . . . Rita Hayworth, 69, actress, Thursday, in New York City, of Alzheimer's disease. </TEXT></DOC>