<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Global Threat: New Culprit Is Indicted In Greenhouse Effect: Rising Methane Level --- Scientists Point to Cattle, Termites and Rice Paddies As Contributing Sources --- Scarier Than Carbon Dioxide? </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ENV </IN><TEXT>   To most people, methane is the flammable ingredient of the natural gas that burns in the kitchen stove. But to some scientists, methane poses a serious global threat.    The scientists are poking into termite nests, slogging through rice paddies and counting cattle to track the sources of the colorless, odorless gas that is rising to unprecedented levels in the atmosphere.    Methane, they say, threatens to accelerate an already worrisome global warming trend caused by human activity.    That warming of the Earth's climate is no longer in dispute, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency said last week in the first official report on the so-called greenhouse effect. &quot;There is scientific evidence that the world is committed to between one and two degrees Celsius {1.8 to 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit} of global warming because of past greenhouse gas emissions,&quot; the agency said.    Echoing earlier reports by scientific organizations, the EPA predicted widespread social and economic dislocations as corn, cotton, wheat and soybean crop lands are forced northward, as coastal cities dike themselves against a rise in sea levels and as warmer summers put staggering new demands on electrical capacity.    &quot;A century of human industry has added immeasurably to the atmosphere's greenhouse-gas burden, and all indications are that this load will continue to increase indefinitely,&quot; says science writer Ben Patrusky in a coming issue of Mosaic, published by the National Science Foundation. &quot;Like a blanket swaddling the planet, these gases capture heat that would otherwise radiate into space redirecting much of it back to Earth,&quot; he says.    Until recent months, methane's role in the greenhouse warming of the climate was obscure and uncertain. Instead, attention focused on carbon dioxide spewing into the atmosphere from burning oil, coal and gasoline.    But earlier this year atmospheric chemists at the University of California in Irvine published new measurements of methane in the troposphere, seven to 10 miles up. Last year, Donald R. Blake and F. Sherwood Rowland found there were almost 1.7 parts of methane per million parts of air. That was 11% higher than a decade earlier and confirmed previous estimates that methane concentrations are climbing a steady 1% a year, the Californians said. Moreover, if analyses of air bubbles trapped in the ice in Greenland and Antarctica are accurate, methane in the atmosphere has doubled in the last 200 years, they noted.    Whether this rising level of methane was abnormal or was just a natural variation was uncertain. But, within a matter of weeks the other shoe dropped. French and Russian scientists reported their analyses of ancient ice cores taken at the Soviet's Vostok station in the Antarctic. They found that over the past 160,000 years, the concentration of methane in the atmosphere ranged between a peak of 0.7 parts per million of air during warm periods and a nadir of 0.3 ppm during the ice ages.    The worrisome conclusion: The 1.7 ppm of methane currently piled up in the atmosphere is 2.4 times higher than it has ever been in the last 160,000 years -- and is headed higher. &quot;This is not good news,&quot; says atmospheric chemist Ralph Cicerone of the federal National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo.    Methane, like carbon dioxide, smudges the atmospheric window through which the planet's daily heat escapes to outer space. The sun's energy pours onto the Earth mostly as visible light and ultraviolet waves, which are among the shortest wavelengths in the energy spectrum. The soil, oceans and other objects on the Earth absorb these short waves and then re-emit the energy in the much longer infrared waves, the heat that one feels walking barefoot down a sidewalk or pavement after sundown.    Fortunately for life on Earth, the nitrogen-oxygen atmosphere is relatively transparent to the long infrared waves coming off the sidewalks, soil and oceans, allowing the day's solar heat to slowly escape to space. This window is just the right width and transparency to keep the Earth's heat gain and loss in balance and thus maintain the present-day climate, at least for a short period of geologic time.    This atmospheric heat-escape window, however, already has been dirtied by carbon dioxide spewing from factory smokestacks and automobile exhausts. Carbon dioxide impedes the outflow of infrared energy just as glass panes impede the escape of infrared energy from a greenhouse. If scientists' computer models of the climate are anywhere close to reality, the carbon-dioxide buildup will increase the atmosphere's average temperature, currently 59 degrees Fahrenheit, by one to five degrees in the next 50 to 100 years.    Methane, the new worry, blocks a narrower range of infrared wavelengths than carbon dioxide. But molecule-for-molecule, it traps 20 times more infrared energy in the atmosphere. Thus, even a small increase in methane concentration concerns scientists trying to predict the warming of the climate.    At present levels, carbon dioxide would account for about three-fifths of any greenhouse warming, while methane and other trace gases would produce about two-fifths, Dr. Cicerone of the atmospheric-research center says. But &quot;in the future it will be more like 50-50&quot; as methane concentrations climb, he says. &quot;Whatever climate changes happen&quot; because of carbon dioxide, he says, &quot;they'll be accelerated by trace gases like methane.&quot;    The big mystery is the methane's source. The ice cores show that it somehow must be linked to human activity and the industrial revolution. But methane vented from oil and gas wells, coal mining and other human tapping of the gas trapped in the planet's crust can account for no more than 15% to 30% of the methane hissing into the atmosphere, according to estimates.    The only other known sources of methane are bacteria in the figurative bowels of the Earth and the literal bowels of animals. These microbes are the presumed descendants of bacteria that arose more than three billion years ago when life was first evolving in an oxygen-free atmosphere. Today, they survive only in dark recesses where there is a lack of oxygen. Because these microbes digest their meals in the absence of oxygen, they directly or indirectly convert the carbon in their diet to carbon dioxide and methane, (a carbon atom with four hydrogen atoms) rather than, say, carbon dioxide and water as would be produced if they existed in an oxygen-containing environment.    Researchers are trying to learn what is stirring these methane-making microbes to such frenzied activity. Scientists like Patrick Zimmerman, a biologist at the atmospheric-research center labs in Boulder, have been poking around the nests of termites. The methane-making bacteria dwell in the oxygenless hindgut of these insects. The bacteria pay the rent by digesting the almost indigestible cellulose of the wood the termites eat, converting it to more-usable nutrients for their hosts. In the process the bacteria produce methane.    The ubiquitous termites are suspect because their population explodes where forests have been burned off to create farm and grazing land. A library search by Mr. Zimmerman found old reports of termite census showing 4,400 or so termites per square yard in the tropical forests and wet savannas, their favorite natural habitats, while in burned-off clearings the population jumped to 6,000 to 7,000 a square yard. Humans have been clearing the tropical and temperate forests at a rapid rate in the last century, of course.    How much methane these little wood chompers waft into the atmosphere is a mystery, however. A few years ago, Dr. Zimmerman and his colleagues dragged nests of two different termite species into the lab and measured their methane output. They then estimated the bugs produced 150 million metric tons of methane a year world-wide, but said the estimate could be off by 50% either way.    When other scientists charged that the lab termites' methane output was far higher than in the wild, the Colorado researchers hied off to Kenya to poke around termite nests there. They found that many termite nests have a sprawling network of tiny air-conditioning tunnels. Gases were being vented to the surface as far as 30 to 50 yards away from the central termite mound, Mr. Zimmerman says. The methane emissions were huge, he adds. Previous termite investigators apparently had missed these distant vents and underestimated the bugs' methane output.    &quot;But we really haven't gotten the bottom line yet,&quot; the researcher adds. No one has the vaguest idea of how many termites are in the world, and until such data are gathered by sampling the deserts and forests, researchers don't know whether they are sending 10 million metric tons of methane into the atmosphere a year, or 150 million tons, the scientists at the atmospheric-research center say.    The world's growing population of meat animals also is high on the suspect list. Methane-making bacteria flourish first in the stomach of ruminants like cattle, where they aid their hosts by digesting carbohydrates, particularly the cellulose-rich plant stalks and leaves. The cud chewed by cattle is the result of this microbial service.    The world's 1.2 billion head of cattle are belching out 54.3 million metric tons of methane annually, according to recent estimates by chemist Paul W. Crutzen and his colleagues at the Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry in Mainz, West Germany. Toss in domesticated buffalo, sheep, goats, pigs, camels, and horses, and the total rises to more than 73 million metric tons of methane a year, a 435% increase since 1890, they estimate.    (Humans, if you are wondering, are a mere puff in the wind by comparison. Only 30% to 50% of humans carry the methanogenic bacteria in their guts, and they collectively emit only 300,000 metric tons of methane a year, the German researchers estimate.)    The trouble with blaming these domestic animals for the 200-year rise in atmospheric methane is that no one knows whether they are producing more or less methane than the once-huge populations of wild animals were producing in past centuries. Wildebeests, wild buffalo and giraffe on the Serengeti plain in Africa have been found to be big methane producers. &quot;We don't know how many bison there were in North America in the past, though there were supposed to have been millions,&quot; Mr. Cicerone says.    The prime suspect, however, is rice paddies. The methane-making bacteria have always thrived on the decaying matter in the dark, airless muds of swamps, bogs and wetlands. Mr. Cicerone and his colleagues slogged into flooded rice paddies a few years ago to take methane measurements. To their surprise, they found that the rice plants, themselves, act as gas vents allowing higher-than-expected amounts of methane to puff into the atmosphere from the muddy depths.    Not only is the amount of acreage devoted to rice spreading, but with irrigation, a growing number of farmers are getting two crops a year from their paddies, Mr. Cicerone explains. The rice paddies probably are blowing 115 million tons of methane into the air every year, at least as much as is coming out of natural swamps and wetlands, Mr. Cicerone estimates.    But whether rice paddies, termites and cattle can account for the rising amount of methane in the atmosphere is unknown. Recently, Mr. Cicerone and his colleague, R.S. Oremland at the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif., tried to sum up the situation. When they added up all the published estimates of methane production, the total ranged from 400 million to 640 million metric tons a year. Estimates of how much methane the atmosphere can handle are similarly uncertain, ranging from 300 million to 650 million metric tons a year.    Enlarging the uncertainty, Messrs. Cicerone and Oremland note, is the methane from the past locked in tiny molecular cages of water known as methane hydrates in the permafrost soil of the arctic regions and the muds of the continental shelves. No one knows how much of the gas is in this hydrate form or currently coming from it.    More worrisome are forecasts by some geochemists that if the climate gets warmer, it will warm these hidden methane hydrates, releasing even more methane into the atmosphere. The researchers seem to agree that no one knows exactly where the atmospheric methane buildup comes from and, with the current meager data, there seems no way to predict how severely it will affect the planet's climate.    &quot;To me, methane is more scary than carbon dioxide as a greenhouse gas,&quot; says Mr. Zimmerman of the atmospheric-research center. It is possible to put some control on the burning of fossil fuels and thus slow or stop carbon dioxide's impact on the climate. &quot;But methane is directly related to the food supply and the world's food supply has got to get bigger,&quot; he explains. </TEXT></DOC>