<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890731-0115 </DOCNO><DD> = 890731 </DD><AN> 890731-0115. </AN><HL> Europe:@  Reforming the Italian Marketplace@  ----@  By Alberto Saravalle </HL><DD> 07/31/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;While at Rome they talked, Sagunto was taken.&quot; With these harsh words Titus Livius blamed his countrymen for the indecision that permitted Hannibal's capture of the allied Spanish city, and cleared the way for the Carthaginian's devastating march on Italy.    The potential for a similar situation is at hand today in Italy. Its financial markets are governed by outdated regulations that could prevent it from competing effectively with other financial centers in the European capital market. A coming deadline, 1990, makes the problem more serious. Next year all remaining controls on capital movement within the Common Market are set to be lifted, except for a few nations granted extensions. Capital will flow freely to the most efficient markets.    The approach of this deadline is compelling reforms to introduce transparency and efficiency at both the European and national levels. A proposal for a European Community directive on tender offers has been completed recently, as has a directive on insider trading, while many countries already have begun restructuring to meet those challenges. Suffice it to mention the United Kingdom's Big Bang of 1987, and more recent reforms in France and Spain. And Italy?    To be sure, in Italy the reform of the financial market has become a high priority in the past few years, if the many public debates, formations of parliamentary commissions and reports by various regulatory agencies are evidence. Also, various bills for regulating insider trading, tender offers, permitting closed-end and real-estate funds, creating a new type of securities company and authorizing futures markets have been introduced in Parliament. To date, though, concrete change is lacking.    The Milan stock exchange, after the strong performance of 1985 and 1986, has attracted the attention of the nation's small investors. The Italian economy also has drawn foreign investors. Such attention, however, is limited largely to forays rather than sustained investment. Some legislative intervention to bring efficiency and transparency to Italy's securities dealings is necessary. A brief look at the market conditions reveals further opportunities for change: Approximately 70% of trading takes place off the official exchanges by banks that match up buy-and-sell orders among their own accounts, going to the exchange only to offset imbalances.    Thus, exchange price and volume data do not reflect accurately shares traded. Public information is not abundant as listed companies are required to report only every six months; insider trading is not banned. There is no legislation governing tender offers or takeovers. Only in 1984 were open-end mutual funds established, while neither closed-end nor real-estate funds are permitted. Futures markets do not exist.    The guidelines for reform have been in place since 1987, when Consob, Italy's securities watchdog agency, called for the replacement of the current auction system with electronic trading and compulsory trading on the official exchange. The body also called for regulation of insider trading and fraudulent dealings, the establishment of takeover rules, and the formation of new securities companies controlled by both banks and brokers.    The establishment of the latter, known as Societa di Intermediazione Mobiliare, or SIMs, represents a compromise in a struggle between banks, which wanted direct access to the exchange through electronic trading, and brokers, who wanted to maintain their monopoly of the trading floor and simultaneously ensure that all trades pass through them.    Unfortunately, the lack of regulation is convenient to many parties. In the confusion, they have carved niches. As initial proposals were put forward, brokers, banks, commission agents and others began heavy lobbying that produced conflicting vetoes of the various bills presented. Also contributing to the inertia is the failure by the government to present a coherent overall plan.    Not surprisingly, the result was a variety of bills, two of which have been approved by Italy's upper house. These represent the first concrete steps toward reform. The first bill, which regards tender offers, was approved by the Senate last year. Since then it seems to have been forgotten, and has not yet been called for discussion in the Chamber of Deputies, Italy's lower house. Despite this delay the bill is a sign something finally is happening in Italy. The importance of setting clear rules for the behavior of both potential acquirers and target companies is self-evident.    The new rules serve a second function of protecting small investors, ensuring that they will be granted the same treatment as large shareholders, particularly in the event of a change of control. The bill provides that in exceeding certain thresholds of share ownership within a specified time, a tender offer becomes mandatory. The benefits would be divided equally among all shareholders. This is important in Italy, where most listed companies are controlled by large shareholders. In the past they made the rules of the game and were able to transfer controlling interests at a premium price without sharing with minority holders. The second draft bill with significant potential for change concerns the SIMs. This was pending in the Senate while banks and brokers each sought to amend it in their favor. Eventually the bill was approved at the end of April. It provides for exclusive performance by SIMs of trading and dealing in securities, underwriting, portfolio management and financial consulting, among other things. An exception permits bank and fiduciary companies to perform certain of these activities as well. Under this law Consob will control the regulatory, informational and transparency aspects of the SIMs, while the Bank of Italy will oversee their financial stability.    A major achievement of this draft bill, yet to be passed by the second house, is the proposal that all trading be effected on official exchanges. An important feature is the introduction of criminal sanctions for abuses of fiduciary responsibility.    A crucial issue that has yet to be addressed satisfactorily is the conflict of interests. While the SIMs will be strictly prohibited from dealing in shares of affiliate companies, the problem of separating the various functions undertaken by a SIM, which may be involved in various securities activities, has been left for Consob and the Bank of Italy to regulate. This is scarcely sufficient, as the potential for insider trading and conflict of interests is immense. The law itself should have proposed a Chinese Wall and imposed sanctions for its violation. Finally, this draft bill provides for the institution of a futures market by 1992.    Italy has just formed a new government. Now is the time to abandon the pattern of fragmentary intervention and adopt a new global approach consistent with the spirit of reform in the rest of Europe. Such action would be an important gesture for business in Italy. After such reform, the strength of Italy's economy could truly be reflected on the securities markets.    ---   Mr. Saravalle, a member of the New York and the Italian bar, practices corporate law in Rome. </TEXT></DOC>