<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH WAS VOTED limited immunity by the congressional Iran-Contra panels.    Despite an appeal Wednesday by independent counsel Walsh to forgo granting protection from prosecution for the former White House aide, the panels approved immunity to compel North to testify. He is expected to be questioned in private after June 15. Congressional investigators also disclosed evidence regarding profit-taking in the affair, and a plan to channel to North money from the arms sales to Iran. The evidence corroborated testimony by businessman Albert Hakim.    Secord reportedly withdrew more than $80,000 from his $1.5 million share of Iran arms-sales profits, apparently contradicting his earlier testimony that he had forsworn any financial gain.    ---   REAGAN WILL SEEK support from allies for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war.    A White House spokesman said the president would ask U.S. allies at the economic summit in Venice, Italy, to endorse a pending U.N. resolution urging a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war and a return by those countries to former borders. The U.S. won't request that the allies pay fees to help cover the Navy's cost in escorting ships in the Persian Gulf. Reagan also embraced Bonn's endorsement of a Soviet offer for the removal of medium and short-range missiles from Europe.    Moscow has stationed three small navy ships in the gulf area and appears to be preparing to deploy a guided-missile cruiser, U.S. officials said.    ---   Indian military planes dropped relief supplies for Tamils in the northern Sri Lankan city of Jaffna. The airlift followed Sri Lanka's refusal Wednesday to allow an unarmed convoy of Indian fishing boats to enter Sri Lankan waters. Colombo officially protested the air supply drop as a &quot;naked violation of our independence.&quot;    ---   Former Nevada Sen. Laxalt dropped a $250 million libel suit against the McClatchy Newspapers. Both sides claimed victory over the settlement, which didn't call for the retraction of a 1983 story reporting that the IRS had evidence of money &quot;illegally skimmed&quot; from a casino then owned by the Laxalt family.    ---   The Justice Department declined to take over a lawsuit alleging that Morton Thiokol Inc. defrauded the government by providing false information about the space shuttle Challenger, which exploded after takeoff last year. The lawsuit was filed in January by a former engineer for Morton Thiokol.    ---   A U.S. appeals court in New York upheld a contempt of court ruling against the nation's Roman Catholic bishops for refusing to release records demanded in a suit by a pro-abortion group. Two bishops' groups, threatened with $100,000-a-day fines, had balked at submitting data about political activities and relationship with the IRS.    ---   A Hamburg-based newspaper reported that a West German pilot who landed in Red Square is being interrogated by the Soviets, who suspect he may be involved in espionage. Western sources speculate that a Soviet campaign to portray the pilot as a possible spy could mark a political setback for Gorbachev.    ---   A French researcher told an AIDS forum in Washington that a new AIDS virus spreading from Africa to Europe and other continents will reach the U.S. American experts, however, said the virus shouldn't markedly worsen the current epidemic of the disease.    ---   South African President Botha traveled to black townships and called on community leaders to negotiate with the white-led government to end racial unrest. Botha visited Sebokeng, Sharpeville and Lekoa, where the township's mayor urged Botha to allow blacks to serve in Parliament.    ---   Britain closed Iran's consulate in Manchester and ordered five diplomats to leave the country after failing to receive an apology or explanation for last week's abduction and beating of a British diplomat in Tehran. The Khomeini government was expected to retaliate, possibly with the expulsion of a similar number of Britons from Tehran.    ---   The Philippine Supreme Court dismissed two opposition challenges to the May 11 congressional elections, clearing the way for the proclamation of winners in the Senate races. The opposition had contended fraud and urged nullification of the results.    ---   Iran's Khomeini has appointed a high-level committee to supervise talks for the release of foreign hostages held in Lebanon, according to the editor of the Lebanese magazine Ash Shiraa. The editor said the groups holding Americans and others captive were under the ayatollah's control.    ---   Salvadoran military officials warned that security forces would crack down on violence and unrest in the capital. The warning followed a wave of protests by students and labor unions as well as accelerated activity by leftist guerrillas in San Salvador.    ---   South Korea's ruling party blocked an opposition-backed special session of the National Assembly, which was to discuss the death in January of a student during police interrogation. Dozens of opposition members began a hunger strike in the chamber.    ---   Israel's army reportedly was placed on alert in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip as Palestinians closed shops and stoned vehicles to mark the anniversary of the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. An army spokesman in Jerusalem said a curfew was imposed in certain Arab neighborhoods. </TEXT></DOC>