<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Congress's Failure to Fix Budget LawMakes Major Cuts Unlikely This Year---By Alan Murray and Jeffrey H. BirnbaumStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congress's failure to overhaul the Gramm-Rudman budget law before leaving for its August recess makes it unlikely that there will be substantial budget reductions this year.    Congress did manage to extend the expired federal borrowing limit before the recess, but it ducked the broader deficit issue -- an action that was greeted privately with relief by Reagan administration officials.    The plan had been to revitalize the automatic spending cuts of the Gramm-Rudman law and attach such a measure to a longer-term increase in the debt ceiling. After a week of intense negotiations, that fight was postponed until Congress returns in September.    The breakdown of those talks reduces the chances for meaningful budget reduction this year. As a result, the deficit could increase in fiscal 1988 after narrowing sharply in fiscal 1987.    Despite this prospect, administration officials have grown increasingly wary of efforts to &quot;fix&quot; the deficit-cutting law and are content to see those efforts fail.    &quot;If it falls apart up there (on Capitol Hill) and they can't put it together, we won't be the ones pulling the plug on Gramm-Rudman,&quot; said one administration official, who asked that he not be identified. &quot;Looked at over a two-year period, we'll still have good deficit reduction in 1987 and 1988.&quot;    The congressional talks were intended to strengthen the Gramm-Rudman law by devising a new mechanism for automatic spending cuts to replace the one knocked down by the courts last year as unconstitutional. In addition, members of Congress wanted to widen the law's deficit targets, because its existing goal of $108 billion for fiscal 1988 was widely viewed as unrealistic. But the talks broke down because of partisan disagreement over issues such as whether the automatic deficit-cutting mechanism should remain in place after 1989, when the president might be a Democrat.    In the meantime, the existing Gramm-Rudman law is being largely ignored. Congress has made no move to establish the temporary panel that under the law's fallback procedure would begin to work this month on across-the-board spending cuts. And the Reagan administration has abandoned its plans to propose the new budget cuts needed to reach the $108 billion target.    The latest administration estimates show the budget deficit narrowing to $155 billion in fiscal 1987, which ends Sept. 30, from $221 billion last year. But because a large part of that reduction results from a one-time windfall of revenue as a result of tax overhaul, the estimates show deficits widening again in fiscal 1988 and 1989 if no spending cuts or tax increases are made. The Congressional Budget Office has estimated the deficit would shoot back to $198 billion by 1989.    Administration officials acknowledge that a toughened Gramm-Rudman law could force the White House to sit down with congressional leaders and negotiate a deficit-cutting compromise, including some new taxes. &quot;If there were a Gramm-Rudman fix, if it were the type that said there will be automatic cuts within 30 days (if a budget-cutting plan isn't agreed upon), then during that 30 days there could be some possibility of a negotiated settlement,&quot; the administration official said.    Some officials, such as Treasury Secretary James Baker, are said to favor a budget agreement with Congress to keep deficits on a declining path.    But in recent weeks, the administration's desire to see a strengthened Gramm-Rudman law has been greatly reduced. Administration budget officials have become increasingly convinced that Democrats in Congress are less interested in negotiating a budget agreement than they are in gaining a political edge by forcing President Reagan to accept a tax increase.    Moreover, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, Secretary of State George Shultz and National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci have been arguing strongly against a Gramm-Rudman fix, fearing that automatic cuts would devastate defense and foreign-affairs programs.    Democrats also were quietly fearful of a big deficit-reduction number. They worried increasingly that they wouldn't be able, or politically willing, to raise taxes by the sizable $19.3 billion they had pledged for fiscal 1988.    More bargaining remains, and Congress still may attempt to put new teeth in the Gramm-Rudman law when it returns from its recess in mid-September.    But administration and congressional officials agree that significant changes will be difficult, with a new fiscal year beginning Oct. 1. White House officials believe that it will be more difficult for members of Congress to vote for automatic cuts when the deadline for cuts is so near.    Sen. Phil Gramm (R., Texas), co-author of the budget law, said fixing the law by Oct. 1 will require &quot;heavy lifting for an athlete who hasn't run a race in a year and a half, and I'm talking about the U.S. Congress.&quot;    Gramm-Rudman is an issue because many lawmakers have threatened to resist a long-term extension of the debt ceiling until a sure-fire method is in place to narrow the budget deficit. So far, Congress and the president have failed to come to terms on a deficit-reduction package.    Congress has managed to keep the government solvent by extending its authority to borrow more money for brief periods. On Friday, the Senate voted 51-39, following a voice vote in the House, to raise the debt ceiling to $2.35 trillion from $2.11 trillion, enough to keep the government operating until Sept. 23. The limit had expired on Thursday.    Lawmakers had hoped to extend the limit through May 1989 by raising the ceiling to $2.8 trillion. But consideration of that measure, which would place the volatile debt-ceiling debate outside of election-year politics in 1988, is awaiting a measure that would repair Gramm-Rudman.    The raising of the debt limit clears the way for the Treasury to conduct its quarterly debt-refinancing operations this week. The department is expected to announce this morning that it will auction three-year notes tomorrow, 10-year notes on Wednesday, and 30-year bonds on Thursday.    All the new securities will be issued next Monday, when $11 billion in notes outstanding come due. The refinancing originally had been planned for last week, but was postponed because of uncertainties surrounding the debt limit.    In addition to the refinancing, the Treasury will hold its regular weekly auction of $13.2 billion in Treasury bills today. The Treasury also will resume selling savings bonds, which it stopped selling at midnight on Thursday because of the debt limit's expiration.    Treasury officials say the disruption of the sale of Treasury securities has probably caused the government to pay higher interest rates than it would have otherwise. But officials say it is impossible to estimate just how large the cost of wrangling over the debt limit has been. </TEXT></DOC>