<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Congress May Restore Airline Workers' Feather Bed---By Herbert R. Northrup</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORAIRLINES (AIR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Both the Senate and House this fall passed so-called airline consumer bills that would require airlines to report on-time performance, give free tickets to those whose luggage is delayed and provide a free telephone service for questions about lost baggage. The bills are now in conference while the House and Senate work out the few differences between them.    While the final bill may be politically popular, it won't solve the problems travelers are complaining about. The real solutions lie, first, in more airports -- the funds for which Congress will not vote and the locations of which homeowners have refused to tolerate -- and second, in more, not less, deregulation. Varying airport landing fees according to time and carrier size, and varying fares according to time of travel (more for rush hours and weekdays) would ease congestion. Not only will Congress's approach not solve the problem, it will result in higher airline costs, for which the consumer will pay.    So why has the bill got as far as it has? Part of the answer lies in the support it has received from the airline industry's unions, which see the bill as an opportunity to push not only for re-regulation but also for a return to the extraordinary benefits airline employees received before deregulation.    Unions generally oppose deregulation because it encourages competition and thereby forces companies to stand firm against overgenerous wage levels, restrictive rules and other featherbedding practices. Before deregulation, the airline industry used to be full of featherbedding; management went along with union demands since it knew that the government would approve compensatory fare increases.    All that ended with deregulation. Management demanded and gained wage concessions and removal of restrictive restraints. Still, in 1985 the average compensation for airline employees was 69% higher than the industry average in the U.S. Employees in all classifications -- from janitors to pilots -- were paid much more than those in comparable jobs elsewhere. Nevertheless, the unions, led by the Air Line Pilots Association, have been waging a holy war against deregulation. Getting Congress's support for the current bills was first victory in this campaign.    But the unions support the bills not only to begin the demolition of deregulation, which has brought lower fares, easy entry for new carriers and greater access to air travel. A more important reason is that both bills contain a provision, known as the &quot;labor protective provision,&quot; (LPP) that can bring millions of dollars in benefits to the already highly paid airline employees. Couched in terms of &quot;fair treatment&quot; of airline employees in cases of mergers or equipment sales, benefits include maintenance of salaries of current positions for four years if an employee is downgraded; unemployment allowances of 60% of the previous year's pay for up to five years; maintenance of fringe benefits for up to eight years; full moving expenses for reassigned employees and families for three years following a merger; and protection for reassigned employees against any loss on a home or lease.    These benefits, which exceed anything in industry generally, were developed in the 1930s in the railroad industry and were adapted to the airline industry by the now-defunct Civil Aeronautics Board during the regulation era. The CAB's rationale was twofold: that laid-off employees would have smaller chance of re-employment and that no competitor could take up the economic slack. The first ignored the fact that, while employment in the railroad industry has steadily declined since World War II, airline employment has continually increased despite some cyclical downturns. Deregulation demolished the second rationale since any airline now can enter any domestic market. Free entry has become the norm, which gives laid-off employees opportunities with other airlines.    As a result, following deregulation in 1978, the CAB announced that it would require LPPs for approval of mergers only in &quot;special circumstances.&quot; The Department of Transportation, which took over this function when the CAB became extinct, has never required a LPP as a merger condition, arguing that it was either too costly and would thwart a merger involving a failed carrier, or that it was unnecessary since agreements already had been worked out with employees.    Originally a separate bill, the LPP was attached to the current bills at the request of the Air Line Pilots Association. According to ALPA president Harry Duffy: &quot;Since the Reagan administration has signaled a veto of any LPP bill, the inclusion . . . in a popular consumer bill enhances the likelihood of a presidential signature.&quot; The final version will almost certainly contain an LPP since the measure is included in the bills passed by both houses.    If the LPP does become law, it could have drastic results, since the extraordinary benefits for employees that are already among the highest paid in the country are extremely expensive. LPP requirements could cost a carrier between $92 million and $388 million and could bring benefits as high as $500,000 to a pilot of a DC-10 who is reassigned to the smaller DC9, and between $119,000 and $145,000 to reassigned or laid-off mechanics, clerks or flight attendants. Why those among the highest paid in U.S. industry should receive benefits far in excess of others is something Congress has avoided explaining.    If the LPP is legislated, future mergers may well become cost prohibitive. This is exactly what the airline unions seem to want -- even though during the past few years a lot of jobs were saved by the takeover of failed or failing airlines. Midway's purchase of bankrupt Florida Air and Texas Air's acquisition of People Express and Frontier are examples. Pan American is now a takeover candidate, and America West appears to be tottering.    Is it better for this country that these airlines fail and that foreign airlines gobble up Pan American's routes because no U.S. carrier wants to spend millions paying employee compensation not required of industry generally? Or is it preferable to save most of these jobs and services for American employees despite some compensation and/or job losses by a few? The bill passed by the House and the Senate clearly ignores employee interests as it does passenger interests. Once again Congress, by trampling upon market forces in favor of special interests, appears determined to be legislating against the general welfare.    ---   Mr. Northrup is professor of industry and director of the Industrial Research Unit at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School. This article is adapted from the next issue of the Journal of Air Law and Commerce. </TEXT></DOC>