<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0114 </DOCNO><HL> How Some Cities Get LOOTed---By Linda Paustian</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;Our city needs jobs,&quot; says the Building Trades Union local. &quot;Our downtown area has deteriorated,&quot; says the Mayor. &quot;We must improve our city's image,&quot; says the Chamber of Commerce. &quot;Business, labor and government must work together for the benefit of our city,&quot; editorializes The Newspaper. &quot;Tourism is suffering,&quot; says the Hotel Association. &quot;Other cities are building or expanding,&quot; says the Convention and Visitors Bureau. If you live in a metropolitan area in the United States, this probably sounds familiar.    This scenario played Houston last week with the opening of the $105 million George R. Brown Convention Center. It has also played recently in Washington, New York and San Diego, and is now running in Denver, Minneapolis and in my home, Philadelphia. The script and scenery are similar in each city and all the parts are played by a bipartisan group I like to call the Leaders Of Our Town, or LOOT. The members of LOOT, most of whom suffer from an &quot;edifice complex,&quot; think that building a new, large taxpayer-financed convention center will fix everything.    Sixty cities are now building or expanding their convention centers for a total cost of more than $6 billion. Between 1975 and 1985, more than 250 public-assembly facilities were built or renovated, adding at least 12 million square feet of exhibit and meeting space. An important reason for this boom is a relatively new source of funding: In the late 1970s, many cities passed laws levying taxes on hotel rooms and earmarking the funds for promoting tourism, especially convention centers. The biggest source of funds, however, is local and state taxpayers who subsidize visitors' conventions by paying millions in construction costs and debt service and millions more in annual operating losses.    In Philadelphia, convention-center mania has reached new heights: Instead of renovating the existing convention center, which is one of the largest in the country and which operates at a loss of more than a million dollars annually, the Leaders Of Our Town are building another one at a projected cost of $500 million. In the process, they are demolishing 89 buildings on five downtown blocks and evicting 170 businesses with 2,000 employees. LOOT is planning this based on two studies carried out by the very people who will make millions if the center is built -- so-called experts who are hotel, convention and trade-show consultants.    Like ancient Troy, unsuspecting American cities welcome convention centers as gifts, when in fact they carry with them possibly lethal surprises. Large, government-operated centers are Trojan horses, usually featuring outrageous construction costs, enormous operating losses and exaggerated benefits. Costs that are far in excess of those for private convention centers burden taxpayers for years.    Consider that the Cleveland Expo, which opened in 1985, cost $25 per square foot of renovated exhibit space. Other privately financed centers have been built from the ground up for well under $200 a square foot. By comparison, San Diego's public center cost $500 per square foot of exhibit space. Washington's center cost $179 a square foot; San Francisco's $381, Atlanta's $347 and New York's Javits Center, $675.    Chicago's McCormick Place expansion was to have cost $252 million in June 1984 but has cost overruns amounting to $60 million. New York's recently completed Javits Center was more than $111 million over budget. Philadelphia's new center, the most expensive convention center per square foot ever conceived, has already had $88 million in cost increases before construction has even begun.    In addition to decades of debt-service payments on construction costs, taxpayers must pay huge operating losses. A look at the financial statements of 25 public centers larger than 300,000 square feet shows yearly operating losses averaged 42% of revenue. Many centers try to hide this fact by including taxpayer subsidies as &quot;revenues&quot; and not including such costs as interest payments, employee benefits, utilities and insurance in annual reports.    Part of the reason for the operating losses is that most conventions don't require a center as large as the mega-centers being built. According to a 1986 report by Meetings and Conventions magazine, 87% of conventions require less than 100,000 square feet, and only 14% have 2,000 or more delegates. The Trade Show Bureau says 80% of all shows require less than 40,000 square feet, and 46% need only 10,000 square feet or less. But civic pride has become more important than market demand as cities build enormous convention centers. Houston's new center is 1.1 million square feet, big enough for 35,000 convention goers.    Proponents maintain conventions will create jobs and bring money into the local economy. Houston officials estimate their center will pump $300 million into the economy and create up to 10,000 jobs. Atlanta's Georgia World Congress Center allegedly supports &quot;11,000 direct and indirect jobs that would not otherwise exist,&quot; and in Chicago, supporters of the McCormick Place expansion say it will mean 20,000 new permanent jobs and $76 million in annual tax revenues. New York officials credit the Javits Center with creating 30,000 jobs and $120 million in taxes. Philadelphia says the new center will mean $1.5 billion in revenue and 10,000 new jobs.    Cities get these numbers by using economic &quot;multipliers.&quot; In Philadelphia, convention-center proponents used a multiplier of three; for every dollar spent in the tourist industry they claim that three dollars of additional economic activity will result. The president of the Milwaukee Exposition and Convention Center estimates the multiplier of his facility as seven times direct expenditures, and the Salt Palace in Salt Lake City used 3.5.    When local governments take money from some individuals in order to subsidize the hospitality businesses of other individuals, some jobs may be created, but others are lost. The &quot;multiplier effect&quot; is canceled out by the &quot;de-multiplier effect&quot; as those not in the hospitality business close down or move to the suburbs.    Taxpayers also should question claims of millions of dollars in increased tax revenues. An examination of Philadelphia's figures shows that the &quot;$1.5 billion in new revenues&quot; is the result of inflating benefits 6% annually and then simply adding up 30 years' of costs and benefits without discounting to compare the net present values, a fundamentally flawed methodology not acceptable to any private investor. Given a high inflation rate, even gilding the sidewalks would appear profitable when a zero discount rate is assumed. When properly discounted, a comparison of the future costs and benefits shows a new loss to Philadelphia taxpayers of millions of dollars.    How do the Leaders Of Our Town get away with such nonsense? Few people have the expertise, inclination or standing to challenge the members of LOOT. The fancy terminology -- income streams, capitalized interest, debt service, payback periods, rate of return, multiplier effect -- is beyond the understanding of the average citizen, and most public officials. When Philadelphia Mayor Wilson Goode was asked where the city will get the money to pay for this enormously expensive project, he answered that it would sell bonds. Who will make the bond payments? He didn't say.    Unfortunately for city taxpayers, finance and economics are also beyond the understanding of most of the fourth estate, if Philadelphia is any example. Journalists here who examine every detail of the $20 million MOVE bombing and who investigate a few thousand dollars of illegal overtime by city workers, swallow whole without challenge every news release on the largest public project in the history of Pennsylvania. No public-relations firm could have done a better job of promoting the center than the Philadelphia Inquirer, which has published 39 editorials in favor of the project. The Inquirer's publisher, Sam McKeel, was named by the mayor to help push the convention-center funding bill through the legislature.    And there are so many ironies. It's ironic that those involved in the hospitality industry will make millions, while their fellow members of the Chamber of Commerce will subsidize them and wonder why their business taxes continue to rise. It's ironic that yuppies will support a big convention center but complain about high property and income taxes. It's ironic that construction and hotel union workers, marching in support of a new taxpayer-financed center, are cheered on by unemployed city residents who will never be hired because the increased taxes or reduced city services necessary to pay for the center will drive out the businesses that might have hired them. It's ironic that this kind of forced taxpayer-subsidization of large, private businesses is supported equally by &quot;free enterprise&quot; Republicans and &quot;compassionate&quot; Democrats.    In Philadelphia, though, the most outrageous irony is that the city's proposed center is only eight blocks from a site where 200 years ago a convention of 55 men argued for four months over how to establish a government that would not seize property and institute injurious taxes to benefit the privileged few, but would instead protect the rights of all citizens.    ---   Ms. Paustian is a businesswoman who founded a coalition to oppose Philadelphia's convention center. </TEXT></DOC>