<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0065 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> UAL LABOR TAXESPUBLISHING (PUB)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)AIRLINES (AIR)SUPREME COURT (SUP)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to decide the extent to which the First Amendment protects the news media against lawsuits for articles that may cause emotional distress but aren't libelous.    The vehicle for this prospective decision is an appeal by Hustler magazine and its publisher, Larry Flynt, of a $200,000 jury award for the Rev. Jerry Falwell.    The jury award for intentional infliction of emotional distress -- $100,000 in compensatory damages and $100,000 in punitive damages -- was upheld last year by a federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., causing alarm among lawyers who defend news media against libel lawsuits.    If the Supreme Court rules that the media are entitled to less First Amendment protection in claims of emotional distress than in libel cases, news media lawyers warn that the media will become more vulnerable to lawsuits for damages and freedom of the press will be chilled.    Henry Kaufman, director of the Libel Defense Resource Center in New York, said a study by his organization a couple of years ago found few cases against the news media in which a claim of emotional distress was raised in addition to libel. Furthermore, the study found courts have been reluctant to recognize such claims against the news media. If such claims &quot;were recognized more broadly&quot; by the courts, he said, &quot;it would become more problematical.&quot;    Mr. Falwell sued after Hustler ran a parody in 1983 of an advertisement for Campari liqueur. The Campari ad usually features celebrities talking about their &quot;first time&quot; drinking the liqueur. The parody, however, described Mr. Falwell's &quot;first time&quot; as his first sexual experience, describing a fictitious drunken encounter with his mother.    In his lawsuit, Mr. Falwell alleged invasion of privacy, libel, and the causing of emotional distress. The trial judge threw out the privacy claim, and the jury rejected the libel allegations. But the jury ruled against Hustler and Mr. Flynt on the emotional distress claim.    In libel cases, the Supreme Court has said the First Amendment requires several protections to ensure the news media's freedom to disseminate information. In particular, the court has said that when a public figure, like Mr. Falwell, alleges libel, he must prove that his reputation was harmed by a false statement and that it was done with &quot;actual malice,&quot; either with knowledge that it was wrong or with reckless disregard for whether it was true or false.    This is a difficult legal standard for a public figure to prove. But neither the federal district court nor the appeals court required any such standard in Mr. Falwell's claim for emotional distress.    News media lawyers warned that the ruling means a statement recognized by all to be an expression of opinion, rather than fact, may lead to liability for emotional distress. They said the approach used by the appeals court would threaten free expression in editorials, editorial cartoons, columns, reviews and parodies and by comedians.    In urging the high court to leave the judgment intact, lawyers for Mr. Falwell said the real problem for Hustler isn't the legal standard, but rather that actual malice was proved.    Airbag Appeal   The Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal challenging the Transportation Department's rule on airbags and safety belts as too lenient. The appeal, filed by the New York State attorney general, argued that the rule, issued in 1984, didn't consider motorists' safety as the issue of paramount importance.    Last September, a federal appeals court in the District of Columbia upheld the rule, except for one section on which the court declined to rule.    The 1984 rule required auto manufacturers to phase in automatic restraints for new cars by September 1989. Last week, the deadline was modified by the Transportation Department so that automatic restraints must still be installed for drivers by 1989, but installation for front-seat passengers may be delayed until 1993. The required restraints are either airbags that inflate on the impact of a crash or seat belts that fasten automatically when the car door is closed.    New York complained that Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole's rule was too lenient because it permits the use of automatic seat belts that can be detached, instead of requiring either airbags or nondetachable belts. Detachable belts won't have the desired safety effect, New York argued. The appeals court rejected this argument 2-1, and the Supreme Court's refusal to hear the appeal makes it final.    Arthur Andersen Case   The justices let stand a federal court ruling that ordered Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. to face trial of a civil securities-fraud lawsuit filed by investors in a partnership created by John DeLorean. A federal court in Miami dismissed the lawsuit in 1985, finding that the allegations against Arthur Andersen, if true, didn't involve violations of federal securities laws. But a federal appeals court in Atlanta ruled last September that the case should go to trial because the lawsuit alleges that Arthur Andersen knew about and assisted the alleged fraud.    The lawsuit stems from Mr. DeLorean's decision in 1978 to sell shares in a limited partnership to fund research and development of a sports car. Mr. DeLorean allegedly used the money fraudulently for other purposes, the lawsuit charges.    The allegation against Arthur Andersen is that it knew of the alleged fraud but permitted investors to rely on auditing and financial statements that the firm prepared earlier.    Lawyers for Arthur Andersen argued that the firm can't be accused of assisting a fraud that occurred after investors bought into the venture. It also said federal securities law doesn't impose liability on an accounting firm that filed accurate audit reports but failed to disclose an alleged fraud that began after the audits were filed.    United Airline Pilots   The high court refused to hear an appeal by the Air Line Pilots Association in a dispute with UAL Inc.'s United Airlines unit over the status of 504 pilots who defied the company's order to cross a picket line during a 1985 strike against United.    The pilots had just completed United's training program when the airline was struck. The trainees largely refused to cross the picket line, although United officials warned that they wouldn't be given jobs if they honored the strike. A federal judge in Chicago ordered United to hire the pilots, but a federal appeals court last October reversed the ruling and said United wasn't obligated to hire the 504 trainees.    Tax Conviction   The justices let stand the criminal conviction of Irwin Schiff, a longtime lecturer and author on ways to avoid paying taxes. Mr. Schiff was sentenced to six years in prison and fined $30,000 for attempting to evade personal federal income taxes and for failing to file a corporate tax return. </TEXT></DOC>