<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880413-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: France's Election Will Deliver Gains in War of Ideas </HL><AUTHOR> Guy Sorman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   France traditionally has been a nation split by ideological struggle. In 1789, the revolution opened a wound between left and right that wouldn't heal. Almost 200 years later, after the founding of the postwar Fifth Republic, ballots continued to reflect civil wars of ideas. In 1974 and 1981, the campaigns between conservative Valery Giscard d'Estaing and Socialist Francois Mitterrand represented a crucial, historical choice between socialism and free-market liberalism.    In this year's presidential election -- the first ballot of which takes place April 24 -- the situation is radically different. On the far left, the Communist Party, long viewed as a threat at home and abroad, now has the support of only 5% to 6% of the electorate, down from 20% two decades ago. On the far right, a new party is gaining power, Jean-Marie Le Pen's anti-immigrant National Front. Mr. Le Pen may gather 10% of the votes. But the party does not propose to change French society. For the first time in modern French history, the Socialist candidate -- in this case President Mitterrand -- no longer needs the support of the Communists to win. Most important, however, are the parties in the middle and the three candidates they support. In addition to Mr. Mitterrand, there are a former prime minister, Raymond Barre, on the center-right, and the current prime minister, Jacques Chirac, self-proclaimed heir to Charles de Gaulle.    The surprise at the center-right is how difficult it is to distinguish the two candidates. As a Gaullist, Mr. Chirac comes from an authoritarian tradition quite different from Mr. Barre's low-profile Christian Democratic one. Yet both men advocate a free-market economy, European unity and strong ties with the U.S. They favor the same remedies for unemployment and slow growth: deregulation, privatization, better education and more enterprise in business.    The distinction between them is visible on a more trivial level: The placidity of Mr. Barre contrasts with the authoritarian Gaullism of Mr. Chirac. On the organizational plane, too, the two differ: Mr. Chirac enjoys the powerful support of a machine he built himself, while Mr. Barre, a lonely character, is mildly supported by a loose coalition of small centrist parties. Finally, the men advocated different strategies when the right won the parliamentary elections in 1986. Mr. Chirac became prime minister for a Socialist president, while Mr. Barre condemned cohabitation.    The shared liberal convictions -- liberal in the European sense of minimal government -- of the two center-right candidates are what's new here. Mr. Chirac's posture represents a fundamental shift for a Gaullist. The Gaullists, traditionally, have been statist and nationalist: De Gaulle -- and Mr. Chirac himself, until not long ago-favored central planning, exchange controls and a strong public sector. De Gaulle's attacks on the Atlantic Alliance are still fresh in Continental memories, along with Mr. Chirac's hostility to European unification. Even Mr. Barre, as prime minister from 1976 to 1981, was not strongly committed to a free-market economy. The French right, in a short time, has gone through an ideological sea change comparable with what has happened to Britain's conservatives. No French candidate can match Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's or President Reagan's free-market commitment.    The ideological switch of Mr. Mitterrand and the Socialist Party is even more spectacular. When first in office, Mr. Mitterrand nationalized all the banks and major industrial companies. He introduced a new tax on so-called &quot;big fortunes.&quot; He recruited 100,000 civil servants to reduce unemployment, and tried in vain to suppress Catholic schools.    Today, the same president promotes a neutral, minimal state and business enterprise. The Socialist Party for its part has lately discarded much Marxist mishmash and has come to resemble its moderate West German, Spanish and Italian cousins. Mr. Mitterrand and his supporters still advocate more social justice and equality, but this ritual stance is not supported by constraining proposals. The Socialists seem to accept privatization, even if they accuse Mr. Chirac -- and rightly so -- of favoring political friends and major capitalists rather than the small saver.    The result of this conversion of viewpoints is that Mr. Mitterrand is likely to be re-elected. A fairly large share of the conservative constituency is behind him. The 72-year-old figure is perceived as a father. For the first time in French history, a political campaign focuses more on advertisement than on party platforms. But to term this an &quot;Americanization&quot; of French politics, as many have done, seems to me a rather superficial analysis.    The reason such a comparison is superficial is that the major subjects for discussion are hidden, but not resolved. European unity, the future of agriculture, the income tax, social security, unemployment among youth, education and the politicization of state are all likely to emerge and cause splits at later dates.    Take the issue of a united Europe. All the candidates say they are for it, but none says what kind of Europe he favors. The difference between a liberal, free-exchange Europe and a bureaucratic, protectionist one is big. The question of whether the European Community will continue to subsidize agricultural products for the rest of the world through internal price supports is also important. Here, though, the candidates provide little guidance.    On income tax, they are similarly silent. Only Mr. Barre had addressed the fact that French upper brackets remain among the highest in Europe, encouraging fraud and entrepreneurial drain to low-tax nations such as Britain and the U.S. The French social security system is close to bankruptcy, but no candidate dares to advocate the end of its monopoly. Minimum-wage laws work to the detriment of the young unemployed, but such hot items are faced in private conversation only.    The point is that the liberal revolution in France is far from complete. Nobody, except in marginal circles, still believes in the state capacity to create jobs; nearly everybody favors privatization, a word that did not even exist in the political vocabulary here before 1983. The major consequences of a truly liberal policy have not yet been perceived by the political class, intellectuals or many so-called entrepreneurs. The Chirac government has impoverished the liberal idea, by identifying liberalism with privatization only.    On this front Mr. Barre is a bit more advanced. An economist, he is the only one who dares promote Thatcherism as a model for study by the French. Beyond economics, he has set the pace by challenging his adversaries too on the question of the politicization of the state. Because of this needling, Messrs. Chirac and Mitterrand have been forced to say that the state under their rule would not be -- as it has in the past -- the personal property of their respective political parties.    Political liberalism, rather than economic liberalism, has become the focus of discussion. As economist Frederick Hayek wrote, the conflict between statism and liberalism is an objective one. Facts were what showed France's Socialists to be in the wrong. Facts too are likely to force its next president -- whoever he is -- to continue implementing a liberal agenda.    ---   Mr. Sorman, a French writer, is the author of &quot;The Conservative Revolution in America.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>