<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870623-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Lender's Lament:FCA's Rapid GrowthGot Out of HandAnd Regulators Failed---Financial Corp. of AmericaCouldn't Stem Big Losses;New Managers Faltered---Bad Loans, Strategic Blunders---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FIN GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Nearly three years after federal regulators decided that Financial Corp. of America was too big to fail, they have learned a painful lesson: Such a decision doesn't make losses disappear; it just defers them to another day.    In 1984, they believed that the main problem at FCA, which is the parent of American Savings andamp; Loan Association, the nation's largest thrift, was its chairman, the flamboyant, growth-oriented Charles W. Knapp. On Aug. 2, 1984, Edwin J. Gray, the chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, hauled Mr. Knapp into his Washington office for a 15-minute dressing-down.    &quot;I told him that he was operating in an unsafe and unsound manner, that I was going to try to get control of the institution and that I would do everything in my power to make sure he would not run that organization,&quot; Mr. Gray recalls. Mr. Knapp declines to be interviewed.    Just 26 days later, in the midst of a $6.8 billion deposit run on Financial Corp., Mr. Knapp resigned. Mr. Gray picked a successor, former Bank Board official William J. Popejoy, and promised full support to Financial Corp., whose headquarters is in Irvine, Calif. The run, which Mr. Gray feared would sink the entire savings and loan industry, ceased.    But throwing out Mr. Knapp didn't save Financial Corp. from the huge losses that were lurking in its real-estate loan portfolio. While new management has added $1.15 billion to reserves for possible loan losses, the company's balance sheet still carries more than $4 billion in assets that are of questionable value, swamping its stated net worth of $320 million.    &quot;It's the largest insolvent institution in the country&quot; in everything but name, says R. Dan Brumbaugh, a former Bank Board economist and one-time California thrift executive.    Financial Corp. management has tried several strategies to build a profitable thrift. None worked for very long. The latest, which depended on profit from trading of mortgage-backed securities to offset operating losses, came a cropper when interest rates rose sharply two months ago, thus depressing the value of the securities.    The day of reckoning for Financial Corp., whose common shares fell $1 yesterday to close at $5.50 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading, may be fast approaching. Mr. Gray has undertaken an all-out effort to find a buyer for the company before his term ends June 30.    The Bank Board has hired Salomon Brothers Inc. to represent it in negotiations with potential buyers, which include an investor group led by former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon and Ford Motor Co. (Ford has accumulated $9.4 billion of cash and is considering broadening its financial-services holdings.)    In effect, the negotiating process will determine how Financial Corp.'s current and future losses are to be divided among three groups: the company's shareholders; the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., which is itself technically insolvent; and an acquirer, which would inject about $1 billion in new capital and accept some losses in return for potential tax benefits, regulatory concessions from the Bank Board and indemnities from the insurance fund to cover certain losses.    It isn't clear that Mr. Gray will be able to strike a deal before leaving office. And Mr. Gray's successor, Senate Banking Committee aide M. Danny Wall, may not feel the same personal urgency that Mr. Gray has felt to resolve Financial Corp.'s problems quickly.    Whether or not Financial Corp. remains independent, its story is a vivid example of how fast a highflying company can crash and of how ill-equipped regulators may be to deal with such a failure. In reviewing the Financial Corp. saga, thrift executives and former regulators stress three episodes: the Bank Board's approval in 1983 of the merger that made Financial Corp. the nation's largest thrift company; the 1984 deposit run; and the Bank Board's approval last year of Financial Corp.'s attempt to grow out of its troubles by betting on lower interest rates.    Until 1983, Financial Corp.'s main unit was State Savings of Stockton, Calif., which was known for paying above-market rates on big deposits solicited by telephone and for making real-estate loans that other thrifts wouldn't touch. State Savings also increased its reported profit by taking big up-front loan-origination fees in exchange for charging lower rates on loans.    In early 1983, Mr. Knapp, who had frequently thumbed his nose at stodgier thrift executives, struck a deal with S. Mark Taper, a traditional thrift operator, to acquire his First Charter Financial Corp. and its American Savings andamp; Loan unit.    Mr. Taper, a Polish-born, British-educated autocrat, had built American Savings into a model of the old-style thrift, with a wealth of stable, low-cost deposits gathered from a widespread branch system, a high capital-asset ratio, and conservative lending practices.    The $810 million merger of First Charter into Financial Corp. &quot;was like putting together a swinger and a little old lady,&quot; says one former thrift regulator. In effect, regulators hoped that American's capital and deposit base would stabilize Financial Corp.    Many thrift executives tried to convince regulators that the merger shouldn't be approved. The Bank Board appointed a five-member advisory committee of outside experts to review the merger and sent a special team of examiners into State Savings to review its operations.    Mr. Gray and several former Bank Board staff members say the examinations didn't turn up enough evidence of problems at State Savings to stop the merger. &quot;We weren't even close to having the type of information we needed to deny a voluntary merger,&quot; says a former examiner. &quot;That's what's so sad,&quot; he says, in light of the loan-quality problems that appeared later. Other former Bank Board people suggest that the corps of thrift examiners at the time was too small and technically unsophisticated to match wits with Mr. Knapp and his employees.    Mr. Gray says he relied on Mr. Knapp's promises to become more conservative. &quot;Charlie had agreed to be a good boy from here on out,&quot; Mr. Gray says.    When the Bank Board approved the merger in August 1983, it tried to limit Financial Corp.'s growth by requiring that its thrift unit have capital equal to 4% of assets, compared with the prevailing 3% requirement for the rest of the industry. The newly merged thrift, called American Savings, had assets of $20.4 billion, the greatest in the industry.    Mr. Knapp, however, didn't put a lid on the company's growth. The capital requirement could be enforced only at the end of each year, so early in 1984 Mr. Knapp pushed the company to make more fixed-rate loans, virtually all financed by volatile, short-term deposits.    By June 30, 1984, American Savings had grown to $31.4 billion, even though it had promised to grow to only $25.4 billion by the end of that year. At that rate, the Bank Board calculated that American Savings would reach $45.5 billion by December 1984 and $100 billion by January 1986.    &quot;At these extremely high growth levels, we believe that it is impossible for American to maintain adequate internal controls and underwriting standards,&quot; said a Bank Board staff memo prepared for Mr. Gray's meeting with Mr. Knapp in August 1984.    In fact, the company had long been out of control. A former internal auditor for Financial Corp. recalls that &quot;deals were done on cocktail napkins. You'd find memos in the files that Foster {J. Foster Fluetsch, Financial Corp.'s vice chairman} had met with a borrower and authorized the loan to be funded, and no other documentation.&quot; Mr. Fluetsch, who resigned in 1984, says, &quot;I don't imagine that there would have been many loans {made} on that basis,&quot; but he declines further comment.    The auditor says that such findings were pointed out to Mr. Knapp, but he didn't take any action. The transactions and others are subjects of numerous civil lawsuits and at least one criminal investigation by a federal grand jury. The former auditor also recalls Mr. Knapp as a &quot;charming&quot; executive and fondly remembers flying in the company's $14 million Learjet, which had gold-plated faucets in the lavatory.    But by May 1984, concern about Financial Corp.'s loan quality and accounting practices pushed its stock price below $16 a share, less than half its historical high of nearly $33. To increase the price, Financial Corp. offered to swap debt for 25% of its shares.    But the Bank Board blocked the transaction and shared some of its concern about Financial Corp. with the Securities and Exchange Commission, according to former Bank Board staff members.    In late June, Financial Corp. dropped its debt-swap plan. In July, institutional depositors quietly began withdrawing funds. And on Aug. 15, Financial Corp. bowed to SEC pressure and restated its second-quarter results to show a $107.5 million loss instead of the $31.1 million profit reported earlier. Financial Corp. hadn't properly accounted for losses from mortgage-backed securities transactions, the SEC said.    With that announcement, the run began in earnest. To replace lost institutional deposits, Financial Corp. began heavy borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco. Because the Home Loan Bank requires collateral, Financial Corp. employees made emergency trips to the bank, unloading boxes of loan documents from the back seats of their cars. But soon there was nothing more to borrow against.    Bank Board officials felt their options were limited. To have taken over American Savings would have spooked uninsured institutional depositors there and at other thrifts, and it could have caused $50 billion to $75 billion in such deposits to flow out of the savings and loan industry, they feared.    Shareholders actually benefited because the company's financial problems were so severe. &quot;If we had wiped out the shareholders and done a . . . receivership, the liquidity crisis would have been too big,&quot; Mr. Gray says.    Within days of taking over, Mr. Popejoy promised to shrink Financial Corp., much to the relief of other thrift executives. But in early 1985, after stopping the run, Mr. Popejoy says, &quot;we recognized that shrinking was the road to disaster.&quot; The reason, he says, was the company's ballooning portfolio of non-earning assets, mostly bad loans.    Because about $3 billion of Financial Corp.'s assets doesn't earn any interest income and an additional $1.6 billion earns below-market rates, Mr. Popejoy says, the company needed to acquire &quot;a very large base&quot; of earning assets to compensate for that.    In embracing the growth strategy, Mr. Popejoy showed a side that few observers understood when he was picked by Mr. Gray. Mr. Popejoy, who had run several California thrifts, was viewed as a conservative manager compared with Mr. Knapp.    But in previous thrift jobs, Mr. Popejoy had been a risk-taker. At Financial Federation Inc., the last thrift company he managed before Financial Corp., he had been an aggressive lender to commercial real-estate developers. Some of those loans turned sour for Great Western Financial Corp., which acquired Financial Federation in 1983. But others, Mr. Popejoy points out, generated substantial profit for Great Western.    &quot;I think management is paid to take risks,&quot; Mr. Popejoy says. Still, many of Financial Corp.'s California thrift competitors were stunned to hear Mr. Popejoy tell shareholders at the 1985 annual meeting that he wanted Financial Corp. to start growing again.    Disclosing the growth plan was &quot;politically very dumb for me,&quot; Mr. Popejoy concedes. &quot;The uproar from the industry was considerable. As a consequence, we weren't allowed to grow.&quot;    Mr. Popejoy didn't give up, however. He first acquired branches from other thrifts. Then, in May 1986, he finally persuaded Mr. Gray to unshackle him. Within four months, Financial Corp. had $34 billion in assets, up from $27 billion at the end of 1985. Most of that growth came from the purchase of fixed-rate mortgage-backed securities.    Mr. Popejoy contends that such securities offer Financial Corp. wider profit margins than the adjustable-rate loans preferred by other big California thrifts, but they carry risks.    The major one is a mismatch between the yield of such securities, which won't rise with market interest rates, and the cost of deposits, which will rise because most of Financial Corp.'s deposits mature in less than one year. If rates rise sharply, as they did in the early 1980s, the company may have to pay out more on deposits than it receives from loans.    Mr. Popejoy replies that he has reduced Financial Corp.'s interest-rate risk by hedging with interest-rate swaps and financial futures and options. He notes that Financial Corp.'s one-year gap, an industry measure of the excess of liabilities that mature in one year over assets that mature in the same time, fell to 25% from about 70% under Mr. Knapp. However, that 25% figure is about twice the industry average.    Nor has Financial Corp. hedged its mortgage-backed securities against the decline in their market value that occurs when interest rates rise. At the end of last year, Financial Corp.'s $17.4 billion of mortgage-backed securities had a market value $305 million less than what the company had paid for them. And during the rate run-up two months ago, the portfolio value probably declined an additional $447 million, estimates Jonathan Gray, a thrift analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein andamp; Co. in New York.    The FSLIC simply wouldn't have enough money to handle an insolvency of Financial Corp. if all the company's assets were written down to their market value.    Nor is Financial Corp. particularly attractive to a potential buyer. Its core thrift operations consist of $11.6 billion of loans, of which $2.65 billion is delinquent or renegotiated, $17.66 billion of deposits, and 178 branches with about one million California customers.    The company's stated assets also include $1 billion of good will generated by past acquisitions, which must be written off slowly at the rate of about $50 million a year.    As Mr. Gray negotiates with potential buyers, the clock ticking away, a debate rages within the thrift industry about his past strategy. &quot;To have allowed it to grow the way it did, given the fact that it's insolvent, is a mistake of regulatory judgment,&quot; says Mr. Brumbaugh, the former Bank Board economist.    &quot;It was a deliberate decision that was intended to enable the institution to earn,&quot; Mr. Gray says in his own defense.    And while Mr. Popejoy frequently talks about the progress that Financial Corp. has made since 1984, he isn't recommending the company's stock. &quot;I don't think this is a stock for widows and orphans,&quot; he said in answer to a question at the annual shareholders' meeting last month. &quot;It has to be viewed . . . as a speculative investment.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>