<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890911-0087 </DOCNO><DD> = 890911 </DD><AN> 890911-0087. </AN><HL> Presidential Power -- Limits of Power:@  Is President's Authority@  Being Nibbled Away?@  Many in GOP Say So@  ---@  They Rebel as Congress Curbs@  Office in Numerous Ways;@  Democrats Scoff at Notion@  ---@  Cry of Remember Watergate@  ----@  By Gerald F. Seib@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/11/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><GV> CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </GV><TEXT>   {First of Two Parts}    WASHINGTON -- Just in case President Bush isn't sure how to handle his job, Congress has some specific instructions for him.    Mr. Bush's agriculture secretary is required by law to employ at least 14,177 full-time workers in the Soil Conservation Service. His budget aides are banned from even studying the possibility of selling off agencies that market electricity produced at federal dams. His State Department is forbidden to open any diplomatic posts in Antigua or Barbuda -- but generally barred from closing diplomatic posts anywhere else in the world.    The president can't sell military aircraft to any Central American country without informing Congress 15 days ahead of time. But if any other country sells military aircraft to any Central American country, Mr. Bush's secretary of state has to report it to Congress.    Individually, such restrictions are but nuisances to a president. But their proliferation, combined with such high-profile presidential failures as Ronald Reagan's defeat on Contra aid, is kindling a bitter debate about perhaps the most far-reaching issue facing Mr. Bush: the power of the presidency itself.    An increasing number of political activists, mainly conservative Republicans, are complaining that presidential power has been steadily eroded as Congress has become more involved in the details of domestic and foreign policies. The result, conservatives assert, is a presidency too shackled to conduct a decisive foreign policy or clean up the budget mess, and they are launching a campaign to change the balance of power.    &quot;I think it's reached the point of critical mass,&quot; says C. Boyden Gray, the White House counsel and one of the Bush administration's leading crusaders for enhancing presidential power.    The issue has flared anew several times in recent months. Just a few weeks ago, President Bush vetoed a bill Congress passed that would have toughened an agreement the president's aides had negotiated with Japan to jointly produce the new FSX jet fighter. By imposing new restrictions on Japan, demanding a new round of negotiations once production begins and giving congressional aides the power to audit the fighter program, the bill &quot;conflicts with the president's proper authority under the Constitution,&quot; Mr. Bush complained.    Mr. Bush also has strongly protested -- and partially deflected -- a drive in the Senate to clamp restrictions on his administration's talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization. And he complained when Congress acted on its own to slap tougher sanctions on China than the president chose to punish Beijing for its crackdown on pro-democracy protesters.    Though it is largely Republicans who complain about such shackles on the president, even some Democrats argue that the chief executive has become too hobbled. &quot;Institutionally, the office of the president must be strengthened,&quot; declares Stuart Eizenstat, who was President Carter's chief domestic policy adviser.    But this talk of enhancing presidential power sets blood boiling among Democrats in Congress, who argue that the presidency is powerful enough and invoke the ghosts of Vietnam and Watergate to bolster their position. &quot;It's historically absurd&quot; to say a president's power has eroded, steams Wisconsin Rep. David Obey, chairman of the foreign-aid appropriations subcommittee. &quot;Anybody who says that has the institutional memory of a mouse.&quot;    This emotional debate is full of ironies. Traditionally, it has been conservative Republicans who warned about the need to check the powers of a president lest he become dictatorial, while liberal Democrats lobbied for a strong chief executive. Today, the two camps essentially have switched sides.    Moreover, it is surprising that the debate is flaring only a few months after the conclusion of the two-term Reagan presidency, widely thought to have been the most successful in a generation.    But Mr. Reagan's success on issues like taxes and defense in his first term was an &quot;aberration&quot; that masked a long-term decline in presidential authority, argues Burton Yale Pines, director of research at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank. Moreover, he contends, the failures of Mr. Reagan's second term and his weakness after the Iran-Contra scandal wiped out much of the power he enjoyed.    In many ways, the current debate over presidential power is just the latest chapter in an argument that has raged since the founding of the Republic. The framers of the Constitution, of course, tried to institute a system of checks and balances in which the powers of the executive, legislative and judicial branches would partially offset one another.    Today, though, presidential power comes as much from a president's ability to use the White House as a platform for communicating and persuading as from the skimpy powers explicitly spelled out in the Constitution. &quot;Presidential power is associated with the impressions you're able to convey,&quot; says Charles Jones, a scholar at the Brookings Institution. And that, says some observers, leaves the presidency as an institution too vulnerable to incursions from Capitol Hill.    Mr. Bush raised the issue of presidential power in his campaign, once writing a speech on the topic in longhand on a legal pad. He has maintained that the 1973 War Powers Act, which requires that Congress approve any prolonged stationing of troops in hostile areas, is unconstitutional, and he calls for a line-item veto, which would give him the power to excise individual projects in big spending bills.    In practice, Mr. Bush is trying to maximize his power with a strategy of alternately challenging and compromising with Congress. But aides say he regularly raises the issue of presidential power in meetings with lawmakers, and the general counsels of administration agencies recently held an unpublicized meeting to discuss presidential prerogatives.    Mr. Bush gets support from one of his predecessors, former President Gerald Ford. He &quot;strongly&quot; favors repealing the War Powers Act and changing the 1974 Budget Act, which bars a president from simply refusing to spend funds appropriated by Congress. Mr. Ford, who also served 25 years in Congress, declares: &quot;I don't want an imperial presidency, but I don't want an imperiled president either.&quot;    There is little doubt that Congress today dictates more details of some executive branch programs than before. For instance, a bipartisan congressional task force earlier this year reported that laws governing foreign aid now fill some 500 pages and require the president or his aides to send Congress 288 reports.    The executive branch must notify Congress of even minor changes in the cost or details of every foreign-aid project, meaning that the Agency for International Development now sends some 700 official notifications to Congress annually. Congress now &quot;earmarks,&quot; or designates for specific countries, some 98% of the economic-support aid it appropriates, leaving a president little room to shift funds to countries as he deems necessary. The task force concluded that foreign-aid programs are &quot;hamstrung.&quot;    Much of Congress's deeper involvement in executive affairs began in the days of national anger over the Vietnam War and Watergate. Those traumas produced what Mr. Pines of the Heritage Foundation calls &quot;a coup&quot; in the mid-1970. &quot;Congress grabbed a number of important powers away from the president.&quot;    Democrats, though, think the talk about an erosion of presidential power is simply a partisan power grab by Republicans, who have controlled the White House for 16 of the last 20 years but have been frustrated for 34 years in their efforts to control Congress. And there is a distinctly Republican tinge to the campaign to bolster presidential power. The Heritage Foundation has started a drive to raise $250,000 for a program to battle &quot;the Imperial Congress,&quot; and conservative columnist and former Reagan aide Patrick Buchanan argued recently that, with Democrats embarrassed by the ethics scandals surrounding former House leaders Jim Wright and Tony Coelho, &quot;the time is at hand . . . to restore the presidency.&quot;    Rather than crippling the chief executive, many Democratic lawmakers contend, they are merely exercising their duty to oversee federal spending. Rep. Obey argues that presidential power hit its low point in the waning days of the Nixon presidency, and that Congress's role has actually been scaled back since then. For instance, the value of arms that a president can sell abroad without congressional approval has been increased, and the Supreme Court several years ago struck down so-called &quot;legislative vetos,&quot; under which Congress sometimes reversed executive branch decisions.    Like the Republicans, Democrats can cite a former president for support: Jimmy Carter, who says that much of the debate is politically inspired. Mr. Carter argues that a lot of Congress's recent activism was incited by President Reagan's efforts to circumvent or mislead lawmakers, particularly in the Iran-Contra affair. &quot;When a president tells Congress the truth or makes every effort to cooperate with Congress, congressional initiatives to subvert the president are unlikely or are unsuccessful,&quot; Mr. Carter says.    Indeed, sometimes Congress clamps on fetters when it appears to be the executive branch that is abusing power. Lawmakers have been angered, for instance, to find that executive branch aides sometimes stifled programs they didn't like by simply failing to fully staff them.    So Congress writes into bills language spelling out minimum staffs the executive branch must employ in certain agencies -- declaring in an agricultural appropriations bill, for instance, that the Farmers Home Administration must have at least 12,675 full-time positions this year.    Morton Halperin, national legislative director of the American Civil Liberties Union, argues that the Iran-Contra scandal showed that &quot;the problem still is too much presidential power&quot; because President Reagan managed to launch a secret aid program for the Contras although Congress had passed five versions of the so-called Boland Amendment aimed to block military aid.    Presidential aides complain that lawmakers continue to devise ever more ways to affect executive branch actions. To stop the White House from making controversial changes in programs, for instance, lawmakers now sometimes write into spending bills so-called &quot;gag rules&quot; that prohibit officials from even considering the changes. One bill stipulated that the Reagan administration couldn't use appropriated funds -- meaning even the time of paid government workers -- to study selling the Naval Petroleum Reserve in California, which presidential budgeteers think is outdated and expendable.    White House aides say the problem of congressional activism may be most acute in the area of foreign policy, where it robs the president of the one thing he most needs to conduct affairs in the 20th century: flexibility. And often intervention comes not just from congressional Democrats, but from the very Republican conservatives who claim they want to strengthen the White House.    An example was the House's recent vote to impose tougher economic sanctions on China than Mr. Bush wanted following the brutal Tiananmen Square crackdown. The vote to force the president's hand was 418-to-0, and one of those voting in favor was Rep. Newt Gingrich, the fiery Republican whip who regularly excoriates colleagues for grabbing presidential power.    The uncertainty raised by restrictions on presidential freedom on foreign policy sometimes freezes the executive branch, officials say. The Bush administration recently wanted to help Peru fight drugs by building an airstrip in a remote valley so troops could be ferried in to eradicate crops and interdict drug shipments.    There were American bulldozers in the area capable of doing the work. But they had been sent for a road project, not an airstrip, and Congress has ordered that funds be used only for the projects designated in foreign-aid legislation.    The result: Work on the airstrip was delayed for about two months, until executive branch lawyers decided that the bulldozers could be used -- if the State Department, which was handling the drug program, paid rent for them to AID, the agency of the State Department that was handling the road program.    Similarly, when Panamanian President Eric Arturo Delvalle broke from strongman Manuel Noriega last year and tried to overthrow him, the Reagan administration wanted to send Mr. Delvalle a radio transmitter so he could broadcast messages from hiding to rally anti-Noriega forces. Virtually everyone in the U.S. favored helping Mr. Delvalle.    Yet the shipment was blocked when some Central Intelligence Agency officials and administration lawyers raised red flags. Why? Because Mr. Delvalle was still technically the president of Panama, and officials feared that sending the radio would violate a congressional ban on providing any aid to Panama's government. </TEXT></DOC>