<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0078 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The President's Speech</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMT FORGNAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;What we most need is to get the CIA re-engaged in this effort so that it can be better managed than it now is by one slightly confused Marine Lt. Col.,&quot; -- Oliver North, computer message to Adm. John Poindexter, June 10, 1986 (Tower Commission report appendix B).    How did running initiatives like aid to the contras and the Iran arms shipments fall to one overworked, undersupervised National Security Council staffer, who himself recognized he was in over his head? This question is what the Tower Commission report is all about. The Tower Commission's comments on the management failures of the president and his aides are by now so well known you'd think it recommended the president start deciding who should use the White House tennis courts. But to its credit, the commission probed beyond one president and one administration, returning repeatedly to questions on the balance of powers in foreign policy. This Tower Commission theme is in large part what Ronald Reagan should be talking to the nation about in his scheduled address tonight.    We are frankly surprised that there has been virtually no commentary on the Tower report's specific recommendations, which we reprint alongside. Here the balance-of-power theme is manifest, for example in recommendations that Congress keep its hands off the National Security Council, and reduce its oversight committees to a more manageable size. Part V of the report also includes a &quot;Principal Recommendation,&quot; setting out a model of how the NSC ought to work, with a clear if implicit suggestion that President Reagan improve his management organization. But even here, the report starts by quoting a Supreme Court case that the president might also mention tonight.    &quot;Not only . . . is the federal power over external affairs in origin and essential character different from that over internal affairs, but participation in the exercise of the power is significantly limited. In this vast external realm, with its important, complicated, delicate and manifold problems, the president alone has the power to speak or listen as a representative of the nation.&quot; United States vs. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp. (1936).    &quot;Whereas the ultimate power to formulate domestic policies resides in the Congress,&quot; Messrs. Tower, Muskie and Scowcroft added, &quot;the primary responsibility for the formulation and implementation of national security policy falls on the president.&quot;    ---   The current wisdom on Capitol Hill is to ask, whether and when &quot;the law&quot; was broken? The laws in question are in question precisely because they are congressional attempts to limit the president's powers in foreign policy. The statutes usually invoked include the Arms Export Control Act, the National Security Act and the Hughes-Ryan Amendment on intelligence activities. Yet the Tower report concludes, &quot;The legal requirements pertaining to the sale of arms to Iran are complex; the availability of legal authority, including that which may flow from the president's constitutional powers, is difficult to delineate.&quot;    The report says that the vast, unenumerated foreign-policy powers of the executive mean that when Mr. Reagan formally approved the negotiations with Iran, &quot;this ended the uncertainty about the legal status of the initiative and provided legal authority for the United States to transfer arms directly to Iran.&quot; The debate over when President Reagan formally approved the transfers of arms by Israel is thus largely irrelevant -- he acknowledges it was his policy.    On aid to the contras, the relevant law was the ever-changing Boland Amendment. The first Boland Amendment, passed in 1982, prohibited the Defense Department and the Central Intelligence Agency from spending funds to overthrow the Sandinistas or to provoke conflict between Honduras and Nicaragua. In 1983, $24 million was authorized for the contras.    ---   In 1984, Congress again cut off all funding for the contras and prohibited Defense, CIA and any other agency or entity &quot;involved in intelligence activities&quot; from direct or indirect support of military operations in Nicaragua. As the report says, &quot;confusion only increased.&quot; In August 1985, Congress authorized $27 million in humanitarian aid to be administered by any agency except the Pentagon or the CIA. This expired March 31, 1986.    In December 1985, Congress passed two contradictory measures. Part of the 1986 Defense Appropriations Act reenacted a version of the Boland Amendment by prohibiting the Defense Department, the CIA or any other government agency &quot;involved in intelligence activities&quot; from providing funds, material or other assistance to the contras. In contrast, the 1986 Intelligence Authorization Act did authorize classified amounts for &quot;communications&quot; and &quot;advice.&quot;    &quot;The provisions were so ambiguous that even the drafters debated their meaning,&quot; the Tower Commission notes. Lee Hamilton, Democratic chairman of the House Intelligence Committee wrote CIA chief William Casey that this meant intelligence personnel could not advise the contras on &quot;logistical operations upon which military or paramilitary operations depend for their effectiveness,&quot; adding that this restriction extended to humanitarian aid. But David Durenberger, then Republican chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, wrote Mr. Casey that he was certain the bill only precluded advice on logistics integral to &quot;particular military and paramilitary operations&quot; if it &quot;would 'amount to' participation in such activities, even if there is no physical participation.&quot; He thought that the whole idea of the bill was to &quot;encourage advice on logistics related to the effective distribution of humanitarian and communications assistance.&quot;    ---   Beginning in 1982, the report notes, the two branches of government were engaged in an &quot;intense political struggle&quot; over Nicaragua. &quot;Congress sought to restrict the president's ability to implement his policy. What emerged was a highly ambiguous legal environment.&quot; The upshot of the legislative restrictions, the report says, was to present &quot;the administration with a dilemma: how, if at all, to continue implementing a largely covert program of support for the contras without U.S. funds and without the involvement of the CIA.&quot;    A legal opinion by the Intelligence Oversight Board advised Messrs. Poindexter and North that the NSC was not an &quot;intelligence agency&quot; and so could advise the contras. The result was that Lt. Col. North was left to run an operation on his own, without the CIA or other departments. By October 1984, Lt. Col. North had taken charge of arming the contras during the expected delay before more funding was authorized.    &quot;There also does not appear to have been any interagency review of Lt. Col. North's activities at any level,&quot; says the report, adding, &quot;This latter point is not surprising given the congressional restrictions under which the other relevant agencies were operating.&quot;    Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, for example, knew there was a private network of aid &quot;because somebody was giving the contras guns.&quot; But he stayed away &quot;on the grounds that if you got too close, you would end up being accused of facilitating and so forth.&quot;    Put bluntly, much of the blame for this fiasco goes to dangerous and perhaps unconstitutional attempts by Congress to regulate how the executive branch conducts foreign policy. Time and again, the 248-page study traces the root source of the mistakes in the Iran-contra affair to congressional interference with normal executive-branch activities. The president made mistakes, but partly because his advisers felt constrained by congressional legislation from advising him.    ---   Pushing and shoving over constitutional prerogatives is not a problem if there is some consensus over the thrust of foreign policy, of course, and in a sense what needs to be explained is the lack of consensus. Or at least the apparent lack. The Constitution gives the presidency the predominant role in foreign policy, and Ronald Reagan has twice won overwhelming victories. His invasion of Grenada, the bombing of Libya and even his walking away from an arms deal at Reykjavik have all won palpable support from the American people. The consensus among the people is in fact clear enough, but every time it's expressed it comes to the utter astonishment of every courtier in the capital.    In court circles the myth persists that the two problems of foreign policy are avoiding another Vietnam and negotiating disarmament with the Russians. The attempt to legislate this agenda by circumscribing the powers of the executive branch flies in the face of the Constitution, the president's platform and the evident will of the electorate. Little wonder that an administration trying to navigate these rapids falls victim to mismanagement, improvising procedures and policies, slighting consultation and making mistakes.    This is what the president urgently needs to explain tonight. If he can succeed, the people will support him again. </TEXT></DOC>