<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NORTH WAS CHOSEN as the first defendant in the Iran-Contra trials.    Independent counsel Walsh notified U.S. Judge Gesell of his selection of the retired Marine officer as the lead-off defendant in the first of four conspiracy trials ordered by the judge. Walsh suggested empaneling two juries for one trial of North and Poindexter and proposed a joint two-jury trial for Secord and Hakim. Gesell ruled Wednesday that separate trials were necessary so the defendants could use one another's immunized congressional testimony.    The defendants are accused of conspiring to defraud the government by diverting to the Nicaraguan rebels the proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran.    ---   SHEVARDNADZE MET with Shamir and said an Israeli group would visit Moscow.    The Soviet foreign minister and the Israeli premier conferred at the U.N., discussing the Mideast and re-establishment of diplomatic relations, severed in 1967. Shevardnadze said that an Israeli consular team would visit the Soviet Union next month, but that full ties couldn't be resumed until Israel agrees to a global forum on Mideast peace. In Algiers, Arab leaders stopped short of rejecting a U.S. plan for Mideast peace as they ended a summit.    The Arab leaders agreed to support the Palestinian uprising in the Israeli-occupied territories, where an Arab was killed in the latest violence.    ---   A U.S. APPEALS COURT VOIDED its ruling on the Army's homosexual ban.    The federal appeals panel in San Francisco agreed to reconsider its landmark ruling that struck down the Army's prohibition against gay soldiers. The court granted a White House request to refer the case to an 11-member panel for a hearing. The action removes the legal effect of the Feb. 10 ruling in which the court said that Army rules providing for discharge on grounds of homosexual orientation, rather than conduct, were unconstitutional.    The 25-member appellate court's decision was viewed as a &quot;moderate&quot; setback for homosexual rights, according to a gay-advocacy group in California.    ---   South Korean students battled riot police in at least eight cities as Seoul moved to thwart a planned march today to the North Korean border to demand the reunification of the divided peninsula. Thousands of students were involved in the clashes, and officials said dozens of police and students were injured. Scores of arrests were reported.    ---   The House ethics committee met to discuss the possibility of opening an inquiry of House Speaker Wright. The panel was looking into whether the Texas Democrat violated the chamber's conflict-of-interest rules through a book contract and lobbying for oil companies. A decision wasn't expected until today at the earliest.    ---   Sandinista-Contra peace talks ended in Managua without an accord on a permanent cease-fire in Nicaragua's civil war. A temporary truce is expected to remain in effect. The latest round of negotiations concluded after the two sides failed to agree on proposals calling for timetables for disarmament and for democratic changes.    ---   Botha extended South Africa's nationwide state of emergency for a third year. The president said that while Pretoria's government had reduced political unrest, &quot;the ordinary law of the land is still inadequate&quot; to ensure &quot;the safety of the public.&quot; The emergency was to have expired today.    ---   Dukakis met with Costa Rican President Arias and said the U.S. should encourage democracy in Central America through economic assistance instead of military force. GOP candidate Bush campaigned in Texas, and called the Massachussets governor an &quot;out-of-the-mainstream&quot; politician.    ---   Reagan said the focus of America's battle against illegal drugs must be on users rather than on the traffickers. In a speech to corporate officials, the president called for &quot;stern social sanctions&quot; against drug users, and blamed the drug culture of the 1960s and '70s for drug use in the workplace.    ---   The Senate approved legislation banning most private employers' use of polygraphs to test workers. The House cleared the measure last week, and Reagan is expected to sign it. The bill would prohibit about 85% of lie-detector tests that currently are given.    ---   The U.S. Embassy in Beijing issued an &quot;urgent notice&quot; to Americans to beware of a possible terrorist attack by agents from a &quot;third country.&quot; The nation wasn't identified, but the U.S. said it was taking the threat &quot;very seriously.&quot; About 1,500 Americans currently live in China.    ---   NATO foreign ministers opened a two-day meeting in Madrid. The alliance officials planned to discuss ways to encourage economic and political change in Eastern Europe, as well as prospects for joining with the Warsaw Pact in a plan to cut conventional forces on the continent.    ---   A Soyuz spacecraft docked with the orbiting Soviet space station Mir, the official Tass news agency reported. A Bulgarian spaceman and two Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Soyuz joined the two-member crew aboard Mir. They are to conduct a series of scientific experiments.    ---   Britain and Iran failed to reach agreement in negotiations that London hoped might improve diplomatic ties strained by a dispute last summer over the arrest of an Iranian consular official in Manchester. Tehran proposed another meeting for today to discuss compensation claims for damage to the two countries' embassies. </TEXT></DOC>