<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Tough Choices:Stock-Price CollapseIs Confronting FedWith Policy Dilemma---If It Sets Rates Too High,It May Spark Recession;Too Low, a Dollar Plunge---A Loss of Economic Control---By Walter S. Mossberg and Alan MurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROPECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The stock market's collapse is propelling the Federal Reserve toward a perilous policy choice: to defend the U.S. dollar by keeping interest rates up or to defend U.S. economic growth by keeping interest rates down.    The stakes are enormous. If the Fed keeps rates too high, it risks repeating the mistakes of the 1930s and turning the market's drop into an economic slump. But if it lets rates fall too low, it may cause a free fall of the dollar, reignite fears of inflation and set off a renewed flight from the U.S. by foreign investors.    &quot;There are no favorable choices,&quot; says David Jones of Aubrey G. Lanston andamp; Co. &quot;This shows the extent to which we've lost control of our economic destiny by borrowing too much, spending too much and importing too much.&quot;    The painful dilemma was driven home to Fed officials yesterday, as the dollar plummeted in foreign-exchange markets. In late trading in New York, the greenback fell to 1.7365 marks from 1.7575 Tuesday and to 138.48 yen from 140.88. The dollar's drop yesterday was fueled by European Community President Jacques DeLors, who commented publicly that he thinks the U.S. is prepared to see the dollar drop as low as 1.6 marks. Though the U.S. Treasury immediately denied that that was American policy, the incident illustrates the pressures increasing the dollar's volatility.    European central banks tried to cushion the dollar's drop yesterday by intervening in exchange markets and buying dollars. Ultimately, though, Fed policy makers may find that the only way to stop its drop is to raise interest rates; higher rates would encourage foreign investors to keep their money in the U.S. Given the new risks to the economy, however, any talk of tightening credit is certain to provoke bitter dispute.    What will the central bank do? &quot;That's the $64,000 question,&quot; one worried policy maker says.    At the center of the controversy is the so-called Louvre accord, an international agreement designed to coordinate economic policies and stabilize exchange rates and championed by Treasury Secretary James Baker. Critics of Mr. Baker's efforts say that in the wake of the stock-market collapse, that agreement could have catastrophic consequences.    &quot;This whole business of letting the international value of the dollar serve as the target for policy is a prescription for disaster,&quot; says William Niskanen, a former member of the president's Council of Economic Advisers. &quot;The best thing we can do is break the Louvre agreement,&quot; agrees Allan Meltzer, a professor of political economy at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh. They worry that efforts to support the dollar could risk a recession by forcing the Fed to keep interest rates too high.    But Mr. Baker's supporters term defending the dollar essential, given the nation's dependence on foreign capital. &quot;The Fed will face an almost impossible task if the dollar starts falling steeply,&quot; says Stephen Marris, who studies exchange rates at the Institute for International Economics, a Washington research institute. &quot;It will have no choice but to let U.S. interest rates rise again to support the dollar at some level. You can't say that in order to calm the domestic markets you've got to print money and ignore the dollar. You've got to play them both.&quot;    The latest problems are also likely to exacerbate the current split over exchange-rate policies among the president's advisers and among Federal Reserve policy makers. Both Beryl Sprinkel, the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and Budget Director James Miller have argued privately that defending the dollar shouldn't be a goal for monetary policy. And some members of the Fed's policymaking Federal Open Market Committee likewise have warned of the dangers of a dollar-based policy.    Many on both sides of the debate agree that the dollar, over time, may have to fall further to help the U.S. reduce its trade deficit. The question, however, is: How far the U.S. should go in trying to manage the decline or to defend agreed-upon levels for the dollar?    Administration officials are privately discussing a plan that might provide a way out of this dilemma. The idea is to reach a bold deal with Congress to reduce the U.S. budget deficit, then use it as the foundation for a new international agreement with Tokyo and Bonn that would allow a gradual reduction in the dollar's value in world markets and a coordinated easing of interest rates. That would take pressure off the Fed. But any such &quot;grand compromise&quot; with other industrial nations would be difficult to negotiate and may prove impossible in the face of a dollar panic.    To get the crucial reductions in the budget deficits, President Reagan has started negotiations with Congress and agreed to consider new taxes. However, it isn't clear whether he will exercise the leadership necessary to get a deficit reduction big enough to calm the markets.    The Federal Reserve will review its policy next Tuesday, when the FOMC is scheduled to meet in Washington, in the midst of the turmoil and before any international compromise is reached.    After last week's stock-market collapse, the Fed quickly switched from anti-inflation to anti-recession policies and poured money into the banking system. At first, that sharp reversal in monetary policy didn't have any apparent effect on exchange rates.    But yesterday, the effects of an easier Fed policy began to show up in the currency markets. Short-term interest rates in the U.S. had fallen as much as 1 1/2 percentage points since early last week, while short-term rates in Germany and Japan had eased only about half a percentage point. Noting that the premium for investing in the U.S. had dwindled, foreign investors apparently decided to put their money elsewhere, and the dollar fell.    &quot;When the stock markets went down, people stopped focusing on foreign-exchange markets,&quot; one official says. &quot;Now, they are looking again.&quot;    Many analysts believe the dollar needs to fall further in order to make inroads in the U.S. trade deficit. For instance, the Federal Reserve's economic models show the currency must fall an additional 15% before the trade gap begins to close, according to one Fed official. The question confronting U.S. policy makers is whether to be relatively passive about the dollar and let it fall quickly or whether the U.S. should work to moderate the drop.    The Fed will try to thread its way between the grim alternatives of a free fall in the dollar and a surge in interest rates to defend the dollar. The central bank has other tools besides interest rates to influence the dollar, and if the markets don't push too hard, it might get by for a while using these tools -- notably, intervention in the foreign-exchange markets.    There are basically two camps in the government. The first, led by Secretary Baker, wants to manage the dollar through international agreements. The other, which includes Mr. Sprinkel, the chief economic adviser, and OMB Director Miller, fear that those agreements will force the Fed to keep monetary policy too tight in an effort to support the dollar.    Those who want to manage the dollar back the Louvre accord and also support the &quot;grand compromise&quot; plan actively being discussed in the administration. Advocates of this approach say it might allow the dollar to drift downward in a controlled manner to a new but stable level. It would permit the Fed to keep U.S. interest rates low by committing Tokyo and Bonn to ease their own interest rates at the same time. That way, U.S. rates would remain attractive to foreign investors, even while falling, and there still would be an incentive to hold cheaper dollars.    A new deal, as envisaged by U.S. officials, would also finally commit Germany and Japan to domestic stimulus that could offset any slowdown in the U.S. caused by a contraction in the federal deficit.    &quot;If we get from the U.S. a strong commitment on the deficit, involving Congress as well as the administration, we could be in a whole new ball game,&quot; says a German economic official. &quot;I see real possibilities because it would signal to us that we can take greater risks with our own policies, including the question of stimulus.&quot;    One administration official says, &quot;There should be a high willingness to cooperate {in Germany and Japan} because the same market forces operating on us are operating on them as well.&quot;    Cutting such a deal would be squarely in the style of Secretary Baker, who has been trying to nudge the major countries toward a system of managed exchange rates and closely linked policies.    &quot;It's very important to the country, and to the international financial system, to preserve a spirit of international economic cooperation,&quot; one Fed official says. &quot;The classic mistake of American economists over the past 15 years has been to believe you can separate the domestic and international economies. But you can't.&quot;    Everybody agrees that getting such a grand deal during a period of economic stress will be a herculean task, and those in the non-interventionist camp worry that the deal probably wouldn't work anyway. Martin Feldstein, a Harvard economist and former chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, argues that foreign governments &quot;will inevitably pursue the policies that they believe are in their own best interest.&quot; As a result, he predicts, agreements such as the Louvre accord are bound to fall apart.    His prescription is to scrap the Louvre accord and abandon any effort to defend the dollar with monetary policy. &quot;A key reason for the bearish shift of bond- and stock-market sentiment was the fear that the Fed would raise U.S. interest rates to prevent a decline in the dollar,&quot; he explains. &quot;It would be helpful if the Federal Reserve would reassure financial markets that it will not distort domestic monetary policy to support the dollar.&quot;    Mr. Feldstein believes that the dollar needs to fall &quot;at least 30% from its current level over the next five years&quot; to make U.S. products more competitive abroad and to reduce the trade deficit. He adds that coordinated attempts to manage the dollar will slow that transition. </TEXT></DOC>