<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Brokers Plan to Offer Detailed AnalysesOf Portfolios for Wider Range of Clients---By Barbara DonnellySpecial to The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   For an individual trying to manage a diversified portfolio, the hardest part is sometimes just knowing where you stand.    Consider the accounting havoc caused by the breakup of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. &quot;Say (an investor) bought 900 shares of ATandamp;T at $67; how much does that mean he effectively paid for Nynex, Bell South, U.S. West, and the other pieces?&quot; says Mark Molloy, first vice president at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. &quot;Every lot he purchased had the same problem&quot; in attempting to track performance and tax standing.    As new and complex instruments proliferate and even old standbys -- such as stocks and options -- are modified and jolted by splits, recapitalizations and other side-effects of the takeover boom, keeping track of investments is a much bigger headache than it used to be.    Not surprisingly, several major retail brokerage firms are keen to lend their support in this area as a way to please favored clients and attract new ones. They are jockeying with one another, dedicating tens of millions of dollars and years of computer-development effort to offer these individuals portfolio-accounting services that are as sophisticated and detailed as those available to institutional investors.    &quot;Developing a highly sophisticated, intelligent information system for our brokers is an important part of our business strategy,&quot; says Robert Rittereiser, president of E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. &quot;We want to deal with the sophisticated, active, affluent investor in a way that's more efficient and better than the next guy.&quot;    To date, Wall Street's best efforts to provide detailed portfolio analysis to retail customers have been mostly confined to special printed monthly statements. However, these reports are generally reserved for the 25% or so of clients whose accounts contain assets of at least $250,000.    In recent years, some firms -- including Merrill Lynch, Prudential-Bache and E.F. Hutton -- have also offered personal-computer software to brokers who wanted to take the initiative to produce similar, timelier reports for their own clients. These programs are more flexible than the deluxe monthly statements. But they are slow, bothersome to update and require the broker to spend a lot of time acting as a key-punch operator to enter the data. Only about 10% of brokers at these firms bother to get them at all.    Now, these stand-alone programs are being integrated into the firms' central computers in ways that will make them vastly more efficient and easier to use. The new systems being developed and introduced at Prudential-Bache, E.F. Hutton, Merrill Lynch and Shearson Lehman Brothers will deliver up-to-the-minute analysis of customers' portfolios at the broker's request. Pilot programs are just now beginning. Depending on each firm's progress, full deployment to all brokers should be completed in one to two years.    &quot;There's a major development effort to provide portfolio analysis for customers' positions, even including out-of-house positions,&quot; says Prudential-Bache's Mr. Molloy. &quot;Automating the process is a quantum leap from where we've been -- not just us, but everyone on Wall Street -- to where we will be.&quot;    The deployment of these new services to customers will be left to the broker's discretion. For the most part, this means they will be reserved for accounts with broadly diversified holdings or substantial trading activity. Other clients may obtain them as brokers use them as marketing tools to lure new accounts.    Among other features, the new systems electronically maintain each broker's book, or customer-account records. This information then is presented in ways that allow the broker to easily summon a comprehensive overview of a customer's portfolio, making it easier to spot opportunities for shifting exposures to risk, to see if income goals are being met and to highlight problems.    For instance, the systems start by consolidating all the information about a client's holdings -- including securities held at other brokerage firms or in safe-deposit boxes, if the customer is willing -- to give him or her a summary view of estimated annual investment income, current yield and percentage of portfolio invested in each security type. Many of the programs include familiar stock and bond indexes and other barometers of market performance for comparison.    The programs then allow the client to go into greater detail, displaying current holdings by individual tax lot -- including purchase date, cost basis (or purchase price for tax reasons), current price, market value, estimated income, current yield and yield to maturity for fixed-income securities. It also spells out both unrealized and realized gains and losses.    Thus, the report can give a clearer view of best performers and problem spots in the portfolio, as well as highlighting areas where yield might be improved. The information also helps ease tax-filing headaches and aids in planning year-end tax-loss strategies.    Effects of stock splits, dividend changes and other adjustments are automatically incorporated into the report. Moreover, most programs will automatically adjust the cost basis for fixed-income securities such as GNMAs where the payout includes a non-taxable return of principal as well as taxable interest. In listing the customer's holdings, each firm makes an effort to provide values for unlisted, hard-to-price securities, such as municipal bonds and unit trusts, from its own data base.    The new systems also accommodate some intricate transactions. For instance, for tax purposes, the systems account for how option premiums affect the cost or proceeds of the underlying securities when an option is exercised. Say the investor pays $250 to buy 10 calls at a $130 strike price; if the stock rises to $140 and he exercises those calls, most brokers would record his cost as $13,000 (10 calls exercised at $130). However, his real cost is $13,250, taking into account the premium. Similar adjustments apply to other options transactions. Keeping track of these details can make a big difference at tax time for active options investors.    Other features help the investor to evaluate overall exposure to different risk and asset categories. Almost all the programs allow a breakdown by product areas or industry groups, and many include quality assessments by recognized securities rating services. What's more, some of them include quality ratings from the firm's analysts and other research notations for each equity.    Says Richard Gaiti, vice president in charge of Merrill Lynch's advanced office systems group, &quot;With these systems we're leveraging the information we already have.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>