<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Were the Iran-Contra Hearings Worth It?---By Raymond Price</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Drawn up in imperious array, the fearsome Grand Inquisitors -- 26 of them, one-twentieth of the membership of the House and Senate -- set out in a thunder of holy righteousness to expose the heresies of the executive branch and cleanse the government by fire and brimstone. But along the way to the auto-da-fe, a funny thing happened.    The Great Satan got away.    So now they're left with nagging questions, the answers to which may not be entirely pleasant for the inquisitorial branch. What, after all, did they achieve, and at what cost? And beneath their own magisterial robes, did they unwittingly reveal feet of legislative and political clay?    The hearings did provide an education of sorts, and at times a riveting public entertainment. They also had one major benefit that was as unwelcome to the committee majorities as it was unintended by them: an increased public awareness of why the democratic resistance in Nicaragua deserves help, which has translated into measurably increased public support for such help. But apart from this, it's hard to think of anything of major significance we learned that we wouldn't have known without the hearings.    We did get a dramatic look at how the policy process was mismanaged on a particular set of issues and by a particular set of players during the first half of Ronald Reagan's second term. But both the players and the circumstances now are different. Before the hearings even began, the basic facts had been laid out by the Tower commission. The president had already cleaned house and taken steps to ensure that the blunders would not be repeated.    The cost of the hearings has been, and will be, staggering.    For starters, there is the &quot;opportunity cost&quot; -- the return that might otherwise be gotten from the same assets if they were used in another way. In this case, the opportunity cost includes what progress we might have made in the explosive Middle East and in Central America, or in staying one step ahead of Mikhail Gorbachev in his challenge to the assumptions on which the Western alliance is based, if the administration and Congress had not been so distracted and at times paralyzed.    Then there are the costs measured in trust: trust by leaders of other nations that they can deal in confidence with U.S. emissaries, or take political risks themselves in order to further joint objectives without having their cover blown by another grandstanding congressional committee.    George Shultz was effusively praised by committee members for his declaration that &quot;trust is the coin of the realm&quot; in operating a democratic system. But it's both more to the point and truer (in a democracy, after all, trust unleavened by skepticism is hazardous to political health) that trust is the coin of the realm in conducting sensitive diplomatic negotiations. The hemorrhage of sensitive materials, the cascading revelations of secret talks, the detailed reporting of private conversations -- all have an arctic effect on other governments, which take meticulous care of their own secrets.    If there was a genuine chance for an opening to Iran -- and there probably was -- these hearings have almost certainly blown it.    The opening to China offers a striking analogy. Then, diplomatic preliminaries were carried out under a cloak of absolute secrecy, complete with false cover stories (&quot;lies,&quot; in the present parlance) to conceal Henry Kissinger's advance trip to Beijing. One reason such precautions were necessary was that we first had to prove to the wary Chinese that we could keep a secret. Making an opening to the American archenemy was wrenchingly traumatic for China's ruling Communist Party -- just as, today, an opening to the U.S. would be for the ayatollah's Iranians.    Even more than in China then, any in Iran today who want to patch up relations with the U.S. would have to move with extreme caution. They would need absolute confidence that they would not be carelessly exposed to the fanatics' avenging wrath. In the wake of the hearings' cascade of disclosures, it would be fatuous to suppose that such confidence could again soon exist.    The strongest claims for the hearings have been by those who tout their strengthening effect on American democracy.    However, House Select Committee Chairman Lee Hamilton overstates when he claims that the hearings have shown &quot;that policies formed under democratic scrutiny are better and wiser than policies formed without it.&quot; When &quot;democratic scrutiny&quot; means bowing to the short-term political interests of Congress, this is only sometimes true. That process now has Congress hell-bent on enacting ruinously protectionist trade legislation because such measures please powerful, self-interested constituencies in the members' own districts.    A consensus on the overall goals of foreign policies is one thing; finding the best way of reaching those goals is another. In dealing with the rest of the world, what's superficially attractive has a strong tendency to be counterproductive.    The Iran-Contra hearings began as a transparent effort by the Democratic majority in Congress to exploit and if possible exacerbate the political difficulties of a suddenly vulnerable Republican president on the eve of a crucial presidential election. When the explosive public reaction to the committees' treatment of Lt. Col. Oliver North showed that the act wasn't playing in Peoria, they suddenly rewrote the script. Instead of relentless prosecutors, they tried to portray themselves as judicious statesmen.    If that's how they want to be remembered, there is a way to do it. They still can redeem themselves before history, and even make a signal contribution to our understanding of a government of separate and balanced powers in this bicentennial year of the Constitution.    Just as they abruptly changed course when buffeted by the strong North wind, they now need to do the unusual, even unprecedented, thing, and step out of the normal congressional character.    Having begun with exposure of the mote in the executive eye, they need to look now at the beam in their own.    Chairman Lee Hamilton was right when he commented that &quot;the Constitution only works when the two branches of government trust one another and cooperate.&quot; The trouble is that Congress has become so untrustworthy, so uncooperative, that the executive has to slide around it in order to function at all.    There's a distinction between opposition and obstruction. Debating a policy is one thing; meddling in its execution is another. For the past decade and a half, Congress has been intruding relentlessly and aggressively into the president's necessary prerogatives in the conduct of foreign policy -- quintessentially a presidential function.    These intrusions have ranged from the patently unconstitutional War Powers Resolution of 1973, which seriously undermines the effectiveness of U.S. forces when deployed in trouble spots overseas, to the Hughes-Ryan amendments of 1974 hobbling the CIA and the 1976 Clark amendment's prohibition of aid to anti-communist forces in Angola, to the various Boland amendments restricting aid to the anti-communist forces in Nicaragua. They include onerous reporting requirements that bring nearly a hundred members and staff of the intelligence committees into the covert activities act. Individual subcommittee chairmen often abuse legislative procedures in waging their own guerrilla warfare against administration policies.    The complaints against Congress are bipartisan. John F. Kennedy's and Lyndon Johnson's Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, commented recently that the &quot;astonishing increase of congressional power&quot; has created an impasse that &quot;poses an overall threat to our system. . . . Congress has recently tended to run wild with its oversight authority.&quot; Zbigniew Brzezinski complains that congressional &quot;micromanagement of foreign policy&quot; has reached &quot;absurd proportions.&quot;    A system of shared but separate powers demands restraint by each of the three branches. If we are to have a functioning structure of law rather than a tyranny of petty legalisms, that structure must be designed to permit each branch to operate effectively within its own sphere of primary responsibility.    The committees now have a historic opportunity: to recommend to their colleagues ways of rebuilding the bridge of trust from their own end of Pennsylvania Avenue, so that we can once again have the functioning structure of law the Constitution envisages.    ---   Mr. Price is a syndicated columnist and former speechwriter for President Nixon. </TEXT></DOC>