<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Sibling Rivalry: Does Sears Tell Ward? Not if Brennan Boys Don't Tell Each Other --- Ed and Brother Bernie Keep A Distance Though Firms They Run Are Mile Apart --- 'The Material of Epic Novels' </HL><AUTHOR> Francine Schwadel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> S MOB </CO><IN> TNM RET </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The two brothers could be characters in an Ayn Rand saga about the clash of conformity and individualism.    Ed is the consummate bureaucrat. As a junior executive, he agreed to so many transfers that he once owned homes in three cities. More recently, he got down on his knees and measured his company's directors for samples of its new suits.    Younger brother Bernie is brash and independent. Once, when ordered to foul an opponent during a high-school basketball game, he hit an opposing player and started a bench-clearing brawl. In meetings at work, Bernie shows his distaste for ponderousness by waving around a statue labeled &quot;The Bureaucrat&quot; whenever he gets impatient.    Today, Edward and Bernard Brennan are moguls in the same industry. Bearish-looking Ed, 54 years old, is the chairman and chief executive of Sears, Roebuck and Co.; angular Bernie, 49, is the chief executive of archrival Montgomery Ward andamp; Co. Their rise from a broken home in a Chicago suburb to the top of two of America's best-known retailers is a story without precedent in business.    It's also a bit weird. Despite working a mile apart, the two rarely get together. No one is quite sure whether they dislike each other or whether they are just cautious about fraternizing with a corporate enemy. So odd is their relationship and so different their personalities that unfounded rumors have arisen that perhaps they are only half-brothers.    Now, their rivalry is escalating again as Bernie leads a management buy-out of Ward. By making him the boss of an independent company, the $1.5 billion transaction would put Bernie on a more equal footing with Ed. But the buy-out, due to be completed as early as May, also could expose the younger brother to new risks. Ward still faces an uncertain future, and the buy-out removes Mobil Corp. as the retailer's longtime parent -- and backstop.    How the new Montgomery Ward fares will be heavily influenced by its competition with Sears, of course. The two merchandisers have been slugging it out for more than a century, and, with the middle market now shrinking, the stakes are higher than ever. Sears is starting to imitate Ward's moves into specialty retailing, and, down the road, Ed's Sears could help destroy Bernie's company, which is one-tenth Sears's size.    Bernie hopes the Ward buy-out will spur his executives to fight harder. But others see a different goal. &quot;Bernie has always tried to beat his brother,&quot; a former Ward executive says. &quot;It's a major element in his personality.&quot;    Although the Brennans could hardly work at companies more competitive with each other, they have always tried to play down any public suggestion of family rivalry. Ed refuses all interview requests about his brother, and Bernie says only that he is &quot;proud&quot; of Ed's achievements.    Their reticence may have to do with more than family pride. As a chief executive of a major company, neither one can afford to appear influenced by anything other than business judgment. The two men also can't appear too chummy.    Until Ed got the job, some within Sears believed that he could never become chairman for the sole reason that his brother had moved into a prominent position at Ward. Edward Telling, Sears's previous chairman, was widely believed to be among those who would think twice before turning his job over to someone whose brother worked in the enemy camp.    Because of the possibility for collusion on the one extreme and for obsessive rivalry on the other, the situation is &quot;fraught with peril&quot; for the brothers, says Robert Hessen, a business historian at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. He says he isn't aware of any siblings ever thrust into a similar position. He adds: &quot;This is the material of great epic novels.&quot;    Early signs of friction between the Brennans surfaced while both were working at Sears in the 1960s and 1970s. Bernie joined Sears after a job interview arranged by Ed. But on some occasions when Sears employees mistook him for Ed, Bernie angrily snapped out a correction. Later, as Ed began his rapid rise through the ranks of regional store management, Bernie, who was a buyer, avoided trips to Ed's turf. A former Sears employee says Ed sometimes seemed overly sensitive, too: Once, he blew up at a colleague's suggestion that Bernie was the better merchant.    But the incident that many Sears people remember best occurred when Bernie left Sears in 1976. In the classic gunslinger's boast, he declared that Sears wasn't big enough for two Brennans, and he moved on to join Sav-A-Stop Inc., a Florida-based distributor of health and beauty aids.    Comparisons between the two men are inevitable. According to friends and associates, Ed is a polished organization man -- smooth and expert in getting things done in a big company. He is also meticulous and sensitive, with a bit of a schoolteacher's manner. His office is so immaculate that his computer is hidden behind a painting. A few years ago, he concluded a speech by playing a Sears commercial and singing along with the jingle.    Ed's rise at Sears is widely attributed to his strengths in cost-cutting and planning. One of his biggest achievements, though, was acting as a peacemaker in ending a feud between Sears's headquarters staff and its field organization during the early 1980s. He maintains a deep affection for Sears and can rhapsodize for 10 minutes on the merits of a Kenmore washer.    In contrast to straight-laced Ed, Bernie seems more like a rabble-rouser. On his office wall hangs a famous quote about the unpopularity of leadership. The author: Machiavelli. Bernie also has a short fuse, firing executives who don't produce or dressing them down in front of their peers. Once, after reading a report he didn't like, he phoned the author late at night and called him &quot;a liar.&quot;    At Ward, Bernie has achieved a dramatic profit turnaround partly by pitting executives against one another. He started a contest he calls the &quot;Microwave 500&quot; -- a monthlong derby among Ward's operating regions for dominance in the sale of microwave ovens. Each senior executive sponsors a region and tracks its performance by moving model race cars on a drag strip at company headquarters. Bernie's region won last year's race.    Why did the two Brennans turn out so differently? Some attribute it partly to their parents' breakup in 1946, which was unusual for Catholics at that time and especially traumatic for Ed because it occurred on his 12th birthday. Among other things, their mother, Marge, had complained that their father didn't earn enough as a Sears buyer, according to divorce papers. She took their two daughters and moved to Mexico, where she remarried and went to work for Sears herself.    Young Ed clung to his family's retailing roots. (His grandfather and two uncles also worked for Sears.) Ed dressed in Sears clothes and defended the company so fiercely that his friends made fun of him. On summer vacations, it was Ed who shepherded his younger brother on long bus trips to visit their mother in Mexico. Ed &quot;matured quicker than the rest of us,&quot; says Bob Giroux, a childhood friend.    After college, Ed took a conservative path. He married his childhood sweetheart and had a chance to become a McDonald's franchisee because his father-in-law knew Ray Kroc, the fast-food chain's founder. But Ed shunned the entrepreneurial route and went to work as a Sears salesman.    Bernie, an intensely competitive athlete, eventually became more independent than Ed. He seemed to have things tougher than his brother and got another jolt when his father died of a heart attack while the two were water-skiing. That year, Ed was in college in Milwaukee, and Bernie, who was 15, had to live with his stepmother and half-brother, David.    Because the father had left the family with little more than 35 shares of Sears stock, Bernie soon had to get a job. Later, he took a break from college to join the Army as a cryptographer. (One souvenir from those days is his habit of exclaiming &quot;I've broken the code&quot; when he solves a business problem.)    Today, Bernie says his rough-and-tumble nature helps him run Ward. &quot;If being tough brings these results,&quot; he declares, &quot;I'm going to continue being tough.&quot; It also may help in battling Sears and other retailers.    Ward -- an industry laggard ever since World War II -- stayed afloat in the early 1980s only because Mobil pumped $609 million into it. When Bernie joined Ward as chief executive in 1985, it needed drastic action. He quickly closed the ancient catalog operation, liquidated a discount-store chain and discontinued marginal goods accounting for $250 million in annual sales.    But his most important move was to take Ward away from its traditional approach of being, like Sears, a private-label mass merchandiser. He transformed Ward into a low-priced specialty chain focused around such lines as consumer electronics and home furnishings. Although still facing a lot of work to improve Ward's apparel department, he has restored the company to profitability -- making a buy-out possible. Meanwhile, his strategy has caught the attention of -- who else? -- Sears.    The normally plodding Sears is now copying Ward's specialty-store scheme. On Wednesday, it agreed to buy Western Auto Supply Co., its third such venture into specialty retailing in recent months. Later this year, Sears plans to open self-contained appliance and home shops to compete with Ward. Sears is also following Ward's foray into selling more branded merchandise, especially in appliances. And it is branching out of malls to open smaller neighborhood stores that could whittle away Ward's customer base.    The danger to Bernie's plans for Ward is obvious. At the moment, Ward still has a different approach to the same market Sears is pursuing. But Sears, with 815 stores to Ward's 316, could easily take that advantage away -- especially because Ward is only halfway through its store-remodeling program. A profit drop might make it extremely difficult for Bernie to pay off the $1 billion debt that Ward will be carrying following the buy-out.    Meanwhile, Ed also has his hands full. Among other things, he is trying to make a success out of Sears's bold -- some say misguided -- plunge into financial services.    Bernie's best hope is to keep moving faster than bureaucratic Sears. Fortunately for him, he is used to the role of underdog. Facing a sales challenge while running Sav-A-Stop, he became inspired by the U.S. Olympic hockey team's 1980 upset of the powerful Soviets. He invited the U.S. team's captain to make a surprise appearance at the Florida company's annual sales meeting. Trotting the gold medalist out before the audience, Bernie declared, &quot;If they can do it, we can do it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>