<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Hurry Up and Wait; Airline DelaysBring Gripes -- And Lots of Excuses---This article was prepared byWall Street Journal staff reportersBetsy Morris, Timothy K. Smith and Ed Bean</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TEX DALAIRLINES (AIR)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   William Taylor was shocked by his experience at the Hartsfield airport here recently: His Eastern Airlines flight from Jackson, Miss., arrived only 17 minutes late.    Mr. Taylor, an industrial engineer, travels a lot. He has logged more than a million miles in Delta Air Lines' frequent-flier program. And he has developed a rule of thumb for airline schedules: &quot;I just always figure they are lying to me by one hour.&quot;    Steve Robinson, a senior editor at Sports Illustrated, has a similar philosophy. He arrived in Atlanta the same day as Mr. Taylor -- but his Delta flight, from Cincinnati, was 45 minutes late. &quot;It's at the point where you just assume you're not going to be on time,&quot; says Mr. Robinson.    Airline passengers who pay large sums to travel in discomfort and arrive late have little recourse -- that is, besides sweating, cursing and writing angry letters (of which they wrote plenty: Consumer complaints against airlines rose 43% in the first three months of this year, with more than a third of the gripes prompted by delays and cancellations).    But in recent weeks there has been a small consolation: They have been treated to all sorts of explanations as to how they got into this sorry predicament. The explanations, however, are all contradictory.    The Department of Transportation says some airlines fudge their schedules. The airlines say the air-traffic control system is obsolete and understaffed. The air-traffic controllers say air traffic has exceeded airports' capacity. Everybody blames the weather, probably more than the weather deserves.    It is difficult to know who is right in this argument, or even who is telling the truth. But a spot check the Thursday before last at Hartsfield Airport -- on many days the nation's busiest -- produces a few conclusions: Airways, as much as highways, are afflicted by rush-hour congestion; passengers are having large amounts of their time wasted and are either bitter or resigned to it; and airlines are exceedingly sensitive about the subject. (An Eastern flight attendant put it succinctly: &quot;If I talked to you I'd be shot by the time I reached the top of the escalator.&quot;)    The genesis of the problem is that -- at certain times of day -- the nation's large airports have more traffic than they can handle. A business executive may think it reasonable to want to be in New York for a morning meeting and back in Chicago in time for dinner at six. Unfortunately, most business executives feel that way. So the airlines bunch their flights in early-morning and late-afternoon hours to get bookings and hope that most of them will get through with minimal delay.    At precisely 7:25 p.m. on weekdays, for instance, Eastern has eight flights scheduled to leave Atlanta, and Delta has four scheduled to arrive -- more than can possibly fit on Hartsfield's four runways. (An Eastern spokesman says that published departure times refer to when a plane leaves the gate, not when it leaves the tarmac.)    Since the airline industry was deregulated eight years ago, neither the government nor the airlines have been inclined to question this system. Lately, though, the see-no-evil approach has started to wear thin. Prodded by growing passenger complaints, the Federal Aviation Administration -- already hypersensitive about the efficiency of its system since it fired striking controllers in 1981 -- met with airlines earlier this month to discuss juggling schedules to cut down on delays.    During those talks, the Department of Transportation accused Delta and Eastern of setting unrealistic schedules at Hartsfield in violation of the Federal Aviation Act, which prohibits unfair and deceptive practices. Indignant, Delta walked out and the talks were halted. (Both airlines did make some schedule adjustments during the talks, and several other airlines made more substantial changes at Chicago's O'Hare Airport and Dallas-Fort Worth.)    So that leaves the current system -- and it isn't pretty.    On the Thursday before last, Hartsfield handled 2,360 arrivals and departures, according to the local FAA office. Of those, the FAA concluded, 41 departures and 371 arrivals were delayed by at least 15 minutes by air-traffic control problems, most likely because of congestion since the weather wasn't a factor. And these figures for delays may be greatly understated; out of several dozen people interviewed this particular day, only one said his flight was on time.    Eastern's Flight 853, for example, is scheduled to leave for Nassau at 11:19 a.m. As noon passes with no explanation for the delay, the waiting passengers begin to squirm. &quot;Our four days and three nights have turned into three days and three nights,&quot; fumes Tommy Turpin, owner of an Atlanta-based uniform company.    When Billy Johnston, the ticket agent, announces a half hour later that the plane won't leave before 1 p.m. because of a fuel-gauge problem, passengers pounce. &quot;This happens all the time! Why?&quot; demands Roy Davis, an Atlanta salesman. &quot;Do you mean we're going to take off at 1 p.m. or do you really mean 4 p.m.?&quot; asks Steven P. Kersner, a Washington lawyer, loudly. &quot;I've suffered close to 200,000 miles a year on this airline and this is my frequent-flier award.&quot; With averted eyes, an uncomfortable Mr. Johnston simply repeats, &quot;Sir, I don't know.&quot;    Down the concourse at gate C-17, Eastern Flight 274 from Houston is scheduled to leave for St. Louis at 12:20, but has been delayed in Houston -- waiting for a flight crew -- and is rescheduled to leave at 1 p.m. (Eastern says the delay was caused by a crew not completing its minimum-rest requirement because of a delayed flight the previous night.)    At 1 p.m., Mr. Kersner is sitting in the nearby cocktail lounge, spending the time he's reserved for the Paradise Island beach eating airport &quot;food&quot; and watching Ryan's Hope on television. &quot;These days, you arrive at the airport, you have no confidence the plane will leave at all,&quot; he says. &quot;And if it does, it is always late.&quot;    The FAA and some airlines say the weather is responsible for more than half of all delays. On Thursday, though, the Atlanta weather was fine. What, then, was the problem?    The Department of Transportation says an investigation at Hartsfield &quot;uncovered significant discrepancies between airline schedules that are advertised to the public and the actual on-time performance for those flights.&quot; The investigation, which used data supplied by the airlines -- and thus didn't have the same understatement problem as FAA data -- found that 40 Eastern flights and 55 Delta flights to and from Atlanta arrived at least 15 minutes late 70% of the time during a 30-day sampling period. Two Delta flights and one Eastern flight were late 100% of the time.    Essentially, the Department of Transportation is charging that to sell more tickets, the airlines are scheduling, say, 20 arriving flights during a 10-minute period when it knows the airport can't handle more than 14.    These charges produce howls of protest at Delta. &quot;We've been accused of deceiving the public, of telling them we'll fly at 7:30 when we know full well that we can't get out at 7:30,&quot; a spokesman says. &quot;We absolutely resent that. We feel like they (the Transportation Department) are just running a publicity-blitz campaign to shift blame to someone else rather than themselves.&quot;    Lowell Egger, Delta director of flight control, says it's difficult if not impossible to adjust schedules for flight-control delays. The FAA computer delays different flights each day so that no one airline bears the brunt of congestion. And except in special talks where they have antitrust immunity, it's illegal for airlines to collaborate in scheduling. Unilaterally cutting back flights wouldn't make sense competitively, he says. &quot;We could cut out 10 flights and Eastern could add 10,&quot; he says.    An Eastern spokesman says of the Department of Transportation's charges: &quot;We're only doing what we've always done. This pattern goes back 25 years in Atlanta.&quot;    The real problem, the airlines say, is that the air-traffic control system is obsolete. In particular, they say, what is holding up the traveling public is the mishandling of &quot;flow control.&quot;    Flow control is the FAA's way of keeping the number of blips on an air-traffic controller's radar screen manageable. An FAA computer in Washington keeps track of all flights around the country, and projects when a particular airport is likely to reach its saturation point -- an event that happens several times a day at Hartsfield. Once that happens, the FAA starts issuing &quot;gateholds&quot; -- that is, it tells selected Atlanta-bound flights at other airports to postpone taking off. Because of this system, congestion at Hartsfield is felt at airports around the country.    Airlines say flow controls often are imposed needlessly because the traffic control system is operating with out-of-date computers and too few controllers. The FAA says accusations about its flow-control system are nonsense. The problem &quot;very simply is airport capacity,&quot; says local FAA spokesman Jack Barker. &quot;If we added 1,000 controllers, 16 brand-new radars and 22 computers in Atlanta, we could not add another flight&quot; during peak periods, he says.    But local governments that own the airports control the capacity. So Mr. Barker is passing the buck to the local taxpayers. The public, in other words, gets what it pays for.    For whatever combination of reasons, many of Delta's flights at Hartsfield appear to be delayed by Thursday evening. Its flight from Cincinnati is about 45 minutes late because of air traffic in Atlanta. Flight 147 to Tampa and Flight 498 to Jacksonville are both running a half-hour late, for the same reason. Flight 514 to Nashville is delayed 40 minutes; the plane has been held in Tallahassee because of Hartsfield's excess traffic.    A Delta pilot, arriving late from Jacksonville, declines to be interviewed except to say, &quot;It was definitely the FAA computer.&quot; His colleague not only declines to be interviewed but also holds a legal pad over his name tag.    Still, in this atmosphere of delay, frustration and fear of recrimination, it is possible to identify instances in which the airlines are unfairly blamed. At a bank of pay phones in Concourse C, a man calls his wife to tell her his flight has been cancelled. Asked which flight it was, he says &quot;Well, actually, I missed it. My wife isn't too forgiving. I told a little tale, I guess you could say.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>