<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870827-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Snags in Getting Swiss Data Delay PlanTo Seek Iran Indictments, Sources Say---By Edward T. PoundStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMT EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Faced with delays in obtaining crucial bank records from Switzerland, a special federal prosecutor has pushed back plans to seek major indictments in the Iran-Contra scandal at least until October.    According to people familiar with the criminal investigation, Lawrence Walsh, formally called an independent counsel, is concerned that administrative delays in Switzerland and last-minute legal maneuvering by attorneys for some potential defendants could impede his access to the bank-account records for at least several more weeks.    Mr. Walsh's inquiry got a big boost last week when Switzerland upheld his right to obtain the records under a U.S.-Swiss treaty providing for cooperation in criminal investigations. At that time, Swiss officials and Walsh aides were optimistic that the documents, which would trace the flow of some funds used in the Iran-Contra operation, would be turned over in a matter of days. Mr. Walsh had been expected to begin seeking indictments as early as next month.    But a Swiss magistrate still hasn't compiled all of the relevant records, the sources said, and U.S. Justice Department officials said that even after court rulings, it sometimes takes several months for the Swiss to transfer banking records because of complex administrative and review procedures.    Meanwhile, a senior official of the Central Intelligence Agency tossed cold water on assertions by Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North that then CIA Director William Casey authorized and knew all the details of the Iran-Contra operation.    But Clair George, the deputy CIA director in charge of all clandestine operations, said that Mr. Casey was close to Col. North and that the former CIA chief circumvented the agency's normal procedures and bureaucracy in working with the colonel on managing the sale of arms to Iran and helping provide assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels known as the Contras.    Recalling Mr. Casey's days in the Office of Strategic Services during World War II, Mr. George said the late intelligence chief &quot;loved North very much&quot; because &quot;he liked action people . . . Bill Casey was the last great buccaneer from OSS. He was dropping agents into Germany and France and saving lives when most of us were doing nothing . . . and he saw in Ollie North a part of that.&quot;    Mr. George, a 32-year veteran of the CIA with 20 years' experience overseas, testified behind closed doors earlier this month before the House and Senate committees investigating the scandal. A declassified transcript of his testimony was released yesterday.    Like some other U.S. officials who appeared before the panels, Mr. George conceded that he had misled Congress last year about Reagan administration efforts to aid the Contras at a time when such help was prohibited by Congress. Mr. George told a House committee last October that he wasn't aware of any CIA involvement in the airlift-resupply operation managed by Col. North and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord.    Furthermore, Mr. George said that when a State Department official categorically denied any U.S. government involvement in the operation while appearing with him before the House Intelligence Committee last October, he was surprised at the statement but &quot;didn't have the guts&quot; to refute it.    In his testimony before the Iran-Contra committees this month, Mr. George admitted that he and his agency had &quot;general knowledge&quot; of the airlift effort and had been asked by Col. North to purchase some of the planes owned by the Secord network.    Mr. George made it clear that senior CIA officials, including himself, distrusted Iranian arms sales middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar and Gen. Secord, who handled logistics for the shipment of arms to Iran. Mr. George said he &quot;very strongly&quot; urged Mr. Casey that they not be used in the operation. But he said Mr. Casey and Col. North ignored those warnings.    Mr. George described Mr. Ghorbanifar, who played a key role in arranging meetings between U.S. and Iranian officials, as a &quot;bum,&quot; a &quot;loser,&quot; and a liar. He said that during the shah of Iran's regime, Mr. Ghorbanifar was an agent of the Savak secret police, and that the CIA believes Mr. Ghorbanifar to be an Israeli agent. Mr. George also said the CIA had information showing that Gen. Secord had been involved with questionable arms dealers.    When told of this testimony, Mr. Ghorbanifar's lawyer, Stuart Pierson, said yesterday: &quot;When Ghorbanifar was in charge, the transactions went forward as planned. When the CIA took over, they became disasters.&quot;    The committees released documents showing that Col. North often talked with Mr. Casey. Notes made by the Marine show that Mr. Casey apparently authorized the use of Gen. Secord in the Iran operation, and that Col. North and former National Security Adviser John Poindexter intended to have Gen. Secord &quot;serve as an agent for (the) CIA.&quot;    Mr. George made it clear that he didn't believe some of Col. North's public testimony. He said agency officials don't believe the colonel's statement that Mr. Casey devised a plan to designate a &quot;fall guy&quot; if the Iran-Contra operation were exposed.    Mr. George, who characterized some of Col. North's ideas as &quot;harebrained&quot; schemes, disputed testimony by Col. North that Mr. Casey knew about the diversion of Iran arms-sales profits to the Contras and intended to set up an independent, self-sustaining intelligence operation outside U.S. government control. &quot;He would never have approved it,&quot; Mr. George said.    Mr. George said it was &quot;gospel&quot; within the CIA that the agency wouldn't use proceeds from one covert operation to fund another. And he strongly disputed assertions by Gen. Secord and Col. North that Iran arms-sales profits could be used for any purpose. &quot;You cannot take United States weapons and just go out and sell them for a profit and use the profits as you see fit,&quot; Mr. George said.    Mr. George also testified that CIA officials were &quot;bypassed&quot; by a White House plan to use Drug Enforcement Administration agents and $2 million in private funds to try to ransom some of the American hostages in Lebanon. White House spokesmen have said President Reagan didn't know that the operation involved ransom payments, but documents released yesterday by the Iran-Contra committees indicate that Adm. Poindexter intended to use that description in briefing Mr. Reagan about the plan.    Meanwhile, Mr. Walsh is optimistic that he ultimately will get all of the Swiss bank records he is seeking -- even though Swiss authorities could take months to determine whether turning over the material would violate national security or damage the country's banking system.    Although Mr. Walsh would prefer to have all the Swiss records before making final prosecutorial decisions, he hasn't ruled out seeking charges earlier if the process drags on.    The principal targets of Mr. Walsh's grand jury inquiry include Adm. Poindexter; Col. North; Gen. Secord; and Gen. Secord's partner, Albert Hakim, who managed the network of shell companies and offshore bank accounts used in the operation. Gen. Secord and Mr. Hakim are among those who have attempted to block disclosure of the Swiss bank records. </TEXT></DOC>