<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880630-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Subjective Bias in Jobs May Be Illegal Even Without Proof of Intent, Court Says </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> M LABOR T </CO><G> SUP </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled it isn't always necessary to prove that an employer intended to discriminate to show that a company's subjective hiring and promotion decisions amount to illegal job bias.    The justices ruled for the first time that bias in subjective employment decisions may be proven by statistical evidence showing that an employer's practices have had a discriminatory effect. The court said a worker complaining of subjective decisions needn't prove that the employer intended to discriminate.    The 8-0 decision, written by Justice Sandra O'Connor, is a victory for workers bringing discrimination suits. It follows the approach that half the federal appeals courts have taken and imposes it on the other half as well. Some business groups warned before the ruling that such a decision would lead to greater intrusion by federal judges into employment decisions.    But the high court was split on an important aspect of the case and failed to establish any clear guidelines on how the federal courts should handle evidence of subjective discrimination in employment based on race or sex.    The ruling, in the technical but important area of evidence in employment-discrimination cases, extends to subjective decisions the same legal concept that the court in 1971 applied to objective employment decisions. The concept is that federal civil-rights laws don't require proof of an intent to discriminate if statistical evidence shows a discriminatory effect, or a &quot;disparate impact,&quot; as it is described legally.    Objective employment decisions are those involving standard tests for hiring or promotion, or setting specific requirements for a job. Subjective decisions are those based on interviews, recommendations, past job evaluations and the like.    Civil-rights groups generally welcomed the ruling, but with mixed emotions. &quot;This is a clear and unequivocal statement that you don't have to establish an intent to discriminate in either objective or subjective employment decisions,&quot; said Barry Goldstein of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. Deborah Ellis of the American Civil Liberties Union agreed, but added that the points of disagreement among the justices &quot;could make it more difficult to win some of these cases.&quot;    The justices were split over what happens once an employee has shown statistically in court that an employer's decisions had a discriminatory impact.    Justice O'Connor, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justices Byron White and Antonin Scalia, the court's conservative wing, said an employer must then present evidence that the employment decisions were based on necessary business judgments; the employee would then have to prove that nondiscriminatory alternatives existed and would serve the company's business goals.    Justice Harry Blackmun, joined by Justices William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall, the liberal wing, objected and said Justice O'Connor was trying to rewrite the court's precedents. They said that once a case of discriminatory impact has been shown, the employee wins unless the employer can prove, not simply present some evidence, that the actions were a necessary business practice. Justice John Stevens, usually part of the liberal wing, said the court shouldn't try to resolve the issue until a future case.    Justice Anthony Kennedy didn't vote in the case, which was argued before he joined the court; he may cast the deciding vote in the future on how yesterday's ruling is applied in other cases. Some civil-rights lawyers worry that Justice O'Connor's opinion invites a new look at what they had hoped was settled law.    The ruling reversed a decision by a federal appeals court in New Orleans and ordered a new hearing on claims by Clara Watson that she was discriminated against in promotions by Fort Worth Bank andamp; Trust, now known as MBank East, a unit of Dallas-based MCorp.    Union Dues   The justices, in a major defeat for organized labor, ruled that millions of workers who don't join local unions, but who are nevertheless required to pay dues, may refuse to have their dues used for political, legislative, social and labor organizing activities by unions.    The 5-3 ruling, written by Justice Brennan, said that under federal labor law, non-union workers may be legally required to pay dues only to enforce the contract or to administer a collective-bargaining agreement.    The decision, in favor of 20 people paying dues to the Communications Workers of America, will force many unions to refund portions of past dues to workers and to keep detailed records in the future of what part of union funds is spent on contract enforcement and what part on unrelated activities. Some unions already do so.    Under federal labor law, a union and an employer may reach agreement requiring that all workers either join the union or pay dues even if they don't join. These are called agency-shop agreements. The reason for the law is that even nonunion workers frequently benefit from the union's collective bargaining efforts. States may bar such agreements by passing right-to-work laws, but 29 states still permit agency-shop agreements.    Many unions have long used dues for other purposes besides collective bargaining, such as political action, lobbying on labor legislation, organizing workers at other companies and other activities. Under yesterday's ruling, the unions will have to keep those funds separate and find a way to reduce the dues for workers who object to funding these activities.    Justice Blackmun dissented, joined by Justices O'Connor and Scalia. Justice Kennedy didn't participate in the case.    The court has said public employees can't be made to support union causes with which they disagree. Yesterday's ruling extended the principle to private employees, as well.    The 20 workers who sued the Communications Workers in 1976 were all employees of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and Candamp;P Telephone Co. In 1979 and 1983, a federal court in Baltimore ruled for the workers and ordered the union to refund 79% of the dues paid by the workers since 1976. A federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., agreed in 1985 and 1986 rulings, although it ordered additional district court hearings on some issues. The Supreme Court affirmed the appeals court's ruling.    Other Cases   The Supreme Court issued the final rulings of the term and adjourned until October, although the court is scheduled to release a list of orders today on additional cases it plans to review next term. In other actions yesterday, the high court:   --By a 5-3 vote, threw out the death penalty for an Oklahoma boy who at age 15 murdered his former brother-in-law, but the court failed to resolve the major constitutional question of whether it is &quot;cruel and unusual punishment&quot; to execute people for crimes they committed as juveniles.    Justice Stevens, joined by Justices Brennan, Blackmun and Marshall, said executing persons for crimes committed under the age of 16 is unconstitutional. Justice Scalia, joined by Justice White and Chief Justice Rehnquist, said the Constitution imposes no age limit on the death penalty. Justice O'Connor cast the deciding vote to throw out the Oklahoma youth's sentence, but said she wasn't prepared to knock out the death penalty for juveniles entirely in this case. Justice Kennedy didn't take part in the case.    --Ruled, 5-4, that the federal government may provide funds to religious groups to counsel teen-agers against premarital sex. In an opinion written by Chief Justice Rehnquist, the court said a 1981 law creating the &quot;chastity&quot; counseling program doesn't promote religious values in violate of the separation of church and state. The court ordered further federal court review, however, on whether some grants under the program may violate the Constitution. </TEXT></DOC>