<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880725-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Denial Hardens the Drug Crisis </HL><AUTHOR> A. Lawrence Chickering </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON </IN><G> JUS EXE </G><TEXT>   Current policy, backed by the weight of opinion, defines the drug crisis in terms of a conflict between two very different issues: between problems of addiction felt by individuals and effects on society that result from treating drugs as a criminal rather than a health issue. Although addiction hits every economic and social group, the main social effects afflict the inner cities, which drugs have turned into live replays of old &quot;Untouchables&quot; TV episodes, with 9mm Uzis replacing Frank Nitti's .45-caliber Thompson submachine guns.    The social effects amount to much more than the terrible increases in drug-related street violence. They also include increased inner-city school dropout rates (resulting from high-paying &quot;drug jobs&quot;), corruption in law-enforcement agencies because of bribery from drug profits, and -- perhaps more important than any specific effect -- the general sense of social demoralization that happens when crime pays so much and when living an honest, moral life seems to yield so little.    This latter effect appears in newspaper stories of children stealing from their parents to buy drugs, of parents actively encouraging their children to deal drugs and supplement the family budget, and of 14-year-olds proudly announcing ambitions to become hit men. More generally, it may come from a life in which crime brings riches and glory, thus making all &quot;healthy&quot; relationships between responsibility and reward impossible.    Both opinion and policy declare individual addiction to be a greater problem than the social effects. Even if decriminalizing drugs brought an immediate end to those effects, policy makers fear it would cause an unacceptable increase in addiction.    By focusing on addiction, policy makers have concentrated all their energy on criminal prosecutions to reduce supply. Extreme enthusiasts for this approach advocate calling out the Army, sealing off the borders and waging &quot;all-out war.&quot; At the same time, far fewer advocate vigorous criminal prosecution of users (probably because there are so many users who would not tolerate it politically).    Most important, however, is the fact that almost everyone ignores -- and, I will argue, even denies -- the much more troublesome psychological issue of demand: why large numbers of people in all social and economic classes choose to anesthetize themselves regularly from the experiences of ordinary life.    The decision to concentrate on drug use and addiction might make sense if the strategy were working, but it is not. The policy has been a disastrous failure. While federal officials have seized rapidly increasing amounts of cocaine during the past two years, new supplies have come to market so fast that the street price has fallen by half during the same period.    It is interesting that no one in the recent debate on drugs has mentioned the most successful rehabilitation program ever conceived -- a private program that has greatly influenced every successful public program. I am referring, of course, to Alcoholics Anonymous and its companion Narcotics Anonymous.    These programs are successful, as anyone who has been through either can testify, because of their radical, quasi-religious emphasis on empowering individuals to feel responsible for their own problems, and thus to overcome them. AA does not blame alcoholism on liquor stores. In fact, a major reason AA enjoys the success it does is that it treats all attempts to blame third parties as exercises in denial.    The principles that have made AA so successful could hardly be more different than those underlying current drug policy -- and, not incidentally, those underlying all other forms of social policy. While AA believes that individuals can accomplish extraordinary things when they take responsibility for their own lives -- when they reach for their &quot;higher selves&quot; -- government social policy is based on mechanistic, Newtonian notions about man as a machine, without significant resources to solve his own problems. The social-policy view, which follows attempts that began in the 19th century to apply the principles of natural science to understanding man, dismisses appeals to &quot;personal responsibility&quot; as &quot;blaming the victim.&quot;    One must acknowledge the special difficulties facing an inner-city drug addict seeking to conquer his addiction. Part of the cultural problem he faces, however, results from the social-policy belief that systemic socioeconomic conditions make it impossible for individuals in the central city to do anything to help themselves. Yet if inner-city addicts are to have a chance, they must believe, as Jesse Jackson might put it, that they &quot;are somebody.&quot; Indeed, successful programs such as the Haight-Ashbury Free Clinic's in San Francisco encourage individual responsibility, and often make referrals to AA or NA.    In the drug debate, the social-policy perspective is preoccupied with suppliers as the heart of the drug problem. While we laugh at people who blame alcoholism on suppliers, blaming suppliers is all that social policy knows how to do.    If the preoccupation with dealers has failed utterly to curb supplies, a greater indictment is its implicit denial of personal responsibility and its consequent subversion of an environment in which serious rehabilitation might take place. The AA/NA system describes individuals who blame third parties as having a &quot;co-dependent&quot; relationship with the alcoholic or drug addict, unconsciously and covertly supporting the addiction. Other forms of co-dependency include nagging, any form of coercion or negative judgment, or encouraging guilt. Alanon, an AA companion program, works to reduce co-dependent behavior in relatives and friends of alcoholics because such behavior cannot help the alcoholic or addict -- it only (implicitly) encourages him in his addiction.    Individuals' signals to addicts would amount to the classic co-dependent behavior of blaming third parties if their signals were like those now sent both by current policy toward drugs and its supporting rhetoric -- blaming drug dealers for the drug crisis. Whether they come from individuals or from government officials, such signals militate against the personal empowerment that is necessary for drug users to solve their problems.    Those who oppose legalization fear it will be taken as government approval of drugs. The real issue, however, is not approval vs. disapproval; it is: Whose authority will prove stronger in discouraging people from taking drugs -- policemen -- backed by the military -- or health officials? In the inner cities (and perhaps for some middle-class users), dealing drugs is glamorous because it is illegal.    Many people believe health authorities would have greater authority after legalization than the police and courts have now. Moreover, legalized prescriptions for drugs acquired by queuing in sanitized pharmacies attended by people in white surgical gowns would drain all glamour from the process.    There may be good reasons not to decriminalize drugs. But there is no possibility we will hear any until we stop using the decriminalizing issue as a means of denying the reality of personal responsibility that is so necessary for rehabilitation.    All of which returns us to the original policy choice -- ignoring the social impacts of drugs, which are tearing the inner cities apart, to concentrate on the problem of addiction. The strategy we have chosen to address that issue -- vigorous criminal prosecution of suppliers -- is the centerpiece of the co-dependent spirit that animates our national policy toward drugs and makes it impossible to have a serious policy on addiction.    The drug crisis is one among a growing number of modern problems that dramatize the powerlessness of governments to solve. But this issue does more; it also reveals deeper problems in our political discourse, with its antiquated, mechanistic notions about human possibilities and their denial of individual responsibility.    ---   Mr. Chickering is executive director of the Institute for Contemporary Studies in San Francisco. </TEXT></DOC>