<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861204-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/04/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BUSH ACKNOWLEDGED &quot;mistakes were made&quot; in the Iranian arms affair.    The vice president, a 1988 presidential aspirant, carefully navigated a political minefield in his first speech since the imbroglio began. Showing anew his loyalty to Reagan, Bush offered the most comprehensive rationale for covert arms sales to Iran. But Bush sidestepped any role he himself might have played and said he was unaware of and opposed to funneling of money from the sales to Nicaraguan rebels. Separately, Justice Department and congressional investigators are pursuing new evidence that the CIA played an important role in selling arms to Iran and funneling profits to the Contras.    Poindexter refused for the second day before a Senate panel to discuss his role in the Iran affair. But the committee chairman said most of the facts can be uncovered &quot;with or without&quot; the ex-national security adviser's cooperation.    ---   Reagan has tentatively approved a $1.02 trillion budget for fiscal 1988, and is leaning toward a defense budget request of $308 billion, administration officials said. The military spending figure is $18 billion above the current level but $10 billion less than the Pentagon wants.    ---   The U.S.S.R. and its allies face a winter electricity crisis that threatens to cut industrial production and force further restrictions on residential lighting, U.S. analysts say. The power shortage apparently has also caused the Soviets to restart the Chernobyl nuclear complex without promised safety improvements.    ---   The Warsaw Pact will continue to adhere to U.S.-Soviet arms limitation treaties, defense ministers of the Soviet-led military alliance said after a meeting in Poland. But the official news agency PAP said the ministers warned the U.S. that its action to exceed limits of the unratified SALT II treaty would undermine superpower relations.    ---   NATO defense ministers vowed to try to strengthen their conventional forces. The European officials reaffirmed backing for U.S. moves for a pact with Moscow on medium-range missiles and a 50% cut in strategic arms. NATO planners opened a session on improving conventional weaponry and reviewing military cooperation plans.    ---   Bhopal survivors prayed and protested on the second anniversary of the Union Carbide poison-gas disaster that left over 2,300 dead. Protesters burned effigies of the U.S. concern's ex-chairman. Marchers presented the state minister a list of claims from injured survivors, demanding $5.75 billion in compensation and other relief.    ---   Pretoria has begun a crackdown on white foes of apartheid, activist leaders said. The government detained without charge 13 members of an anti-conscription group in Johannesburg and Cape Town. The group opposes mandatory military conscription for white youths on the grounds that many must repress residents in black townships.    ---   Shiite Moslems battled Palestinians in Lebanon for the 10th day, killing 10 and raising the death toll to 379, police said. Most of the victims were civilians. PLO chief Arafat claimed Syrian troops were involved in the Shiite militiamen's assault on Palestinian refugee camps in Beirut and the south.    ---   Punjab's government sought army help for civil authorities to quell Sikh separatist violence in the north Indian state. But New Delhi didn't immediately move to deploy troops. Punjab said Sikh terrorism made the intervention necessary in parts of the state, thus giving soldiers broad powers for searches and arrests without warrants.    ---   Most U.S. students can write at a minimal level but lack communication and critical thinking skills, a national survey of 1984 tests of students in public and private schools found. The National Assessment of Educational Progress said less than 25% of 11th-graders write well enough to 7ucceed in academia, business or the professions.    ---   Iraq said Iranian artillery shelling on the northern front killed seven people and hurt 21, ending a weeklong lull in attacks on nonmilitary targets. Tehran radio said about 100,000 fresh troops gathered in a stadium to hear Iranian leaders' speeches before leaving to fight in the six-year war; some wore shrouds to show their readiness to die.    ---   Aquino wants peace with communist rebels but the Philippine president's &quot;sword of war&quot; will be ready if that can't be achieved, new Defense Minister Rafael Ileto said. A 60-day cease-fire between Manila and the rebels begins Wednesday in a bid to end the fighting. He also said any divisive actions by armed forces will be quelled.    ---   France altered slightly its visa regulations for citizens of the U.S. and some other countries residing in France. Such holders of French resident permits will no longer need visas to leave or enter France. But U.S. citizens who don't reside in France will still need visas to visit the country.    ---   Taiwan's ruling party faces an election challenge Saturday for the first time since the Nationalists fled mainland China for the island in 1949. The Democratic Progressive Party, formed in September by dissidents, is fielding 44 candidates in elections for the National Assembly and Legislative Yuan. Nationalists claim the new party is illegal. </TEXT></DOC>