<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   MANILA'S TROOPS FOUGHT communist rebels in the first post-truce clash.    A Philippine military report said at least 18 people were killed, including 12 civilians caught in crossfire, as fighting erupted about 90 miles north of Manila. It was the first battle between government forces and the insurgents since a 60-day cease-fire in the 18-year-old insurrection lapsed Sunday. Separately, the official Philippine News Agency reported that 39 constabulary troops who took part in a failed coup Jan. 27 were dishonorably discharged from the military.    A spokesman said Aquino planned to announce an amnesty program for rebels Feb. 25, the first anniversary of Marcos's ouster as Philippine leader.    ---   The White House said Reagan has refused to order former aides Poindexter and North to appear before the special commission named by the president to review the National Security Council's role in the IranContra affair. Meanwhile, Reagan provided the panel with excerpts of personal notes regarding the sales of arms to Iran.    McFarlane recuperated from an overdose of the tranquilizer Valium, which police have concluded was an attempted suicide, a police source said. The former presidential adviser, who had testified that Reagan gave prior approval for arms sales to Iran, had left a note to his wife before being rushed to a hospital Monday, the source said.    ---   Reagan discussed the future course of the space-based anti-missile program with his top advisers. Administration sources said the president and his aides decided to step up consultations with Congress and U.S. allies over the program, indicating that major decisions on whether to deploy the first phase of the system may be made soon.    ---   The Kremlin is considering pardoning about 140 more imprisoned dissidents, and has begun reviewing the criminal code with the idea of softening some provisions, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said. During the past eight days, about 140 political prisoners were released as part of a limited amnesty. At least 1,500 others remained jailed.    ---   Moslem kidnappers were trying to reach a pact with Israel that would free 400 jailed Arabs in exchange for three Americans and an Indian held hostage in Beirut and an Israeli airman captured in Lebanon, Beirut radio stations said. In Tel Aviv, officials denied Israel was involved in such talks.    ---   The Reagan administration has agreed to support a plan similiar to one proposed by HHS Secretary Bowen for a federal plan to help pay the huge costs of catastrophic illness, according to a congressional memo. The White House denied that a final decision has been made.    ---   The Pentagon has removed security clearances from about two million military and civilian personnel, Defense Department officials said. The move to protect U.S. defense secrets followed a series of spy scandals involving the theft of U.S. military data during the past two years.    ---   Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini spoke in public for the first time in almost 12 weeks, saying Iranians demanded &quot;war until victory&quot; against Iraq. Although recent reports said Khomeini's health was declining, he delivered a 17-minute speech in what was considered a strong and steady voice.    ---   The U.S. surgeon general told a House panel that he favors advertising condoms on network television because of the health threat posed by AIDS. He said the ads should promote disease prevention rather than sexual activity. The three commercial networks don't carry such ads because they could be offensive to some viewers.    ---   Three teen-agers were charged with murder and nine others with lesser crimes in a Dec. 20 attack in New York in which a white mob beat three blacks and chased one into traffic, where he was killed by a car. The charges apparently were the result of new data provided by an alleged participant in the incident in Howard Beach, Queens.    ---   A Forsyth County grand jury indicted seven whites for their roles in an attack last month on civil rights demonstrators as they marched through the Georgia county, which hasn't any black residents. Those indicted were among 400 Ku Klux Klansmen and their supporters who protested the march.    ---   Western diplomats said a recent series of bombings in Afghanistan's capital could be evidence of factional fighting between supporters of leader Najibullah and backers of ousted President Karmal. One diplomat said the &quot;random nature&quot; of the bombings has led many to discount the possibility that Moslem guerrillas were responsible.    ---   Veterans of the Vietnam War have shown a postwar death rate that is 17% higher than soldiers stationed elsewhere in the world at the same time, a study by the Centers for Disease Control found. The study said the increased death rate in the first five years after discharge was probably due to &quot;unusual stresses&quot; endured in a combat zone.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett released an annual state-by-state assessment of the nation's schools, saying that the pace of improvement essentially held steady in 1985-86 after several years of progress. The report found an improvement in test scores but said the graduation rate had declined.    ---   The Justice Department has notified an Israeli general that he could be indicted and that three other Israelis can expect to lose immunity from prosecution in the Jonathan Pollard spy case. U.S. officials said that prosecutors believe the three Israelis had lied or withheld data and that the general allegedly was involved in certain payments. </TEXT></DOC>