<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0031 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Film:Bertolucci's Chinese Banquet for the Eye---By Julie Salamon</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Pu Yi Aisin-Gioro got to live out the fantasy that every child briefly believes is true.    The world really did revolve around him, because he became emperor of China in 1908 at the age of three. When the imperial toddler ran out into a crowd of grown men, they all fell to the ground, as if by magic.    When he was dirty -- and probably when he wasn't -- one group of servants would bathe him while another group danced and tried to make him laugh. Whenever he ate, his food was first tasted by one servant; after digestion another servant examined his imperial bowel movements.    But the coddling was strictly ceremonial, and the baby emperor grew up to command a realm that ended at the gates of the Forbidden City. By the age of seven he'd become a relic, kept alive, pampered and miserable in his luxurious prison, barely aware of the political turmoil outside.    &quot;The Last Emperor&quot; is director Bernardo Bertolucci's lyrically claustrophobic vision of Pu Yi's life. The picture is a strange and beautiful hybrid of historical saga and psychological drama, with plenty of opulent pageantry but little thunder.    This is an epic without battles and grand speeches and without a lot of movement, though it has a huge Western and Chinese cast, including Ying Ruocheng, the deputy minister of culture who directed and acted in Arthur Miller's &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; when it played in China in 1983.    The movie's considerable emotional force springs from the splendor of its visual poetry. Mr. Bertolucci allows the sweep of 60 years of Chinese history to unfold around Pu Yi as background noise to his peculiar, poignant role in the emergence of modern China.    Though not the first Western movie to be filmed in China, &quot;The Last Emperor&quot; crew was given remarkable access to the Forbidden City. The government cleared out the tourists and gave Mr. Bertolucci the run of big parts of this fantasyland built in the 15th century, destroyed in the 17th century, then rebuilt by one of Pu Yi's Qing Dynasty ancestors in the 18th century. Over the years the palace treasures were looted but the buildings were left alone and recently were restored by the government.    So Mr. Bertolucci found a ready-made set on 250 acres of elaborate temples and courtyards surrounded by thick red walls. The verisimilitude pretty much stops there. Mr. Bertolucci makes no claim to complete historical accuracy, and so has enhanced the record with lush eroticism and melodrama.    Pu Yi, for example, in real life didn't slash his wrists the way he does early on in the movie. And it isn't known whether his wife really had a lesbian relationship with her opium dealer, the way Mr. Bertolucci shows it. However, the director has remained fairly faithful to the emperor's autobiography, written as part of his &quot;remolding&quot; under the Communist regime. The movie comes at you in dreamy episodes that seem lifted directly from the emperor's memory.    It opens in 1950, in the hazy brown light of a train station, where &quot;war criminals&quot; pause on their way to prison. A few diehards kowtow to the emperor, a gray, cowering man shuddering in his colorless prison-issue clothes. He staggers into the bathroom and, while he unsuccessfully tries to commit suicide, he flashes back to his childhood. (Mr. Bertolucci uses the flashbacks throughout; moving back and forth from Pu Yi's 10 years in prison to his life as emperor.)    The palace glitter appears almost psychotically ornate, as the baby Pu Yi (played by adorable youngster Richard Vuu) arrives in this weird Oz. The reigning wizard, the Empress Dowager, from her deathbed wills the throne to Pu Yi, who still doesn't realize he's stuck in the place he's gaping at.    The giggling child is the only recognizably human creature in the gilded court Mr. Bertolucci has re-created. The ladies-in-waiting, their lips luridly red against their painted white faces, teeter on bound feet strapped onto wooden platforms. Eunuchs glide around grinning superciliously. Thanks to elaborate gilded embroidery, everyone sparkles.    The tiny Pu Yi, having just been separated from his mother, runs through this garish scene and stops in front of his father. &quot;Are we going home, Papa?&quot; he asks. His father responds by kowtowing to his three-year-old.    John Lone, who plays the adult Pu Yi, has a pinched, handsome face that looks convincingly bewildered. It's the haunted face of a man whose entire life has been spent bending to someone else's will while deluding himself into thinking he's the one in control.    Besides his wet nurse, he had only one relationship that was more than merely formal (including the relationships with his wife and mistress): R.J. Johnston, his stiff British tutor (Peter O'Toole), who encouraged his student to wrest some control away from the palace officials.    Mr. Bertolucci is so caught up with the perversity of Pu Yi's upbringing -- and the richness of his own visual imagination -- he shows little interest in making the historical context coherent. He and his longtime collaborator, cinematographer Vittorio Storaro, have made this picture a wildly visceral experience, a surfeit of color.    Despite the grandeur of the settings, the director keeps the narrative focus limited almost entirely to the emperor's point of view.    From Pu Yi's perspective, Sun Yatsen's 1911 Revolution wasn't nearly as memorable as the moment when his wet nurse -- who suckled him until he was eight years old -- was removed from the palace. After he was kicked out of the royal palace, he became a puppet of the Japanese invaders not out of political conviction but because he had nowhere else to go.    If those who crave pulse-racing action sequences in their epics are disappointed by this film, they aren't paying attention to the gorgeous thing that's been set before them. </TEXT></DOC>