<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Prosecutor Asks Judge to Dismiss ChargesAgainst Three Arbitragers in Insider Case---Government Plans to WidenCase With New EvidenceAnd Seek Re-Indictment---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The prosecution of three prominent Wall Street arbitragers charged with insider trading was derailed, at least temporarily, as the government sought in a federal court to dismiss the indictment against the three men.    In a stunning reversal of a yearlong series of successes by the government in cracking down on insider trading, assistant U.S. Attorney Neil Cartusciello, the prosecutor in charge of the case, told U.S. District Judge Louis L. Stanton that, faced with the choice of going to trial Wednesday or dismissing the charges, &quot;the government has concluded that the indictment must be dismissed.&quot;    However, the government said it intends to seek a new, expanded indictment of the three that would allege illegal trading in the securities of at least nine companies. Mr. Cartusciello said the existing indictment is &quot;merely the tip of an iceberg.&quot;    In an interview, U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani said the government has recently granted immunity from prosecution to potential witnesses who had previously invoked the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination and had refused to testify. The witnesses are now providing testimony and records that could lead to more charges against the three men and to the naming of additional defendants, Mr. Giuliani said. He declined to identify the witnesses or possible defendants.    Despite the vow to seek a new indictment, the government seems to have been thrown on the defensive for the first time since Wall Street's largest insider-trading scandal erupted a year ago. The setback is all the more striking, given the highly publicized arrests in February of the three men whose indictments the government now seeks to dismiss.    Richard Wigton, former head of arbitrage at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., a General Electric Co. unit, was handcuffed and led from his office; Richard Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., also was arrested at his office, and Timothy L. Tabor, a former Kidder arbitrager, was arrested and jailed for a night before his arraignment. The arrests followed a series of plea agreements made by former investment banker Dennis B. Levine, takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky and former Kidder investment banker Martin A. Siegel. Mr. Siegel implicated the three defendants.    The motion to dismiss the indictment is &quot;an acknowledgement that the government made a profound mistake in proceeding with the arrests,&quot; said Stanley S. Arkin, Mr. Wigton's lawyer. He and other defense lawyers are expected to argue that because of the public humiliation their clients have suffered, the indictment should be dismissed &quot;with prejudice,&quot; meaning the government can't file a new indictment containing the same charges. And defense lawyers indicated that if the government obtains a new indictment, they will quickly challenge it on legal grounds.    The government's setback also appears to be the first blemish on the spectacularly successful record of Mr. Giuliani, who has been frequently mentioned as a candidate for high public office. The arrests of the three arbitragers drew widespread condemnation on Wall Street and enraged Kidder Peabody and Goldman Sachs. Yesterday, Mr. Guiliani defended the arrests, saying that at the time, &quot;there was ample evidence to support the actions taken by the government.&quot; He emphasized that the three were treated no differently than other criminal defendants.    The indictment earlier obtained by the government charged the defendants with conspiracy and mail, wire and securities fraud. But it alleged unlawful trading in the stocks of only two companies, Unocal Corp. and Storer Communications Inc. Since then, the government has indicated it would seek an expanded indictment that would charge illegal trading in stocks of at least nine companies involved in about a dozen major takeover-related transactions.    Defense lawyers complained that the government was seeking more time to strengthen a shaky case. This is &quot;a cynical and transparent evasion of a right to a speedy trial,&quot; said Mr. Arkin, the lawyer for Mr. Wigton. Andrew L. Lawler, Mr. Tabor's lawyer, said the government's motion &quot;reflects badly on the strength of the government's case and on the strategy in making the arrests.&quot;    Indeed, while the government has never explained why it proceeded against the three men the way it did, the tactic was widely perceived as an attempt to pressure them into cooperating. If so, the tactic has failed so far. Mr. Tabor, for example, was asked shortly after his arrest to implicate others by making tape-recorded phone calls, but refused, according to people familiar with the government's investigation.    Since the indictments, Mr. Wigton has been suspended without pay by Kidder, which also stopped paying his and Mr. Tabor's legal fees. Kidder also is negotiating with the Securities and Exchange Commission a settlement of a related civil case. It wasn't clear whether yesterday's motion would have any effect on the negotiations or on Mr. Wigton's status. A Kidder spokesman declined to comment, saying the company hasn't seen the government's papers seeking dismissal. A Goldman official declined to comment.    In Washington, the SEC said yesterday's action relates solely to the U.S. attorney's office and has no effect on its continuing investigations.    Mr. Tabor, who left Kidder in early 1986, was dismissed by Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., his most recent employer, at the time of his arrest. Mr. Freeman's status as a Goldman partner has remained unchanged since last February.    The charges against three arbitragers with ties to two of Wall Street's most prestigious firms may have stunned Wall Street more than any other charges in the recent insider-trading scandal had. The three were implicated by Mr. Siegel, who pleaded guilty to two felony charges for his part in the scandal.    Mr. Siegel said that he passed inside information about Kidder clients to Mr. Freeman, who in turn provided inside information about Goldman clients. Mr. Siegel said he gave that information to Messrs. Wigton and Tabor, who traded on the information for Kidder. The scheme is alleged to have generated millions of dollars of illegal profits. Mr. Siegel earlier was implicated in the scandal by Mr. Boesky. Mr. Siegel is awaiting sentencing, and is expected to be the government's star witness in any trial of Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor. </TEXT></DOC>