<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871228-0047 </DOCNO><HL> The West Can Do Business With Soviets---By Theodore C. Sorensen</HL><DD> 12/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Private business agreements with Soviet entities, like public-policy agreements between our two governments, are not quickly or painlessly reached. More lofty plans and outlines are announced than final agreements signed. Glasnost at the top is not always matched by negotiators in the bureaucracy. But, as General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev said in Washington, the ice is breaking.    Last January, with considerable fanfare, Mr. Gorbachev promulgated the new Soviet initiative for joint ventures with Western business. Aimed at encouraging an infusion of Western capital, technology, and management and marketing knowhow into the bedraggled Soviet economy, the new law has thus far interested comparatively few American companies.    U.S. businessmen, upon discovering that negotiations require repeated trips to Moscow as well as translation of all documents into Russian, have remained skeptical. In the Soviet capital last month, I encountered Finnish, West German, Greek and Swiss entrepreneurs but no other Americans. Even in Western Europe, where trade with the U.S.S.R. has been commonplace for years, early hopes that joint ventures offered easy access to the vast Soviet market have not been fulfilled.    However, as both Soviet and Western negotiators have lowered their expectations to the realities of a competitive world, more deals are being made. New Soviet modifications in the joint-venture law, announced in October, have further increased its flexibility and further reduced its dependence on centralized authority. Western banks have expressed a willingness to provide financing on the basis of Soviet assurances under the law that each foreign investor can repatriate his profits without restriction or delay, and can be guaranteed by the time the project is liquidated the return of his original investment. (Combustion Engineering recently concluded a comprehensive joint-venture agreement that contains these guarantees and offers opportunities for sales to the joint venture.)    Moreover, many provisions of the law that most dimmed enthusiasm when first reviewed last January have proved to be less onerous in practice.    --A 20% tax on the repatriation of hard-currency profits on top of a 30% profit tax is no small burden for the Western investor. But imaginative negotiations have produced a number of indirect forms of transfer to which the tax is not applicable; and the Soviet Ministry of Finance -- if a particular project and investor are wanted badly enough -- has authority to extend a profits-tax exemption beyond the two-year period contemplated and indeed to lower either or both taxes. Moreover, the two-year tax holiday begins only after the project becomes profitable.    --Insistence upon no less than 51% Soviet ownership, a Soviet majority on the board under a Soviet chairman, and a Soviet director general in charge of operations sounds like total control will rest on one side of the table. But if -- as Soviet negotiators have agreed -- all important questions require board action and the board on all important questions requires unanimity, no Western investor can be overridden. He can also designate a deputy director general who would, like the director general, report to the board.    --Similarly, Soviet authorities appear willing to give a new venture a term extending well beyond its estimated pay-back period; to permit Western auditors to join Soviet auditors in the preparation of financial statements; to allow a joint venture to buy with rubles Soviet raw materials for which the foreign investor would otherwise pay hard currency; and to grant other concessions to alleviate Western anxieties.    Those anxieties have not all vanished, to be sure. At least some Soviet civil servants, I have noted, are still unfamiliar with the new law's parameters, unresponsive to its purpose, and uncomfortable dealing with free-market concepts of profitability. That kind of inexperience and uncertainty can only prolong Moscow's traditional bureaucratic delays and intransigence. In addition, instead of the rigid centralized control that Western investors once feared, they are encountering turf-conscious Soviet agencies unwilling to yield to a sister agency one whit of their jurisdictional or financial interests for the good of the national economy.    Moreover, certain fundamental problems remain. The Soviet state will still own the land on which the joint venture's facilities stand. The Soviet economy on which some joint ventures' success will depend is still highly centralized, antiquated and vulnerable. And how much should be paid for Soviet labor and raw materials? How little should be charged Soviet customers? How should the venture value the land and other non-cash items contributed by the Soviets as part of their 51% of the venture's equity capital? How much profit should be excluded from dividends in a required reserve for &quot;social development&quot;? No Western-designated board member or manager can contemplate with confidence continual negotiations with his Soviet counterpart, who may well have a different agenda and perspective.    Most discouraging to some would-be Western investors is the fact that the Soviet effort is still aimed primarily at increasing that country's hard-currency export earnings, not giving Westerners access to the vast internal market or launching expensive new enterprises requiring sizable Soviet contributions of foreign exchange. Monsanto's hopes to build a joint fertilizer plant in the U.S.S.R. reportedly are foundering on this shoal.    Although the establishment of new domestically oriented industries that can reduce Moscow's outlays for imports would meet these Western objectives, and sales to the Soviet market can now be made for currencies other than rubles, profit distributions abroad by the joint enterprise must be drawn wholly from the hard-currency proceeds of the venture's sales to foreigners. (Whether, to be available for these dividends, the proceeds must all be profit, and whether that distribution must be limited to the foreign investor's share of such proceeds or profit, is a matter for negotiation.)    Sharing markets and proceeds outside the U.S.S.R. with a Soviet joint-venture partner is not likely to have much appeal to those already successfully selling in those markets unless they will benefit from a particular Soviet technology, raw material, location or other contribution.    For their part, the Soviets are more likely to be interested in those joint ventures (a) that will gain them, and not the Western partner alone, substantial foreign exchange; (b) that will generate enough new foreign exchange to pay for the hard-currency capital costs of the new enterprise; (c) that will give Soviet-produced goods or services the &quot;downstream&quot; participation, higher quality or improved marketing necessary to reach new customers; (d) that will involve a &quot;value added&quot; contribution of new investment, facilities or technology on Soviet territory, and not merely the export of Soviet natural resources; or (e) that will sell to Soviet entities or citizens, if at all, only essential goods previously supplied by imports.    Nevertheless, those in the West with joint-venture proposals meeting one or more of these tests will find Soviet negotiators far more open, responsive and flexible than in the pre-Gorbachev era.    It was a remarkable experience last month to hear dedicated communists acknowledge that a new Soviet enterprise's production and marketing decisions are to be cleared not with some state body but with Western capitalists who are the private co-owners of the enterprise; that such an enterprise can establish branch offices outside the Soviet Union, maintain unrestricted communications with investors and customers outside the U.S.S.R., and refer disputes to arbitration outside the Soviet Union; and that foreign partners and contractors can be given primary responsibility for the training, hiring, disciplining, rewarding and even firing of Soviet employees under a collective labor agreement.    The new Soviet sophistication and enthusiasm are not unrelated to Mr. Gorbachev's larger purpose. He needs hard currency, Western technology and modern management and marketing to stimulate a stagnant economy. He needs confidence-building measures that can facilitate further agreements reducing the crushing burden of the arms race. He needs improved access to Western markets. (Thus, with no repeal of the Jackson-Vanik amendments, one U.S. firm is proposing a joint venture that will &quot;substantially transform&quot; Soviet raw materials in an offshore facility before importing them on a most-favored-nation basis into this country.)    The law is still skeletal and ambiguous, and experience with its provisions is still sparse, placing a premium on the imagination, skill and determination of negotiators on both sides. American businessmen with a balanced proposal who approach the inevitably prolonged negotiations in Moscow with patience, tact, skill and empathy will encounter an interest, flexibility and even efficiency of negotiation that were all too rare only a few years ago.    ---   Special counsel to President John Kennedy, Mr. Sorensen is a partner in a New York law firm and recently returned from a trip with clients to Moscow. Roman Pipko, an associate at the firm who studied law in the U.S.S.R., contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>