<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Venture Capitalists Are Plugging Into Superconductors---Competition for Profit Is SparkedBy Discovery of the New Materials---By David StippStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   Products based on recently discovered superconductors are still just twinkles in researchers' eyes. But ventures aimed at reaping profits from the new materials are quickly springing up.    Companies with such names as American Superconductor Corp. are being formed, and at least five university-industry consortia are being set up for superconductor research and development. Entrepreneurs are talking about a national sweepstakes among states to form &quot;Oxide Valley,&quot; a Silicon Valley-like concentration of ventures to develop the new copper-oxide superconductors. And industry, government and university representatives are meeting in Washington this week to discuss ways to speed commercialization of the new superconductors.    To many venture capitalists, however, it still seems too early to place big bets on the new superconductors -- materials that conduct electricity without resistance. Despite recent excitement about potential applications -- such as faster computers, levitated trains and frictionless bearings -- the new materials are still largely mysterious and difficult to work with.    Moreover, start-up companies already face stiff competition from large concerns with big research staffs in the race to commercialize the new superconductors. Even the basic research finding that started the race came from a big company: Last year, two scientists at International Business Machines Corp. discovered the new, ceramic superconductors, which work at less frigid, more cheaply attained temperatures than formerly known ones do.    &quot;It's an area that is obvious to a lot of major corporations, and that will make it hard to carve out a protected niche,&quot; says Reid Dennis, a partner of Institutional Venture Partners in Menlo Park, Calif. &quot;An awful lot of money is going to be lost by a lot of people trying to invest in this.&quot;    Though acknowledging that IBM and other big companies may dominate some areas of the nascent industry, many venture capitalists expect it to evolve largely from start-ups that spring out of universities, as biotechnology did. &quot;I expect in short order that we will see a wave of new companies formed to develop specific applications in fields like medical imaging, motors and transportation,&quot; says John Doerr, a partner at San Francisco-based Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield andamp; Byers, a venture-capital firm.    Venture capitalists also are mindful of difficulties that start-up companies could face getting and protecting patents on the new superconductors. Such problems stem partly from the fact that there is no widely accepted theory to explain how they work.    &quot;If you had a good theory, you could write a patent application specifying a broad class of materials,&quot; says George Reichenbach, a venture capitalist with Advent International in Boston. &quot;But since we don't know how they work, patents can only deal with specific compounds people make.&quot; He adds that a patent on a particular compound is hard to protect because competitors often can make materials whose chemical compositions are slightly different -- and thus aren't covered by the patent -- but that have the same properties.    &quot;Since we think the likelihood of anyone getting a strong patent on composition is small,&quot; says Mr. Reichenbach, &quot;we're looking at trying to find researchers and companies with clever manufacturing processes and knowledge of specific applications&quot; to invest in.    Similar ideas led George McKinney of American Research andamp; Development Inc., a Boston venture-capital firm, to two Massachusetts Institute of Technology researchers in February. The researchers, Gregory Yurek and John Vander Sande, are developing a process to make wire and other products from malleable, metal precursors, which, before heat treatment that produces superconductivity, are far easier to shape than the brittle, ceramic materials are in final form.    &quot;We think the greatest opportunity in the near term will be in fabricating processes,&quot; says Mr. McKinney, who spearheaded the formation in April of American Superconductor, a start-up company based on the MIT process. Indeed, the technique his company plans to develop is a particularly hot idea in superconductor research -- at least three other research teams, including ones at Boston's Northeastern University and at Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago, are working on closely related processes.    Mr. Vander Sande, an MIT materials scientist, says much work remains to be done to make the process commercially useful. But he and other American Superconductor participants already envision their company as a major player in the fledgling industry. They have added several other MIT researchers to the scientific team and plan to establish a facility outside the school by October. The venture team also has expanded to include Rothschild Ventures Inc., a unit of Rothschild Inc., and other investors may soon join.    &quot;It may sound corny, but our goal is to build the American superconductor corporation,&quot; says T.L. Loucks, a Rothschild partner. He adds that the company already is lining up potential partners and customers, such as makers of electric motors and cables.    Venture capitalists agree that paybacks from investments in start-up superconductor companies are probably years away. &quot;We're taking a long-term bet,&quot; says Mr. McKinney, who predicts that American Superconductor may not make significant profits for seven to 10 years.    Noting that the new superconductor industry is likely to remain a research game for years, some investors are hoping to achieve relatively quick returns by developing materials and instruments for such research. &quot;Instead of waiting for big future payoffs, we're being more pragmatic and investing in technology that will provide information to superconductor researchers,&quot; says Sam Colella, a partner of Menlo Park's Institutional Venture Partners. He declined to elaborate, for competitive reasons.    Taking a similar tack, Guernsey Coating Laboratories, a small Ventura, Calif., concern founded five years ago to develop thin-film technology, plans to coat objects with superconducting ceramics for researchers. Though it hasn't perfected the process yet, the company recently advertised it in a physics journal and already has received dozens of inquiries from prospective customers, says Peter Guernsey, the company's president.    To get their feet wet without going overboard, some superconductor investors are supporting university research, which typically gives them priority in licensing patents that result. &quot;Our premise is to establish a small research group&quot; at MIT, says Laurence Storch, a lawyer in Washington, D.C., and co-founder of a new superconductor company named Conductor Technologies Inc. &quot;We're in no rush to set up an outside laboratory until the technology matures more. The whole thing is still frothy, and we want to make sure we're not going off on something half-baked.&quot;    Many universities aren't waiting for venture capitalists to come to them. &quot;Almost any professor working on superconductivity who is worth his salt wants to start a company,&quot; says Advent International's Mr. Reichenbach. Adds Steven Roth, a partner at Aegis Funds in Boston, researchers &quot;are coming out of the woodwork&quot; with proposals for new superconductor companies.    Several universities are forming superconductor-research groups and consortia, and are seeking funds from companies and government agencies to support their work. Lehigh University in Bethlehem, Pa., for example, expects to raise about $400,000 from a dozen companies to establish a consortium within a few weeks, says Donald Smyth, director of the school's materials research center.    Two of the most ambitious new univesrity initiatives are at the State University of New York at Buffalo and at the University of Houston, recently designated by Texas as the site of the state's new Texas Center for Superconductivity. With an expected $4 million in initial funding, the Houston center will employ 200 people in nine groups to tackle problems in pure and applied research, says Roy Weinstein, associate director of the center. </TEXT></DOC>