<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861231-0096 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):On With the '80s</HL><DD> 12/31/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   As 1987 draws nigh, we are struck by an absence of Big News. Economic forecasters, with a ho hum, are forecasting a 1987 about like 1986, a year of moderate growth. The two largest communist powers, Russia and China, are preoccupied with internal experiments, and hence aren't giving us much trouble. Inflation is low and tax rates are coming down. There's not much going on and not much in prospect. For lack of a better term, call it normalcy.    Normalcy is not a word especially loved by Americans. Warren G. Harding's promise of a &quot;return to normalcy&quot; won him the presidency in 1920 but neither that phrase nor Harding himself stirred the souls of men. Yet the country did enter a period of unprecedented prosperity in the 1920s without benefit of stirring leadership. With greater attention to its international responsibilities, it might have sustained that prosperity longer.    Some things about the present worry us, of course. Recent economic growth has been enormously uneven, which not only leaves important regions behind but suggests an underlying instability. The weakness of the dollar in recent weeks is troubling, at the very least suggesting the Federal Reserve has little room to stimulate if a recession looms, as sooner or later it will. The president has been crippled by the Iranian problem, and Congress has shown no inclination to manage the federal budget responsibly. Yet despite such problems, the real world Americans inhabit as they enter 1987 is relatively calm.    Indeed, a political culture that could convert the disorder of the late-1970s into the relative order of the 1980s deserves greater appreciation than it usually receives. It is important to notice that the recent trend toward calm did not start with Ronald Reagan's administration, but under Jimmy Carter's presidency. A decade ago, through some mysterious inner wisdom, the American electorate turned to Mr. Carter as a leader who would reconcile the country's warring factions of right and left and calm post-Watergate and post-Vietnam passions. Mr. Carter's government mirrored the Democratic Party itself, an uneasy coalition of Southern populists, Northern blacks, Naderites, business liberals, environmentalists, international accommodationists and other aspiring groups, with a Polish-born foreign-policy hawk thrown into the bargain.    We were certainly critical at the time, and in retrospect that administration did have some of the earmarks of a children's crusade. But at least it gave some previously disaffected folks a shot at wielding power. Most found it an instructive experience, if sometimes a humbling one. Bad ideas were proven bad by demonstration. Energy shortages, inflation, overregulation and military weakness grew worse initially. But by the time it was over, the Carter administration had begun rearming, had given Paul Volcker a mandate to kill inflation and had begun, at the behest of Naderites no less, some significant programs of economic deregulation, most particularly in the airline industry.    Ronald Reagan and the 98th Congress carried those policies forward and added more. State-level tax revolts gave impetus to federal tax reform. The Staggers Act eased railroad regulation, breathing new life into a moribund rail network. Trucking, financial services and communications were opened up to greater competition by both explicit and de facto deregulation. The long struggle to deregulate energy finally removed wellhead controls on crude-oil prices, ending in one fell swoop the artificial &quot;energy crisis.&quot; All the while the nation was being made increasingly secure by military modernization.    Finally, the bipartisan 1986 tax reform ended a long, self-destructive romance with punitive taxation. In a sense, this is deregulation, too. It frees up all economic decision makers to be more rational. It can only further the cause of economic efficiency. A renewed spirit of entrepreneurship has reminded the world that the trail toward higher forms of technology is broken by creative individuals.    Which brings us to this quiet period at the beginning of the new year. The country is not lacking in further problems to confront. Laying aside problems in Washington, there still are troubling manifestations of social degeneration -- crime, illegal drug trade and associated official corruption, family disintegration. Such problems do not lend themselves well to political solution. Our political culture may be starting to recognize the importance of restoring a sense of community and social engagement.    Getting back to that word normalcy, its vapidity lies in part in a certain absence of meaning. Normalcy is actually unknown in a highly pluralistic and constantly changing society such as ours. All we know is that this incredibly complex political culture has brought us to where we are and that many political leaders elsewhere in the world look upon it with begrudged envy. It won't hurt for us to savor that achievement a bit as we confront a new year. </TEXT></DOC>