<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880816-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Holy War: Rift Widens in GOP Between Traditionalist And Evangelical Wings --- Religious Faction Becomes A Republican Equivalent Of Black Jackson Backers --- Armed Guards and Fistfights </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just below the tranquil surface of this week's Republican National Convention brews a holy war.    On one side are people like Lyle Shira, a Delta pilot from Georgia who says he and his colleagues on the religious right &quot;represent a power threat to people who for years ran the party like a private club.&quot; On the other are people like Polly Logan, a longtime Republican national committeewoman from Massachusetts who finds members of the Christian right &quot;frightening,&quot; calls them &quot;fifth columnists,&quot; and warns that traditional Republicans &quot;should be vigilant about not letting these zealots take over our party.&quot;    This battle -- a class struggle, a power struggle and a political struggle rolled into one -- will help determine the shape of the GOP. The fight also will help determine whether the GOP fulfills its goal of becoming the nation's majority party by the end of the century.    &quot;The key question to the future of American politics,&quot; says A. James Reichley, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank, &quot;is how the Republican party handles these tensions.&quot;    Right now, the Republicans aren't handling these religious wars too gracefully. Christian broadcaster Pat Robertson addresses the GOP convention tonight -- a sign of unity. But traditional Republicans and new Christian Republicans have clashed throughout this election year. Last week, John Stuckey, the Georgia Republican chairman, likened the religious right to &quot;the people who brought you the Salem witch trials and the Spanish Inquisition.&quot; Sometimes, the battle has degenerated into fistfights. Armed guards and cadres of ruffians were part of the crowd this year at state conventions and delegate meetings in several states.    The Republicans are undergoing a cultural conflict as much as a religious conflict. &quot;This is bringing a whole new set of people into the Republican tent,&quot; says Thomas Rath, a former New Hampshire attorney general prominent in GOP circles. &quot;They're first-generation players, they wear white socks -- and not for tennis -- and they live in trailer parks. And they bring an intensity, a fierceness, that Republicans aren't used to.&quot;    Increasingly, members of the religious right are becoming the Republicans' equivalent of the black Jackson Democrats: It is difficult for the party to prevail without their support, but their support alone isn't enough to provide an electoral majority. And the more the party appeals to the group, the more it risks alienating other groups, including Jews and independent-minded moderates.    It is less the political content of the religious right's beliefs that troubles traditional Republicans than the group's narrow emphasis on social issues such as a constitutional ban on abortion, prayer in the schools and tuition tax credits for parents who send their children to private and parochial schools. The stridency, combativeness and dogmatism of the religious right also cause alarm.    &quot;They have an unrelenting approach to politics,&quot; says John Long, who confronted evangelicals as director of the Bush campaign effort in Michigan this winter. &quot;For them, it was Armageddon.&quot;    Some Republicans fear that an influx of the religious right could so alienate middle-class voters that it could drive them from the party in droves. &quot;That's an element of the party that must be ignored for us to be successful,&quot; insists Roger Stone, a Republican political consultant who was a top adviser to New York Rep. Jack Kemp, among other conservatives.    &quot;If we're going to reach out to blacks, Hispanics and blue-collar Catholics, we can't expect to adhere to a very narrow view on social issues that is held by only a tiny part of the populace,&quot; he says. &quot;If we go on some social jag, this party will blow apart.&quot;    But GOP consultant Eddie Mahe believes the religious right has the potential of delivering to the party a huge influx of new voters, enough perhaps to present the Republicans with the missing piece to make up their political majority. &quot;Ronald Reagan never brought anyone new to the party,&quot; he says. &quot;We've not had a major new constituency come into this party for 20 years.&quot;    Public-opinion polls show that voters who consider themselves born-again Christians constitute about a third of the electorate, but as a homogeneous political group they are probably closer to 10%. Nevertheless, members of the Christian right already have made enormous inroads into the GOP.    The Robertson campaign, which didn't capture a majority of the evangelical vote in the winter and spring primaries, claims that 13% of the Republican delegates here at this week's convention support the religious broadcaster. More than a quarter of the delegates here say they are born-again Christians, according to a survey by the Analysis Group, a Democratic polling firm. Robertson forces claim they control the state party governing boards or are part of a controlling coalition of those boards in 10 states.    &quot;The Junior Leaguers of the 1960s and 1970s aren't being replaced by other Junior Leaguers, but by evangelicals,&quot; says Lance Tarrance, a Republican political pollster.    With the evangelicals who supported Mr. Bush added to the mix, the Christian right movement has altered the face of the Republican party. It is melding blue collars with blue bloods and shifting the locus of power from Wall Street and Main Street to suburban side streets, from country clubs to country roads.    The resultant cultural tensions aren't unprecedented. Neither is the incongruity of scores of evangelical conservatives gathering in a Catholic city to nominate a Yale Episcopalian for president. A substantially Catholic immigrant party gave an Episcopalian patrician, Franklin Roosevelt, the Democratic presidential nomination in 1932.    In 1988, however, the wounds caused by these tensions are raw and deep.    The battle for control of the Michigan delegation to this week's convention was bloody. For more than two years, the state GOP endured a hopelessly confusing parade of elections, caucuses and lawsuits culminating with two competing state conventions. The conflict was settled last month only when some Bush delegates, including former Gov. George Romney, stepped down to help soothe tensions. &quot;We've got a Senate seat and all kinds of state seats at stake in November, and we can't have this fighting continue,&quot; says State Sen. Richard Posthumus, one of those who resigned. &quot;We're sick of it.&quot;    In Georgia, the tensions were so great that Mr. Stuckey, the state party chairman, called Mr. Shira, the Delta pilot, a &quot;social misfit&quot; during a break in the state's credentials fight here last week. Mr. Stuckey accuses the evangelicals of &quot;using holy terror to take over the party&quot; and says of the religious right faction that eventually won control of the Georgia delegation: &quot;What we see here is a narrow agenda, a fanatical dedication and an absolute moral certainty. . . . It has to be stopped if this party is going to be saved.&quot;    Mr. Shira says he has grown used to this acrimony. &quot;They hate us,&quot; he says. &quot;But at all our meetings we pray for them. I suspect they don't pray for us.&quot;    The evangelicals argue that they aren't substantially different from traditional Republicans on the issues. But James Guth, a Furman University specialist in religion and politics, says his studies of Robertson activists and contributors show they are the most conservative identifiable group in the GOP. Their views on foreign policy and economic issues mirror those of the party as a whole, but they are much more conservative on social issues.    &quot;These are people who believe the whole Bible cover to cover and the whole Republican platform cover to cover,&quot; he says.    Even so, Christian Republicans believe they are being ostracized less on the basis of their political convictions than because they represent a challenge to the party establishment that has grown used to its perquisites and jealous of its prestige.    &quot;The old guard was worried they'd lose control of the party,&quot; says Kathryn Worre, who directed the Robertson campaign in Minnesota, where Mr. Bush finished fourth and Mr. Robertson second. &quot;The oddest thing was that all these polite Norwegians who hardly get emotional over anything were rude and were shouting.&quot;    Christian Republicans in Michigan and Iowa demonstrated their ability to mobilize large numbers of voters. But party leaders still say the group lacks a commitment to the traditions of the party and an ability to take control of the party apparatus.    &quot;We had to take control back,&quot; says Peter Secchia of Michigan, vice chairman of the Republican National Committee. &quot;These were well-intentioned evangelicals who thought they were doing God's work but who couldn't steer the ship.&quot;    The explanation for these tensions may be simpler still. Traditional Republicans and evangelicals feel uneasy together.    &quot;These groups are afraid of each other,&quot; says David Zanotti, president of the Northeast Ohio Roundtable, which describes itself as a pro-family conservative organization. &quot;The evangelicals look at the old-line money conservatives and worry they're too pragmatic. The old-line guy looks at the evangelicals and is scared to death.&quot;    Jeffrey Hadden, a University of Virginia expert on politics and religion, says GOP regulars see the new Republicans &quot;as a bunch of theocratic soldiers ramming their life style down their throats rather than an element of a monumental shift between the two parties.&quot;    &quot;They make me uncomfortable,&quot; says Mrs. Logan, the Massachusetts committeewoman. &quot;They embarrass me.&quot;    &quot;We're not involved so we can get invited to all the good parties,&quot; says Melinda Fowler, a political activist who headed the Robertson effort in the Lexington, Ky., area and who is an alternate convention delegate from Kentucky. &quot;We want to change America.&quot;    But even some mainline Republicans argue that the party ought to concentrate more on arithmetic and less on chemistry. They say the party should welcome the evangelicals and reject the advice of people who worry about alienating other voters. &quot;To disinvite someone -- evangelicals -- on the speculative premise you can attract some other voting group is a convoluted and unproductive strategy,&quot; says Robert Franks, the Republican state chairman in New Jersey.    Evangelicals, who as recently as 1976 sided with the Democrats in presidential voting, are a mobile political group.    An important element in the founding of the Republican Party in the mid 1850s, the evangelicals drifted into the Democratic Party in the early 20th century and had become a strong force by the 1920s. Although today they have little affinity with the Democrats, many evangelists warn that the Bush campaign should not take evangelicals for granted.    &quot;We want to build the Republican Party, and the party leaders -- the Bush people -- didn't want our help,&quot; says Sue Wyatt, who ran the Robertson campaign in North Carolina. &quot;I've never heard of a campaign that told a big group of voters to get lost.&quot;    Many evangelicals now are turning their attention to building political power from the bottom up, concentrating on state and local races. Brant Frost IV, who ran the Robertson campaign in Georgia, says more than 50 religious-right adherents are running for offices in his state ranging from school board to Congress.    The religious wars inside the GOP won't be solved in the next two days nor even in the next two years. But some Republicans hope that the strains within the party can be eased and that the combatants can find the common ground that traditional and Jackson Democrats struggled to achieve at Atlanta a month ago.    &quot;The myth is that economic conservatives and social conservatives can't be woven together,&quot; says Marc Nuttle, who ran the Robertson campaign nationally. &quot;This movement doesn't have to tear the party apart, and it may present Republicans their only chance of becoming a majority party in the 1990s.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>