<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0103 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Haitians Struggle to Wrest Their Revolution From Tyranny---By Raymond A. </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   Last Sunday four Haitian Catholic priests accompanied by a Canadian colleague were ambushed on a major highway by a civilian mob armed with sticks and stones that was yelling: &quot;Here are the communists, let's get them.&quot; Their vehicle was damaged and they were beaten, some requiring hospitalization. One of the priests attacked, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is the leading critic of the ruling National Council of Government (French acronym CNG) and the most radical proponent of the Haitian brand of liberation theology, known there as Ti Legliz, or grass-roots churches. Father Aristide and his companions escaped with their lives. About 40 others, those who have died in political-related violence in Haiti over the past two months, were not so lucky.    After nearly three decades of tyrannical rule by the Duvalier family, and a tradition of despotism, the country is experiencing the traumas inherent in long-overdue political, economic and social changes. And the old order will not disappear without inflicting great damage.    The outcome of the Haitian struggle is of interest not only to Haitians, but also to Haiti's neighbors, specifically the Dominican Republic with which it shares the island of Hispaniola. Other countries watch nervously and with expectation the unfolding of events in Haiti, a strategically located Caribbean island state only 50 miles east of Cuba's Oriente Province. But the most important outsider remains the U.S., which, in the heyday of the Monroe Doctrine, militarily occupied the Maryland-sized piece of real estate from 1915 to 1934. Now the U.S. is often blamed for the current state of affairs in that wretchedly poor but proud nation.    The transition to stability will be difficult in Haiti because it lacks the structure and the institutions to carry out a smooth change. Unlike the Philippines, where a democratic election put an end to Ferdinand Marcos's regime, in Haiti self-styled President-for-life Jean-Claude &quot;Baby Doc&quot; Duvalier had opposed all elections. While the Filipinos had a charismatic Corazon Aquino to lead them, in Haiti the dictatorship hindered the emergence of any leadership.    In Haiti, the dictator, fleeing in the wee hours of Feb. 7, 1986, aboard a U.S.-provided Air Force jet, turned over power to a military-dominated junta referred to by Haitians as &quot;Duvalierism without Duvalier.&quot; Yet, under pressure from within and without, the junta grudgingly accepted freedom of speech and of assembly. In recent weeks, however, various radio stations have come under machine-gun attack by unidentified military-clad individuals, and public assembly by more than 20 people is forbidden, unless granted prior official authorization.    At the heart of the crisis in Haiti is the issue of transferring power. The 1987 constitution, overwhelmingly approved in March by the citizens, provides for a Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) to oversee the electoral process. The nine-member agency is representative of various sectors. But the junta unwisely attempted to usurp the CEP's power, thereby unleashing nationwide protests. Although the junta has since overruled itself and returned power to the CEP to carry out the elections, most people mistrust the government. And for the past two months the most popular creole slogan in Haiti has been: Rache manyok ou bay te a blanch, loosely translated as &quot;Pack up and go.&quot;    If the junta were to pack up and go, there would indeed be chaos, and any new government would have to call on the military to keep order. &quot;It wouldn't be long before we have a stronger military government,&quot; says Gregoire Eugene, a centrist presidential candidate. Thus, the centrist leaders, including Marc Bazin and Leslie Manigat, are pleading for elections, which are now scheduled to take place the last Sunday of November. But it is doubtful that they can be held in the current atmosphere of violence.    Meanwhile groups are jockeying for power, and the players are legion. Here are the most important:    --The Army. Although it is in the saddle, it's not sitting tall. Decimated by the Duvaliers, it numbered 7,500 in a country of six million inhabitants when Baby Doc fled. It has since grown to 12,000, but can't yet fill the void created by the approximately 40,000 Duvalier militiamen who are better known as the Tontons-Macoute. The Tontons have been officially disbanded, but many are still in the countryside, often protected by the military, with whom some are allied.    --The Churches. With the ever-growing influence of the Ti Legliz movement, there's no longer one Catholic Church. There is a widening split between the Bishops' Conference, the highest ecclesiastical authority, and the radical priests. The split was glaring last week when the Cathedral of Port-au-Prince was occupied for six days by about 100 youths, including seven who went on a hunger strike. They were protesting the transfer of Father Aristide from his popular base in a poor parish of the capital to a rural parish believed to be a stronghold of the Duvalierists. The transfer order was rescinded. Father Aristide has since called for Haiti to take &quot;a sharp left turn (and) establish a socialist government.&quot; Although he says he doesn't mean communism, his critics question his intentions.    The Protestant Federation, which speaks for about 30% of the population, has called for &quot;dialogue&quot; to solve the problems of the country, while Herard Jean Simon, a leading Voodoo priest, has asserted that the gods &quot;are displeased&quot; with the bickering and the endless demonstrations. That's why, he said, they visited the city in a vengeful mood last month when a torrential flood unearthed skeletons at Port-au-Prince's main cemetery and sent them floating in neighboring streets. In a country where superstition is rampant, this had a sobering effect on people.    --Unions and student federations. Many of the crippling strikes have been successful because drivers of public transportation (the buses are privately owned) obey the strike orders either by conviction or for fear of having their windshields smashed. Also, secondary-school students joined the protests by boycotting recent year-end examinations. Only 4,500 of the expected 25,000 candidates appeared, and many tore the exam sheets in protest against the ruling council and the past two months' killings.    In this tug-of-war among and within groups and factions, the main solution remains the people. They should be given a chance to state their preference. If it is Father Aristide's brand of socialism or the centrist solution with the constitutionally mandated change every five years, let it be through honest, democratic elections.    While the discredited Duvalierists on the right and the extremists of the left seem intent on derailing the electoral process, it is heartening to see those who insist that democratic elections be given a chance in Haiti. They include at least 46 congressmen who issued a bipartisan position, and the late Bayard Rustin, whose last trip to Haiti three weeks ago was geared to find a democratic solution to the problems that vex the first black republic.    ---   Mr. Joseph, a former Journal reporter, publishes the Brooklyn, N.Y.-based weekly Haiti-Observateur. </TEXT></DOC>