<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880121-0110 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Foreign Policy Has Outlived Its Time </HL><AUTHOR> Irving Kristol </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST FORGN </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> EXE DEF </G><TEXT>   A specter is haunting the foreign policy of the United States -- the specter of the status quo. Our statesmen are desperately clinging to past policies that they feel have served us well even as they confront a future that subverts the raisons d'etre of those policies. The post-war era is coming to an end and uncertainty is beginning to infiltrate what seemed only yesterday to be solid principles.    One of the most critical challenges to leadership is to read the signs that announce the status quo has outlived its time. Established habits of thought always tend to prevail over the candid recognition of emerging realities. What is involved is not a failure of intelligence -- or even a weakness of will -- but a deficiency of imagination, that rarest of faculties in any leadership. It is rare because it is not usually very important. But it becomes crucial at precisely those moments when its absence is most critical -- moments that represent turning points in the evolution of policy. At such moments innovation, not coping, is the order of the day.    Its absence is most evident today in the case of our relations with West Germany, the linchpin of NATO. The INF agreement has removed from German soil a major deterrent against Soviet aggression -- nuclear missiles capable of reaching the Soviet Union itself. True, those missiles had been put in place only a few years ago, in an effort to persuade the Soviets to dismantle their medium-range missiles targeted at Western Europe -- an effort at persuasion which, to everyone's astonishment and the dismay of some, has been successful. So, in a sense, nothing has changed. After all, the probability of a German government permitting those missiles to be launched, therewith ensuring the nuclear annihilation of the German nation, was always closer to zero than NATO's generals would admit.    Yet, in a sense, everything has changed. For the Soviet Union now seems to have come to the conclusion that nuclear intimidation will not work against Western Europe, and that a radical restructuring of the nuclear threshold is to its advantage. As a result, the INF agreement opens the door to negotiations over the short-range battlefield nuclear weapons now dotted around Germany.    The German government finds itself in a quandary on this issue. There is no doubt that the German people are very uneasy about these weapons, especially if they are to be used, as NATO doctrine prescribes, in case of a successful conventional attack by the Soviets. This would turn Germany into a devastated nuclear battlefield -- and to what end? To protect France and Britain and Holland from Soviet occupation? To spare the U.S. the prospect of a Soviet-dominated Western Europe? This is too much to ask.    It is to reduce the likelihood of a successful Soviet conventional attack that the German government now is insisting that future negotiations be unequivocally linked to a unilateral reduction in Soviet conventional forces. But this is a non-starter. Why on earth should the Soviets surrender their superiority at the conventional level while getting nothing in return? They won't.    What can Germany offer them in return? A Germany incorporated into NATO can offer nothing; its allies would not permit it to do so. But a non-NATO Germany might have quite a lot to offer: perhaps, for instance, the withdrawal of American troops and all nuclear weapons from West Germany in return for a united, non-nuclear and neutral (but not disarmed) Germany. Or an independent, nationalist West Germany rearming on a massive scale while having its own nuclear deterrent located in a few submarines at sea. The Soviets would give a lot to avoid that.    What is clear is that Germany has reached a point where it needs a German foreign policy, and can no longer subordinate its national interests to NATO.    This is unknown territory for any German government, which is why the current government dithers and procrastinates. Way back in the German mind is still the hope -- unspoken but powerful -- that any Soviet aggression would quickly escalate into a Soviet-American nuclear exchange, with the Germans watching the missiles pass overhead in both directions. The presence of those 300,000 American troops and civilians is supposed to guarantee that.    But no one any longer believes in any such scenario. The U.S. is not going to commit national suicide for the sake of Germany any more than Germany can be expected to commit national suicide for the sake of the U.S. Indeed, once the Soviet Union achieved nuclear parity with the U.S., it was utterly predictable that NATO would find itself in this dead end.    Just how a German government will cope with this new agenda in the years ahead remains to be seen. But it is a new agenda, a frightening one in many respects, an unfamiliar one in all respects. The German government will try to deny its existence, as will our State Department and our other West European allies. But one can be sure that the Soviets will insist on its reality, and that this is the reality that will confront the U.S.    It is not only in regard to NATO that the State Department (and the Pentagon, too) is busy trying to deny the new reality. The entire international position of the U.S. has been changing, even while the State Department keeps repeating the same old mantras.    Take the matter of U.S. military bases abroad, a subject that the media dutifully report on but in a very low-keyed way, as if it were one of those transient difficulties that come and go. This one will not go. What is at stake is the kind of world power the U.S. will be in the future, assuming it will wish to remain a world power.    In friendly nation after friendly nation -- Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, the Philippines, even South Korea -- an American military presence is being called into question. It is important to realize that these &quot;American&quot; bases are not American at all. In each case, the U.S. can make use of them only with the permission of the host country. The assumption behind this arrangement is that their most likely use will be in response to Soviet aggression that posed a clear threat to the host country or its interests. Under those circumstances, permission obviously would be automatic.    But those are not the circumstances that now prevail. These military bases turn out to be needed against smaller client states of the Soviet Union, or simply against anti-American governments that are behaving in an obnoxious way (Libya, for instance). The national security of the host nations is not involved -- or they perceive it not to be involved. In any case, their fear of direct Soviet aggression has receded, as they see the Soviets trying to disentangle themselves from Afghanistan while concentrating on an economic reformation. What they do fear is getting entangled in a conflict that serves American interests but not their own. In short, what was once defined as an identity or at least mutuality of interests has ceased to be so. Those &quot;American&quot; bases are rapidly becoming an anachronism.    And what is our response? We offer to pay blackmail -- in the form of rent or economic assistance -- to those governments in order to protect them against a supposed Soviet threat that they are indifferent to! Even this, however, will not work for much longer, since we never are willing to pay enough. It is a ridiculous and demeaning situation for the U.S.    But how will the U.S. remain a world power, and what kind of world power will it be, without those bases? Obviously, we shall have to redesign our armed forces, redefine our global commitments, rethink our contingency plans. It will be a different world for the U.S. -- perhaps better, perhaps worse. The recent report of the Ikle-Wohlstetter Commission confronts the issue of a world in which we are far more likely to be relying on non-nuclear weapons to confront enemies other than the Soviet Union and recommends major reforms of our military preparedness. But there is precious little evidence that anyone is paying serious attention to this crucial document.    The world conflict between the Soviet Union and the U.S. -- a conflict with roots in the antithetical ideologies of the two nations -- is going to continue, of course. One can assume that the Soviets will continue to make mischief for the U.S. where it is relatively costless to do so. One can hope -- with far less assurance -- that we will retaliate in kind.    But the major mischiefs we both shall encounter probably will come from a variety of other sources: the collapsing economies and societies of Eastern Europe and Latin America, for instance. So the rules of engagement are changing because the status quo is dissolving. The world is becoming a more problematic place for both superpowers. Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev seem aware of this, however dimly. But it will take bolder, more imaginative leadership than either can now provide to navigate the risky, uncharted waters ahead.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>