<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870731-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese Cabinet Considers ProposalTo Toughen Law on Strategic Exports---By Karl SchoenbergerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone's cabinet today will consider a proposal to toughen the law regulating strategic exports to communist nations, but Japan hasn't fully resolved bureaucratic rivalries that threaten cooperation between the various agencies involved.    A much-publicized &quot;turf war&quot; between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of International Trade and Industry purportedly was resolved yesterday, when officials of both agencies agreed on the proposal that the cabinet will review.    But the draft of the revision leaves arrangements for interagency cooperation conspicuously vague. Contacts between the two ministries were addressed, but no provisions were made for participation in the screening apparatus by defense officials, who have sought a role in the process.    A trade ministry official conceded that the proposed measures probably will fall short of pleasing U.S. congressional leaders, who have assailed Japan for laxity in strategic-export controls since it was disclosed earlier this year that Toshiba Machine Co. illegally exported sophisticated machine tools to the Soviet Union.    The Toshiba Corp. unit's export of milling machines between 1982 and 1984 allegedly enabled the Soviets to make ultraquiet submarine propellers. U.S. and Japanese authorities have condemned the sales as a blatant and intentional violation of rules established by the multinational Coordinating Committee for Export Control, or Cocom, and have said that they compromised Western security.    &quot;We don't think the Congress of the United States will be satisfied with what we've included in the proposal,&quot; said Atsushi Iwai, director of MITI's strategic-export control office. &quot;But there will be other measures to follow.&quot;    Essentially, the proposed amendment to the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Law contains steps outlined by International Trade and Industry Minister Hajime Tamura when he visited Washington a few weeks ago. The changes would increase criminal penalties and administrative sanctions against companies that violate rules limiting high-technology trade with East-bloc nations.    The proposal also contains a provision for informal exchanges between the foreign and trade ministries on Cocom cases, a change widely interpreted as giving the foreign ministry new authority in an area that has been MITI's sole domain.    Under the proposal hammered out by the two agencies, the foreign ministry's role in the screening and investigation of export-license applications would be limited to technology and commodities related to Cocom agreements.    It's unclear to what extent the foreign ministry's new role would influence the effectiveness of MITI's screening apparatus. The foreign ministry initially proposed that an entirely new law be drafted to govern Cocom exports, but it was rebuffed by MITI.    The foreign ministry also had demanded that the revised law provide for formal &quot;consultations&quot; between the trade and foreign ministers on Cocom cases. In a tense compromise, MITI agreed to have a more informal arrangement outlined. A draft of the revision says the foreign minister &quot;may give his opinion to the minister of international trade and industry when he deems it especially necessary for the maintenance of international peace and security.&quot;    In practical terms, that means a six-man staff in the foreign ministry's economic-affairs bureau would monitor MITI's Cocom-screening activities, but would have no legal standing in the licensing process, officials said.    Separately from the proposed amendment, negotiations are under way that might provide for liaison meetings among officials of the two ministries and the Defense Agency, the National Police Agency, the Justice Ministry and the Finance Ministry's customs bureau. Defense officials in particular have been pressing for an active role in the system. But the bureaucrats haven't decided in what form or at what level the meetings would take place.    MITI previously announced plans to double the number of inspectors involved with export-license applications, to about 80 from 40. Inspectors handle about 200,000 applications a year. The number of trade officials conducting full-time inspections of Cocom-related exports, which number more than 4,000 annually, is currently 10 and will be increased to 15.    Japanese officials argue that their system of control relies heavily on self-regulation by industry, and that Toshiba Machine's case -- in which the company was accused of falsifying its export application -- was an anomaly.    Already, the proposal to add a new bureaucratic layer to Japan's export-licensing process has drawn complaints from the business community, which says too much regulation could stifle free trade and hurt legitimate commerce with the East bloc.    And if the cabinet approves the proposed revision, as expected, and submits it to the Japanese parliament, the plan is likely to come under attack by opposition parties. Legislation related to national security generally generates heated debates in parliament because of sensitivities over Japan's militaristic past. However, foreign ministry officials said they expect the ruling party to insure the bill's passage.    Mr. Iwai said MITI wasn't considering any new measures to crack down on suspected diversions of Cocom-proscribed technology to the East bloc after export from Japan to neutral third countries, an area of pointed criticism from U.S. officials. In this matter, he said Japan would work within the existing framework set by Cocom, which applies only to diversions involving member countries. </TEXT></DOC>