<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870603-0087 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:Reporter on the High Seas---By Paul B. Carroll</HL><DD> 06/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> NIEUWPOORT, Belgium  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Editor's Note: On May 16, Wall Street Journal reporter Paul B. Carroll first put to paper his thoughts on participating in the 3,000-mile Constitution Race from Belgium to New Jersey as a crew member on a sloop skippered by a friend. He relayed his first dispatch to the offices of The Wall Street Journal/Europe in Brussels before the start and filed another report when his boat returned to port for repairs 1 1/2 hours into the race. Back on the open sea, he communicated with the Brussels office by radio.    Nobody said this would be easy, but this is ridiculous.    We've been planning this transatlantic race for a year. Now, at 1 a.m. on May 16, 11 hours before we're to set sail for Cape May, N.J., the crew is unloading some of the food we had spent much of the previous two days stowing into the nooks and crannies of our 42-foot sloop. We have decided that the 1,300 pounds of groceries are too much for the six-member crew for the three-week crossing, so we're removing some of the ballast -- a can or a jar at a time -- from the depths of the aft locker, from under the floorboards, and so forth.    A more challenging problem has been the little leaks through the deck that will no doubt further dampen our bunks, not to mention our moods. We have been training day and night to make the crew function as a team. Weariness, sleeplessness and sea sickness have made our dispositions as gloomy as the Belgian skies. One source of discontent among those of us who have always hated cold showers is our captain's sanitary rule. He has decreed that we must wash each day -- and do so by standing naked in the stiff North Atlantic wind on a pitching boat while a merciless shipmate douses us with icy sea water. There is no point appealing. The good captain, John Kalish, is an unbending sort. One of the more opinionated crew members found that out during practice sessions when he was offered a sudden choice between voicing his thoughts and alighting on a rock somewhere in the English Channel.    All of this has elicited early on a fundamental question for me: &quot;Why am I doing this?&quot;    After all, last summer I couldn't even negotiate a sailboard. But the romantic adventurer in me I guess could not resist the idea of this race, conceived as a one-time tribute to the 200th anniversary of America's Constitution and the 30th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome. The race was to include our American boat, the Philadelphia, and 13 others representing the European Community and each EC country.    That number gradually dwindled over the months to 10. Then in the past few weeks, some promises of funds evaporated, one boat was bounced because of a legal squabble, and a skipper failed in a grandstand play to get his country's sailing federation to pay him a huge sum to sail its boat. So the total slipped to seven. In the past few days, the German boat, which a customs official said he had sighted, somehow never arrived, nor did the rumored French boat ever quite make it over the horizon. So just five boats will sail later today: Europe for the EC, Hellas for Greece, Letzebuerg for Luxembourg, Portugal for that country, and Philadelphia.    There is some comfort I suppose in knowing that we're not the only ones with problems. Take the Greek boat. The team drove it here. In Italy the police decided that the boat's papers weren't in order, so they threw its skipper in jail. By the time the problem was sorted out, the crew was three days behind. That left the Greeks less than a week to reassemble Hellas and prepare for the race.    Everyone has had trouble with electronic gear. Our ship-to-satellite-to-allover-the-galaxy marvel, which I had been promised would enable me to call my mom in Pittsburgh, refused to communicate with the port of Oostende just 10 miles up the coast until we indulged it with $1,000 worth of repairs.    The European boat wasn't nearly so lucky. Its frenetic crew had to send the marine radio back to the factory in Lille, France, just two days ago. Technicians there found two burned-out parts and had to order replacements from Toulouse. The radio is promised for 8 this morning, with a technician scheduled to install the thing at 10:30 a.m. Plenty of margin for the noon start. Right?    The Greeks and Portuguese at least are relieving their frustrations, drinking fond farewells of ouzo with the stagiaires dispatched by the EC to help with the race. &quot;There'll be no drinking ouzo while sailing,&quot; Greek Capt. Emanuel Gogossis assures. &quot;After all, this is a serious race.&quot; The farewells, nevertheless, seem likely to last well into the morning.    Soon anchors are weighed, booms swing (I've cleverly learned to duck this week), sails billow and the adrenalin pumps. We're under way less than two hours when a spectator craft noisy with photographers edges too close as we tack past a buoy. There is a sickening crunch as the collision punches a hole above the first &quot;L&quot; in the PHILADELPHIA insignia. Capt. Kalish pours forth an appropriately salty stream of mariner's expletives, then says with a sigh: &quot;Well, boys, I think that's it for us.&quot; At the least, we must put back into port for some hours of repairs. Had the framers of the U.S. Constitution and the treaty of Rome suffered such setbacks?    ---   The Philadelphia got under way after spending about 11 hours in port for repairs. The crossing hasn't been an easy one. Four crew members were almost washed overboard in a severe storm. One crew member needed two stitches in his lip and the captain lost his glasses to a wave that crashed across the deck. But things may be looking up. The weather forecasts, at least, have improved.    ---   Mr. Carroll, of the Journal's New York bureau, expects to file his next dispatch from Penn's Landing in Philadelphia.    (As of yesterday morning, Letzebuerg was in first place with 1,071 miles to go; Europe was second, 90 miles back; Portugal was third, 248 miles behind Europe; Philadelphia was fourth, a scant eight miles behind Portugal; and Hellas was 38 miles behind Philadelphia. -- Ed.) </TEXT></DOC>