<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0061 </DOCNO><HL> International: Marcos Vows a Battle in Court, But Some Officials Expect a Deal --- White House Mulls Talks On Return of Wealth By Ex-Philippine Head </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor and Eduardo Lachica (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><G> JUS EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Despite Ferdinand Marcos's vow to fight racketeering and other criminal charges to the end, many U.S. and Philippine officials are convinced that the ailing, former Philippine ruler will give up much of his hidden fortune in order to avoid jail.    For now, Mr. Marcos appears determined to use a series of legal maneuvers to contest federal charges that he and his wife, Imelda, embezzled more than $100 million from the Philippines, fraudulently converted much of it to prime Manhattan, N.Y., real estate and then conspired with Saudi Arabian arms merchant Adnan Khashoggi to try to hide the assets. A federal grand jury in Manhattan also indicted five other Marcos associates on racketeering and other charges.    Richard Hibey, an attorney representing Mr. Marcos, said his client will appear in court and plead innocent to all of the charges. The former Philippine president is expected to challenge, among other things, the authority of U.S. prosecutors to delve into his activities as a foreign ruler. Mr. Marcos is bound to contend that prosecution in the U.S. would make it impossible for him to defend himself against separate criminal charges expected to be filed in the Philippines.    But U.S. and Philippine officials say the 71-year-old Mr. Marcos, whose health has been failing for years, probably couldn't stand the strain of a prolonged trial. Reagan administration officials also want to avoid lengthy legal battles, which they fear would reveal sensitive national-security issues and focus attention on potentially embarrassing details of earlier U.S. support for the now-disgraced Marcos regime. Administration officials hope last week's sweeping criminal charges will provide them with important leverage to try to negotiate a possible agreement requiring Mr. Marcos to return much of his allegedly ill-gotten fortune to the Philippines in exchange for dropping many of the criminal charges against him and his wife.    Severina Rivera, a Philippine government lawyer who cooperated with Justice Department investigators, said prosecutors collected a wealth of evidence, including sworn affidavits, supporting the criminal charges. She predicted Mr. Marcos will strike a deal with the Justice Department once he realizes the strength of the case. Several Justice Department and White House officials expressed the same sentiments, adding that they expect talks between prosecutors and attorneys for Mr. Marcos to resume after the initial legal skirmishes.    Prosecutors emphasized that the grand jury accused the Marcoses of continuing criminal conduct in the U.S., including obstruction of justice, by conspiring with Mr. Khashoggi to create allegedly false, backdated documents to circumvent a federal court order freezing their assets.    A lawyer for Mr. Khashoggi, who made headlines for his role in helping finance some early shipments of U.S. weapons to Iran in the Iran-Contra scandal, said his client &quot;vehemently denies that he knowingly violated&quot; any laws.    Regardless of how the criminal case is resolved, last week's developments were as much a stinging public rebuke of Mr. Marcos's 21 years of authoritarian and opulent rule of the Philippines as an indictment of his actions after he left his homeland for refuge in Hawaii 2 1/2 years ago.    Although some charges against Mr. Marcos had been expected, some of the details in the 79-page indictment open a window to the former Philippine ruling family's extensive, closely guarded international financial holdings. Rudolph Giuliani, the U.S. attorney in Manhattan who spearheaded the two-year investigation, told a news conference Friday that the U.S. could recover as much as $250 million in Marcos assets, including real estate, oil paintings and jewelry.    James Fox, the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation's New York office, asserted that the Marcoses abused &quot;their position of trust to turn the Philippines' treasury into their treasure.&quot;    The grand jury accused the Marcoses of taking &quot;bribes, kickbacks and gratuities&quot; over the years and hiding them in secret bank accounts in Switzerland, Hong Kong, the U.S. and other countries. The indictment doesn't identify the sources of such payments. Similar allegations have been made in civil actions against the Marcoses, but the indictment is the first time prosecutors have leveled such charges against Mr. Marcos and his cronies.    The couple also was accused of reporting $1.1 million in income between 1965 and 1984, while allegedly bypassing the Philippine Central Bank's monetary controls to fraudulently transfer much larger amounts to foreign bank accounts they controlled during their rule.    Also named in the indictment are two of the Marcoses' closest friends and business associates, Roberto Benedicto and Gliceria Tantoco. Both vanished shortly after Mr. Marcos fled Manila. From 1976 to the Marcos regime's collapse, Mr. Benedicto ran the Philippine sugar trade as a virtual state monopoly and an extension of the Marcos political machine. The monopoly's profits were never fully accounted for.    The Los Angeles-based bank that Mr. Benedicto acquired during the Marcos rule, California Overseas Bank, also was indicted on racketeering charges.    As part of the alleged scheme, Mr. Marcos and other defendants were accused of fraudulently obtaining a total of $165 million in loans from Security Pacific Corp.'s Security Pacific National Bank unit, Citicorp's Citibank unit and other sources to finance real-estate transactions.    In the Philippines, President Corazon Aquino's government has filed more than 30 civil cases against the Marcoses. Officials have delayed filing criminal charges there, primarily to avoid giving Mr. Marcos an opportunity to return home and create political turmoil.    In addition to potential forfeitures, Mr. Marcos and his wife each faces a maximum of 50 years in jail and a $1 million fine. If convicted on all counts, Mr. Khashoggi faces a maximum 65 years in jail and a $1.5 million fine.    ---   John J. Fialka in Washington and Betty Wong in New York contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>