<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870217-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Trading: The Scandal Spreads --Freeman's Case Looms Large Over Wall Street---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When U.S. marshals arrested Robert M. Freeman last week on charges of insider trading, they dealt one of the government's closest blows yet to the heart of Wall Street.    As partner in charge of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., Mr. Freeman occupied a top position at a firm widely regarded as one of the world's most powerful and prestigious investment banks. There, he had a reputation as one of Wall Street's most trusted traders in takeover-oriented stocks.    His name stands out, Wall Street professionals agree, from the list of junior professionals implicated so far in the spreading insider trading scandal. &quot;A lot of these other guys are relative nobodies,&quot; said one veteran Wall Street trader. &quot;Freeman is clearly a relative somebody.&quot;    Mr. Freeman's case also looms as the first potential fight in the government's investigation of stock-market information abuses. The 44-year-old arbitrager hasn't made any public comment since his arrest, but sources close to Goldman Sachs say he is strenuously maintaining his innocence. Goldman says its own internal review hasn't found any wrongdoing by Mr. Freeman or the firm.    &quot;Clearly the U.S. Attorney's office has had a very good track record in this case,&quot; says one Wall Street source. &quot;But in this one there's going to be a fight.&quot;    Inside Goldman Sachs, says one employee, the firm's pugnacious attitude is: &quot;We're going to bring Giuliani down. He's overstepped.&quot; Rudolph Giuliani, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, is leading the government's criminal case against insider trading.    In defending Mr. Freeman, Wall Street sources say, Goldman and its lawyers have been arguing that the case against him is based on information supplied by Martin A. Siegel, the investment banker who last Friday confessed his role in an insider-trading scheme involving arbitrager Ivan Boesky. Mr. Boesky has agreed to plead guilty in the government's insider-trading probe. &quot;The bottom line is, Bob Freeman was dragged into this by an admitted felon who's going to do hard time,&quot; one source said.    But people familiar with the government's case say authorities were investigating Mr. Freeman even before Mr. Siegel agreed to cooperate. There is some speculation that another informant also implicated Mr. Freeman, and that Mr. Siegel supplied corroborating evidence that led to Mr. Freeman's arrest.    The government charged that Mr. Freeman leaked confidential details to Mr. Siegel about Unocal Corp.'s defense against T. Boone Pickens Jr.'s hostile takeover bid. Unocal was a Goldman Sachs investment banking client.    The government also alleges that Mr. Freeman traded for his own account in Storer Communications Inc. stock based on inside tips from Mr. Siegel. Mr. Siegel, then at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., was advising Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. in its bid for Storer.    Before last Thursday's sudden arrest, Mr. Freeman's career was a model of mainstream Wall Street success. He went to high school in Winchester, Mass., a Boston suburb, and to Dartmouth College, where he played freshman basketball and belonged to the Phi Delta Alpha fraternity.    After earning a master's degree from Columbia Business School, he joined Goldman Sachs in 1970. He went straight to the arbitrage department as a junior analyst, helping pick takeover transactions for the firm to invest in. He rose steadily, becoming a vice president in 1975, a partner in 1978 and head of the department in 1984.    Today Mr. Freeman lives with his wife and three children in Rye, N.Y., an affluent New York City suburb where he is a member of the exclusive Apawamis Club. He had planned a Colorado ski vacation, but was arrested the day before he was to leave. The government said he could proceed with the vacation as long as he was processed and fingerprinted first.    As at other big Wall Street firms, Goldman Sachs's arbitrage operation is small in staff but gigantic in power and capital. It has only six other professionals besides Mr. Freeman, but has a portfolio that normally ranges from $300 million to $400 million.    While Goldman's own investment bankers are famous for disdaining the hundreds of arbitragers who regularly beseech them for information about takeovers, Mr. Freeman is said to have had unusual access to other Wall Street firms.    &quot;I talk to almost nobody in the arbitrage community, but Bob is a guy I would call if I had a question about how the market would react one way or another,&quot; one investment banker recalled this weekend.    Within Goldman Sachs, Mr. Freeman became known as a hard-charging trader with a fiery temper. One Goldman insider describes him as haughty but self-deprecating. &quot;He thought he made more money for the firm than anyone else,&quot; the Goldman employee says. &quot;But he didn't take himself too seriously.&quot;    While Mr. Freeman's chief responsibilities at Goldman were in arbitrage, his work at the firm occasionally took him outside that department. He helped Goldman keep up its investment-banking relationships to a handful of clients he knew personally. The most prominent of these was David Murdock, the wealthy Los Angeles industrialist.    The two men became close friends more than a decade ago, and Mr. Freeman often stayed with Mr. Murdock on West Coast trips. When Mr. Murdock wrested control of the leasing company Flexi-Van Corp. in 1983, Mr. Freeman was one of the new directors he installed on the company's board.    Two years ago Mr. Murdock took over Castle andamp; Cooke Inc., a San Francisco food and real estate company, and merged it into Flexi-Van. After the merger, Mr. Freeman became a member of Castle andamp; Cooke's board.    Mr. Murdock says he doesn't believe the government's complaint against his old friend. &quot;Bob Freeman is the most decent and honorable man I've ever done business with,&quot; he says. &quot;His mind works so fast that sometimes he even stutters because he thinks faster than he can talk.&quot;    Mr. Freeman also played a role in Goldman's growing international stock-trading operations. Several articles over the last year quoted him praising the increasing deregulation and globalization of the world's markets. Two years ago, at a New York Stock Exchange conference on international securities, he spoke at a panel on &quot;Methods and Techniques of Trading.&quot;    Finally, Mr. Freeman was often called on to advise Goldman's merger teams on their own takeover deals. Arbitragers at an investment bank are forbidden to trade in takeovers the firm is working on. They are informed of such stocks by distribution of a restricted list. Once a firm takes on a merger client, it is common for its investment bankers to consult with the firm's in-house arbitragers about outside stock market activity related to the merger.    Indeed, in its 1985 annual review, Goldman bragged about the role its arbitrage department placed in its defense of Unocal -- the deal the government last week charged was the subject of tips from Mr. Freeman to Mr. Siegel.    &quot;A landmark defense was engineered by Unocal against an unsolicited takeover attempt,&quot; the report says. &quot;Goldman Sachs' strengths in fixed income trading, arbitrage and corporate finance were important to the pricing and structuring of this transaction.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>