<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880405-0084 </DOCNO><HL> REAL ESTATE </HL><AUTHOR> William Celis III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> REL CON FIN BNK </IN><TEXT>      Lenders Give a Break   To Relocating Couples   TWO-CAREER couples transferred by one spouse's employer often have trouble buying a house in their new locale comparable to the one they're selling. Lenders usually don't count the second spouse's income on a mortgage application because the transfer often leaves him or her temporarily jobless.    But policies are changing, and 50 to 60 lenders now cater to relocating couples. Weyerhaeuser Corp.'s HomeLenders unit, US Mortgage Corp., GMAC Mortgage Corp. and Goldome Realty Credit Corp. have started counting up to 75% of the jobless spouse's previous income when evaluating a mortgage application.    Two years ago, getting a lender to recognize a second salary was &quot;very difficult,&quot; says a spokeswoman for ChemExec Relocation Services Inc.    The change reflects a growing acceptance of such loans by investors who buy mortgages on the secondary market. Investors generally don't consider the loans risky because two-career couples make more money and have fewer delinquencies than the average couple.    But relocating couples aren't home free. Many lenders require that couples put in escrow an amount covering six months of mortgage payments, returnable when the second person has found work. Many lenders also consider the career of the second person; nurses and other sought-after professions have better chances of getting part of their previous incomes counted.    Tenants Grow Adept   At Legal Maneuvering   THESE ARE unhappy times for some apartment house investors and owners. Tenants increasingly are using bankruptcy and pro-tenant laws to avoid eviction or beat landlords out of rent payments.    The tactics have emerged in Arizona, Texas, Georgia and New York. But California has been the most fertile ground, because a 1978 state court decision created a loophole for apartment dwellers.    In that case, a Los Angeles landlord filed to evict a tenant for nonpayment of back rent. The tenant had moved. But his roommate was still living in the apartment, and her name had never appeared on the lease or, consequently, on the eviction notice. She successfully sued the landlord, claiming her due process had been violated.    Many California tenants use that precedent to avoid eviction. Typically, after being served with eviction papers, a tenant enlists a friend to pose as a roommate or spouse. The friend's due-process claim halts eviction and can take up to 60 days to resolve. About 3,000 claims were filed last year in Los Angeles alone, 97% of which were found to be without merit by the city's courts.    Tenants in several states also are using federal bankruptcy statutes. A bankruptcy filing triggers a stay of eviction and can enable a tenant to skip rent payments for up to three months as the filing is processed. Some tenants then drop the filing and skip out. The tenant's credit history isn't tainted because bankruptcy filings, if not completed, don't appear on credit records.    Mark Dolan, a Los Angeles apartment owner, says he lost $20,000 last year in legal expenses and unpaid rent because tenants abused the laws. But California landlords are fighting back. Two bills introduced in the state legislature would allow authorities to serve blanket eviction notices rather than specify a tenant's name. State officials say there is a good chance such a measure will be passed this year.    All-Purpose Architects   Headed for Extinction?    THE ARCHITECT may be going the way of the general practitioner. Like doctors before them, architects are under growing pressure to specialize.    The firm of Leo A. Daly, Omaha, Neb., is building its reputation around airport design. Ruck, Tate andamp; Associates, Chicago, focuses increasingly on schools. Bank Building Inc., St. Louis, designs mostly financial buildings. Ewing Cole Cherry Parsky, Philadelphia, counts among its specialties the design of horse-racing facilities.    Developers and other sources of design contracts say they are exerting the pressure as a way to reduce risk. &quot;We won't hire anyone who doesn't have experience&quot; in specific design areas, says John W. Wynne, president of Duke Associates, an Indianapolis-based commercial developer. Financing also is easier to get when lenders know the architect has specific design experience.    The trend isn't without risks for architects. Although most firms say they've based their specialization on demographic studies that indicate growing demand for their expertise, they concede that they could be miscalculating. For that reason, some firms have shunned specialization at the risk of losing business. Says Arthur N. Sosa, an architect in a small Corpus Christi, Texas, firm: &quot;We can't afford to put all our eggs in one basket.&quot;    Odds and Ends   HERE'S MORE bad news for the country's mortgage lenders, already beset by slackening consumer loan demand: In the 1987 fourth quarter, mortgage delinquencies rose for the first time in two years, says the Mortgage Bankers Association. Delinquencies, loans on which payments are late by at least 30 days, climbed to 4.99% of all mortgages at year's end from 4.63% in the third quarter. Weak economies in the Southwest and parts of the Midwest contributed to the increase, the trade group says. . . . Commercial construction spending is expected to rise only slightly this year, to $342.4 billion from $341 billion in 1987, says Cahners Economics. The Newton, Mass., economic forecasting firm says overbuilding of office, retail and hotel space has started to curtail construction in many regions. </TEXT></DOC>