<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0121 </DOCNO><HL> New Immigration Bill Opens Wrong Door </HL><AUTHOR> Dirk Olin </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   During debate on the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act, many legislators cited the need for fairness to legal immigrants as the reason for &quot;getting control of our borders.&quot; As Sen. Alan Simpson (R., Wyo.) said in 1984, &quot;Illegal immigration endangers a fair and generous policy of legal immigration.&quot; So, now that control of our borders has been legislated, Congress is turning its attention to reform of legal immigration.    Unfortunately, the bill currently before the Senate would take us back to the time when passage through our open door was based more on birthplace than on merit. Sponsored by Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) and Daniel Moynihan (D., N.Y.), the bill discriminates in favor of applicants from Ireland, Britain and Canada by instituting a point system that heavily favors applicants fluent in English.    Sens. Kennedy and Moynihan are correct in criticizing our current system. It is balanced in favor of family reunification and against immigrants seeking admission on the basis of talent. In 1986 only one-tenth of all legal immigrants entered the U.S. without benefit of a family tie.    The current annual ceiling is 270,000 immigrants. Roughly twice that number actually are admitted, since spouses and minor children of U.S. citizens are granted unlimited entrance outside the quota. Within the 270,000, other categories of relatives (siblings, older children, parents, etc.) dominate a seven-tiered preference system that makes little provision for talented applicants who don't have relatives here. Nor does the system do a good job of accommodating applicants who feel a special affinity with the U.S. and want to become Americans -- a category the U.S. traditionally has welcomed -- albeit somewhat haphazardly.    Sens. Kennedy and Moynihan propose to raise the annual level to 320,000, with the new 50,000 slots reserved for &quot;independent immigrants.&quot; While that is a good idea in principle, it is an insidiously biased one in their bill.    To apportion these new visas, the senators initially proposed favoring a select group of nations, mostly in the Western Hemisphere. (In 1986 a similar dispensation attached to the 1986 Immigration Act and sponsored by Rep. Brian Donnelly (D., Mass.) allowed Irish immigrants to get 3,112 of 10,000 special visas.) But when the senators' proposal to extend that favoritism provoked an uproar late last year, Sen. Kennedy came up with the English-proficiency proposal: a tactic designed to win the same result while avoiding charges of discrimination.    Ironically, it was a freshman Sen. Kennedy who was widely credited with ending racist immigration policies in the U.S. 23 years ago. In 1965 he helped shepherd through major amendments to the McCarran-Walter Immigration Law, rescinding the national-origins criteria that had piled up throughout years of intermittent xenophobia on Capitol Hill.    Those amendments, which let in a lot of non-Westerners, also put the relatives of U.S. residents at the top of the immigrant-preference list. Since 1965 Asian immigrants have made extensive use of the family-preference system, and many Mexicans and Central Americans have entered the U.S. illegally in the hope of gaining legal status and then bringing in their relatives. Today, with 90% of legal immigrants entering under the family-preference system, Europeans account for only 11% of the immigrant pool. Asians and Hispanics constitute far more than half.    Sen. Kennedy says his bill is designed to redress &quot;the inadvertent restriction on immigration from the 'old seed' sources of our heritage.&quot; Yet, by trying to open the immigration process to a few favored nations (or using legislative legerdemain to achieve the same result by language test), the Kennedy-Moynihan bill skirts the difficult question about how to fashion a truly fairer system. The question should not be where an applicant is from, but what he can contribute. English proficiency, which already is required for U.S. citizenship, is not nearly so vital as a substantive re-evaluation of the goals underlying our immigration policy.    Family reunification must remain an abiding principle behind any humane immigration policy. Yet there is enough room to value other attributes too. Congress should significantly enlarge the independent category, but acceptance should be predominantly based on individual skills irrespective of national background or linguistic proficiency. Applicants with skills the U.S. needs should receive special preference. Those to target might include farm workers, electrical engineers and data processors, since workers with those skills are in short supply right now. Under this approach, some countries would benefit more than others, of course. Mexico, for instance, has many farm workers who want to come to the U.S.; Nigeria has a supply of electrical engineers; data processors can be found in several Asian countries.    Currently, would-be independent immigrants need specific jobs offers and their prospective U.S. employers must jump through myriad bureaucratic hoops to prove that Americans aren't available for the jobs. A better system would build upon the economic and employment forecasts of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. By using those estimates, immigration officials could establish preferences based on general job categories that are -- or are projected to be -- in demand. They might include street-sweepers or nannies, by the way, as often as ballerinas or rocket scientists. The point is that it would encourage America to judge more immigrants by talent rather than by tribe.    ---   Mr. Olin, a Washington-based journalist, has written extensively on immigration. </TEXT></DOC>