<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Sleepy Watchdogs:Regulation of BrokersBy Securities IndustrySeems to Be Faltering---Customer Complaints Surge;Some Firms Shun ActionAgainst Key Salespeople---A Tragedy in a Small Town---By Bruce IngersollStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> STILLWATER, Minn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In his suicide note, Robert Rice faulted his stockbroker for taking him for &quot;a ride&quot; and himself for being &quot;stupid enough to believe in his 'very reliable' inside information on the merger.&quot;    Mr. Rice took his life at age 41 after borrowing $25,000 on his home at his broker's urging and losing practically every dollar on a purported takeover stock.    The suicide scandalized Stillwater, a sylvan town of 12,000 on the banks of the St. Croix River. The broker, Michael O'Brien, was from an old-line family and headed Dain Bosworth Inc.'s office here. Several other customers also blamed him for big losses in the same stock, and business fell so sharply that Dain Bosworth closed the office. State securities regulators last year revoked Mr. O'Brien's license and disciplined the firm. And now, in a wrongful-death suit filed in a Minnesota county court, Mr. Rice's family alleges that Dain Bosworth failed to adequately supervise its former broker, a charge that the firm denies.    The scandal is but one example of increasing breakdowns in the securities industry's system of self-regulation. Amid an upsurge in customer complaints about brokers' sales practices, many regulators contend that a quest for productivity and profits is breeding broker-dealer abuses -- and undermining self-policing efforts.    &quot;Brokers are salesmen on commission,&quot; says Phillip Parker, a Securities and Exchange Commission lawyer. &quot;Firms don't carry them for more than a few years if they don't produce.&quot; Adds SEC Commissioner Aulana Peters: &quot;Management may scrutinize less carefully, or even ignore, the trading activity of 'big producers' or those who are struggling to meet their production quotas.&quot;    More and more disgruntled customers are suing wayward brokers or filing arbitration cases with stock exchanges. And in record numbers, they are complaining to the SEC. The agency received 10,392 complaints last year, up 121% from 1982. The National Association of Securities Dealers recorded a startling 171% increase. The biggest surge in complaints to the SEC involves unauthorized trading, high-pressure sales pitches and &quot;churning&quot; -- excessive trading in customer accounts to generate commissions.    Although the understaffed SEC can't go after every rogue broker, it has begun acting against firms for &quot;systemic&quot; breakdowns in supervision. Many lawyers expect it to follow up its recent blitz against insider trading with a barrage of failure-to-supervise cases against managements of firms ensnared in the scandal.    &quot;I'd be shocked if the SEC didn't go after senior officials at every one of the firms involved,&quot; says Arthur Mathews, a partner in the Washington firm of Wilmer, Cutler andamp; Pickering. Commissioner Peters says she favors bringing failure-to-supervise cases to spur firms into curbing misdeeds in their ranks.    The SEC gained the remedies of such a case without having to file one in Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.'s recent $25.3 million settlement of insider-trading and other civil charges: Three Kidder executives were ousted, and Kidder pulled out of risk arbitrage and agreed to overhaul its compliance procedures. The settlement indicates that a firm's willingness to rectify its internal problems is likely to bear heavily on the government's decision to bring a civil case instead of a criminal one. &quot;It was important that they confronted the problems head-on,&quot; Gary Lynch, the SEC's enforcement chief, says of General Electric Co., Kidder's parent.    Should the government catch senior officials condoning illegal conduct or breaking the law themselves, a securities firm's board of directors could be called into account. &quot;When you get to very high-up management, you may see questions raised as to the {supervisory} role of the board,&quot; says Nicholas Wolfson, a University of Connecticut law professor.    Breakdowns in supervision aren't limited to securities trading. De Rance Inc., one of the world's largest Catholic charities, gave PaineWebber Inc. $8 million to invest in the gold market after Paul Sarnoff, then a vice president in the firm's New York commodities office, sold the management of the Milwaukee-based charity on his trading prowess. But PaineWebber never disclosed that Mr. Sarnoff was a beginner in commodities trading, according to a legal brief filed by De Rance in federal court in Milwaukee.    Moreover, PaineWebber deliberately exempted the De Rance account from any supervision in June 1984, the filing says. &quot;During the next 5 1/2 months, Sarnoff engaged in a pattern of wildly speculative trading without regard to De Rance's investment objective,&quot; the filing says. &quot;The result was a loss of almost $13 million in the De Rance account,&quot; which went from a positive balance of $9.6 million to a minus $3.2 million.    The foundation sued PaineWebber, charging, among other things, fraud and a failure to supervise, and the firm countersued. A jury awarded De Rance $28.2 million in damages. In a decision issued last September, Judge John Reynolds said PaineWebber gave De Rance &quot;misleading reports&quot; while Mr. Sarnoff's trading generated $3.5 million in commissions. PaineWebber, Judge Reynolds added, allowed Mr. Sarnoff &quot;to proceed unhindered because there was so much money to be made.&quot; The firm, which has appealed the verdict, declines comment. So does Mr. Sarnoff, who has retired.    While regulators and the courts are tackling the question of responsibility, Stillwater's tiny brokerage community is trying to forget what one resident calls its &quot;financial Peyton Place.&quot; In administrative complaints, state regulators accused Mr. O'Brien of, among other things, pushing investments that were unsuitable for several customers, given their finances, level of sophistication and investment objectives. Mr. Rice, for one, was a tool-and-die maker earning $30,000 a year before his death in 1985. Yet, his portfolio records show, he frequently risked the equivalent of six months' pay to buy stock on margin. His trading losses totaled $65,000 in 1984 alone, while his profit barely covered his $7,500 of margin interest.    &quot;If any supervisor had pulled the {Rice} account, he would have said, 'What's going on?'&quot; asserts one regulatory official.    One of Mr. O'Brien's favorite over-the-counter stocks was Kroy Inc., a Scottsdale, Ariz., maker of lettering machines and signs. Indeed, he accounted for 10% of Kroy trading nationwide in the last four months of 1984, according to the state's complaint. This was when the state's complaint alleges that he told Mr. Rice and others that he had inside information about an impending takeover of Kroy. Beyond denying that allegation, Mr. O'Brien won't comment. Dain Bosworth insists that it &quot;did a more than an adequate job&quot; of supervising him.    Another Stillwater resident, Anne Simonet, a former Piper, Jaffray andamp; Hopwood Inc. broker, partly blames the compensation system for sales abuses. &quot;The best product to put a client in may not pay the best commission,&quot; she says. &quot;Brokers are rewarded because they are good producers, not because they are ethical.&quot;    Office managers, who are supposed to supervise their brokers, face a similar conflict of interest. Typically, their income depends on their brokers' production. &quot;Going to the branch manager with your complaint is the wrong way to do it,&quot; says Arthur Schwartzstein, a Washington, D.C., attorney. &quot;You're probably complaining about his biggest producer. He's sitting there with his finger in the pie.&quot;    The dilemma is illustrated by the SEC's enforcement action last year against Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. and several of its employees, including Sam Kalil Jr., a big producer in the Jacksonville, Fla., branch office.    Mr. Kalil's transgressions, according to the SEC, included churning customer accounts and unauthorized trading in stock options. Several customers lost heavily while he reaped big commissions, the agency says in an administrative action. One customer, an 82-year-old man who wanted &quot;safe investments,&quot; lost $380,000 in just two months. In addition, the SEC says, Mr. Kalil tried to mask the losses by transferring $2 million in customer funds and securities from profitable accounts to hard-hit ones.    John Solomon, former manager of the Jacksonville office, was censured by the SEC for several supervisory failings: He didn't challenge Mr. Kalil on the transfer of assets, as required. He didn't check whether the customers, some of whom couldn't speak English, really understood the huge risks in Mr. Kalil's options strategies. And he didn't heed &quot;many red flags&quot; warning of excessive, unsuitable trading.    But Mr. Solomon had &quot;financial motivation to treat Kalil preferentially and to be less strict&quot; with him, the SEC contends. At times, Mr. Kalil accounted for 50% of the Jacksonville office's sales. One year, Mr. Solomon's income doubled, thanks to the broker, who now has been barred from the brokerage business.    Messrs. Solomon and Kalil decline comment.    Sales executives at Prudential-Bache's headquarters also &quot;appeared to be influenced&quot; by Mr. Kalil's output, the SEC says. Twice in the late 1970s, the firm's compliance department recommended firing Mr. Kalil for unauthorized trading, only to be overruled by a top executive in New York. And twice in the early 1980s, the compliance department urged a regional manager to question Mr. Kalil's customers about the trading in their accounts. The regional manager refused both times, with New York's backing, according to the SEC.    Prudential-Bache, which neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing and was censured by the SEC, moved to put its house in order. A spokesman for the firm says the computerized surveillance system to detect suspicious trades was improved, as was employee training in compliance procedures and rules. The compliance staff was expanded to 33 members from 18. Under a new policy, compliance directives take precedence over the concerns of sales executives; only the general counsel can override them. In many respects, Prudential-Bache's efforts may foreshadow what the SEC will demand of firms caught up in the insider-trading debacle.    For large, rapidly growing operations such as Prudential-Bache's, the challenge is &quot;really a question of trying to keep thousands of people out in the field, who are essentially operating on their own, from breaking the law,&quot; says Martin L. Budd, a partner in the Hartford, Conn., law firm of Day, Barry andamp; Howard.    He and many other securities lawyers say the current scandal is raising the industry's consciousness and strengthening the hands of compliance officers. &quot;Compliance won't be on the back burner, as it has been in the past,&quot; says Thomas Russo, a partner in the New York firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham andamp; Taft.    At the same time, the New York Stock Exchange is leaning on its member firms to monitor more closely the trading and sales practices under their roofs. One proposed rule would require each firm to compile an annual report on supervisory efforts, including inquiries into customer complaints.    Supervision isn't easy. Last year, Arthur Ainsberg, the compliance officer at Marcus Schloss andamp; Co., a small Wall Street firm, overheard a young arbitrage analyst on the telephone discussing takeovers, according to an SEC complaint. The analyst, Andrew Solomon, later acknowledged getting inside information on impending takeovers from a law associate with Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton andamp; Garrison. Mr. Ainsberg then observed Mr. Solomon discussing what he took to be inside information with two Marcus Schloss principals.    Seeking confirmation, Mr. Ainsberg invited Mr. Solomon to his Manhattan apartment for dinner. Over cocktails, with a hidden tape-recorder running in the credenza, he drew the young man out. But once he had the details on tape, he figured that he had a problem, says his lawyer, Melvin Brosterman: &quot;How do you report wrongdoing to people you believe are the wrongdoers?&quot;    Irwin Schloss, the president of Marcus Schloss, says through an attorney that an internal inquiry turned up no evidence of wrongdoing by the firm, and he insists that Mr. Solomon acted on his own.    Eventually, Mr. Ainsberg took his tape to the SEC. &quot;He felt, under the conditions at the firm, that was the only place to go,&quot; Mr. Brosterman says. Soon afterward, the agency exposed an insider-trading ring and prosecuted the young Wall Street professionals called the &quot;Yuppie Five.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>