<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880523-0066 </DOCNO><HL> The Government Juggernaut Rolls On </HL><AUTHOR> Jeffrey A. Eisenach </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> ECO CMD PHA INS ARO BNK FIN ENV </IN><G> EXE DEF AGD </G><TEXT>   The battle against big government is being lost, in large measure, by default. Government is growing by giant steps, while advocates of competition spend their hours analyzing the benefits of privatizing a few weather satellites.    The first step in fighting the growth of government is to get back onto the real field of play. The &quot;game&quot; can be described in terms of &quot;government-administered markets.&quot; In such a market, government control has gone beyond mere &quot;regulation.&quot; Regulation suggests that government sets parameters of operation within which the marketplace operates to set prices and output, determine the number of firms and the kinds of products offered, etc. In a government-administered market, those parameters have been so narrowed as to trivialize the role of the market. The government, with or without outright ownership and direct control, is &quot;administering&quot; the market.    The lack of a consensus for further deregulation can be attributed to several factors. First, some of the more notorious and visible examples of counterproductive regulation have been eliminated, with (importantly) the Civil Aeronautics Board no longer regulating air fares and (trivially) the Occupational Safety and Health Administration deciding to let the market determine the shape of toilet seats. Regulatory &quot;horror stories&quot; are much tougher to come by in 1988 than a decade ago.    Second, the Reagan administration botched its communications efforts with respect to deregulation. &quot;Regulatory relief&quot; connoted favoritism for &quot;big business,&quot; playing into the hands of liberal critics. Whatever prospects for meaningful reform that remained were destroyed by the public-relations disasters at the Environmental Protection Agency and, later, the Interior Department.    Third, administration efforts to cut federal spending have created a broader public impression that the worst government excesses have been eliminated. To the extent that the demand for deregulation was a function of a general anti-government feeling, that motivation has been weakened if not removed. Proponents of competition and limited government must therefore begin with the realization that the consensus for &quot;cutting back on big government&quot; has all but disappeared.    Unhappily, there have been virtually no real cuts in government's role. In nearly every area of the economy and by nearly every measure -- from the number of employees to the hours of paper work -- government is growing or, at best, holding stable at levels close to those of 1980.    The total government tax burden grew to nearly 29% of gross national product in 1980 and has continued growing since to nearly 30% in 1987. The spending side is no more encouraging. Spending grew from 30.1% of GNP in 1980 to more than 32% in 1987 -- down just slightly from the 1983 peak of 33%. Even federal domestic spending -- the focus of this administration's budget-cutting efforts -- has shrunk only slightly since 1980, from 17.1% of GNP to 16.4%.    In beginning to think about the objectives of a new strategy for limited government, it is interesting to look at the factors that led to a consensus on deregulation.    The initial arguments for deregulation cast it as a weapon against inflation. It promised more than the advancement of some theoretical notion of free-market competition; it promised lower prices.    Second, &quot;regulation&quot; has been an umbrella for a set of ideas much broader than the term sometimes connotes today. It has meant &quot;government restrictions on individual freedom.&quot; In redefining the agenda, it is important to remember that reducing government restrictions on freedom -- and increasing individual control -- is the ultimate objective.    Third, deregulation played off of a deep-seated American mistrust of big government. Horror stories, like the OSHA-designed toilet seats, struck a chord because they suggested that government was out of control, not reasonably regulating commercial enterprise but instead interfering with even the most trivial aspects of individuals' lives. A new message must endeavor to strike that same chord, with clear examples of government intervention that go &quot;beyond regulation.&quot;    Defining a new agenda is only the first step in an evolutionary process. Let's start by looking at some areas where government's role is large and growing.    --Government control of education. New laws and regulations have made it increasingly difficult for parents to choose what their children will learn, and for schools to choose what technologies to employ in producing educational services. The government response to the 1983 &quot;Nation at Risk&quot; report primarily has been to increase central control over the already bureaucratized public school system. At the post-secondary level, the Grove City legislation, combined with court decisions like the recent one requiring Georgetown University to accredit homosexual groups, has vastly increased the extent of federal control over colleges and universities.    --Government regulation of agriculture. Approximately 90% of U.S. production of corn, wheat, rice and other crops is conducted under the auspices of the federal government's price-control programs -- up from much lower levels just a few years ago. As with most government programs, they come with strings attached, not the least of which is the requirement that farmers &quot;set aside&quot; as much as 35% of their land. Marketing orders limit production and regulate quality; quotas prevent entry; and the farm debt crisis has given government lending agencies virtually complete control over the production decisions of hundreds of thousands of debtor farmers.    --Government dominance of the health-care market. Health care may be the most heavily controlled major segment of the economy. Reagan administration efforts at cost control are little more than price controls for doctors and hospitals, which have led to reductions in service quality and distortions in innovation. To the extent that government does not control this marketplace as purchaser, it exercises indirect control through state regulation of medical insurance.    --Government control of defense and aerospace. With the Defense Department, NASA, and the grants-making agencies, government exercises very substantial control over the defense and aerospace industries. And for some reason, many proponents of competition who would shrink from government intervention elsewhere seem ready to accept government control over this market.    This list is by no means all-inclusive. Others that might qualify as administered markets include banking and other financial services, insurance, retirement income, environmental control services, and so on. Indeed, if we look closely at almost any segment of the U.S. economy characterized by poor performance and low consumer satisfaction, we are likely to find an administered market.    &quot;Regulation&quot; is too weak a term to describe the government's role in these markets. Output and prices are determined not by &quot;market forces,&quot; but by the decisions of legislators and government bureaucrats; innovation can occur only if sanctioned by government.    Just as &quot;regulation&quot; does not adequately describe what the government is doing to these markets, &quot;privatization&quot; is not an apt description of the remedy. &quot;Privatization&quot; limits the focus to potentially commercial enterprises that are owned and operated by government. Certainly the experience of privatization abroad, especially in Britain, has much to teach advocates of competition here. But as it is now being pursued in the U.S., privatization is liable to give us a competitive market for postal delivery -- and precious little else.    Deregulation succeeded in the U.S. because scholars were able to demonstrate that regulation was producing unnecessarily higher prices and harming consumers. Privatization succeeded in Britain, in large measure, because Margaret Thatcher was able to draw a connection between the failure of the British economy and its increasing socialization. By the same token, the first steps in battling the increasingly extensive government administration of the U.S. economy are to define the nature of the problem and begin measuring its costs.    With answers to these questions in hand, we can begin to develop a strategy for limiting and ultimately reversing the trend toward government administration. Here we can call on lessons learned from the U.S. experience with deregulation in the 1970s and from more recent foreign experiences with privatization.    One lesson these experiences have taught -- perhaps the only good news here -- is that it is possible to build an effective political coalition to combat the growth of government.    ---   Mr. Eisenach is president of Washington Policy Group, an economic consulting firm, and former director of research for Pete du Pont's presidential campaign. </TEXT></DOC>