<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890803-0118 </DOCNO><DD> = 890803 </DD><AN> 890803-0118. </AN><HL> China Syndrome:@  Beijing's Economic Ills@  Pose a New Threat@  Of Social Upheaval@  ---@  Foreign Ventures Are Cut@  And Inflation Rate Rises@  As Old Guard Retrenches@  ---@  New Rules for Buying a Pepsi@  ----@  By Adi Ignatius and Amanda Bennett@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/03/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> BEIJING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With the blood of protest long washed from the streets around Tiananmen Square, China's old guard now turns to the nation's underlying crisis: An economy in such chaos that it threatens to inflame popular passions anew.    From technocrats inside the country and joint-venture partners outside, the prophecy is the same, and bleak: Unless China's new, hardline leadership can untangle the nation's contradictory economic programs, and revive incentive and productivity, the country's stagnation, inflation and shortages will only worsen. Already, many foreign investors -- chilled by the bloody spring revolt -- are cutting back operations in China or, worse, simply staying home.    &quot;The government isn't dealing with China's economic problems,&quot; warns Wu Jinglian, one of China's leading economists. &quot;As long as those problems aren't solved, the root causes of instability will still exist.&quot;    But don't count on any bold innovations from the old guard. With the economy firmly in the hands of communism's conservatives, retrenchment seems more the order of the day. When a group of Western bankers recently met in Beijing with Yao Yilin, the country's chief economic planner, they asked him what reform policies China still plans to pursue. Mr. Yao seemed to draw a blank. Finally an aide prompted him. &quot;Price reform,&quot; the aide whispered. &quot;Price reform,&quot; Mr. Yao quickly repeated. It was, the bankers say, unconvincing.    Measuring the effect the revolt had on China's economy is difficult for economists abroad and at home, since most of the problems evident today have been festering for some time. At the very least, experts here say the revolt cost China dearly in worker morale and productivity. The best estimates say the two months of unrest resulted in more than $1 billion in lost man-hours and damaged property alone.    At Capital Iron andamp; Steel Works outside Beijing, for example, workers joined the demonstrations en masse, and returned to the line only after tanks swept into Beijing. To minimize further disruption, factory leaders are giving workers the benefit of the doubt, ascribing their absence to &quot;traffic problems.&quot; Workers now spend long hours studying ideological speeches, amid warnings of severe punishment if they take to the streets again. The result: Resentment is up, productivity is down.    &quot;Since the unrest, a lot of people aren't working as hard as they should,&quot; says Mr. Wu, the economist. He calls the phenomenon one of the biggest indirect costs of the unrest and subsequent crackdown.    Foreign managers as well are expecting worker responsiveness to wane. &quot;One of the things we import is Western ways of management,&quot; says James Ko, general manager of a General Foods Corp. food-processing joint venture in Canton. &quot;Now our students will be more reserved in embracing our techniques. They learned it doesn't pay to be in the forefront.&quot;    The unrest has already taken a clear toll on tourism, from which China derived about $2.2 billion in crucial foreign exchange last year. Between July 1 and Dec. 31, China had been expecting over a million overseas tourists, says Jill Hunt, editor of China Travel Press, a Hong Kong-based trade publication. But because of the violence, she figures between 600,000 and 900,000 of those visitors won't show up. As a result, trade officials here say China stands to lose at least $1 billion in foreign exchange.    Early evidence of that loss is everywhere. At the posh Hong Kong Guilin hotel in Guangxi province, which would normally be packed with foreign tourists, the revolving restaurant lurches on its unsteady course for just two Western diners. A taxi driver at the airport grumbles that he has had to wait four hours for a fare. On the banks of the Li River in Guilin, one die-hard vendor, tries an appeal to the heart: &quot;I haven't sold anything to a foreign friend for a month now,&quot; he complains, proffering calligraphy brushes, &quot;and I'm not getting enough to eat.&quot;    In downtown Beijing, there are huge swaths of land cleared for construction of 10,000 new hotel rooms that were planned for the next two years. But projects are being delayed. Over the last few weeks, construction crews at some have simply stopped showing up.    But the damage done to tourism is almost insignificant compared with how the crackdown affected the international business community. Angered by the violence this spring, Western governments and aid groups have delayed or restricted loans. Commercial banks, already worried about China's long-term economic travails, have tightened credit. And various joint ventures have either cut back production or delayed planned new investment. For China, a country starved for technical know-how and basic infrastructure, these have been severe blows.    Expecting a slowdown in trade, the government of Canada, for example, has trimmed its commercial staff in Beijing by about a third. International Business Machines Corp. has given up about 35% of the office space it rents and has turned back to Beijing's Lido Hotel about half of the 29 apartments it uses for employees. The Canton office of Nissho Iwai Corp., a Japanese trading company that did about $200 million in business with China last year, says it expects business to be off 50% this year. East Asiatic Co. (Hong Kong) Ltd., a Danish trading company, is also bracing for a slump: It has trimmed its staff of 160 employees in China by 37.    Direct investment is also cooling. Peugeot SA and PepsiCo Inc. have postponed expanding their separate joint-venture factories in southern China. According to one Western trade official, five Fortune 500 companies had plans to invest a total of $650 million in China operations, but, because of the worsening economic and political outlook, only one of the five still plans to proceed. A Japanese trade official, meanwhile, estimates that Japanese companies -- always leery of China -- will invest &quot;less than half&quot; the $200 million they committed last year.    Meanwhile, an increasing number of banks have been stepping back from long-term lending and have jacked up short-term rates to account for the new risk they see in doing business with China. International financial institutions, including the World Bank, have postponed considering $1.2 billion in loans. Japan has also postponed a six-year, $5.7 billion loan program that was intended to finance 42 major projects in China, including railways, ports, dams and telecommunications systems.    Choking off the flow of cash has an immediate effect in China. The decision by several Western governments and aid agencies to freeze low-cost loans, for example, has thrown a hydroelectric-power project in southwest China into doubt. Johnson K.M. Li, a manager with Asea Brown Boveri China Ltd., a Swiss-Swedish company responsible for the project, says that without outside money &quot;we have no chance. They {the Chinese} can't afford to build the project without foreign financing.&quot;    Credit in general could prove the undoing of many domestic and foreign enterprises. Many of China's banks are strapped for cash, particularly since there was an outflow of funds last year when nervous depositors saw economic trouble in the offing. The general manager of one American food-processing joint venture that sells within China says he will be struggling this year to keep the decline in his sales to just 20%. The problem: His buyers have money on deposit in Chinese banks, but the banks, lacking cash, can't honor withdrawals. &quot;It will get worse before it gets better,&quot; he predicts.    All this is occurring against a backdrop of a sick economy growing sicker. An increasing number of economists conclude that a plunge in national output and a significant recession is inevitable in China. The dominoes tumble from there: A recession could mean huge losses at state-run factories, requiring a bailout from the state of billions of dollars, further draining depleted state coffers. Last year, bail-out subsidies rose 18% to $12 billion, and ate up one-third of total state revenue. According to the economists' scenario, thousands of smaller, semiprivate enterprises, particularly in rural areas, would probably go bankrupt, since they have no state-financed safety net and are at the mercy of available credit. A collapse in this sector could help create China's first large-scale unemployment since the Communists took control in 1949. Those displaced workers, the experts warn, could present a potent new source of unrest.    The nation's industrial production was up 11% in the first half of this year, trailing the 17% rise in the year-earlier period. This is good news for those hoping to bring down inflation, which has been driven by an overheated economy. But the cooling is uneven. State enterprises, for example, are stagnant. But nonstate businesses continue to grow too rapidly, fueling fears that this part of the economy is soon due for a hard landing.    The country's trade deficit grew to $5.79 billion in the first six months of this year, a nearly fivefold increase from a year earlier. Foreign debt, continuing to grow, stands at $40 billion.    As they try to rein in the country's spending, China's economic hard-liners are already starting to centralize authority again. Until now, for example, PepsiCo's bottling plant in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone in southern China has seen explosive sales growth -- from 2.5 million cases in 1984 to 7.2 million cases last year -- partly because cities were allowed to issue permits for distributors to buy Pepsi. Now the central government must grant that permission, and it doesn't want to expand the number of distributors. PepsiCo expects sales to stagnate this year.    Another retrenchment: The state is talking about limiting the &quot;reasonable&quot; profit that private Chinese enterprises can reap, in an effort to reduce growing income disparities. The slogan of the last decade of reform was, &quot;To Get Rich Is Glorious.&quot; No longer, it seems.    A shortage of energy and raw materials is already wreaking havoc in many of China's major industries. A factory that makes Nike shoes in Guangdong Province has to run a generator three days a week to stay in operation. The plant's Taiwanese joint-venture partners are stockpiling coal and oil for power, in case their supplies get cut off. Many nearby Chinese factories simply shut down two or three days a week for want of energy. Moreover, 2,000 workers at the Tianjin aluminum-products factory recently were ordered home because the company couldn't get enough raw materials. At one point this year, supply shortages forced a third of the nation's aluminum factories to close.    Last year, high prices and shortages of fertilizer in the agricultural sector triggered widespread outbreaks of peasant violence. So did the state's use of IOUs, instead of cash, to pay for grain. Beijing is desperately trying to avoid a repeat this year, but funds are short, and IOUs are again likely. Farmer's Daily reports that the government may be able to pay cash for only half this year's crop.    Coming up with cash for grain purchases will mean either printing more money -- thus exacerbating the country's high inflation -- or trimming expenses elsewhere. The Party has lately been trumpeting the value of &quot;frugal living,&quot; a possible signal that a limit may be put on wage increases.    &quot;Any cut in wages will kill worker incentive,&quot; says a western economist. &quot;If that happens, production will nosedive.&quot; And unrest would likely mount.    As the regime veers from market-oriented economic policies back to a more Soviet-style command system, inflation will be on everyone's mind. It is at the root of the country's economic problems and fanned much of the revolution of rising expectations evident in the Spring rebellion. Consider the paradox that reform wrought at Capital Iron andamp; Steel, often presented as a model of Deng Xiaoping's policies.    The past decade of liberalization saw profits at the city-sized factory rise 20% a year, bolstered by an incentive system under which the factory pays a fixed amount to the state and retains the rest for reinvestment and salaries. The wages of the 180,000 workers at the factory tripled since reforms began in 1978.    But, at the same time, inflation ran rampant. Prices for many vital foods and consumer goods have doubled in the past year alone. The overall inflation rate -- about 25% by official reckoning -- more than wiped out the 16% average wage increase workers at the factory earned this year. Thus, hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of workers from China's model factory flooded the streets in Beijing this spring in protest.    Political indoctrination alone can't keep that from happening again. But it is unclear whether the regime's economic retrenchment can either. </TEXT></DOC>