<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880711-0106 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK -- (Editorial): 'A New Era' </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   Even after the release of official results, the outcome of the election in Mexico will be disputed for weeks, if not forever. But two things are clear: A new era of political pluralism has dawned. And over the past few days, no faction in Mexico has been working harder to promote democracy than the Salinas-de la Madrid wing of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI.    Yesterday all three candidates were claiming they were ahead on the basis of partial vote counts. There is very little basis for deciding among these claims. The PRI, which has lost only a few local elections in Mexico during its 60-year tenure, has a well-documented history of vote-stealing, and incidents of fraud are again reported in the current balloting. On the other hand, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, the candidate of the left, until recently has also been a member of the PRI; indeed, it is widely believed in Mexico City that he continues to be backed by the PEMEX union, one of the government's most dubious elements. PRI officials charge that Mr. Cardenas's vote was also inflated by fraud.    The vote claims of Manuel Clouthier of the free-market National Action Party are hedged and no doubt pro forma. But his party's strong showing, possibly even capturing a senatorial seat in Mexico City, utterly refutes the notion that the election is a mandate for leftist economic tinkering. Even by Mr. Cardenas's own disputed count, some 39% of the voters went for the left, while 33% backed the PRI despite its program of economic austerity, and 25% backed the PAN with its program of further market-opening.    The real drama since the election, though, has been the obvious battle within the PRI over whether to accept democracy. In this battle, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the PRI presidential candidate, has so far been courageous in trying to contain what some of his own people call &quot;our dinosaurs.&quot; Late Wednesday night, for example, the president of the PRI, Jorge de la Vega Dominguez, hosted a traditional celebration to announce the trouncing of the opposition. Mr. Salinas, however, declined to show up, saving his appearance for his next-day speech which acknowledged and accepted a &quot;new era&quot; of democratic party competition. Indeed, Mr. Salinas campaigned explicitly on a platform of clean elections.    One result is that Mexico this morning is yeasty with ideas for setting its course. Economic measures initiated by outgoing President Miguel de la Madrid were intended to lead the country toward market-oriented development. The notion of protecting national industries through the hocuspocus of import substitution was dismissed in favor of opening the economy. Tariffs were lowered, import and export restrictions were eased along with tax rates, the currency was kept in line with prevailing rates, monetary growth was curtailed and huge hard-currency surpluses began to accumulate. In the past these surpluses had been used to artificially stimulate the economy. But today's surplus of about $17 billion is locked away with promises of using it to buy back part of the external debt. These were difficult but necessary decisions. It is unlikely that Mr. Salinas, one of the architects of this policy, would change course.    The PAN's economic platform is slightly more free-market; it allows greater foreign investment, a more free-floating peso, and gives peasant farmers title to lands they now farm for the state under the stifling ejido, land-tenure system.    The PAN and the PRI now share a far greater affinity than before, and certainly have more in common than the policies of Mr. Cardenas. His party advocates suspension of foreign debt payments, prohibition of oil exports so that petrochemicals are used exclusively for internal consumption, and the renationalization of the state enterprises the de la Madrid administration sold to the private sector.    The extent to which the PRI's highest officials have accepted multiparty politics isn't yet clear. Possibly Interior Minister and election chief Manuel Bartlett Diaz is maneuvering on his own. Recall that the Salinas candidacy itself wasn't a sure thing. President de la Madrid passed over Mr. Bartlett and other major PRI figures to pick the candidate most committed to opening up the system. Moreover, he did not need to let Mr. Cardenas split; the time-honored PRI technique would have been to find his price. As candidate, Mr. Salinas did not need to push so hard for open elections; faced with a historical setback, he could have gone along with the party chairman's instinct to declare early victory.    There are now signs that Mr. Salinas may compromise with party regulars, possibly at the expense of the PAN. Even so, Messrs. Salinas and de la Madrid have taken the PRI a long way on the path toward openness. In the continuing dispute, this should earn them an important element of credibility. </TEXT></DOC>