<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890726-0124 </DOCNO><DD> = 890726 </DD><AN> 890726-0124. </AN><HL> Asia:@  LDP's Loss May Be Japan's Gain@  ----@  By Steven Platzer </HL><DD> 07/26/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The stunning defeat of the Liberal Democratic Party in Sunday's balloting suggests momentous changes have begun in Japanese society.    Of the 126 seats at stake, the LDP, which has ruled Japan for the past 34 years, won only 36. The Japan Socialist Party won 46, Komeito 10, Japan Communist Party five, Democratic Socialist Party three, and a cluster of smaller parties 26. That leaves the LDP with a total of 109 seats, far short of a majority in the 252member Upper House.    The outcome makes it most unlikely that the LDP can maintain its single-party rule for much longer -- particularly not in the form that its leaders have insisted is necessary for Japan's political and economic stability. Japanese voters are so disenchanted with the corruption spawned by 34 years of uninterrupted LDP rule that they now are willing to experiment with a more pluralistic form of democratic government. That judgment will transform the fabric of Japanese political life.    But no one should be deceived about the kind of changes that these forces will -- and will not -- make possible. Politically Japan must change, but ideologically it may not.    A large percentage of the votes cast for the Japan Socialist Party were actually a protest against the scandal-tainted LDP. There is little reason to believe Japan's electorate would support the JSP if it tried to move the country far to the left.    Thus, even if the LDP were to lose its control over the more-powerful Lower House -- a general election must be called by next summer -- the JSP probably would not tamper with the economic system that has made Japan a capitalist superpower. These constraints aside, Japan's political landscape will be quite different.    The LDP will be weakened if it continues to formulate national policies in secret, or if it tries to impose new laws in the same manner employed earlier this year to pass an extremely unpopular 3% consumption tax. The members of the Upper House will find themselves obliged, finally, to discuss their nation's problems with the representatives of opposing parties in an open and rational manner.    As a consequence, the Upper House gradually will move away from the party-oriented form of politics now practiced, and begin to focus on issues. And since no single party will be able to impose its will, they all will have to learn how to defend and promote their policies. The highly divisive customs of insult and denunciation typical of post-war parliamentary debate will go out of fashion.    There are four popular explanations as to why this situation came about: the fallout from the Recruit influence-peddling scandal; the hated 3% consumption tax; farmers' anxiety over liberalization of Japan's markets to agricultural products; and the furor about Prime Minister Sosuke Uno's private habits. But other factors also have been at work.    Japanese women, long taught to regard political matters as taboo subjects that are the privileged domain of men, have been deeply angered. Many of them have started to vote for female candidates who promise to assert what is now being referred to as &quot;women's power.&quot; The recent comments of one LDP minister about the unsuitability of women in the world of politics -- remarks directed against JSP Chairwoman Takako Doi -- probably persuaded a good number to vote against the LDP. The JSP has capitalized upon this trend by fielding a record number of successful women candidates, but it remains to be seen whether the JSP will be able to accommodate the interests of both women and labor, its traditional base.    Less obviously, but no less significantly, LDP leaders inadvertently have disproved their long-held claim that Japan's economic prosperity was a direct result of the political stability LDP rule guaranteed. Since the Japanese economy is still going strong, in spite of the political instability the LDP has wrought, voters no longer believe that the economy will fall apart without the LDP's stewardship. This was confirmed when the Tokyo Stock Market rose 193.9 points Monday, to finish at 34,093 -- even as rumors were spreading about Mr. Uno's impending resignation.    Japan's Diet now must decide what to do about the consumption tax, widely viewed as the main cause of the ruling party's defeat. LDP leaders probably will move to reform this tax in the Lower House since continued support for it in its current form would mean political suicide. But they most likely will do so in the same strong-armed manner originally used to pass it in the first place, without much debate. When the new bill they ratify reaches the Upper House, however, it will be discussed and probably rejected. If the LDP stays true to form, it will ignore the Upper House and enact the legislation in the Lower House, where it still has an overwhelming majority.    But if this scenario plays out, LDP leaders inevitably will contribute to the Japanese voters' desire for a less party-oriented form of politics. This will in turn deepen spreading dissatisfaction with the party's long-running attempt to enforce a form of parliamentary government in which the only issues discussed are the ones on the LDP's agenda. And within this emerging environment, a more pluralistic form of issue-oriented politics will be regarded as providing the best way to further the nation's strength and recover its damaged politics. If the political transformation Japanese voters launched on Sunday proves successful, it probably will work itself out along these lines. If it does, the extreme form of social conformity long generated by a lack of pluralism may well begin to break down. The end result would be the development of a more-open form of political life.    How will this affect Japan's relations with the rest of the world?    The Liberal Democrats long have argued that foreign companies have not been successful in penetrating Japan's markets because the Japanese don't want many foreign products. Of course, what they don't say is that the Japanese people have not been able to purchase freely foreign-made items, or to do so at prices they would find attractive.    But if Japan's political system is opened up, there is good reason to believe that the interests of Japanese consumers finally will be recognized. That naturally would ease many of the tensions between Japan and its leading trading partners.    Moreover, the fears that Japan's East Asian neighbors have expressed about its continuing military buildup will be allayed if a socialist-centered alliance succeeds in slowing the pace of military expenditures. Given the recent lessening of East-West tensions, the Socialists may very well be able to realize this longstanding part of their political platform.    Sunday's election, then, did not just mean fewer seats for the LDP; it has important implications for the future of Japan and the world.    ---   Mr. Platzer is a visiting fellow at Tokyo University. </TEXT></DOC>