<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880205-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Cram Course: Running for President, Candidates Bone Up On Issues in a Hurry --- Both Dukakis and Dole Try To Study Foreign Policy And Key Regional Topics --- Gaffes Cost Votes, Credibility </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   &quot;I finally understand the Federal Reserve System,&quot; said Walter Mondale, after the former vice president had studied up for his 1984 presidential campaign.    &quot;Fine,&quot; answered his friend John Reilly. &quot;Who can you tell?&quot; Certainly not the public, Mr. Reilly now says with a chuckle. &quot;God, you don't want people to think a former vice president didn't know.&quot;    Mr. Reilly's advice is gospel for 1988. After two terms of Ronald Reagan, knowledge about the issues is at a premium in presidential politics. But the process by which presidential candidates acquire that knowledge is bruising. In the midst of a crazy-quilt schedule of rallies, interviews and fund-raisers, candidates must familiarize themselves with a bewildering array of topics, sorting vast amounts of information fed to them by competing advisers.    Thus, a campaign often seems a test of which candidate best hides his ignorance. The stakes are high: A gaffe can cost votes and, ultimately, credibility. Moreover, today's speeches are tomorrow's commitments, and the education of a candidate can shape government policy.    A look at how two candidates undertake to educate themselves offers insight into the judgment and style of those who would lead the nation. Democrat Michael Dukakis and Republican Robert Dole, it is widely agreed, are among the ablest of the current field. Yet both have had to fill in gaps in their knowledge in the heat of the campaign.    Mr. Dukakis has put himself through a crash seminar in arms control. At the same time, this governor of a high-tech urban state must learn the problems of Texas oil men who joked a decade ago of letting Yankees freeze and those of the Midwestern farmers who still remember the time he cited Massachusetts' endive crop in discussing agricultural problems. These days, he finds safer ground promoting alternative -- but costly -- uses for surplus farm products and softens his image by staying overnight with Iowa families.    Meanwhile, Senate GOP Leader Dole's limited foreign-affairs experience makes him vulnerable alongside Vice President George Bush, a former ambassador and director of the Central Intelligence Agency. Mr. Dole also has had to get himself up to speed on issues important in politically critical regions, such as acid rain and nuclear-plant safety in New England, and must show that he can break out from the legislative netherworld of Congress.    These limitations -- in knowledge and style -- showed up on the stump recently in Charlestown, N.H. &quot;What are your ideas on acid rain?&quot; asked a college student. &quot;Reduce it,&quot; Mr. Dole answered. &quot;How are you going to reduce it?&quot; the student persisted. &quot;I'm going to bring {the bill} up in the Senate,&quot; the GOP leader said. (Earlier this week, he delivered a major environmental speech in Concord, N.H.)    Other presidential candidates slip as well. Mr. Bush finds it hard to explain provisions of the very nuclear-arms treaty he champions. Sen. Paul Simon, an Illinois Democrat, suggests that money could be saved by building the Stealth bomber instead of the B1; in fact, the B1s have already been built, and no longer are substantial savings possible.    For a candidate on the campaign trail, facts alone aren't enough; he must prepare sufficiently to speak with confidence. Gov. Dukakis, a lawyer by training, argues his way to conclusions. Sen. Albert Gore, a Tennessee Democrat and former newspaper reporter, takes frequent notes. Sen. Dole, crippled in his right arm and weak in his left from war injuries, relies on his ability to concentrate on those he brings in to talk to him.    &quot;He's listening, and playing things back to himself to get familiar with them,&quot; says Richard Haass, a foreign-policy adviser at Harvard University.    All camps reach out for information -- sometimes in the same direction. Stuart Eizenstat, the domestic-policy adviser in the Carter White House, lends himself not only to Gov. Dukakis but also to three rival Democrats. Henry Kissinger remains close to his Nixon administration colleague Alexander Haig but also briefed Sen. Dole at the senator's Florida condominium over New Year's. Party lines cross in academe. Soviet scholar Seweryn Bialer met with Mr. Mondale before the 1984 campaign; today, he helps Mr. Dole.    Gov. Dukakis tends to draw his advisers from the Harvard-Washington axis, but his list is also personal and eclectic. On Central America, for example, his most important relationship may be with Stephen Kinzer, a former aide who now is a New York Times correspondent in the region. Years in politics have made the governor a better listener, but he remains an insular man and very much the executive determined to set his own course.    &quot;The challenge of this business is to make some choices,&quot; he says, and brushes aside the notion that choices can be harder to make when a candidate is fully informed of the complexities of an issue. &quot;The more information you have, the more knowledge you have,&quot; he says. But the governor -- who often mentions his conversations with Costa Rica President Oscar Arias -- shows none of the same curiosity or willingness to meet with the leadership of the Nicaraguan Contras, whom he opposes. &quot;I don't consider them legitimate,&quot; Mr. Dukakis explains.    His strengths and vulnerabilities are seen in his deliberations on arms control. As a governor, having not been involved in past national debates on the issue, he has more freedom to make choices. Unlike many Democrats, for instance, he isn't locked into support of the costly Midgetman missile. &quot;He will say, 'Let's start over. Why is this a position?'&quot; says Georgetown Prof. Madeleine Albright, the governor's senior foreign-policy adviser.    But Mr. Dukakis's newness to the debate may also make him unduly enthusiastic about Soviet relations. He speaks ardently about the rule of law and often interprets events through the prism of domestic budget concerns, whether in Moscow or Washington. Among his advisers, the burden of proof is on those who want a new weapon system. For example, he supports research on the sea-launched D-5 nuclear missile but would reserve a decision on production. &quot;We're hanging on to it by my fingernails,&quot; says Albert Carnesale, a Harvard professor who has advised Mr. Dukakis.    When campaigning in a state such as Texas, Mr. Dukakis has more of a record to overcome. His long opposition to an oil import fee is a liability; he must find alternatives that appeal to the depressed oil and gas industry but are also salable in his Northern base. His answer is a call for increased consumption of natural gas and a &quot;countercyclical&quot; package of tax and economic incentives targeted to increase employment in the drilling fields.    How that plan came about reflects the impromptu nature of campaign policy making. On a July swing through Texas, the governor met John Sharp, an ambitious young member of the Texas Railroad Commission, which regulates the state's oil industry, and Pieter Schenkkan, an Austin attorney for Vinson andamp; Elkins, the prominent energy law firm. In September, the two men met with his staff in Washington and the same day flew with the governor to Boston to discuss their policy proposals. Just a month later, the ideas were incorporated in a speech in the East Texas drilling region.    Mr. Dole's years in Congress have taught him to think on his feet but sometimes leave gaps in his thinking on long-term policy. &quot;It helps to read your wife's mail,&quot; he jokes about an idea on nuclear safety that evolved almost by chance from a proposal forwarded to her by a New Hampshire voter.    A recent Iowa City foreign-policy speech illustrates the pressures. Schedule changes suddenly required it to be moved up by 11 days, and drafting was crowded into a weekend when the candidate was also preoccupied with a New Hampshire debate. The day before the speech, Mr. Dole met at Newark Airport with his campaign chairman, William Brock, and Robert Ellsworth, a foreign-policy adviser, to discuss revisions. Tougher language was added to pressure the administration -- and Mr. Bush -- on negotiations to reduce conventional forces in Europe. Mr. Ellsworth lost out on another point in the speech but submitted a memo on it in case questions came up later.    &quot;There are a lot of things I don't know, but I'm a fairly fast study,&quot; Sen. Dole says. Years in Washington give him access not only to former aides who have gone on to other jobs but also to a Jeane Kirkpatrick or a Richard Nixon. After the conservatism of the Reagan years, his activist record on domestic issues attracts Republican intellectuals such as Princeton University's Richard Nathan, a former Rockefeller aide and Nixon administration official who both advises Mr. Dole and draws in other academics.    There is a built-in tension within the campaign's issues operation. On the one hand, the preparation of policy papers is a tightly held secret. On the other, a blue-ribbon panel of foreign-policy advisers publicly demonstrates the candidate's support among a range of experts. That is especially important to Mr. Dole, who is dogged by voters' murky image of his congressional role and by their perception that Vice President Bush must know more simply by virtue of his position.    That is ironic, since even Sen. Dole's own supporters sometimes criticize him for being too preoccupied with the details of legislation and not speaking more of a broad &quot;vision&quot; for the country. &quot;Sometimes I think perhaps we get too specific,&quot; Mr. Dole says with frustration after touring a New Hampshire shoe factory.    Maybe this year's candidates can find solace in the case of the president most identified with the phrase &quot;best and brightest.&quot; James Tobin, a Nobel laureate and adviser to John F. Kennedy, remembers that Mr. Kennedy -- like Mr. Mondale -- needed tutoring in the workings of the Federal Reserve. Even on Inauguration Day, Mr. Tobin recalls, the young president &quot;had no particular knowledge of this sort of thing.&quot; He recalls Mr. Kennedy once joking that he remembered to separate &quot;fiscal&quot; and &quot;monetary&quot; policy only because monetary policy fell under the venerable Fed Chairman William McChesney Martin -- whose name began with the letter M. </TEXT></DOC>