<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Allegis, Sources Say, Plans to AuctionHotels and Hertz, Slash Costs at United---By Laurie P. Cohen and Judith ValenteStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEGTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   Allegis Corp. plans to establish an auction format for selling its extensive hotel and rental car operations and may soon move to slash costs at its United Airlines unit, sources said.    Preliminary procedures for selling the Hertz, Westin and Hilton International units are scheduled for review at an Allegis directors meeting today, according to sources familiar with the plans. The sources said that Allegis plans to publicly disclose the broad outlines of the auction format if it is approved by the board.    Yesterday, an Allegis official confirmed that the board will meet today, but said he wasn't aware what matters would be on the agenda.    Allegis directors recently ordered the sale of the subsidiaries in connection with their highly publicized decision to overrule the business strategy of Richard Ferris, who then resigned as the company's chairman and chief executive officer.    Sources also said Allegis may announce as early as today a plan to cut costs at United Airlines. They said the company intends to issue a statement after the directors meeting outlining the need for immediate cost reductions at the carrier as it attempts to resolve the conflicting goals of United labor groups concerning ownership of the company.    Resolving that conflict remains the company's stickiest problem. United's pilots continue to insist they won't settle for anything less than control of the company. Other unions, meanwhile, oppose the pilots' plan and want only partial employee ownership. The company is expected to put forward a proposal that would make each union a part owner of the airline, but its progress in winning agreement from the differing groups apparently has been negligible.    The uncertainty over the ownership issue is complicating an array of other important decisions, including the financing and management for whatever company finally emerges. The level of labor ownership affects the amount of financing the company will need -- and possibly who provides it. If the labor groups end up with a controlling interest, they intend to pick their own bosses.    Sources said Allegis isn't likely to disclose any specific details about how the airline will be restructured after today's board meeting. One director who isn't expected to attend is Charles Luce, the senior non-management member of the board who led the move to reverse the company's business strategy. Mr. Luce, 69 years old, was hit by a bus while riding his bike Tuesday and suffered a broken pelvis. Mr. Luce couldn't immediately be reached for comment.    With no apparent easy solutions to the labor dilemma, Allegis executives appear to be focusing their immediate attention on selling the non-airline businesses. The auction process for the hotel and car rental assets is expected to take three to six months, sources said. Allegis's advisers have received dozens of inquiries from companies and individuals interested in buying the hotel operations and Hertz.    More than half the parties who have expressed an interest in bidding on the hotels are foreign companies, who have an advantage because of the weakness of the U.S. dollar. Among those who have told Allegis they are interested in buying some or all of the hotel operations are Marriott Corp., Japan Air Lines and SwissAir.    The presence of other airlines as possible buyers for the hotel operations poses an interesting dilemma. United may not want to see the hotel units go to a competitor who might benefit as a result. But in deciding to overturn Mr. Ferris's strategy, Allegis directors have taken an action that implies that such benefits aren't significant.    Sources said that Hertz is likely to be bought by a leveraged buyout group. In a leveraged buyout, a small group of investors acquires a company in a transaction financed largely with borrowings. Financial experts had predicted that the company would be bought in this manner because three of the rental company's competitors had been purchased in leveraged buyouts in recent years.    Last year, Gibbons, Green, VanAmerongen Ltd. bought Budget Rent-A-Car Corp., PaineWebber Inc. bought National Car Rental System Inc. and Wesray Capital Corp. bought Avis Inc. in leveraged buyouts.    The asset sales will be handled by First Boston Corp. Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., which had been the company's traditional investment banker prior to Mr. Ferris's resignation, will work with First Boston in restructuring Allegis. </TEXT></DOC>