<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Newt Gingrich vs. Jim Wright </HL><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Your profile of Georgia Rep. Newt Gingrich (&quot;Gingrich's Fiery Fight to Prove Wright Is Wrong Has GOP Colleagues Scurrying for Cover,&quot; back page, May 20) errs in its attempt to diminish the courage of a dedicated legislator. It paints the portrait of a maverick Don Quixote who is shunned by his Republican colleagues in the House of Representatives. That picture isn't true.    What is true is that few members of Congress -- certainly no Democrats -- have the nerve to accuse the speaker of the House, the third most powerful man in the country, of wrongdoing, no matter how many volumes of evidence they have to support the position. It is a very frightening allegation to make, and your paper should not diminish Mr. Gingrich's courage in acting on his principles.    I am proud to serve with Newt Gingrich in the people's house, and I applaud his efforts to ensure that all the people's elected representatives have a voice there. I may not always agree with every one of his positions, but I always learn from him in the process. Perhaps others could as well, instead of engaging in the mindless exercise of name-calling.    Rep. Lynn Martin (R., Ill.)    Washington   ---   Fred Wertheimer, the president of the formerly esteemed Common Cause, has gone fishing. Joining with Newt Gingrich, the darling of the radical right, Mr. Wertheimer has pursued a fishing expedition in an attempt to embarrass Speaker Jim Wright. Rep. Julian Dixon, chairman of the House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, must now assume the role of game warden and call a swift stop to the poaching that these two are attempting with their repeated media attacks on Speaker Wright. It is a genuine shame that Mr. Wertheimer has allowed himself to be drawn into the transparent partisan tactics of Mr. Gingrich.    In his recent letter to Chairman Dixon, Mr. Wertheimer has relied upon newspaper reports that purport to expose rule violations on the part of the speaker. These reports have been repeatedly cited by Mr. Gingrich in his call for an unneeded investigation by the committee. The questions have been asked and answered by Mr. Wright and others allegedly involved.    As we all know, any representative worth the title regularly intercedes on behalf of his constituency, particularly when faced with a local or national crisis such as the savings and loan problems resulting from the depression in Texas and other Southwestern states.    House rules specifically allow the earning of royalties from book authorship and sales. It is incredible that Mr. Wertheimer has stooped to assumption, innuendo and rumor to attempt to create the appearance of improprieties by the speaker. It is something one would expect from a muckraking newspaper editor, but since when does Common Cause engage in partisan mudslinging? This meritless campaign would make Sen. Joe McCarthy proud.    I sincerely hope that Chairman Dixon and the committee will consider the source of Mr. Wertheimer's unfounded accusations and file his letter where it belongs, in the garbage. The speaker and the House have important business to address and we should not be wasting time and resources on witch hunts with no reasonable foundation. As for me, I have full confidence in the integrity of Speaker Wright and no further use for Mr. Wertheimer or the organization that he supposedly represents. I can only hope that the membership of Common Cause has higher standards of ethics, manners and associates than does its president.    Rep. Tommy F. Robinson (D., Ark.)    Washington   ---   This is one GOP member who is not &quot;scurrying for cover.&quot; I fully support my good friend and colleague, Mr. Gingrich, and his efforts to uncover the truth about ethics charges against the speaker.    Rep. Donald E. Lukens (R., Ohio)   Washington</TEXT></DOC>