<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880316-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Exit Poll of Illinois Democrats Shows Blacks, Whites Voting on Racial Lines </HL><AUTHOR> Rich Jaroslovsky (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   The results among Democrats in the Illinois primary, according to an NBC News poll, portray a stark picture of two electorates: one black, one white.    The poll of voters, taken as they left their polling places, also showed Vice President George Bush to be highly popular across the board with GOP voters. The poll found that Illinois Republicans overwhelmingly believe Mr. Bush will be the GOP nominee this year. Not only did more than 90% of his own voters believe he will win the nomination, but two-thirds of Sen. Robert Dole's voters also think the vice president will win.    Among Democrats, Jesse Jackson demonstrated his firm grip on black support, and home-state Sen. Paul Simon was clearly the favorite son of the white electorate.    Among whites, Mr. Simon ran strongly in all groups: white-collar and blue-collar voters; Jews, Catholics and Protestants; union members and nonunion members. Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, by contrast, had no such pockets of strength, although he fared somewhat better among young people than he did among most other groups.    At the same time, the black Democratic electorate overwhelmingly supported Mr. Jackson. NBC found that he won the votes of nine in 10 blacks this time, an improvement for Mr. Jackson over the results in the 1984 Illinois primary, when former Vice President Walter Mondale contested with him for black support. That year, Mr. Jackson won 74% of the black vote. In contrast to his strong support among Illinois blacks this time, NBC found, he won the support of only about one in 12 white voters.    It is more than just support for Mr. Jackson that separated the black and white electorates, however. According to NBC's survey, black voters were more enthusiastic about their choice: About 85% of black voters said they strongly supported the candidate they voted for, while only slightly more than half of whites identified themselves as strong supporters of their choice.    A greater percentage of black voters also believe the country is ready to elect a black president -- about six in 10. But three out of four whites say the country isn't ready for a black president.    As he has in previous contests this year, Vice President Bush rode President Reagan's coattails. The NBC News poll found that about three-fourths of Illinois Republicans approve of Mr. Reagan's performance in office, and the vice president got the votes of about two-thirds of these people. Among the quarter of Illinois Republicans who think the president is doing an only fair or poor job, the vice president won less than 40%.    But while Mr. Bush's performance among pro-Reagan voters provides a strong boost in his quest for the nomination, that kind of support would be less helpful in a general election campaign, given Mr. Reagan's lower popularity among Democrats and independents.    Sen. Simon, a veteran Illinois politician who previously served as a congressman and as the state's lieutenant governor, benefited from general satisfaction with his performance in the Senate. About three-quarters of all Democratic voters approve of the job he is doing as senator, the NBC News poll found.    But, given Mr. Simon's failure to win any previous presidential contests, even his supporters don't believe he will wind up as the Democratic nominee for president. Only about a third of those who voted for him think Mr. Simon will be the nominee, while another third believe Gov. Dukakis will get the nod. By contrast, nearly eight in 10 Dukakis voters expect that he will be the Democratic nominee.    Among white Democrats, Mr. Simon -- not surprisingly -- was viewed the most favorably of any of the candidates. But Mr. Dukakis also had good &quot;favorability&quot; ratings; he was viewed substantially more positively than either Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore Jr. or Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt.    As in several previous contests, Mr. Dukakis tended to fare worse among blue-collar voters than among some other groups in Illinois. The NBC News poll showed that he won the support of only about one in five blue-collar whites; by contrast, he had the support of three in 10 white-collar whites, and about the same proportion of whites in professional and managerial positions. </TEXT></DOC>