<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   IRAN VOWED to avenge the deaths of 402 people in Saudi Arabia clashes.    More than a million people shouting &quot;revenge&quot; surrounded the Kuwaiti and Saudi Arabian embassies in Tehran to protest the deaths, mostly of Iranian pilgrims who clashed Saturday with police at the Moslem shrine of Mecca. Iranian officials blamed the U.S. and called on all Moslems to attack American and Saudi Arabian interests. The U.S. denied the charge. An Iranian-backed group in Beirut released a photo of American hostage Terry Anderson and promised to punish Saudi Arabia. Tehran also said it will conduct maneuvers code-named &quot;Martyrdom&quot; in the Persian Gulf this week.    The Navy called off the search for three crewmen missing since their helicopter crashed in the gulf Thursday.    ---   Reagan is preparing to address the nation on the Iran-Contra affair before leaving for a vacation next week. Congressional hearings into the affair are to end this week, with Defense Secretary Weinberger scheduled to conclude his testimony today. The hearings leave a record of conflict in the administration.    ---   A Soviet official indicated Moscow might be willing to compromise on nuclear missiles in West Germany as a condition toward a treaty scrapping U.S. and Soviet mid-range and shorter-range weapons. In an NBC-TV interview, the deputy Soviet arms negotiator said the Kremlin would consider allowing the missiles to remain until they became obsolete.    ---   Philippine gunmen ambushed and killed a member of President Aquino's cabinet in Manila Saturday. The slaying of Jaime Ferrer, local governments secretary, was the latest in a wave of political killings that has left at least 51 police officers and soldiers dead. The government has blamed Communist rebels for the killings.    ---   A top Tamil rebel leader agreed to abide by an Indian-brokered peace accord to end separatist fighting in Sri Lanka, and met with his military commanders yesterday to persuade them to lay down their arms. Tamil sources in India said the rebel leader was promised power in a provisional provincial government in return for his support.    ---   The White House is expected to pick within 10 days a successor for Commerce Secretary Baldrige, who died in a July 25 accident while practicing for a rodeo. The pool of possible candidates is large, but an administration official said the selection process is just beginning and that there are no front-runners yet.    ---   Palestinian gunmen killed an Israeli military police officer as he drove through the Gaza Strip, military officials said. Defense Minister Rabin, who visited the shooting site, promised an &quot;exceptional response.&quot;    ---   The fairness doctrine is expected to be abolished by the Federal Communications Commission tomorrow. The 38-year-old doctrine requires broadcasters airing controversial material to give opponents free air time to respond. Its abolition would intensify the FCC's battle with Congress over broadcast regulation.    ---   Unidentified gunmen in Beirut killed President Gemayel's chief Moslem adviser. Separately, Sweden arrested a Lebanese army private suspected of planting the bomb that killed Lebanese Prime Minister Karami June 1. Stockholm said it isn't likely to deport the suspect because he could face the death penalty at home.    ---   Mexico detained the American pilot and co-pilot of a Belizean plane that crashed onto a highway just outside Mexico City Friday, killing at least 40 people. The two injured men weren't formally charged, but Mexican officials said the government was investigating allegations of manslaughter, bodily injury and property damage.    ---   Canadian rescue workers continued to search for possible survivors after a series of tornadoes struck Edmonton, Alberta, Friday, killing 26 and injuring 300. Insurance officials estimated the damage from the tornadoes, Canada's worst in 75 years, could be more than $56 million.    ---   Reagan is &quot;feeling just fine&quot; and is expected to work today following a 45-minute procedure to remove cancerous tissue from his nose Friday, the White House said.    ---   A Panamanian army colonel retracted accusations of murder and corruption against Gen. Noriega, Panama's de facto ruler. The charges touched off a recent wave of unrest. A lawyer for Col. Roberto Diaz Herrera, who was arrested July 27, released a document signed by the officer that said he couldn't prove the charges.    ---   The Soviet Union launched what is believed to be the largest civilian Earth-study satellite ever put into orbit, the offical Tass news agency said. The launch took place July 25, and no explanation was given for the delay in announcing the orbiting of the school bus-sized radar platform.    ---   Soviet authorities rounded up and sent home hundreds of Tatars who have been staging recent protests in Moscow, the Associated Press reported. The Tatars have been demonstrating for the return of their homeland on the Crimean Peninsula.    ---   Haitian opposition leaders urged the U.S. and other nations to cut off aid following the deaths of four people when troops fired into a crowd Saturday. The troops had been deployed to quell protesters who attacked a truck carrying the bodies of people the demonstrators believed were killed by police.    ---   Died: Joseph E. Levine, 81, movie producer, Friday, in Greenwich, Conn. . . . Pola Negri, 87, silent-screen star, Saturday, in San Antonio, Texas, of pneumonia. </TEXT></DOC>