<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0167 </DOCNO><HL> On Ship Off Alaska,All That Glitters IsGold From Sea Floor---Former Tin-Mining DredgeIs Hauling Up a TreasureOf $14 million for Summer---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> IRCMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN><DATELINE> NOME, ALASKA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A rainbow arcs from a snowy mountain, casting a translucent leg onto the Bering Sea.    &quot;Now you know why we're here,&quot; says Peter Bosse, an engineer for Inspiration Gold Inc. as he boards the Bima, the world's largest ocean-going mineral dredge.    He and the other crewmen of the Bima actually are here for the gold at the end of the rainbow. The pot of gold -- in this case a rusting Hills Brothers coffee can used as a repository for the dredge's gleanings -- is situated in a sealed room of the dredge, named for a Malaysian goddess of fortune.    The Bima, tugged 6,500 miles from Singapore into the waters offshore from this historic gold-mining town, is making the first large-scale effort to mine gold from the sea floor.    Clamped to the bottom by 81 tons of anchors, the 14-story-tall Bima is essentially a battleship-sized gold-panning machine. The dredge uses 137 giant steel buckets on an escalator poking into the sea to scoop up gravel and silt, delivering about 11,000 tons a day into vast hoppers. Rocks and an occasional starfish are hosed down chutes for a noisy return to the sea.    What remains is sifted through fingernail-width wire mesh, eventually ending up on so-called shaking tables. On these tables, millions of tiny flecks of gold, and a few nuggets, are separated from the debris, forming a thin stream of gold flowing unceremoniously into the coffee container. By October, when the Bering Sea freezes and ends the Bima's first full summer of operation, the stream should accumulate 30,000 ounces of gold, worth roughly $14 million. Though the Bima has only 48 workers -- an odd collection of geologists, adventurers, civil engineers and 15 Eskimo workers -- its output rivals the annual production of a modest-sized U.S. gold mine.    Inspiration Resources Corp., the New York-based parent of Inspiration Gold, won't say whether the dredge is profitable yet, though Dennis Josephson, the project's manager, hints that, given the first-year production results, the Bima will probably be busy for the next five to seven years working its state-owned lease area off Nome.    Yet company officials also concede that production fell 10,000 ounces short of its own expectations, in part because of technological snags. Though the Bima's success may spur others to get into the ocean gold-dredging business, the Bima currently is a &quot;prototype&quot; experiencing usual prototype glitches, says Jake Timmers, Inspiration Gold's president.    Then there is Alaska's climate. &quot;Weather has been our big problem,&quot; Mr. Josephson says. The waters off Nome didn't thaw enough to permit work until mid-June, and the Bering Sea is a notorious storm cradle. The Bima was forced to close down for several full days this season when huge winds and waves made dredging impossible.    Walruses can cause problems, too. Three times this summer, they have taken rides up the Bima's bucket lines, causing work to stop. Because the huge mammals are an important source of food and ivory to the Eskimos who make up 60% of Nome's 3,700 population, dredge operators try to avoid mangling them. In one case, a worker found himself slowly herding a grumpy bull walrus a bucket at a time down the Bima's 270-foot-long bucket ladder.    The Bima began life 1979 as a lowly tin dredge working Indonesia's tropical waters for a European concern. But when the tin market went bust in the early 1980s, the Bima was idled. About the same time, Inspirational Resources was concluding that the relatively shallow depths off Nome were worth mining. The location, says Mr. Timmers, had been seriously studied by a number of minerals concerns since 1964 and seemed a &quot;logical&quot; place for exploration, given Nome's golden past.    Nome's gold fields have yielded about four million ounces of gold since 1898, when three Swedish prospectors dug up the first nuggets, including an astonishing 11.4 pounder, on the outskirts of town. Because glaciers are thought to have pushed Nome's gold out of the mountains about a million years ago, and because 50,000 ounces were panned from the town's beaches in a single year, prospectors always thought that the gold might easily have migrated beyond the water's edge.    As miners eventually moved into the sea, however, they had less luck, says Mark Bronston, an Inspiration Gold geologist. Some tried gold panning in the surf's 46-degree temperatures. Dredging efforts with &quot;all manner of contraptions&quot; habitually failed, he adds. Not long ago, a small dredging concern customized an oversized road-grader for dredging in shallow waters off the beach. But the grader's elephant-sized tires, designed to allow it to navigate the shallows, caused it to float away helplessly.    Mr. Timmers thought the massive 565foot-long Bima might do the trick. In 1985, Inspiration Resources bought the out-of-work dredge for about a tenth of its original $40 million value and towed it from Singapore to Nome. After a successful test dredge in the summer of 1986, the Bima was towed to Seattle for a $15 million overhaul and returned here this June.    The Bima extracts gold in much the same way as Nome's turn-of-the-century miners, but on a far grander scale. Because gold is heavier than the elements around it, it eventually gravitates to the bottom of a container as other sediments are sifted out. The Bima lifts its ore in two-ton gulps, rids itself of coarse rock with high-pressure hoses and uses the big mechanized shaking tables to separate out the fine particles of gold.    Vernon Kugzruk, one of the Eskimos on the dredge, spends 12 hours a day directing the thin stream of gold into the coffee can and making sure the shaking tables don't stop shaking -- a development that would grind all work to a halt.    Though the Bima's workers sometimes grouse about its seven-day work week, few complain about pay, which ranges from $25,000 to $35,000 for the short summer season. For gold-crazy Nome, where construction workers routinely pan the materials they have excavated at construction sites, the Bima has brought new jobs and a flush of excitement. After all, says Lois Wirtz, director of the town's visitors' bureau, &quot;there are still old-timers in Nome who use gold as a medium of exchange.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>