<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871209-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Europe's INF Message to President Reagan---By Jean-Marie Benoist, Hans Huyn and Gerald Frost</HL><DD> 12/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>      Mr. President:   As longstanding admirers of your great personal contribution to the cause of freedom we wish to draw your attention, and that of the Senate, to the risks inherent in the agreement now signed to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear forces from Europe. Although we would like to convince ourselves otherwise, we believe that the accord will seriously and adversely change the balance of military and political forces within Europe in favor of the Soviet Union.    We are also fearful that unless NATO defenses are buttressed by a range of compensatory measures the agreement may set in train a course of events that will progressively undermine the fragile cohesion of the Western Alliance.    Ours is not, we think, a Euro-centric view. We fear that the accord will damage the influence and reputation of the United States, upon which all free, democratic societies remain dependent. It also will damage the vital interests of the U.S. itself. We must therefore decline to join in the summit euphoria that has gripped so many and that brings to mind unfortunate historical precedents. Rather, we would respectfully ask you -- and by means of this open letter, members of the Senate who will soon be asked to ratify the accord -- to consider the following:    The zero-zero option will remove a vital part of the architecture of deterrence that cannot be replaced soon. The cruise and Pershing II missiles serve a combination of functions that are essential to NATO strategy in an age of growing Soviet military superiority. The missiles make a general contribution to deterrence through their ability to reach targets deep within the Soviet Union -- a capability not matched by any other U.S. land-based missile in Europe. The missiles link the European pillar of the alliance to the American pillar. They provide a crucial element between the level of tactical missiles and the strategic level. Take away that vital rung in the escalatory ladder and you immediately throw into question the mutual transatlantic involvement and solidarity that have preserved the peace in Europe for 40 years.    It is also important to bear in mind that the Soviet SS-20s no longer present the same threat to Western Europe they once did: the strategic and political value of their removal may therefore be exaggerated. This is partly because, by the latest standards, the SS-20 lacks accuracy and sophistication. Indeed, it will soon be obsolete.    Meanwhile, the Soviets are modernizing their nuclear arsenals by the inclusion of such weapons as the SS-24 that are outside the scope of the agreement. Thus, although the Soviets will give up many more warheads than the U.S., there is no balance or symmetry in this exchange. Even in the short term the accord will not exclude the possibility of an intermediate-range nuclear strike against Europe: The Warsaw Pact may simply re-target a proportion of its Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles against Europe.    It should also be remembered that if the Soviets break the agreement -- as they have violated earlier deals -- or find ways of avoiding its provision, it is unlikely that any American president will be able to put the missiles back. It is doubtful, too, whether it would be possible to create a European consensus in favor of the missiles' re-deployment. At a later date some European nations may have been effectively neutralized.    We regret that you have not followed the advice of European political leaders who urged that what was needed to preserve deterrence in Europe was not the zero-zero option but a balanced reduction of INF forces. Perhaps the Europeans did not speak sufficiently clearly and consistently. We fully understand that Americans must be irritated by Europeans who appear ambivalent or hostile to the U.S. position when so many of their fellow Europeans have pushed you relentlessly in the direction of the negotiating table.    These comments, however, come from those who have publicly supported both the case for INF deployment throughout and the case for SDI program. We are not partisans of the arms race for its own sake and we emphatically are not opposed to arms reduction in principle. Indeed, we are saddened to read that you recently dismissed informed criticism of the INF deal as coming from those who believed nuclear conflict was in any case inevitable.    SDI, the British and French strategic nuclear deterrents, Pershing II, cruise missiles, shorter-range intermediate nuclear weapons, the N-bomb and conventional weaponry -- all these interdependent assets complicate the calculations of the Soviet military planner and so deter attack. This may not be the case if the Soviet Union comes to believe that a conventional land battle waged in Europe can be successfully fought without risk of a nuclear response. Clearly, the Soviet political leadership already believes the new agreement brings it closer to securing its related objectives of achieving a nuclear-free Europe and of dividing that continent from its Atlantic partner.    All this we have explained at length to our countrymen. Our friends will be baffled and our adversaries delighted if the great political and strategic victory represented by the INF deployment is now to be canceled. Such an eventuality would provide the most unexpected and welcome encouragement to neutralists and unilateralists who in Holland, Belgium, West Germany and Britain lost the game and were proved wrong.    Americanism scarcely provides evidence of brilliant statecraft. Whatever show of unity Western politicians may now feel obliged to provide, the inescapable truth is that the West has been comprehensively outplayed. We run the risk of a denuclearized, neutralist West Germany, which in our view would be fatal to the alliance. Europe generally may be plunged into a worse state of doubt than that which existed prior to INF deployment. All this because in our haste for an agreement the arms-control process became an end in itself.    As Frank Barnett has written: &quot;We have played at the arms-limitation table now for more than 60 years, first against Nazi Germany and Japan, then against the Soviet Empire. For the most part we gained little more than the euphoria of being seen at the Peace Casino while our adversaries went home to convert 'lawful' winnings into larger stockpiles of more advanced weapons.&quot;    It is one thing to strike a spectacular arms deal with one's adversary. It is another to preserve the conditions of peace and freedom. We remember the president who once denounced the &quot;empire of evil&quot; and who courageously scorned fashionable opinion in order to build up Western defenses. To that president we wish renewed courage, resolve and good fortune. We extend no less to the members of the United States Senate to whom the burden of a historic responsibility now passes.    ---   Mr. Benoist is a senior fellow of the College de France. Count Huyn is a former member of the Bundestag and a diplomat. Mr. Frost is director of the London-based Institute for European Defense and Strategic Studies. </TEXT></DOC>