<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Does Washington Need a New Set of Books?---Capital Budget Is a Useful Tool...---By Michael J. Boskin</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   President Reagan has made reform of the budget process, including a line-item veto and balanced-budget amendment, his highest domestic policy priority for the next two years. Several years ago he called for moving federal credit activity onto the budget, and his director of the Office of Management and Budget, James Miller, has wisely revived the call for a separate capital budget.    With capital budgeting, there would be two budgets, a capital and an operating budget, with capital spending placed in the capital budget and a charge for depreciation and obsolescence of the capital stock taken onto the operating budget.    There is a fear that a separate capital account will lead to unnecessary spending, as proponents of specific capital projects delight in the capital spending excluded from the current services budget and deficit. I believe the opposite is the case. First, anyone can add two numbers. The borrowing to finance investment spending will not be hidden. A capital budget properly implemented can bring capital investment spending under control and help us plan for future maintenance and repair costs, development and financing.    Some limited amount of capital budget information is already presented by the federal government, but this is not well integrated conceptually or practically in the budget per se, and certainly not in the budgeting and appropriations processes.    The federal government's accounting procedures differ greatly from generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). The unusual features of federal government accounting include a cash rather than accrual basis, failure to separate capital and current accounts, and the exclusion of a variety of items.    Consider what this would mean for the financial reporting of some of our best-known corporations. General Motors had one of the most profitable years in automobile history in 1984. However, if General Motors treated its huge investment expenditures as current expenses, it would have reported a large net loss.    SeaFirst Bank Holding Co. reported a $180 million loss in 1982. Over $100 million of this loss was an increased loan loss provision for expected future losses. If the bank had followed government accounting procedures, recording only net loan losses that actually occurred in 1982, it would have been slightly profitable in 1982.    Our current budget prevents us from properly anticipating future costs. For example, in most years our budget reports negative spending on deposit insurance, as it nets current spending and revenue. In fiscal 1982, in the depths of the recession and at the height of the debt crisis, our budget reported that spending on deposit insurance was a negative $1.4 billion; spending and the deficit were reduced by $1.4 billion, although we probably accrued $20 billion in future payouts.    The need for more comprehensive financial reporting by the federal government has long been felt by accounting professionals. The comptroller general recently issued a report outlining some of the possibilities. Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. periodically provides a very rough cut at &quot;sound financial reporting for the U.S. government,&quot; and argues for using GAAP. It estimates that the approximately $200 billion deficit for 1984 would amount to $333 billion under GAAP (the primary difference is the accrued addition to unfunded Social Security liabilities). It estimates total federal liabilities as $4.7 trillion and total assets as $937 billion. My own research indicates this systematically underestimates the value of the assets and inappropriately values liabilities, but it highlights the fact that ignoring these factors can be misleading.    There are many technical problems in implementing a capital budget; some arbitrary decisions will have to be made. But that is true for GAAP in general and the accounting of private firms as well.    And the need for change is great. The federal government capital investment is almost $100 billion, and has sometimes reached 20% of total on-budget spending (a larger fraction of purchases of goods and services). Congress often approves these projects without reviewing meaningful cost-benefit data.    The advantages of a properly implemented capital budget are many: a uniform government-wide policy regarding cost-benefit analyses, such as discount rates and actuarial assumptions; understandable estimates of current and future costs and better-informed choices among capital projects; a more open budget process that decreases the public-works pork barrel, as future maintenance and repair costs would be brought out into the open; more systematic evaluation of capital projects vs. current operating programs. A capital budget, if properly implemented, would thus improve the budget as a reporting, control, accounting, priority-setting and fiscal-policy instrument.    But just separating the investment spending is no guarantee that the investment will have sufficient social returns to merit public financing. There is no substitute for systematic cost-benefit analysis, since the federal government does not undergo a market test that would value the outcomes of the political process. There is no capital market analogous to the stock market, which provides an independent check on the wisdom of capital investment decisions of private firms.    Thus, capital budgeting, while potentially quite useful, could also be abused. It must be tied to other improvements, such as multiyear budgeting, a line-item veto, and some sensible fiscal-policy rule such as budget balance for current operating expenditures over a time frame longer than a typical business cycle.    The likely benefits of a federal government capital budget substantially exceed the expected costs. It is no panacea for our budgetary woes. It will not eliminate the deficit, nor will it guarantee better spending decisions. But it is potentially valuable as part of an overall package of structural budget reforms that would improve the efficiency of government.    ---   Mr. Boskin, a professor of economics at Stanford University, is author of the forthcoming &quot;The Real Federal Budget&quot; (Harvard University Press).    (See related story: &quot;...That Special Interests Will Abuse&quot; -- WSJ Dec. 2, 1986) </TEXT></DOC>