<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Preacher Politics: Unlikely to Be Chosen, Jackson and Robertson Still Play Pivotal Roles --- But Their Supporters' Zeal Unnerves Party Regulars; Two Best-Case Scenarios --- What Do They Really Want? </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Both of them are preachers, drawing inspiration -- selectively -- from the Bible. Each of them is bolstered by a perfervid constituency that is ready to vote any place, any time.    The two preachers are, of course, Democrat Jesse Jackson, who is black, Baptist and positioned on the left wing of the political spectrum, and Republican Pat Robertson, who is white, born-again and positioned on the right wing.    &quot;When these preachers sound the altar call,&quot; says Bert Lance, the Georgia Democrat, &quot;the sinners come forward.&quot;    So far, hardly anyone seriously suggests that either of the preachers can be nominated for president. But both are going to play important roles that may well decide whom the parties choose and whom the nation elects. And they both make party regulars nervous, for they are the only candidates in the race with highly committed followings. Blacks in overwhelming numbers support Mr. Jackson. Charismatic, Pentecostal Christians support Mr. Robertson in numbers that the experts can only dimly perceive.    Mr. Jackson's blacks scare some of the Democratic Party's conservative whites. Mr. Robertson's passionate Christians -- they are not quite the same people recruited for President Reagan in 1980 by fundamentalist Jerry Falwell -- scare temporal Republicans.    In a year when all the other candidates seem dull, the telegenic preachers glisten. They are impervious to the ups and downs of caucus and primary results. They are here, on earthly business, to stay. Yet if humiliated or thwarted, these two clever, ambitious men are perfectly capable of tossing their parties' furniture around, and Mr. Jackson, at least, has talked about walking out the front door and setting up his own place.    &quot;The Democrats must be very careful in the way they treat Jackson,&quot; says A. James Reichley, a political analyst at the Brookings Institution, &quot;and the Republicans must be just as gentle with Robertson.&quot; The Democrats will need black voters in November, the same way the Republicans will need conservative churchgoers. Yet if either party's nominee is seen as pandering to the preachers, he is likely to alienate large numbers of other voters.    The preachers are both American originals, with roots reaching deep into the nation's cultural, religious and political past. Of the two, Mr. Jackson is the more familiar. He ran as a rebel in 1984, collecting 3,280,000 votes and 465 delegates in primaries and caucuses. Last time, he shared the black vote with former Vice President Walter Mondale. This time, running more comfortably within the system, he has no serious challenger for black votes.    The best-case scenario for Mr. Jackson goes something like this:   Adding disaffected white voters -- what Mr. Lance calls the &quot;hurtin' folks&quot; -- to his own natural base among blacks, Mr. Jackson surprises the political oddsmakers by running third or fourth in the Iowa caucuses on Feb. 8. He survives a poor showing in wintry New Hampshire on Feb. 16 and then heads South to a warm welcome from black voters, especially churchgoers, and beats everyone else in the 20 states choosing delegates on March 8, Super Tuesday. (His campaign literature predicts that he will carry Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, Mississippi, Arkansas and Texas.) At that point, the thinking goes, Jesse Jackson will be the front-runner.    What happens next as the campaign moves north and west, away from Mr. Jackson's base, is a little murky. But something dramatic is supposed to occur -- the emergence of a coalition of blacks, poor white farmers and laborers, Hispanics, Asians, Arabs, peace activists, white liberals. Uniting them all will be an &quot;economic crisis&quot; and a feeling that Mr. Jackson can deliver jobs and &quot;economic justice.&quot;    The Robertson best-case scenario works this way:   With his base of charismatic and Pentecostal Christians, Mr. Robertson scores a striking Jan. 27 victory in, of all places, Hawaii. Then he does well at the Michigan convention Jan. 29 and 30, makes a strong showing in Iowa and wins in states like Maine, Minnesota and Vermont.    And then, just like Jesse Jackson, he moves south to Super Tuesday, defeating his more moderate rivals in a number of key states with an outpouring of conservative, evangelical Christians. And, just like Mr. Jackson, he emerges from Super Tuesday as his party's front-runner.    After that, things get murky for Mr. Robertson, too. &quot;We go into the trenches,&quot; says Jeffrey K. Hadden, a University of Virginia sociologist specializing in evangelical politics. Mr. Hadden, a liberal Democrat speaking of the Robertson theory rather than his personal preference, says of the strategy: &quot;We move out of the basic mode that depended upon evangelical Christians, and we move north and west and enlist the cultural conservatives.&quot;    Who are the mysterious voters that the Robertson forces hope to muster? &quot;People who watch Phil Donahue,&quot; says Mr. Hadden. &quot;People who experimented with marijuana in the '60s, people who are in their second marriage. People who are unhappy with their own biographies.&quot;    Anson Shupe, a sociologist and Robertson watcher at Indiana University-Purdue University, Fort Wayne, says that Mr. Robertson's scenario is more likely than is Mr. Jackson's. &quot;Robertson has a potential appeal far beyond Jackson's, whose Rainbow Coalition remains pretty monochromatic,&quot; Mr. Shupe says.    Mr. Robertson is not as well known as Mr. Jackson as a politician, but by most accounts he has been preparing to make this run for president for several years. Mr. Hadden points out that Mr. Falwell, the fundamentalist &quot;Moral Majority&quot; preacher, paved the way by saying in 1980 that &quot;it was all right for a conservative Christian to be involved in politics. 'Get them saved, get them baptized, get them registered,' Mr. Falwell said. Now along comes Pat Robertson, and he says, 'Let's do it, guys.'&quot;    Mr. Robertson, unlike Mr. Jackson, is well-financed and well-organized. He is also good at what he does. &quot;No one has ever made a mistake by overestimating Pat Robertson's ambitions or his skills,&quot; says Anthony Podesta, the founding president of People for the American Way, a liberal watchdog group.    Party regulars on both sides concede that the preachers will be in the running through Super Tuesday. But, they say, that is to all intents and purposes the end of it. &quot;They both have these huge negatives,&quot; says Robert Teeter, the Republican poll taker. &quot;The rule is people should look at a candidate favorably by 3-to-1 positive. These candidates are more than 2-to-1 negative.&quot;    Mr. Jackson didn't fare quite that badly in a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll last autumn: 45% of likely voters held an unfavorable opinion of him, while 39% had a favorable view. But that hardly qualifies as a groundswell of enthusiasm. Mr. Jackson is distrusted by many white voters because he is black and politically radical; polls show most white Americans aren't prepared to vote for a black candidate for president.    The public's distaste for Mr. Robertson is even stronger. The same Journal/NBC News poll showed that 47% of likely voters had an unfavorable impression of him, while only 18% held a favorable view. Mr. Robertson is distrusted because of his background as a TV evangelist -- an unsuitable calling for a president, most Americans agree -- and perhaps because of his radically conservative views.    The high negatives ensure that neither can win his party's nomination, the experts say; eventually, the negatives will catch up with both of them, and other, more traditional candidates will move on to win both contests.    Yet party regulars remain uncomfortable, for these two preachers are not aberrations: They draw sustenance from this nation's taproots.    &quot;Jesse Jackson is in the mainstream of traditional black churches in this country,&quot; says Thomas Ogletree, the dean of the Drew University Divinity School, who has taught both Mr. Jackson and another Democratic contender, Sen. Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee. &quot;The main concern of the black churches is the social well-being of all their people,&quot; Mr. Ogletree points out. Thus, Mr. Jackson turns for inspiration in the Bible to these words from Amos: &quot;But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.&quot;    Mr. Jackson preaches a social gospel seeking help for the oppressed, here and in the Third World. He instinctively toasts Fidel Castro on a visit to Cuba and sympathizes with Nicaragua's Sandinista government.    Mr. Robertson's preaching background is in the fastest-growing church in America, the electronic church of television, but in a tradition that grows out of revival ministries reaching back into the 19th century. Like many other TV evangelists, he preaches what sociologists call the gospel of prosperity.    &quot;If you are in financial trouble,&quot; says Mr. Robertson, &quot;the smartest thing you can do is to start giving money away,&quot; perhaps, but not necessarily, to Mr. Robertson and his ministry (now set aside for the duration of his presidential campaign). Mr. Robertson turns to Malachi: &quot;Bring the whole tithe into the {Lord's} storehouse.&quot; The more you put in the Lord's storehouse, Mr. Robertson says, the more you will get back. He calls it the Law of Reciprocity.    &quot;They read the Bible differently,&quot; says Mr. Shupe, the sociologist. &quot;God wants us to be prosperous and healthy, Mr. Robertson tells us. God wants more federal dollars to help poor people, Mr. Jackson preaches. They're both reading a book that has an enormous amount of lessons.&quot;    If the U.S. were a parliamentary democracy, both of these preachers would lead important and significant factions. Brookings' Mr. Reichley says that Jesse Jackson could be a modern-day Charles Stewart Parnell, the Irish nationalist who, with his 80 followers, played the Tories and the Liberals against each other in the English Parliament in the 19th century to win favors for Ireland. Mr. Jackson could do the same thing for black Americans, winning, say, more public housing; Mr. Robertson could cut deals with both Republicans and Democrats for conservative evangelicals on such issues as a school-prayer constitutional amendment.    But this isn't a parliamentary system, so the two preachers must play by the rules as they find them. This makes it hard for them, hard for the two parties that must accommodate them and hard for the preachers' passionate followers -- who sometimes must sense that they will never see an ideal president or a sympathetic Congress.    A popular political game, then, is trying to divine the two preachers' motivations. What do they want? What can they do?    There are two theories about Mr. Robertson. One, expressed by Mr. Reichley, concludes that he is &quot;someone who would like to fit into the system&quot; -- perhaps as secretary of commerce in the next Republican administration. The other, spelled out by Mr. Hadden, the Virginia sociologist, sees Mr. Robertson aiming to take over the Republican Party and make it &quot;the foundation for the triumph of Christian and cultural conservatism in the 21st century.&quot;    The Republicans' best hope is that Mr. Robertson really would settle for a cabinet job. On the stump, though, he doesn't sound like a man running for a low-profile post. He talks about putting 20 to 40 dedicated Christians in every precinct in America, people united in the holy cause of liberty who can change the outcome of any election in the nation.    &quot;You and I,&quot; he tells his cheering followers, &quot;have been called to the nation to start a second American revolution. We will restore the greatness of America through moral strength.&quot;    Powerful words, powerful ambition. That kind of talk scares many Republicans. It causes some observers to believe that Mr. Robertson may be more of a threat to the traditional Republican Party than Mr. Jackson is to the Democrats.    Mr. Jackson isn't interested in being secretary of commerce, and he doesn't talk about a moral crusade. He seeks power. If, for the first time in 36 years, no one wrapped up the nomination in the primaries, Mr. Jackson would be a broker at the convention. He could dictate the platform, and maybe he could choose the nominee. Surely he would revel in that kind of melodrama. But &quot;if Jackson feels offended,&quot; says Mr. Reichley, &quot;he could walk out and launch a third-party effort.&quot;    In any event, both ministers represent forces in politics that the sinners trying to conduct the affairs of the two parties can't ignore. When these preachers give the altar call, they must step forward: It is the only way they can be saved. </TEXT></DOC>