<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0090 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Olympics: May the Event Be Uneventful </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Seoul, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like most writers, I am an inveterate clipper and saver of articles from many publications, and I arrived here Wednesday with a fat sheaf of them on the Summer Olympics, which are scheduled to begin tonight, U.S. time. They give scant comfort to a follower of the world of fun and games.    The earlier clips bear stories speculating on a possible Olympic boycott by communist nations eager to express solidarity with their brothers in the northern half of the divided Korean peninsula, who spent the past four years either denouncing the planned proceedings or asking to co-host them. At length, all the potential boycotters except a few smallish ones (Cuba, Albania, Nicaragua) decided that putting a few Korean noses above the 38th parallel out of joint was a price that must be paid for a spot in sports' quadrennial Big Show.    The later clips are more disquieting, centering on threats to disrupt the Games with acts of violence. The primary threateners, although they always threatened in veiled terms, have been the North Koreans. Their record of murders and kidnappings on foreign soil, and of civilian aircraft bombings, proves they can bite as well as bark.    Others have weighed in, too, most recently a local group here that calls itself the Death Squadron. A South Korean news agency reported this week that the outfit sent a letter to Juan Antonio Samaranch, the Olympics chief, saying that &quot;a bloodbath like Munich&quot; would ensue unless Samaranch granted the North's demand for co-host status. You'll recall that in Munich, at the 1972 Summer Games, Palestinian terrorists killed most of the Israeli weightlifting team after an attack on their rooms in the Olympic village.    The scariest clips are of the Japanese Red Army, a free-lance gang based in Lebanon with a grizzly history of international mayhem. Although several members have been nabbed in various countries of late, Japanese police were quoted as saying that others apparently had made their way to Seoul using stolen passports.    The Red Army was a student group formed in the turbulent 1960s. It hasn't outgrown its predilection for violence even though members now are middle-aged and said to look, and dress, like typical Japanese &quot;salary-men.&quot; That's really dreadful. Who can you trust if not a guy wearing a suit and carrying a briefcase?    The South Koreans have read the same pieces I have, and have taken measures to prevent anything marring their showcase. They have assigned some 100,000 police and troops to patrol Olympic venues and other places where visitors will congregate, such as Kimpo Airport. I haven't checked out the stadiums yet, but Kimpo bristles with more guns than an NRA convention. (Also, by the way, the Kimpo rifle carriers have more smiles. The two aren't mutually exclusive.)    South Korean cops have been trained in the latest SWAT techniques, and U.S. television has featured films of them rappelling down skyscaper walls and over stadium balconies. In addition, a U.S. carrier fleet is (or will be) poised in the waters off the peninsula to protect against sea attack or other mischief.    There are two ways to view these precautions. Bud Greenspan, the film maker who has visited Seoul many times, says the sight of all that artillery makes him feel safer here than in New York, where he lives. Whenever I see a gun, I can only wonder if it'll go off.    It is, of course, nothing new that guns and Games go together; each Olympics since Munich '72, including our own '84 fest in Los Angeles, took place in an armed camp. This is dictated not by anything that takes place on the fields of play, but by the extravaganza the Olympics have become.    However dedicated the athletes, or inspired their performances, the Games really are about commerce and national &quot;face.&quot; The combination of sport and nationalism is irresistible, capturing the attention of a global audience like nothing else. The Olympics will be on television everywhere the medium can reach, almost all the time, for the next two weeks, and featured in every newspaper as well. There will be 11,000 athletes here, and 10,000 members of news organizations. Or maybe it's 10,000 jocks and 11,000 newsies. No matter; the point's the same.    That's what makes it worthwhile for industrious South Korea to have forked over some $3 billion for facilities that will magnificently display its new economic eminence. It's why advertisers will pay $330,000 to pitch their products for 30 prime-time seconds on NBC, the U.S. TV outlet. It's also why groups with a grudge, or a political point to make, might find Seoul '88 an unmatched stage. A monster has been created, and one can only hope that blood isn't on its current menu.    If we are lucky, and nothing untoward happens, these Olympics will be remembered for sport. That would be dandy, because they shape up as the best ever. At least, they will be the first Summer Games since '72 to escape a bloc boycott.    Chances are the Soviets and East Germans will capture the lion's share of the medals. Predictably, this will set off weeping and wailing in the U.S., as did the poor Yank showing in the Winter Games at Calgary. But the point here will be the same as there: They don't necessarily produce better athletes than we do, they just plan their choice of sports more shrewdly, as far as the Olympics are concerned. Our sports are baseball, football and basketball, and we're wonderful in them. Trouble is, together they account for six official Olympic medals, all in the hoop sport, and no nation can win more than two, one for each sex.    By contrast, there will be 42 medals up for grabs in rowing, 39 in shooting, 36 in canoeing and 30 each in weightlifting and Greco-Roman wrestling. The Sovs and East Germs encourage their youth in such pursuits, and, consequently, will clean our clock in them and, consequently, all those &quot;unofficial&quot; national medal counts everyone runs.    Don't worry, though, because we still should have plenty to cheer about. Carl Lewis, Jackie Joyner-Kersee and the many-splendored Florence Griffith-Joyner figure to do us proud in track. Little Janet Evans and big Matt Biondi could rule in the pool. Phoebe Mills can flip with the best of 'em.    And to all the prayers, oaths and anthems that will be recited in tonight's opening ceremony, I propose a small addition: &quot;May the event be uneventful.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>