<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880404-0056 </DOCNO><HL> Troubled Waters: The Real River Jordan Is Shallow, Sluggish -- And Heavily Fortified --- It Bears Little Resemblance To Famed River of Song; Locals Feel Ambivalent --- Middle East's 'Iron Curtain' </HL><AUTHOR> Tony Horwitz (WSJ Special) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   At a clapboard church in Liberty, Mo., Rebecca Salti once sang about a River Jordan that was deep and wide, with milk and honey on the other side.    As an adult, teaching art to Palestinian children near Jericho, she discovered the real river was a brackish stream, bordered by minefields, that meant something very different to those who grew up on its banks.    &quot;My students always drew Phantom Jets screaming over the water,&quot; says Ms. Salti, who taught there in the 1970s. &quot;It didn't look like the place I dreamed about in bobby socks and saddle shoes.&quot;    The embattled river of the Middle East never has resembled the Jordan that winds through religious song, a symbol of peace and liberation. But the contrast between the two rarely has been so stark.    The river where Jesus was baptized and which Joshua crossed to enter the Promised Land now bristles with electrified fences and machine-gun nests. Since 1967, most of the river has formed a border, dividing Jordan from Israel and its occupied West Bank. Phone links across the river are barred, most bridges are gone, and anyone attempting to wade across risks being shot. Today, the Jordan keeps on rolling, a symbol of how Arab and Jew live side by side, while remaining entirely separate.    &quot;This itsy-bitsy river,&quot; says Ms. Salti, &quot;has become the Iron Curtain of the Middle East.&quot;    A contemporary journey along the Jordan shows the irony of that division. In its course from the Galilee to the Dead Sea, the river cuts through a deep, narrow valley where Israeli kibbutzniks drive tractors within shouting distance of Jordanian fruit-pickers. The river is sluggish, shallow, and choked with reeds. After decades of draining for agriculture, most of the Jordan can be forded on foot.    But few people even get close. &quot;Kids grow up here without ever putting a toe in the water,&quot; says Micha Hellman, a gardener at Kibbutz Kfar Ruppin, the closest Israeli settlement to the Jordan. Adds David Katzir at Kibbutz Dafna near the river's headwaters in Upper Galilee: &quot;Even Joshua couldn't cross it now.&quot;    The river hasn't always formed such an imposing social and political divide. At the turn of the century, Christian pilgrims paddled up the Jordan, while Turkish-owned slaves sent sheep downriver on rafts. As a young man, Khalaf Ghoblan, an 87-year-old Bedouin from Jordan, often swam across the river to buy clothes from Jewish seamstresses. &quot;I felt we were fellow Semites and the river was ours to share,&quot; he says.    Even after 1948, when the formation of Israel turned a short stretch of the river into a border, traffic continued. When 150 cows from Kibbutz Kfar Ruppin wandered across the Jordan in the 1950s, Arab farmers returned them. The Israelis rewarded their neighbors with chocolate and fruit.    But after the Six-Day War of 1967, when Israel occupied the entire West Bank, the main thing Arab and Jew exchanged across the river was gunfire. Following the war, the east bank became a base for Palestinian guerrillas, and three years of fighting turned the river valley into a no man's land of bombed-out fields and villages. Homes and culverts still bear the scars.    &quot;I cry for the old times,&quot; says Mr. Ghoblan, who now winters near South Shuna on the east bank. Tossing aside his cane, the aged Bedouin offers to show off a musket he once fired at Israeli soldiers. &quot;I think the river now makes us two people forever,&quot; he says. &quot;War is the only language Israelis understand.&quot;    Such bitterness is common among Arabs on both banks of the river. Jordan's population is about 60% Palestinian, and the wounds of 1948 and 1967 haven't healed. Recent violence on the West Bank has deepened hostilities in the river valley. In particular, many Arabs resent a barrier that has cut them off from friends and family a few miles away.    Mohammed Abu-Helal, a West Bank farmer, used to ride his donkey across the river on Fridays to attend an east-bank mosque. But in 1967 the Israelis turned his farm into a closed security zone. The land he got in return is near the water, but he has crossed only twice in 20 years.    &quot;The West Bank and Jordan used to be one big village,&quot; says Mr. Abu-Helal, who shares two rooms with his wife and six children in Marj Al-Naja. &quot;Now the river is one wall in a big Palestinian prison.&quot;    All along the river, the border dominates daily lives. Mr. Hellman, the Israeli gardener, needs a military permit to reach riverside fields. The permit allows him to pass through an electronic fence that Israel built along the entire border after 1967. As he checks a fishpond one afternoon, Israeli patrols work beside the fence, raking a dirt track that is inspected daily for footprints. Nearby, Israeli and Jordanian sentries peer at each other through binoculars from the guard posts that line both banks.    As a child, the 28-year-old Mr. Hellman spent three years sleeping in an underground bunker as rockets screamed overhead. The shelling killed two people in his kibbutz. Each morning, he and other children gathered missile tails and traded them like baseball cards.    Cows still step on unexploded mines, but after 17 years of de facto peace, Mr. Hellman finds the river border odd. &quot;I don't know the names of my closest neighbors,&quot; says the gardener, who sometimes wakes to the call to prayer from a Jordanian mosque. &quot;I don't even know the name of their village.&quot;    Mr. Hellman says the recent West Bank violence &quot;only shows that we need to be talking.&quot; But like most kibbutzniks, he represents the liberal end of Israeli opinion. Many Israeli strategists regard the grand river of spiritual song as a &quot;natural antitank ditch,&quot; too valuable to be bartered away in any negotiations.    The valley's desolation reflects that view. A wide security strip has stunted agricultural growth on the Israeli side of the river. Although there are pockets of lush acreage along the southern half, much of the &quot;occupied territory&quot; is occupied only by hitchhiking soldiers. &quot;We can make the desert bloom, but not mine fields,&quot; says Yitzach Levi, who lives at Kibbutz Almog, a patch of green in an expanse of untilled semi-desert.    Along most of the Jordan, border guards keep travelers from getting within a half-mile of the water. An English minister who canoed down the river in 1932 counted more than 20 bridges, fords and ferries; today, the two remaining bridges are anchored by machine-gun nests. At the Allenby Bridge, the river's main crossing, arid gullies are dotted with signs shouting &quot;Danger Mines!&quot; in English, Arabic and Hebrew.    A small quantity of Palestinian produce moves across the river under tight military control. And some of the Jordan's limited commerce is illicit. Superior, kibbutz-grown palm trees, for instance, are sometimes purchased by Palestinians and smuggled across to east-bank farms.    Israeli Jews cannot cross into Jordan, and Arab travelers endure Draconian regulations. West Bank males between 18 and 26 must wait nine months after crossing into Jordan before returning to their homes. Arabs entering Israeli territory are routinely strip-searched for weapons and pro-Palestinian literature.    &quot;They are paying the price for what terrorists have done and are still doing,&quot; says Major Elise Shazar, a spokeswoman for the Israeli authority that governs the occupied West Bank.    But among those who live along the river, years of peace have bred a certain ambivalence. Haitham Nuseibeh, whose family has farmed the east bank for 20 years, distrusts the Israelis and wonders whether they have designs on his side as well. Still, as a practical matter, he feels that the two countries should stop pretending they remain at war. &quot;You have to say hello to your neighbor, whether you like him or not,&quot; Mr. Nuseibeh says.    Jacob Noy, who has lived at Kibbutz Kfar Ruppin for 40 years, agrees: &quot;After all, we've been through, it's hard to see each other as people.&quot; he says. &quot;But it won't change if we keep living like this.&quot;    Ironically, some people feel the river itself may help bring the two sides together. By building canals and adopting Israeli innovations such as drip irrigation, the Jordanians have used the river's water to leapfrog their neighbors. Today, the east bank is a rich tapestry of eggplant, watermelon, citrus and other crops, supporting twice the population it did 15 years ago.    &quot;Now we must have peace because we have so much to protect,&quot; says Munther Haddadin, who recently finished a five-year term as director of the Jordan Valley Authority. Israelis, too, see the development as a hopeful sign, noting that development along the Suez Canal preceded the Camp David accord with Egypt.    But as agriculture burgeons on the east bank, the river will shrink even more. To ensure future water supplies, Jordan recently agreed with Syria to dam the Yarmuk River. This will further diminish the Jordan into which the Yarmuk flows.    Already, the draining of the Jordan is lowering the Dead Sea, into which the river empties. Since the border runs down the middle of the sea, this shrinking is bringing Arab and Jew closer together. At a seaside park named Einot Zukim, the water has fallen so far that the old beach is now a parking lot. &quot;At this rate, I'll be working in Jordan in another five years,&quot; jokes Dudu Unger, who sells food at a beachside kiosk.    Acknowledging the tacit peace, Israel in 1982 allowed pilgrims to return to the site of Jesus's baptism, after barring the ritual for 15 years. In December, three well-armed guerrillas cut through security fences along the Jordan, the first such break in 10 years. But when Israel picked up the intruders, it quickly scotched suggestions that Jordanian guards intentionally let them through.    Neither the quiet nor the mellowing of attitudes, however, has thawed official relations between Jordan and Israel. With political divisions in Israel and an administration nearing the end of its term in the U.S., few people hold out much hope for recent peace initiatives. Thus, along the river, impatient residents have begun their own rapprochement.    At Kfar Ruppin, an artist named Danny Zait is building a giant sculpture on a hillside that was once a target for Palestinian shells. In 45-foot-high stone letters facing Jordan, he is writing &quot;Salaam,&quot; the Arabic word for peace. So far, he has completed only two letters. &quot;I think of it like an unfinished symphony,&quot; says Mr. Zait, who was cheered on by Jordanian farmers. &quot;I am waiting for the real peace to come so our neighbors across the river can help me complete it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>