<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880606-0047 </DOCNO><HL> It's Ear-Shattering, It's Brain-Blasting, Man, It's BAD! --- Car-Stereo Crazies Vie to Be The Loudest of the Loud; And the Chicks Go Nuts </HL><AUTHOR> Ken Wells (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ELE </IN><DATELINE> BAKERSFIELD, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Orlando Madrid turns up the volume on his car stereo and strange things happen.    His car windows bulge slightly. Sheet metal on the roof ripples. The trunk shudders violently. Bass notes pound so hard they thump him on the back of the head, like little jabs from a prizefighter.    Some people might be alarmed by sound that threatens to pummel a perfectly good Toyota Celica into the dust. Mr. Madrid is ecstatic. With the earnestness of a rocket scientist, he fiddles with dials and buttons, hoping to coax out still more volume. Alas, a computer linked to a microphone in his car delivers bad news: He has achieved only 130 decibels, five short of the loudest car stereo measured here today.    &quot;Man, I was still adjusting the system. They didn't even let me get to my peak!&quot; Mr. Madrid protests, his own decibel level nearing the red line. Only a week earlier he hit 140 decibels, and he's sure his limit is a few beyond that.    Let's put Mr. Madrid's disappointment in perspective. Chit-chat is carried on at 60 decibels, your average punk-rock band performs at 110, and a jet at takeoff cranks out 125. At 140 decibels, the unprotected human ear throbs with pain, the eardrum on the verge of annihilation. Beyond 150 the possibilities include death: The vibrations are capable of short-circuiting the heart. A sound of 180 decibels, focused by scientists into a beam, has bored a hole through three feet of concrete.    The car radio has grown up, and it is a monster. This being America, people have decided that louder is better -- and that it ought to be awarded a prize.    So on a recent hot and dusty Sunday, Mr. Madrid and 149 other car stereophiles are at a park outside of town here to enter a &quot;crank-it-up contest,&quot; hoping to win one of the six-foot-high trophies and, the fondest dream, be named loudest of the loud. The contests go by other names as well: car wars, soundoffs, Thunder on Wheels competitions. Maybe 200 of them will be held around the country this year. Though deafening volume is the crowd-pleaser, it isn't everything; complicated formulas judge the stereos on many other features, like sound clarity and quality of installation.    There are at least three sanctioning organizations. The National Autosound Challenge Association sponsored the one in Bakersfield. Based in Riverside, NACA has 20,000 competing members and expects to draw 500,000 spectators at its events this year, culminating in a championship in Phoenix in October.    A Texas-based rival, the Thunder on Wheels circuit, claims its October championships in New Orleans is likely to produce a new world-record volume. The current record, achieved at a May 7 Thunder on Wheels contest in Beaumont, belongs to Wayne Guillory, a car-stereo dealer there who managed to get his van's sound system to play a compact-disk recording of &quot;Flashdance&quot; at shattering 151.1 decibels.    &quot;At those sound levels, it's a lot like drag racing at 286 miles an hour,&quot; says the 43-year-old Mr. Guillory, who wore earmuffs and turned off the mid- and high-frequency speakers to avoid damage to either the van or himself.    &quot;That's a good analogy,&quot; says Reese Haggott, an NACA official and a founder of Alpine Electronics of America, a maker of &quot;high-end&quot; car-stereo equipment. (&quot;High-end&quot; is loosely defined as systems, costing $1,500 and up, with more than 100 watts of power, separate amplifiers and signal processors, and four or more speakers.) Crank-it-up, Mr. Haggott says, isn't much different than the hot-rodding and customizing of the 1950s and 1960s, except the action has moved inside.    &quot;The EPA {Environmental Protection Agency} took over the engine system, what with catalytic converters and 55 mile-an-hour speed limits,&quot; adds Dave Forsberg, a judge at the Bakersfield contest. &quot;Where else are you going to have fun, except with the stereo system?&quot;    These systems aren't exactly the 10-watt radio/cassette player that came with your Chrysler. Mr. Guillory's is powered by 5,600 watts of amplifiers and has 36 speakers and sophisticated sound-stage electronics. It cost $33,000.    He couldn't have done it without a leap in technology. The same microcircuit breakthrough that has shrunk radios to fit a jogger's palm means that components once confined to a living room can be scaled down to fit a car.    Not necessarily its dashboard, though. The trunk typically becomes the power center, because, although a single high-power amplifier would fit beneath the dash, competition systems have as many as six. They can generate such heat they need cooling fans; trunk-mounting avoids turning the passenger compartment into a blast furnace.    The firewall between the trunk and the back seat is usually converted into a rack to hold bass speakers, of up to 18 inches in diameter. In some vans, virtually every inch of wall space beyond the driver's seat is given over to speakers and amplifiers. The cars often need more than one battery, plus high-performance alternators, to feed enough power to these Godzillas.    Besides technology, the craze has had a prod from capitalism. From a trickle five years ago, sales and installation of highend car audio equipment -- fanned by development of the car compact-disk player -- have swelled to perhaps 5% of the $2.5 billion consumer-electronics market. Not surprisingly, it was this industry that came with up the idea of people racing radios just like cars.    One pioneer was George Reed, a drag racer from Conroe, Texas, who for steady work represented several high-end car-amplifier makers. In 1981, he decided to organize a crank-it-up contest in Austin. &quot;The kids were into loud radios anyway, so why not just make it competitive?&quot; he figured.    The sound achieved back then was tame next to today's shattering blasts, but Mr. Reed knew he was onto something. Hearing stereos that physically shook the cars they were in, spectators &quot;went absolutely wild.&quot; Mr. Reed (&quot;Doc Thunder&quot; to his friends) now is the czar of the Thunder on Wheels circuit and, as such, at the heart of a crank-it-up controversy with international overtones.    Though it may seem like a Sumo wrestler complaining about weight, it turns out that Mr. Reed's group is accused by others of overworshipping the decibel. It also turns out that people who win Thunder on Wheels competitions tend to win with American-made components, or at least with American amplifiers that have proven superior in delivering ultra-high decibels. NACA -- which stops awarding points for decibels at 140 -- says it pretty much grew out of the notion that soundoffs ought not to be weighted to favor any particular set of manufacturers.    Mr. Reed represents American amplifier makers but notes that Thunder on Wheels contests are open to all. He theorizes that NACA was begun as an &quot;equalizer&quot; for foreign component makers which, though known for clarity, don't have the muscle to compete with the American amplifier makers.    &quot;Well, when you go to the drag races, you go to see the excitement of speed and records broken,&quot; says the very loud Mr. Guillory, a die-hard Thunder-on-Wheelite who won't enter NACA competitions, implying they are a trifle wimpy. But Mr. Reed concedes that as volumes move up toward the 160-decibel level, it's likely his circuit will require drivers to leave their cars during sound-level testing.    Here at the Bakersfield contest, people aren't exactly riveted by these larger debates. Manuel Silva Jr., a 16-year-old from Lemoore, Calif., just wanted to have the best car stereo in his school. After coaxing $4,100 from his grandmother, he rigged his 1968 VW Beetle with 475 watts and turned his back seat into a rack holding four 15-inch speakers. &quot;I got the baddest stereo in town,&quot; he says.    Mike Strope, of Burlingame, Calif., has 440 watts, connected to 26 speakers. Through his compact-disk player, a jazz band seems to come to life in his van. &quot;This is what it's all about,&quot; says Mr. Strope.    And then there is diminutive Robert Vasquez, 20, who has invested most of the proceeds from managing his parents' Farmersville, Calif., tortilla factory in a white, skirted, low-slung BMW and a 910-watt stereo system. It has cranked out 134 decibels at today's contest. Mr. Vasquez, seated in a director's chair wearing ultra-dark glasses as admirers ogle his German soul machine, is candid about one of his motives.    &quot;The chicks,&quot; he says, &quot;go nuts over this.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>