<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN PLANS to replace the White House chief of staff, sources said.    The departure of Donald Regan from the White House may come as early as this week, a source said. Last night, it wasn't clear whether Regan had formally offered his resignation or had been asked to leave. A growing number of political advisers have been urging the president to replace Regan as the only way to restore order to the administration, which has been hurt by the Iran-Contra affair.    Regan has been embroiled in a dispute with Nancy Reagan over how active the president should be following his recent prostate surgery, sources said.    ---   MOSCOW OFFERED to reimpose its moratorium on nuclear-weapons testing.    A Soviet spokesman, in an interview on ABC-TV, said that if the U.S. stopped exploding nuclear devices, the Kremlin would renew its self-imposed ban, which it said it was abandoning after the U.S. conducted a test Feb. 3. Meanwhile, American scientists monitoring such tests in the Soviet Union were told to switch off seismic equipment, prompting speculation that Moscow was preparing to conduct a test within days.    Reagan has directed U.S. arms-control negotiators in Geneva to temporarily defer talks with the Soviet delegation on space-based missile defenses.    ---   SYRIAN TROOPS ADVANCED into West Beirut in an effort to end fighting.    A 4,000-member Syrian peace-keeping force entered the Lebanese capital, as part of an attempt by Damascus to quell the fighting between Shiite Amal militiamen and an alliance of Druse and leftist gunmen. Lebanese police said the Syrian troops entered Beirut unchallenged. More than 200 people have been killed and at least 400 injured in a week of factional fighting for control of the mainly Moslem sector.    An American Moslem envoy said foreign hostages held by extremists in Lebanon are apparently safe despite the battles between Moslem militias.    ---   Investigators are questioning the accuracy of Attorney General Meese's testimony about the Iran-Contra affair, and are pursuing allegations that Lt. Col. North destroyed files last November, law enforcement officials said. Independent counsel Lawrence Walsh is looking into both issues, the officials said.    ---   French police captured four suspected leaders of the Direct Action guerrilla group near Orleans. The arrests Saturday were seen as an important victory in France's anti-terrorism drive and have provided a boost to the Chirac government. Direct Action has claimed responsibility for about 80 attacks since 1979.    ---   A congressional study concluded that Israel won't be able to build a planned new jet fighter within its budget ceiling. The General Accounting Office said the cost of the Lavi jet would range from $17.3 million to $17.8 million, higher than the $14.5 million estimated by Israel.    ---   A hand grenade exploded at the Damascus Gate of Jerusalem's Old City, wounding 12 Israeli border guards and five bystanders, at least two seriously. Four Palestinian guerrilla groups, including the PLO, claimed responsibility for the attack outside the ancient walled city. More than 70 Arabs were detained by Israeli police.    ---   Jewish activist Iosif Begun said he planned to immigrate to Israel. Begun was freed Friday from a Soviet prison, where he had been jailed more than three years ago for anti-state activities. Separately, Israeli officials urged the U.S. to deny free entry to Jews who leave the Soviet Union, saying they should settle in Israel.    ---   Iran said its forces launched an attack against Baghdad's troops north of the Iraqi port city of Basra in renewed ground fighting along the southern front of the Persian Gulf War. Tehran also reported the arrests of four anti-government guerrillas. Iran said the People's Mujahedeen members were caught transmitting radio signals to Iraq.    ---   Filipinos began celebrations to mark the first anniversary of the revolt that toppled the Marcos government and brought President Aquino to power. Cardinal Jaime Sin urged Filipinos to make &quot;sacrifices that will allow deep and lasting change to take place&quot; after a year of coup attempts and plots against the Aquino government.    ---   Pakistani President Zia said his talks with Indian Prime Minister Gandhi helped ease tensions caused by a troop buildup along the India-Pakistan border. Zia held talks Saturday in New Delhi with Gandhi over a Feb. 4 accord under which both sides would withdraw their border forces. Further talks are set for next week in Islamabad.    ---   Two leading academics resigned from South Africa's ruling National Party. The resignations of theoretician Sampie Terreblanche and law professor James Fourie followed a dispute with Botha over Pretoria's failure to quicken the pace of eliminating apartheid, and came as the party prepared for the May 6 whites-only election.    ---   Died: Andy Warhol, 58, artist, in New York City, following a heart attack. . . . David Susskind, 66, television, film and theater producer, in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>