<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881003-0188 </DOCNO><HL> New Features On Investing Begin Today </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Beginning in this section today, the Journal is introducing several new statistical and graphic features on markets and investing and is enhancing other aspects of its coverage.    Among the most important new features are:   --Stock indexes measuring the daily performance of nearly 700 issues in 82 industry groups and nine economic sectors.    --Investment Insight, a daily statistical and graphics feature highlighting trends in markets and investments; it appears in the lower left corner of this page.    --Mutual Fund Monitor, which each day will track the best and worst performance of mutual funds in two dozen categories. The data come from Lipper Analytical Services Inc.    --Tapewatch, a key to news events that will be moving markets each day; it appears on this page.    --The Bond Market Data Bank, which highlights statistics that illuminate moves in various segments of the bond market, with data provided by several leading Wall Street firms.    Significant enhancements include:   --Your Money Matters will appear on this page each day, focusing on investment trends, developments and strategies.    --Coverage of mutual funds and other investments of interest to individual investors will appear daily, rather than twice weekly, on the inside back page.    --Stock listings, set in more readable type, will highlight stocks with significant price moves and sharp increases in trading volume. Each common stock's symbol will be included.    --In addition, stock listings will run from front-to-back in this section, beginning on page 3. The Heard on the Street and Abreast of the Market columns have been relocated to page 2 of this section, where an enlarged Stock Market Data Bank also appears.    --Financial futures and options also have been relocated to positions devoted to coverage of the underlying investments. For example, currency futures and options now will appear adjacent to daily foreign exchange listings.    Two of the innovations in this new section merit additional background information.    Industry Group Indexes   The industry groups currently include 693 stocks representing about 80% of the market capitalization -- price times shares outstanding -- of the U.S. equity market. The number of stocks will fluctuate from time to time to maintain the 80% level of representation.    The groups themselves are clustered into nine sectors that reflect larger segments of the U.S. economy; index numbers also will be published for these.    Most of the industry groups are well-defined by their names. For instance, railroads, chemicals, electric utilities and banks leave little doubt as to which industry's stock performance is being measured, and technology, finance etc. clearly describe sectors.    But a few groups have less-specific names, mainly to encompass wider arrays of stocks that tend to move together and also to account for the changing nature of many industries. Thus, the financial-services group includes stocks of companies that have mixtures of financial businesses ranging from securities brokers and credit cards to mutual funds and mortgages.    The groups with &quot;diversified&quot; in their names include stocks of companies whose business mixes are so divided that no one of them constitutes more than half of their annual revenues. The conglomerate group consists of very large companies whose businesses are in more than one sector as well as several industry groups.    All industry groups together make up the Dow Jones Equity Market Index, which indicates broad movement of the stock market. By contrast, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, the oldest and best-known stock-market barometer, tracks 30 blue-chip securities of large companies that are widely followed by both individual and institutional investors. (All 30 stocks in the industrials also are in the industry groups, which include issues from the New York and American exchanges and Nasdaq's National Market System.)    The Journal's market coverage will continue to emphasize the familiar Dow Jones industrial, transportation and utility averages, which are valuable for tracking the overall market through this century. The new indexes provide investors with additional standards against which to measure the performances of their own portfolios or to judge individual securities.    An important difference between the familiar Dow Jones averages and the new indexes is the method of computation. The averages are &quot;price weighted&quot; -- that is, the sum of the prices of all stocks in each average is divided by a divisor that changes over time to account for stock splits, spinoffs and so forth. The effect of this method is that higher-priced stocks move the average more than lower-priced stocks.    By contrast, the Dow Jones industry group indexes and the Equity Market Index to be published in the Journal are &quot;market-capitalization weighted.&quot; That means both the price and number of shares outstanding enter into the computation, which also involves a divisor that is adjusted periodically for similar reasons as those of the Dow Jones averages. The effect of this method is that stocks with big market capitalizations influence the indexes the most.    The industry groups and Equity Market indexes are all based on 100 on June 30, 1982, so their relative performance since then can be discerned at a glance. Composition of the groups was recreated through the past six years using the same criteria that are currently applied to add or delete stocks to the groups. Representatives of three divisions of Dow Jones andamp; Co. -- the Journal, Barron's and Information Services -- collaborated in developing the indexes. Historical computations were done by Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. An announcement about how to obtain historical data will be made soon.    Earlier this year, Dow Jones and Shearson Lehman Hutton announced a joint venture to create indexes to measure stock performance world-wide. The industry-group indexes being introduced today will constitute the U.S. component of the indexes tracking industry-group performance world-wide and regionally. The global indexes are expected to be introduced next year.    Bond Market Data Bank   Designed to serve professional money managers as well as small investors in the credit markets, the data bank consists of nine categories: major indexes, corporate bonds, tax-exempt bonds, mortgage-backed securities, collateralized mortgage obligations, foreign government bonds, guaranteed investment contracts, total rates of return for the world's major bond markets and Eurodollar bonds.    The major indexes measure price returns over a specified period for a basket of bonds. For example, the Shearson Lehman Hutton Long Term Treasury index consists of all Treasury securities maturing between 10 years and 30 years. The Merrill Lynch Corporate Master index represents a portfolio of about 4,360 nonconvertible, coupon-bearing bonds with remaining maturities of at least one year, a minimum of $10 million outstanding and an average credit rating of single-A-1.    The listing of corporate bond prices and yields compiled by First Boston Corp. consists of about 20 actively traded issues. Yields are calculated on a semiannual basis. Prices reflect institutional round lots of $1 million. Issues in the list may change from time to time to insure that the bonds quoted are benchmark issues.    Tax-exempt bond prices and yields, compiled by the Bond Buyer, consist of actively traded issues. Prices are representative of institutional trades. Yields are calculated to maturity.    The mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations compiled by Salomon Brothers Inc. provide representative yields and prices as well as yield margins above similar-maturing Treasury securities. The yields are based on projections from Salomon's mortgage prepayment model, assuming interest rates remain unchanged from the previous day's levels.    Prices and yields from four major foreign government bond markets are listed daily. All yields are semiannual, compounded to maturity, equivalent to the U.S. method, to allow investors to make reliable comparisons of relative value. Total rates of return for these and other markets provide performance measures of the world's major bond markets.    Guaranteed investment contracts are based on the T. Rowe Price GIC index provided by T. Rowe Price Guaranteed Assets Advisers Inc. The index is a daily compilation of GIC rates from about 30 major U.S. and Canadian life insurance companies. All rates shown are net of carrier administrative and investment management expenses, assuming no broker commissions. Quotes are based on the carriers' best rate within the $2 million-to-$5 million range, single-sum deposit with annual interest payments.    The listing of Eurodollar bonds provides prices and annual yields of actively traded dollar-denominated bonds issued outside the U.S. by countries and corporations. The bonds may be changed frequently to reflect new benchmark issues. The bonds have remaining maturities of at least one year. </TEXT></DOC>