<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Assessing the Market's Fall</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   A principal factor in the stock-market sell-off is the investment community's ever-eroding confidence in leadership in Washington. Nearly every proposal and act of Congress that is currently in the pipeline serves to undermine investor confidence. To name but a few: the determination to balance the budget via tax increases; the penchant for judicial activism and the attendant litigation and liability explosion; punitive trade provisions; openness to anti-competitive regulations and mandated employment benefits.    It appears today, as investors shiver in the chill, that our duly elected officials have helped bring us to a low point in investor confidence.    Paul R. Farago   Pawtucket, R.I.   ---   Modest changes in the real interest rate and the economy's expected growth rate can change stock values dramatically. Add the feedback effect of lower wealth on consumer spending and profitability, and more drama follows.    The fundamental economic outlook may change for the worse and the reasons are not so elusive: Last month's trade deficit revealed again that buying fewer physical units of foreign goods doesn't ensure that the deficit in dollars improves right away. This probability of protectionist measures is now higher, in part because President Reagan doesn't appear to have the political capital to stop them.    More important, the weakness in the administration raises the probability of higher taxes soon. Given that Democrats control Congress, the deficit will not fall by the amount taxes are raised. Economic growth will suffer. This combination of higher taxes and lower growth means more pressure on the federal budget and interest rates.    We've just veered off the course of high growth, low taxes and free trade. The first few steps on the low growth, higher taxes and protectionist path don't feel too good.    Prof. Edward A. Snyder   University of Michigan   Graduate School of   Business Administration   Ann Arbor, Mich.   ---   As a response to the current serious bear market in equities world-wide, the Federal Reserve has helped by easing monetary policy. The markets seem to want the federal budget to be decreased by the administration and Congress, but raising taxes is a fiscal tightening that will only deepen the feared recession.    A dramatic lowering or elimination of the capital-gains tax is a more appropriate move. This will encourage long-term investors to hold on to their stock, rather than sell before year end and encounter an additional 5% tax. Meanwhile, our representatives need to work out structural changes in spending that will lower our federal deficit. Protectionist trade legislation will worsen this problem. A balanced-budget constitutional amendment will ameliorate it.    Renee M. Rady   New York   ---   Reagan administration policies may have facilitated the bull market, but its dramatic fall wasn't due to fear that these policies wouldn't be continued. Rather, it was the market's fear that these policies can no longer be continued. &quot;Bloody Monday&quot; demonstrated in just how fragile and precarious a situation those policies have left us.    A strong stock market today doesn't necessarily lead to a strong economy tomorrow. The last thing Washington needs to do is to &quot;stand tight.&quot; Congress and especially the president had better get going and show they are serious about the twin deficits. To stay the course means sure disaster.    Mark A. Deremer   Brooklyn, N.Y.   ---   Because of the stock market's havoc and distress, we are very likely to see a real effort at solving the budget deficit -- an action unattainable for years. And we are surely likely to see a squelching of the recent interest-rate surge -- an action much to be desired.    Jay R. Willner   San Francisco   ---   Since the 1987 stock-market crash, all that is heard from the media, business and government officials is that the U.S. budget deficit must be reduced. Should government spending now be markedly reduced or taxes significantly raised, the resulting de-stimulation of the economy could very well throw the nation into another very austere era.    William E. Bourgeois   Marinette, Wis.   ---   The economic future of the U.S. seems to be on the skids more than ever since the Great Depression of the 1930s. Deficit spending is most certainly one of the major culprits. But a tax increase at this time could easily become a grave mistake over the long run.    The solution to a better economy is a presidential line-item veto. Congress would then have to rationally consider each spending measure on its own economic merits, and &quot;pork-barreling&quot; would be changed for the better. The line-item veto should be considered as a very useful tool in managing deficit spending.    John W. Weeks   Salem, Ore.   ---   The market drop is analogous to what applied mathematicians call &quot;undamped harmonic motion.&quot; The high-speed, computerized decision making and order execution process essentially defeats the normal adversarial thinking of the bulls and bears. This results in an avalanche effect. Essentially it is like a dog chasing its tail, with the instantaneous feedback defeating the normal market forces. Let us get the human being back in the process.    Norman Y. Zelvin   Eastchester, N.Y.   ---   While the economic ramifications of a mushrooming deficit are most often discussed, there is another important consideration that was eloquently raised almost 200 years ago by one of this nation's greatest thinkers and statesmen -- Thomas Jefferson. In a letter sent to James Madison on Sept. 6, 1789, Jefferson ponders the morality of perpetual deficits:    &quot;Then I say, the earth belongs to each of these generations during its course, fully and in its own right. The second generation receives it clear of the debts and incumbrances of the first, the third of the second, and so on. For if the first could charge it with a debt, then the earth would belong to the dead and not to the living. . . . {For debts} between society and society, generation and generation, there is no municipal obligation, no umpire but the law of nature.&quot;    Jeffrey A. Jones   Somerville, Mass.   ---   We will not sleep soundly until we admit that such gimmicks as options and futures on market indexes serve primarily as vehicles of speculation. They should never have been permitted because they destabilize the primary market and negate all the safeguards.    Max J. Schindler   Boonton, N.J.   ---   What ever became of that old Wall Street adage, &quot;Never sell on Monday&quot;?    Oliver Berliner   Beverly Hills, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>