<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870630-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Sandamp;Ls Seduce Congress -- It's a Scandal---By Martin Mayer</HL><DD> 06/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Back in 1951, when inflation threatened the commonwealth, a panel of eminent bankers and underwriters tried to persuade their fellows to refuse loans for unproductive purposes. Among those offended by this advice was the governor of West Virginia, who had in mind a bond issue for the payment of a veteran's bonus. George Moore, later chairman of Citicorp, was on the restraint committee and remembers in his memoirs someone asking what the veterans would do with the money. Well, the governor said, about a third would be spent on booze, a third on women, and the rest would be wasted.    This may be roughly what's happening to the immense unintended subsidy the taxpayers are giving to the proprietors of the nation's savings-and-loan associations through the operation of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. FSLIC is now somewhere between $25 billion and $40 billion in the hole. But in the past few weeks, since the collapse of Vernon (Texas) Savings andamp; Loan Association -- which Speaker of the House Jim Wright personally protected from closure by an enraged Federal Home Loan Bank Board six months ago -- it has become clear that some measurable part of this money has indeed gone for quasi-public uses, in the form of contributions for the benefit of, parties in honor of, and gifts of travel to members of Congress.    Vernon Sandamp;L, a $1.3 billion institution now included in the Bank Board's distinguished group of 128 insolvent associations that are being kept open in a conservancy program because FSLIC does not have the funds to pay off their depositors, owned among other things the yacht High Spirits, a sister ship to the Sequoia, the presidential yacht before Jimmy Carter austerely sold it off. Like its sister, High Spirits was kept at anchor in the Potomac, where Vernon kindly made it available for fund-raising and thank-you parties.    Among those who used this service were the Democratic whip, Rep. Tony Coelho of California, and Democratic Reps. J.J. Pickle and Jim Chapman of Texas. No doubt they intended to pay for this hospitality, but when Vernon forgot to send a bill the whole thing slipped their minds. Meanwhile, the Vernon jets were available for flights around the West, and among those on the logs were Rep. Coelho (a frequent flier), Rep. Wright, and Republican Sens. Paul Laxalt of Nevada and Pete Wilson of California.    Don Dixon was the president and largest stockholder in Vernon Sandamp;L, and in six years multiplied the size of its liabilities, if not the real value of its assets, by eight. He had friends other than politicians, naturally. His borrowers were his friends. They were, apparently, the wrong friends: When the Bank Board finally decided to brave the wrath of the speaker and kick Mr. Dixon out the door, no less than 96% of the bank's loans were behind in their payments or worse, which is probably a world's record.    Between the day Speaker Wright bullied Bank Board Chairman Ed Gray into giving Mr. Dixon another chance and the day Vernon was seized and placed in other hands, the Sandamp;L grew by about $300 million, virtually all of which, apparently, will be lost. Mr. Dixon has filed for personal bankruptcy in California.    Even believers in the great-man theory of history will have to admit, I think, that a foul-up of these dimensions requires not just individuals making individual mistakes, but an idiotic system. That system is the unintended but by no means unpredictable consequence of several deliberate decisions made in this decade by people who should have known better.    The most important of these decisions, in the Garn-St Germain bill of 1982, freed depository institutions from restraints on the interest they could pay for deposits but maintained full federal deposit insurance of both principal and interest up to $100,000 per account. Thus anybody with a banking or thrift license who wanted money, for whatever purpose, could simply advertise his willingness to pay more for it, backed by a government guarantee. The conservator of Vernon was asked on the McNeil/Lehrer show the other night whether he was experiencing any difficulty getting deposits into an institution widely known to be a walking catastrophe, and he said, nah, people still trusted FSLIC, and besides, he was paying 9 1/4%.    In fact, he was probably paying more, because an Sandamp;L with a bad rep can most easily suck in new money by engaging the services of a money broker, who may be paid as much as 1% of what he brings in, up front. Some of this business, which requires the intelligence and skill of an average high-school dropout, is done by highly reputable firms: Merrill Lynch is reported to clear $40 million a year from such fees, and has stood tall against all attempts to police the field.    It is also, of course, done by crooks. The executive vice president of First United Fund Ltd., one of the largest money brokers, pleaded guilty in Kansas City recently to counts of conspiracy to commit wire fraud and bribing administrators of union pension funds; the president, who was out on bail while appealing a previous conviction in Florida, was arrested shortly thereafter and the feds seized his assets, including a jet airplane, a Rolls-Royce, jewelry valued at $306,000, and $14.6 million in cash. Money brokerage can easily be coupled with instructions as to where the bank or thrift that receives the deposit should lend the funds, which makes it an ideal money laundry. When the buttons fall off, Uncle Sam pays up.    Adding insult to injury, the government after Garn-St Germain pretty much abdicated its control over the uses to which depositories could put these insured deposits. I was a member of President Reagan's National Commission on Housing in 1981-82 and vividly remember an argument with Preston Martin, not yet vice chairman of Fed (let alone, partner of former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon in the profitable reclamation of thrifts, as he is now). Mr. Martin wanted Sandamp;Ls to have the power to put a high fraction of their assets into equity investments in property development, retailing and other businesses. I thought this wrong -- partly because it gave the Sandamp;Ls unfair advantages over business competitors that had to raise their own money without government guarantees behind them, partly because I thought a large percentage of the Sandamp;Ls that plunged into that exhilarating pond would drown. But Mr. Martin won in the commission, and his attitudes were adopted by both Congress and the regulators. Unfortunately, I was right and he was wrong.    Worse, FSLIC continued to cover deposits even where state law gave Sandamp;Ls carte blanche to squander their customers' funds. In California and Texas, especially, thrifts were specifically encouraged to become entrepreneurs.    A consultant to a number of California thrifts sourly said last winter that with a law that gave Sandamp;Ls all but unlimited asset powers, requiring only that no more than 10% of all assets could be in any one business, it had become fashionable to bet the bank on 10 ventures. If any one of the 10 went sour, net worth disappeared, the proprietors shut up shop, turned the problem over to FSLIC, and went off to start a new Sandamp;L. A study for Rep. Doug Barnard of Georgia and his Consumer and Monetary Affairs subcommittee found recently that fraud in California Sandamp;Ls has &quot;reached epidemic proportions.&quot; And this is before the junk-bond market goes pop: We have a thrill ahead of us when the congressional committees look at the junk bonds the Sandamp;Ls bought from the fellows who brokered in the money.    Rep. Barnard, who defended money brokerage a couple of years ago when FSLIC and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. tried to restrict it, was shaken by what he saw, and said that while he still thought money brokers did a service for rural banks in Georgia that had good uses for funds from far away, he now feels he could support some rule that limited the amount of money any insured depository could receive from the brokers to a sum no greater than its capital or net worth. In any event, he added with some annoyance, the biggest money broker in the world was now the Federal Home Loan Bank system, which kept its 128 terminal patients alive by such infusions.    Interestingly, the FSLIC rescue package now before the Congress does not touch the sources of these continuing disasters: Vernon may be dead and gone, but the rest of the Sandamp;Ls (not to mention the money brokers) still offer the politicians yachts or their equivalents.    The disputes are not over how to cure a diseased system, but over extraneous measures to stop nonbank banks and to prevent the Federal Reserve Board from rewriting the Glass-Steagall Act for the presumed benefit of its clients in the money-center banks. And the central element of the package is a head fake to permit the accountants to pretend, against their better instincts and first judgments, that this burden can in fact be shifted from the federal budget (which is where it lies, because -- as banking consultant Carter Golembe has noted -- we really have a guarantee program, not an insurance program).    FSLIC's losses are to be met in the short term, under this legislation, through the sale of zero-coupon bonds backed by the credit of the Federal Home Loan Banks. Nobody in his right mind should buy this paper, however, because this first issue is obviously to be followed by many more, inevitably depressing the price, and because the credit of the Home Loan Banks is at bottom no better and no worse than the credit of FSLIC itself.    There is a lot Congress doesn't want to do waiting for it on the legislative drawing board. Though the political influence of Sandamp;Ls is like dragon's teeth and springs up through real-estate broker and other housing lobbies if suppressed directly, Congress could at least strengthen the penalties against gifts to congressman by institutions receiving federally insured deposits, and prohibit such institutions from making political contributions.    ---   Mr. Mayer writes frequently on financial institutions. </TEXT></DOC>