<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880706-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Seoul's Olympian Security Threat </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Wadden and Stuart Pardau </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST JAPAN </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   If nations consulted psychologists, North Korea would almost certainly be diagnosed as psychotic. Time and again, it has proved itself to be an outlaw nation -- kidnapping and killing on foreign soils in defiance of the most basic tenets of international law. Now, the North's repeated threats to &quot;disrupt&quot; the Seoul Olympic Games -- presumably by terrorist or military attack -- make a global blueprint to curb Olympic terrorism all the more urgent, for history suggests that Pyongyang has the means and will to deliver on its threat. This was the concern behind last week's meeting in Seoul of government security officials from eight Asian nations and the U.S., and representatives of 13 airlines that fly into South Korea.    Even a cursory review of North Korea's previous acts of terrorism suggests ample cause for alarm. In 1968, North Korean commandos infiltrated Seoul and were halted only after a deadly exchange of fire at the gates of the presidential manor. Five years ago, a North Korean bomb killed 17 high-ranking South Korean government officials who were on a state visit to Rangoon, Burma. Former President Chun Doo Hwan's late arrival saved his life. Late last year, in one of the North's most barbaric acts to date, Pyongyang agents blew up a Korean Air jetliner, killing all 115 passengers and crew.    In the past, analysts have expressed puzzlement, even disbelief, at North Korea's disdain for even the most fundamental codes of civilized behavior. Over the years, North Korean soliders have hacked to death with tree-trimming axes members of the U.S. truce-keeping forces in the armistice village of Panmunjom. In one of its more bizarre exploits, North Korea's espionage agency even kidnapped from Hong Kong a leading South Korean film director and his actress wife, apparently under orders from Kim Jong Il, the son and designated heir of North Korean ruler, Kim Il Sung. (The younger Mr. Kim, a movie buff, reportedly hoped to enliven the North's moribund film industry through the abductions.)    This pattern of reckless -- even psychotic -- behavior can be explained at least in part by the intense jealousy Pyongyang holds toward the South. Despite generous aid from Russia and China, North Korea is an economic basket case. South Korea, by contrast, boasts a gross national product six times larger than the North's, and its foreign trade is 20 times as great.    By inevitably showcasing the differences between the two nations, the Olympics will add insult to injury. Awarded to Seoul seven years ago, the Summer Games are widely regarded as South Korea's coming-of-age achievement. Much as the 1964 Tokyo Olympics signaled Japan's emergence as a developed nation, the South hopes the Games will herald its own entry into the club of first-rate economic powers. Pyongyang would like nothing better than to rain on Seoul's parade.    Although security around Seoul is tight, it is far from foolproof. No city of 10 million people can be made invulnerable to terrorist attack during an event of Olympic proportions, and officials have conceded that South Korea is virtually defenseless against possible missile attacks on civilian aircraft using Kimpo Airport, the main entry point for the Olympics. Indeed, the bombing that killed five people there on the eve of the 1986 Asian Games demonstrates just how vulnerable the airport is. It's particularly worrisome now that the North has deployed Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles that bring the airport within striking distance.    High-level South Korean and U.S. military alerts coupled with U.S. aircraft carriers off the North Korean coast should discourage Pyongyang from launching a direct military assault during the Olympics. The recent South Korean-Japanese accord to beef up Japan's naval presence in the Sea of Japan and tighten security at Japanese international airports on outbound flights also will help. And South Korean officials are counting on the presence of the Soviets and Chinese at the Games to serve as a deterrent to any attack.    Yet troop readiness and military contingency plans are seldom effective in preventing -- or responding to -- terrorist attacks on civilians. The South Korean and U.S. governments may be unable to respond if the link between the terrorists and their sponsor is not immediately clear. Or, they may be unwilling to respond if the available responses seem excessive given the scale of the provocation.    Rather than focus on unilateral and bilateral responses, world leaders must realize that Olympic terrorism is an international problem that demands an international solution. A global policy forged for the Seoul Games would not only make this Summer Olympics safer, but would also reduce the risks at future Olympiads.    The following proposals could create a basic framework to achieve these aims:   --The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council should develop a plan for the use of collective force against any nation that sponsors or abets terrorism at the Games. Such a measure falls under the auspices of collective global security. A U.N. force that deals specifically with Olympic security should be established.    --Nations that send terrorists to the Olympics certainly shouldn't be allowed to also send their high-jumpers. Any nation that sponsors Olympic terrorism should be permanently barred from participation in the Games. Such a ban would be lifted only when a new regime came to power and there was overwhelming evidence that the new government would no longer sponsor terrorist acts.    --In advance, an international consensus should be reached on the proper economic sanctions to impose against perpetrators of Olympic terrorism as well as the protocol for the confiscation of their overseas assets to compensate the host city and the victims of the attack.    --In instances where the links between a terrorist act and a particular nation are not immediately clear, the proposed U.N. Olympic force should have the right to seek and arrest suspects. Those charged with crimes can be brought to trial in the courts of the country where the act was committed or at the International Court of Justice.    Although these steps are by no means a guarantee against terrorism at future Olympics, they can help deter terrorism of the most dangerous and sophisticated kind, i.e., that masterminded and abetted by central governments. They are an improvement over the current formula, which simply places the burden of Olympic security entirely on the host nation and its allies.    The Olympics are meant to be a moment when the nations of the world put aside the politics of rancor and fear in favor of peaceful pastimes. In practice, however, modern Olympiads often have been a forum used to express political grievances and to propound nationalistic sentiments, sometimes of the most perverse kind. World leaders can begin to bring the Games closer to their original and noble purpose by building a consensus against Olympic terror and the taking of innocent lives.    ---   Mr. Wadden, a lecturer at Kyoto University of Foreign Studies, often writes on Korean politics and economics for Japan's Daily Yomiuri. Mr. Pardau is a lecturer at Osaka Gakuin University in Japan. </TEXT></DOC>