<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871123-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:How to Draw Capital in a Decapitalized Market---By Peter J. Sprague and Charles E. Harris</HL><DD> 11/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   As the business community picks its way through the debris of the recent market crash, it is starting to reexamine the very raison d'etre of Wall Street and, to the extent that the market has strayed from its purpose, to propose reforms.    One of the clear results of the crash is that capital is now at a premium. As a means of providing for those companies without huge reserves or assets we suggest that small companies be allowed to raise capital from the stock market following the same procedures available to individuals under Rule 144 (which permits an insider to sell a minimum of 1% of a company's capitalization each quarter). While such expanded access would address a result of the crash, it would also help address one of its causes.    Wall Street, as opposed to Atlantic City, is supposed to perform two primary functions: facilitate the investment of savings, and raise capital for growing enterprises that create jobs and real wealth. The recent laissez-faire years have led to a distortion of these intentions. Like mutants created from a too-highly charged radioactive environment, the distortions have (at least until the crash) been multiplying rapidly: Insider trading battening on merger and acquisition activity; buyouts leveraged by junk bonds, transforming stable companies into debt-servicing financial fandangos spinning off divisions and employees; manic, computer-accelerated trading of derivative financial instruments; long-term investments in the actual shares of growing companies supplanted by commission-churning options and financial futures; the trading practice of betting on stock fluctuations without actually buying and selling the underlying shares (which is exactly what the &quot;bucket shops&quot; did at the turn of the century before they were outlawed, for the good reason that they siphoned capital away from legitimate investment activity).    In summary, the tail has been wagging the dog as financial maneuvering has often been taking precedence over genuine capital development.    There are two ways to deal with such a condition. One would be to load down a weakened market with yet more regulations and restrictions. Another method would be to allow a bit more freedom of movement for smaller companies -- those without easy access to exotic financial instruments used by the individual and corporate giants to raise capital. We recommend the latter course.    Specifically, if these smaller companies could enjoy the same access to the financial markets that their own insiders have under Rule 144, they could then have a meaningful -- though limited -- source of capital without the time and expense of preparing a registration statement and hiring an underwriter.    Rule 144 already has demonstrated itself as a workable mechanism for distributing limited amounts of stock in the marketplace. If individuals are permitted access to the marketplace in this manner, can it be less in the public interest to permit corporations to have the same access? A corporation and its officers and directors are responsible under the anti-fraud provisions of the securities acts for the accuracy of the corporation's filings. A passive investor selling unregistered shares under Rule 144 is not. The investing public's protections could not be weakened by this liberalization of Rule 144. Nor would it be difficult to implement for corporate officers, directors and corporate counselors, who are typically quite familiar with exercising Rule 144.    If there would be little potential for harm in this liberalization, is there significant benefit to be realized? We believe so. Under current rules, only about 1,500 companies qualify for an S-3 shelf registration, which is rarely used for equity offerings, as it has been claimed that such offerings would depress the market by creating an overhang of shares. The more limited Rule 144 offerings have been shown not to overburden the market.    To illustrate the benefit of the extension of Rule 144, consider the benefit to a hypothetical corporation:    A corporation with $50 million in shareholders' equity selling at a market valuation of two times book value -- or $100 million -- and earning 15% on shareholders' equity -- or $7.5 million -- would be able to sell a minimum of 1% of its capitalization each quarter, or some $4 million worth in a year. Assuming that the company is not paying a dividend, shareholders' equity would grow by $11.5 million instead of $7.5 million in the year, thus giving the company 7% more capital at the end of the year and permitting (all else being equal) 7% more growth in the following year.    While it is routine practice for Wall Street trading desks to call companies to see if they want to buy back blocks of their stock, the trading desks cannot buy stock directly from issuing companies. The ability of a company to sell a block at least equal to 1% of its existing equity capitalization in any quarter would make the commerce with trading desks a two-way street, making it easier for institutions to take positions in smaller companies without disturbing the market.    An additional benefit would be realized for the investing public through this liberalization. Corporate managers would have a continuous reason (other than fear of takeover) to be concerned about their financial public relations, instead of worrying about the stock price only once every few years when the company needs to do a financing or they themselves want to unload some stock. Thus, in post-crash Wall Street, the interests of the investor and corporate manager would be brought more closely into alignment by allowing corporations to avail themselves of Rule 144.    Again, the idea is to address what we view as a fundamental problem in the market, something that may well have played a major role in the crash: Too much distance has been created between the producer and the marketplace. Takeovers and fear of takeovers, leading to fancy bond issues and other financial instruments, have begun to highlight, if not define, our stock market. After the smoke settles (and stock prices stabilize), the only people who really benefit from this activity are the folks in the middle of trades -- the arbitragers, lawyers, traders, etc. Money that could have gone into real growth is lost in the black hole of &quot;profit creation.&quot;    Small- to medium-size companies have been the engines of American industrial growth during the past decade. While the Fortune 500 have been reducing employment, companies with under 500 employees have created 77% of the new jobs during the last reporting period. During the past 10 months, over $1.6 trillion of stock changed hands on the New York Stock Exchange. Public equity offerings during the same period raised only $22 billion on all exchanges. Companies need capital for growth, and the country will need their growth more than ever during the difficult months and years ahead.    ---   Mr. Sprague is chairman of National Semiconductor and has been a director or officer of a wide range of companies. Mr. Harris, a veteran of 17 years on Wall Street, is chairman and chief executive officer of Lexington Group Inc. and chairman of ReCapital Corp. </TEXT></DOC>