<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880926-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH AND DUKAKIS CLASHED over a variety of issues in a campaign debate.    In their first face-to-face encounter -- a 90-minute confrontation in North Carolina -- the Republican and Democratic nominees traded charges about drug policy, the deficit, patriotism and national security. Both candidates achieved at least some of their goals during the nationally televised debate. Bush avoided making any serious gaffes, while striking at his opponent in spirited fashion. Dukakis took the offensive at the very start, hammering away with many of his standard criticisms of Bush and the Reagan administration.    A second Bush-Dukakis encounter is to be held in Los Angeles either Oct. 13 or Oct. 14. Their running mates are to debate Oct. 5 in Omaha, Neb.    ---   SYRIA REJECTED Lebanon's interim Christian-led military government.    Damascus, which maintains about 40,000 troops in Lebanon and is considered the main power broker in the country, likened the cabinet appointed Thursday by Lebanese President Gemayel to a &quot;coup d'etat against legitimacy.&quot; Syria expressed support for a rival government declared Friday by its Moslem allies after Gemayel's six-year term expired. The dispute threatened to formally partition Lebanon along sectarian lines and rekindle the 13-year civil war.    Two bombs exploded in Syrian-controlled areas in mainly Moslem western Beirut, police said. There weren't any casualties reported in either blast.    ---   Gorbachev said the Kremlin risked losing its battle for political and economic changes. In a speech to Soviet editors and ideologists, the Soviet leader said the media had failed to help the public understand the country's transition. He also disclosed that some party officials sought to resign because they couldn't cope with change.    ---   NASA postponed by eight hours the start of the countdown for the space shuttle Discovery to complete preparations for the lift-off. The space agency, which rescheduled the countdown for this morning, still aimed for a Thursday launch. Discovery's flight would be the first since the January 1986 explosion of the shuttle Challenger.    ---   Voters in Turkey rejected a constitutional amendment to hold local elections in November rather than next March, early returns showed. Prime Minister Ozal vowed to stay in office despite an earlier threat to resign if the measure lost overwhelmingly. Officials in Ankara said two were killed and at least 11 injured in voting-related violence.    ---   China is preparing to postpone plans for further liberalization of its economic system. In a plenary session in Beijing today, the Communist Party's Central Committee is to approve an economic plan for the next two years that stresses extreme caution and heightened state control over aspects of the economy.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union exchanged proposals Friday aimed at further nuclear arms control, but U.S. officials said an accord to place interim limits on superpower long-range nuclear warheads isn't imminent. Both Reagan and Shultz met with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze in Washington to discuss arms-control issues.    ---   Burmese security forces killed at least 12 people as mobs violated a curfew imposed by the new military regime and looted shops in Rangoon, state-run radio reported. Separately, an opposition coalition, which had rejected elections sponsored by Burma's government, currently is considering entering such balloting, a spokesman said.    ---   Poland's Solidarity union expanded its leadership, adding representatives of younger workers involved in a recent wave of strikes. As the banned trade union prepared for next month's talks with the Warsaw government, the executive commission was broadened to 21 members from 15.    ---   Deaver received a suspended three-year sentence and a $100,000 fine for lying under oath to a federal grand jury and a House panel about his lobbying activities after leaving the government. He also was ordered to do 1,500 hours of public service. The former Reagan aide said he intends to appeal.    ---   France approved the use of a drug that induces abortion in women at an early stage of pregnancy. The drug, known as RU 486, is to be administered by doctors in family planning centers. China is the only other country to have approved the pill.    ---   Thousands of Yugoslavs rallied in three cities to protest the alleged persecution of minority Slavs by ethnic Albanians in the southern province of Kovoso, the state news agency Tanjug said. The country's Communist Party leaders had appealed Saturday for an end to such protests.    ---   A Navy court-martial panel convicted a rescue-swimmer instructor of negligent homicide Friday in the March 2 drowning of a recruit during a training exercise in Florida. Petty Officer Second Class Michael Combe, 28, also was found guilty of conspiracy to commit battery. The panel rejected a charge of involuntary manslaughter.    ---   A prosecutor in Milan has requested that Carlo De Benedetti be charged with extortion in connection with the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, Italian newspapers reported. A lawyer for the chairman of Ing. C. Olivetti andamp; Co. called the reported allegations &quot;absurd.&quot;    ---   Palace officials in Japan refused to confirm published reports that Emperor Hirohito has cancer of the upper intestine. The 87-year-old monarch remained in serious condition as more than 25,000 pilgrims gathered outside the Imperial Palace in Tokyo to pray for his recovery.    ---   Israeli troops clashed with Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip after a 13-year-old Arab girl was killed by Israeli gunfire. Soldiers also forced militant Jewish families trying to establish a West Bank settlement to leave the area, citing failure to obtain government permission.    ---   Hurricane Gilbert caused far less damage in the U.S. than forecasters originally expected, an insurance industry survey shows. Insured property losses from the hurricane, which had weakened considerably by the time it reached the Texas coast earlier this month, will total about $40 million. </TEXT></DOC>