<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0110 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Real Effect of Sanctions</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRICMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Last week, Chester Crocker, the State Department's African-affairs chief, offered help in furthering negotiations between South African whites and blacks. South Africa's Foreign Minister Pik Botha has just dismissed that offer: &quot;How reliable is it? What would Congress do with any deal I made with your government?&quot;    Welcome to the post-sanctions politics of South Africa.    Three months ago Congress overrode the president's veto and passed economic sanctions against South Africa. Until the passage there were people protesting that sanctions would make South African blacks suffer and cost the U.S. its influence over the South African government. But sanctions activists said that this concern over South African blacks was a cloak for the self-interest of people who did not want to give up profitable South African enterprises. In truth, said these advocates, the economic pain of sanctions was justified in order to press the government for political reform.    Before the sanctions vote it was possible to throw up your hands and say, &quot;Who knows how the South African government will react when the crunch comes? Why not do the morally attractive thing and take our chances?&quot;    So the U.S. did.    Now the data are beginning to roll in. Here is what they show: (1) So far there is no economic crisis in South Africa. But where disruption has taken place, blacks have borne most of the burden. (2) South African politics since the vote have been a disaster for opponents of apartheid.    The sanctions probably gave an extra push to the movement of corporations out of the country. GM, IBM, Warner Communications, Kodak and Britain's Barclays bank have announced pullouts since the action. The corporations sold to their South African managements.    In some cases there will be employment as usual. Kodak workers, however, have lost their jobs, with compensation. Shortly after GM's announcement, its employees struck, demanding a greater say in the new corporate structure to come. The strike was broken.    Meanwhile, the government has been cracking down all over. It announced that it would start sending home Mozambican miners. For the first time in more than a year the military has launched a raid into Angola against the SWAPO. An International Red Cross conference expelled the South African delegate, so South Africa kicked out the International Red Cross, relenting only after the organization's president announced that he disagreed with the decision of the conference.    The government has banned foreign financing to the United Democratic Front, the country's biggest extra-parliamentary opposition group. It has not released a report by the President's Council urging changes -- including mixed-race neighborhoods -- in the Group Areas Act. It has turned down a proposal drafted by blacks and whites for a regional parliament elected by universal suffrage.    It has closed 40 more schools on the eastern cape and says the schools won't open until students and parents quiet down. And after a year's pause the government is once again forcibly relocating blacks and their homes in the name of the homelands policy and residential segregation.    No one knows what sanctions will do to the South African economy in the long run. But now we can see how the South African government will react to whatever changes take place. There is no way for a reasonable person to contend that outside pressure on the government will produce internal reform.    Maybe some pro-sanctions people do not want reform. Maybe they want the impoverishment that paves the way for sudden, radical upheaval. If that is so, they can go on advocating more comprehensive sanctions.    If they say they want reform instead of revolution, you would think they'd have to admit that sanctions are not going to do the trick. But the sanctions advocates are incapable of this sort of analysis. They know the U.S. civil-rights techniques of 20 years ago, in which you pressed a little harder and got a little more. The effect in South Africa scarcely matters; the point is to enact the ritual.    These ritualistic passions are a recurrent feature of American politics. We seem to be undergoing another in the Iran controversy, where the worst allegations scarcely seem to explain the extent of the furor. But in the Iranian case, at least the costs of such bizarre behavior will be borne most by Americans. In the South African case, the spirits have seized us, but others will suffer. </TEXT></DOC>