<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881026-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Commodities: Trading in Copper Futures Becomes Choppy, Prompting Speculation That Market Has Peaked </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD MIN PET </IN><TEXT>   Copper futures trading turned choppy, prompting some speculation that the market has peaked after its prolonged advance.    Prices for most contracts ended higher after first falling.    The lightly traded October contract declined two cents a pound to $1.3940. December, the most active month, rose 1.15 cents to $1.3440. As a result, the premium that traders had been paying for October over December, narrowed by 3.15 cents a pound to five cents.    At least two analysts said that because the October position is used as a pricing basis by dealers in selling physical copper, the drop in price could reflect an easing of tight supplies.    But in London, the cash position on the London Metal Exchange increased its premium over the three-months delivery by the equivalent of $160 a metric ton from Monday, to $360 a ton.    One reason for this strength in the cash position in London has been the decline in stocks of copper in the exchange's warehouses, according to Robert Wylde, president of R.J. Wylde Metals Co., New York metals brokers. Some copper has been shipped from the London Metal Exchange to the U.S. and the October position in New York futures could be reflecting a small unsold part of that metal, Mr. Wylde said. But the overall market remains very tight, according to Mr. Wylde.    New York futures are more of a speculative market while the London exchange more closely reflects the market for physical copper, Mr. Wylde said.    &quot;If you're going to use New York as a basis to judge whether there is still a tightness of copper, it is better to use the difference between the December position and March,&quot; he said. The premium of December over March was 19 cents a pound, he noted. That spread narrowed 0.15 cent a pound from Monday, but the change was insignificant, according to Mr. Wylde.    There also was some difference of opinion as to whether futures were buoyed by an announcement by the Peruvian state-owned mining company, Centromin, that it wouldn't be able to meet its refined copper shipping commitments. Peru is in the grip of a nationwide labor strike that began more than a week ago.    The report was known about 45 minutes before the beginning of trading and still the market opened lower and fell to the low of the day at $1.3050 in the December contract in early trading, an analyst said. Then it suddenly turned around and shot up seven cents to the day's high of $1.3750.    &quot;I'm more inclined to believe that reports that the Japanese had been aggressive buyers of copper on the current decline in both London and New York futures was a price-supporting influence,&quot; he said.    The setback Monday and early yesterday was more of a technical reaction to the rise to a record Friday, according to Bernard Savaiko, senior metals analyst for PaineWebber Inc., New York.    What is concerning traders now is what shape the economy is going to be in later this year and next year, he said.    &quot;The conventional wisdom is that the Federal Reserve will raise interest rates after the election,&quot; he said.    Mr. Savaiko said the Federal Reserve has raised the discount rate, or what it costs financial institutions to borrow from the Fed, &quot;roughly within three months after four out of the last six presidential elections.&quot;    Such moves could slow down the economy and demand for copper-containing products, which in turn would be felt by the copper market, he said.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   ENERGY: Crude-oil futures closed mixed as traders evened out distortions in the prices between various delivery months and re-evaluated the outcome of recent OPEC committee meetings in Madrid. In addition, leading officials of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries issued statements suggesting that OPEC had made progress in coming to terms on a new production-cutting accord. There was nothing mixed about gasoline futures, however, which surged on news that fires had hit Texaco Inc.'s refinery in Convent, La., and an Amoco Corp. refinery in Texas City, Texas. Officials of both companies emphasized, however, the refining units affected by the fires would be back in operation soon, and that the outages won't cause either company to slow gasoline deliveries.    COTTON: Futures prices were narrowly mixed. December delivery cotton eased 0.25 cent a pound to 56.18 cents. A report issued by the Census Bureau prior to the opening of trading showed a drop in U.S. industrial consumption of cotton. The rate of use by mills during September was 27,345 bales a day, compared with 28,150 bales in August and 30,115 bales in September 1987, according to the report. An analyst said that a typographical error in the first news-wire stories -- the September 1987 figure was said to be smaller than it actually was -- may have contributed to some early buying of contracts, before the correction was made. But some technical demand and buying that has been in the market for some time in anticipation of Chinese buying of cotton also could have been a price-strengthening factor, she said. The Chinese buying hasn't materialized, she added.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean futures fell in response to another month of slack export demand and anticipation of large deliveries against the maturing November contracts. Traders are expected Monday to give notice of intentions to deliver at least 20 million bushels of soybeans against November contracts, said John Frazier, a trader at Balfour Maclaine Futures Inc. &quot;This is a very, very large number,&quot; said Mr. Frazier. Soybean prices also tumbled because of a government report released late Monday showing that soybean exports since Sept. 1 have slipped 59% to 52.7 million bushels from 129.6 million bushels a year ago. The Agriculture Department released the report after the close of trading Monday. Despite the lack of any new fundamental developments, wheat and corn futures fell for technical reasons. </TEXT></DOC>