<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880111-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Organizational Skills Could Play a Pivotal Role In the Outcome of Iowa Presidential Campaigns </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> SIOUX CITY, Iowa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Kirk Scheelhaase hunts cattle auctions by day to build up his herd, and voters by night to build up Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis.    Tall and big-fisted, he is a striking contrast with the slight Northeasterner he champions in the Democratic presidential caucuses Feb. 8. Months ago -- before he even was aware of what was happening -- Mr. Scheelhaase was subtly courted by the Dukakis camp. Now as the rural coordinator for two dozen precincts outside Sioux City, the 30-year-old farmer courts others. &quot;They give you a goal,&quot; he says, &quot;but you try to do better.&quot;    It is a contest in organizational politics waged across Iowa today in both parties. A good organization can't save a bad candidate, but a mediocre one can hurt the best. By tradition and necessity, Democrats expend the most energy. But lessons learned in 1980 and the advent of politician-preacher Pat Robertson have led Republicans to invest more resources as well.    &quot;Everything is at the margins,&quot; says Kayne Robinson, deputy director of GOP Sen. Robert Dole's state campaign. &quot;I fully expect it to become a race where organization inevitably is going to be an important factor.&quot;    Buoyed by recent polls, the Dole campaign hopes to pump up voter turnout to record levels to maximize its potential victory over archrival Vice President George Bush. In the tightly bunched Democratic field, Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt seeks to save his candidacy by mounting a major drive to contact as many as 500,000 registered voters in the final weeks.    Organization is an article of faith among political operatives, especially in the Iowa caucuses. The campaigns must persuade their supporters to leave their warm homes on a winter's night, farmers driving country roads in the dark, to attend 7 p.m. meetings that -- especially in the case of the Democrats -- may drag on well into the evening. &quot;You're trying to get these people to come out for two hours at night to stand up for you,&quot; says Rep. Gephardt. &quot;It's an immense organizational hurdle.&quot;    That hurdle is one reason that former Sen. Gary Hart may have trouble translating his lead in some Iowa polls into concrete results Feb. 8. Four years ago, the Colorado Democrat cleverly used organization to finish second in Iowa and become an instant celebrity. Today, his late re-entry in the race and lack of a state organization help explain his insistence that the New Hampshire primary, rather than Iowa, will be the first real test of his renewed effort.    The caucuses here, rich in personal politics, are also deeply ingrown. Fewer than a third of the registered Republicans and Democrats statewide will participate. Old rivalries simmer behind allegiances to different campaigns. Harry Smith, a craggy lawyer for labor's muscle, goes with Mr. Gephardt. John O'Brien, whose clients include the Roman Catholic archdiocese, backs Illinois Democrat Sen. Paul Simon. Mr. O'Brien's son runs the Simon county campaign, while a niece is chosen by the Gephardt forces to captain the biggest precinct in the city.    In organizing their efforts for the caucuses, campaigns focus mostly on those with a proven record of attendance, in the belief that they will be the most likely to turn out again. That emphasis led both parties to greatly underestimate the turnout in 1980, raising questions as to the ability of what were judged well-organized campaigns to identify their supporters. More broadly, critics argue that the attention paid to organization can distort the priorities of a campaign and give it too narrow a focus when a candidate would be better off broadening his message.    New York Rep. Jack Kemp, who stresses his own youthfulness and desire to bring new blood into the GOP, here in Iowa has devoted more energy to appeals to the elderly on Social Security: The elderly have a better track record of showing up at caucuses.    Instead, it is the 63-year-old Mr. Bush who gambles on young Republicans in a sophisticated mailing designed to bring out the 18-to-35-year-olds. &quot;On a winter's night in February . . . will you be there?&quot; asks the holiday brochure in which Mr. Bush pledges a commitment to education funds and an &quot;assault against AIDS.&quot;    Republicans don't require prior registration in the party, and voting demands little more than coming to the caucus and signing a card. By contrast, Democrats ask all participants to register and to vote in a process that requires a camp to have 15% representation to have any chance of getting delegates.    That puts a greater premium on organization among the Democrats. Yet despite the extra emphasis, Democratic turnout still trails Republican. Leaders play down the impact of party rules, but the differences do mean that it's easier for a GOP outsider like Mr. Robertson to break into the process than it is for a Democratic outsider like Jesse Jackson.    Candidates who reach out to new participants must measure the potential gains against the savings of focusing on the old. Here in Woodbury County, fewer than 2,000 Democrats have voted in the past two presidential caucuses, compared with 4,394 who voted in the 1986 primary for lesser offices. How the campaigns use the lists of previous attendees and primary voters tells something of their strategy and capacity.    Democrat Bruce Babbitt, whose support is in pockets elsewhere in the state, is reluctant to invest in going beyond the caucus attendees. The strong local Simon organization will make calls to both lists, but even then he is scarcely reaching a third of the registered Democrats here. Gov. Dukakis's campaign &quot;sweetens&quot; its list by adding groups where he runs well -- Greek-Americans most obviously. But none is so ambitious as Rep. Gephardt, whose final push depends on contacting better than 17,000 Democrats.    In 1984, Democrat Walter Mondale mounted a similar drive that netted only an estimated 5,000 new caucus-goers statewide. It made no difference to the outcome then; for Mr. Gephardt, the same votes would be crucial in his struggle for position. Labor, which gave Mr. Mondale muscle in 1984, remains important to Democrats in Iowa, but it is divided among the candidates and often worn down by wage cuts and strikes.    The question for each GOP organization is how close the turnout comes to the nearly 110,000 voters who participated in 1980. In Sioux City that year, Mr. Bush defeated Ronald Reagan with 982 votes, while Mr. Dole finished seventh with 21. &quot;He did so poorly eight years ago, he can be 'new,'&quot; says George Wittgraf, the Bush state chairman, and that energy of newness can boost a campaign. This year, aided by the organization of Sen. Charles Grassley, the Dole campaign sets targets based on a Republican turnout 30,000 to 50,000 above 1980. Though these may be scaled back, the assumption remains that participation will still be larger than eight years ago.    One reason for the higher projections is the presence of Mr. Robertson's campaign, which has taken as many as 30,000 voter registration cards for distribution to supporters. So far, though, this has translated into very modest increases in GOP registration in counties like Woodbury.    Supporters of the television evangelist are intensely active in some precincts here, but he himself has appeared far less than other GOP contenders. In his absence, videos and tape cassettes of his words are distributed. </TEXT></DOC>