<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880418-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Radio Station in Los Angeles Offers Look At Controversial 'Brokered-Time' Niche </HL><AUTHOR> John R. Emshwiller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEL </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It isn't exactly your typical radio station.    The programming on KIEV here has included grand investment claims from a man who had agreed to an injunction against making unwarranted claims for a previous plan, and health advice from a man who had pleaded guilty to practicing medicine without a license.    KIEV is part of a little-noticed but thriving corner of the radio business that offers &quot;block-time&quot; or &quot;brokered-time&quot; programming. While offering some programs of their own, these stations also sell blocks of time to outsiders who then provide the programming themselves. The buyers are usually purveyors of health, wealth or salvation.    But KIEV, like other block-time stations, has drawn criticism for not screening buyers more carefully. &quot;The station seems to have no discretion about who it puts on,&quot; says Herschel Elkins, head of the consumer fraud section of the California attorney general's office.    Fred and Ronald Beaton, brothers who are KIEV's principal owners, dispute the criticism, saying KIEV checks its programming carefully. For example, Ronald Beaton says, the station recently refused to run a promotion on investing in a Liberian gold mine because it sounded suspect. But the brothers add that no media outlet is perfect when it comes to screening advertisers. Says Fred Beaton: &quot;This is KIEV radio, not KIEV detective agency.&quot;    Block programming dates to the beginning of radio, and it is estimated that hundreds of the country's 10,000 stations currently sell significant amounts of time. Brokered-time stations tend to be small, privately owned and unconcerned about ratings. What counts is how many listeners respond to the pitches being made. KIEV's average audience, for instance, is estimated at 12,000, barely one-tenth that of top-rated music stations in the area.    Because of minimal production costs, brokered-time radio stations can be &quot;incredibly profitable,&quot; with margins that exceed even successful music stations, says David Schutz, managing director of ComCapital Group, a New York-based investment banking concern that specializes in broadcast properties.    KIEV, which appears to be one of the most established and successful block stations in the country, switched to brokered time from a music format in the mid-1970s because &quot;we couldn't compete,&quot; says Ronald Beaton. Each week, several dozen buyers purchase time on KIEV, typically in 15-minute chunks, at a rate of up to $1,200 an hour. Recent shows have included everything from Teledyne Inc. seeking job candidates to a man holding out the promise of better living and health through negative ionization machines. Another on-the-air personality says he draws &quot;genograms&quot; -- genetic diagrams of individuals -- to treat cancer, angst and other ills.    A big buyer of time lately has been Franz Bader, a professional seminar giver. In 1979, Mr. Elkins's consumer fraud office sued Mr. Bader in state court here for allegedly making financial promises to investors that could only be realized through violations of state law. Mr. Bader agreed to a permanent injunction against future misrepresentations, though he says he did nothing wrong. &quot;My attorney convinced me it was uneconomical to go to court&quot; to fight the charges, he says.    These days on KIEV, he recommends investments in restaurant franchises. If the investor chooses wisely, Mr. Bader says, there is almost no risk of failure, and after-tax returns of up to 700% over 10 years are possible. Mr. Bader tells listeners there are many companies offering such arrangements and invites them to free seminars to learn more.    At a seminar and in a later interview, the only company Mr. Bader would name was American Restaurant Enterprises, a local firm that had a representative at the seminar passing out business cards. Mr. Bader and American Restaurant say they have no formal relationship.    American Restaurant's franchise offerings hardly seem to fit Mr. Bader's low-risk description. Some franchises are in a Canadian restaurant chain, O'Toole's Group Inc.; the chain's own president says he isn't sure it will catch on in the U.S. Others are in an American Restaurant chain that has yet to open any outlets.    Sidney Barlowe, another promoter, had a show on KIEV from late 1979 to early 1984. Among the investments he touted were precious metals sold by Bullion Reserve of North America, which turned out to be one of the biggest commodity frauds of the past decade. Mr. Elkins, of the attorney general's office, says the state was looking into taking criminal action against Mr. Barlowe, but the promoter died.    KIEV's program director, Dick Sinclair, says Mr. Barlowe &quot;was the first business guy we had on. We've learned a lot since then.&quot;    KIEV's programming in 1985 and 1986 included investment advice from R.G. Reynolds. Mr. Reynolds is under investigation for suspected fraud in connection with, among other things, a gold-investment plan he promoted on KIEV and elsewhere, according to search-warrant affidavits filed by postal inspectors in U.S. District Court here.    Mr. Reynolds denies any wrongdoing and says he plans to sue the government for its &quot;illegal and unconstitutional&quot; harassment of him. Because of the controversy, he says, he left KIEV by &quot;mutual agreement.&quot; His show still airs on a block-time station in Orange County, Calif.    Then there is the case of Edward &quot;Buz&quot; Schwartz, who hosted another investment show until March 1987. William Potts Jr., a KIEV lawyer, says he called state securities regulators to complain about Mr. Schwartz using his show on KIEV to raise money to buy a competing local radio station. State regulators say they are investigating the fund-raising efforts.    Mr. Schwartz, through his lawyer, denies any wrongdoing. He has filed suit in Los Angeles County Superior Court against KIEV and the Beatons, charging unfair competition and libel. He seeks damages of at least $35 million. KIEV, meanwhile, is suing Mr. Schwartz in the same court for $35,000 in allegedly unpaid bills. Lawyers for each side say the other's charges are without merit.    Some medical advice on KIEV also has drawn scrutiny. Kurt W. Donsbach, who bought time on KIEV from 1983 to 1985, had pleaded guilty in 1971 in an Orange County municipal court to practicing medicine without a license. In 1973, in the same court, he pleaded no contest to a charge of selling an unapproved drug. He was fined both times.    On KIEV, Mr. Donsbach promoted a product called Orachel. In 1985, the Food and Drug Administration ordered Mr. Donsbach to stop marketing Orachel on the ground that he was making unsubstantiated claims about its ability to do such things as help unclog arteries.    James Kenney, a local nutritionist, says he contacted KIEV to warn it of Mr. Donsbach's past. &quot;I was just dismissed out of hand,&quot; says Mr. Kenney, a board member of the National Council Against Health Fraud, a watchdog group. The Beatons say they don't recall hearing from Mr. Kenney and weren't aware of Mr. Donsbach's legal troubles.    Mr. Donsbach says that authorities pursued him on &quot;nitpicking&quot; matters and that he is unaware of any improper health claims about Orachel. He says he is now the administrator of a hospital in Mexico. </TEXT></DOC>