<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0052 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON   </DATELINE><TEXT>   Reagan administration officials prepared testimony for Congress last November that was so misleading regarding the U.S. role in arm sales to Iran that the State Department's legal adviser said he would resign if it were given.    The protest by Abraham Sofaer, a former federal judge, was made directly to the Justice Department, according to sources familiar with the House and Senate inquiry into the Iran-Contra affair. Mr. Sofaer succeeded in forcing corrections, the sources said, but investigators believe the incident also shows there was a concerted effort by some officials to contain the scandal and obscure the White House's early role in the arms sales.    The behind-the-scenes controversy focused on testimony written by Central Intelligence Agency and White House officials for former CIA Director William Casey to be delivered to House and Senate Intelligence Committees last Nov. 21, as the scandal was starting to unfold in public. The prepared text was intensely reviewed by the administration, and a major issue was the White House's knowledge of a shipment of Hawk antiaircraft missiles to Iran in November 1985.    The sale was negotiated initially by Israeli middlemen, but came to involve CIA personnel as well as the National Security Council staff. The cargo was described in internal NSC messages as &quot;oil driling equipment,&quot; but its true identity was known to the administration, including eventually the State Department.    Despite this record, sources say a late draft of Mr. Casey's text was written to indicate that no one in the U.S. government had known weapons were in the shipment, which took place weeks before a formal authorization was signed by President Reagan in January 1986. Mr. Sofaer protested that the prepared testimony amounted to &quot;lying,&quot; according to a source familiar with his account, and the legal adviser took his concerns to Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper at the Justice Department.    Mr. Cooper, who was instrumental in seeing that the text was changed, is scheduled to appear publicly this week, and his testimony will give more detail on the drafting process in the White House last fall. Both he and Mr. Sofaer have been questioned privately by the staff of the committees investigating, among other things, the sale of U.S. arms to Iran and the diversion of profits to Nicaraguan insurgents, known as Contras.    The legal adviser declined to make any comment this weekend, but sources said it was in his initial conversation with Mr. Cooper last November that Mr. Sofaer said he would resign if Mr. Casey's testimony wasn't revised. &quot;It wasn't a threat,&quot; said one person familiar with Mr. Sofaer's account. &quot;It was, 'If we start getting into lying, I'm out.'&quot;    While modified, Mr. Casey's testimony wasn't fully forthcoming even after the protest, according to intelligence sources. The director said only that the CIA didn't know the true contents of the November 1985 shipment at the time -- a claim that has since proven to be incorrect but which also disguises the fact that others in the administration were fully aware of what was happening.    As the Iran-Contra proceedings resume this week, the House and Senate committees are still uncertain whether they will hear soon from the man that many expected would be the star witness this summer, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North. A federal judge last week approved a grant of limited immunity seeking to compel testimony by the former White House aide, but no resolution has been reached as to how Col. North will be questioned.    Brendan Sullivan, the Marine officer's attorney, informed the committees last week that his client wouldn't submit to private questioning. In a meeting last Thursday, Mr. Sullivan also proposed a series of conditions governing the time and order of any public testimony by Col. North. The legal maneuvering casts doubt as to whether Col. North intends to testify to Congress, and a first test comes tomorrow, when he has been ordered to turn over relevant documents, including personal notebooks he kept of his activities.    Failure to comply is expected to lead to contempt proceedings. Lawmakers are eager to avoid any prolonged standoff, but there is increasing resentment that Col. North is now dictating to the same Congress he circumvented in the Iran-Contra operation.    This institutional concern has blurred early differences between the House and Senate committee leadership in how to respond, and the issue could go to the White House if lawmakers ask President Reagan to order the Marine officer to comply. </TEXT></DOC>