<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880322-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Banking's Blue Blood Learns Some Blues --- J.P. Morgan Has Rating, Mexico Debt Setbacks </HL><AUTHOR> Robert Guenther and Peter Truell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JPM </CO><IN> BNK </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At J.P. Morgan andamp; Co.'s two lavish holiday parties this past December, employees were taken aback by the downbeat remarks from Lewis T. Preston, chairman of the venerable banking concern.    Alluding to Morgan's disappointing 1987 earnings, the gruff 61-year-old ex-Marine concluded by saying that he was glad to see employees' spouses were present because &quot;now you'll know why your spouses will be working late at night next year.&quot;    The following evening, Mr. Preston went to some length to make sure that all party guests could hear him because, according to employees' accounts, he said that the previous evening &quot;some people didn't hear me and went home happy.&quot;    Mr. Preston's tough talk -- although he says some of it was in jest -- was prescient. So far, the new year is shaping up as a difficult one for the banking industry's nonpareil: Last month, Moody's Investors Service Inc. knocked the parent company's triple-A credit rating down a notch, leaving the U.S. banking system without a top-rated banking company. More recently, a bold and risky attempt to relieve Mexico of some of its foreign bank debt fell far short of expectations.    These are but two of the recent setbacks for the banking blue blood. Among others: the jailing of a former senior officer for fraud, trading losses of between $20 million and $80 million on certain securities in London, and the failure of a move into big-time takeover financing.    All of this comes as the staid, 150-year-old institution is adopting a more aggressive posture in investment banking and in seeking solutions to the foreign debt crisis.    A Morgan executive concludes that the bank is at a crossroads as it deals with its problems: &quot;Either we will freeze or move ahead.&quot;    Morgan's difficulties illustrate how pervasive the general erosion of profits and businesses has become for the U.S. banking industry. A decade ago, corporate giants began cutting back their bank borrowings and turned to cheaper debt in the securities markets.    Banks reacted by cutting profit margins on loans and taking greater credit risks. But unlike other banks, Morgan lacked a big consumer banking business on which it could fall back.    Rather than cede its corporate customers to securities firms, Morgan in 1979 shifted its strategy to be a complete financial adviser to corporations. That meant beefing up its mergers and acquisitions department and making direct placements of commercial paper in this country, and underwriting securities in Europe. To become truly competitive with Wall Street firms, Morgan has continued to push Congress for broader securities powers.    But by being both commercial and investment banker, Morgan increasingly is being stung recently by problems facing both businesses; the need to reserve for doubtful Third World loans, and the hair-trigger volatility of rapidly changing global securities markets, have sapped earnings.    Morgan staked a big chunk of its prestige on a program to help ease the foreign debt crisis. The program, co-sponsored by Mexico and the U.S. Treasury, aimed to relieve Mexico of as much as $10 billion of its $53 billion foreign bank debt. Creditor banks could exchange some loans at a discount for new bonds backed by U.S. Treasury securities.    But relatively few banks espoused the program. As a result, when the swaps were tallied earlier this month, Mexico's bank debt was pared by a relatively small $1.1 billion.    Despite its troubles, Morgan remains the envy of most competitors. It was the only U.S. money-center bank to be among the world's 10 most profitable banks in a recent ranking by Ibca Ltd., a London bank credit analyst. Daniel P. Davison, chairman of U.S. Trust Co. and a former Morgan executive, observes, &quot;Morgan is the leader in the world of banking. Still, it has got a terrific job ahead of it.&quot;    Although its assets are the fifth largest among U.S. banking concerns, Morgan considers itself a cut above its competitors. It takes pride in its storied past. And in the words of the founder's son, J.P. Morgan Jr., the bank does &quot;only first-class business, and that in a first-class way.&quot;    Morgan certainly has had its share of first-class business. It reorganized the nation's rail system, halted the Panic of 1907, helped create the U.S. Federal Reserve System and was the munitions agent for Britain and France in World War I. Founder J.P. Morgan's power was so legendary that the House Banking Committee in 1912 conducted hearings into whether a &quot;money trust&quot; headed by Mr. Morgan effectively controlled the U.S. economy.    Long noted for Brahmin stuffiness, Morgan managers once were known to upbraid employees for such things as wearing yellow socks and yellow ties. Men were expected to wear their suit jackets not only at their desks but also to the restroom. &quot;If you didn't, you were considered pretty liberal,&quot; one former executive says.    Times have changed at Morgan. Its WASP-ish air has faded as employees today are scrutinized more for their contribution to the bottom line. For the first time ever, Morgan, which has emphasized its &quot;family&quot; atmosphere, is cutting jobs, and in a few cases dismissing or prematurely retiring staff members. &quot;In a quiet way, people are being urged to look elsewhere,&quot; a Morgan executive says. &quot;It isn't a sinecure for anyone.&quot;    Some trappings of the old Morgan atmosphere linger: free lunches for employees, no alcohol in the executive dining room and easy access for employees to top executives.    No one symbolizes Morgan's increased aggressiveness better than Chairman Preston, who, a friend says, &quot;would rather knock down a door than open it.&quot; Mr. Preston acknowledges that Morgan has become more aggressive to make its mark in new businesses. &quot;I'd be crazy to say we hadn't changed,&quot; he says.    Says Mr. Preston: &quot;Our business is more competitive. We're more competitive. It's damned exciting.&quot;    Even Mr. Preston hasn't been spared in the cost-cutting drive. In the sitting room off his office, an antique clock has stopped and burnt-out lightbulbs remain in the chandelier. Morgan no longer assigns an employee to such housekeeping tasks.    On its face, Morgan's new $800 million headquarters, under construction at 60 Wall Street, would seem to belie the bank's cost-cutting. The glass-and-stone tower is a sharp contrast to the stolid, stone headquarters at 23 Wall Street.    But even though the flashy exterior of the new building clashes with the conservative Morgan image, it too represents a cost savings. When Morgan bought the site, the previous owner had city approvals for the design. Mr. Preston says that by accepting that design, Morgan was spared a three-year review of a new design by the city.    As the pressures have mounted on Morgan, Mr. Preston has taken a greater hand in the bank's day-to-day affairs. Mr. Preston's brand of toughness has found its way into Morgan's approach to getting new business. To gain a foothold in the lucrative mergers and acquisitions game, Morgan ran an advertising campaign trumpeting its acumen. The ads, which ran after the stock market crash, suggested that the bank's securities-firm competitors were on somewhat less than solid ground in the wake of Black Monday. The bank also has undercut Wall Street firms' rates to win business, something it wouldn't dream of doing in fields it dominates.    The results have been mixed. The bank won feathers for its cap when it recently advised PaineWebber Inc. on the sale of a 20% stake in the securities firm to Japan's Yasuda Mutual Life Insurance Co., and it was hired to help Irving Bank Corp. defend itself against Bank of New York Co., a hostile suitor.    But when Morgan advised Hoffmann-La Roche andamp; Co. on its $4.2 billion hostile bid for Sterling Drug Inc., for whom Morgan is stock transfer agent, Sterling was furious. The drug company's chairman, John M. Pietruski, wrote to Mr. Preston, saying he was &quot;shocked and dismayed by what I consider to be Morgan bank's unethical conduct in aiding and abetting a surprise raid on one of its longtime clients.&quot;    After Eastman Kodak Co. made a successful higher bid for Sterling, beating out Hoffmann-La Roche, other investment bankers faulted Morgan for setting too low an initial offer price, thus failing to preempt competing bids. Hoffmann-La Roche hasn't commented publicly, but Dennis Weatherstone, Morgan's president, says that the company is &quot;very pleased&quot; with the job Morgan did.    As for Sterling, Mr. Preston says the conflict &quot;has been blown out of proportion. The facts are somewhat different than they have been portrayed in the press. Mr. Pietruski's letter, I suspect, was drafted by some craftsmen quite familiar with the merger business.&quot;    When Morgan became Hoffmann-La Roche's adviser, he says, &quot;we immediately called Mr. Pietruski to offer to expedite the removal of their stock transfer business. It's kind of interesting that we're still their transfer agent.&quot;    The criticism is part of the price of being in the mergers and acquisition business, Mr. Preston says, adding, &quot;Sure, it's going to happen again, alas.&quot;    The new emphasis on merger activity has produced tensions between investment bankers and traditional commercial bankers. Prior to the combining of the two departments last year, commercial bankers complained that job titles in the capital-markets division were being inflated above theirs to allow more investment bankers to qualify for Morgan's lucrative stock-option program.    Mr. Preston acknowledges that the changes created tensions, but he adds that is now behind the bank. &quot;My perception is that we're through that stroke. We have to be competitive. It was an emotional problem for an institution like this one.&quot;    The loss of the triple-A credit rating with Moody's isn't expected to raise Morgan's borrowing costs, since its borrowings are done through its Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., which retains its triple-A rating. Moreover, another major rating concern, Standard andamp; Poor's Corp., recently reaffirmed the parent company's top rating.    But what worries Morgan is that the downgrading will handicap it in competing against European banks. Says Mr. Preston: &quot;The thing that troubles me is: People in Europe aren't going to understand this. They don't know that there are two rating agencies or the difference between the bank and the holding company.&quot; Will foreign competitors use the downgrading against Morgan? &quot;Absolutely,&quot; says Mr. Preston.    Morgan's reputation was tarnished with the disclosure in 1986 that Antonio Gebauer, at the time a senior vice president, diverted $8 million of Brazilian clients' money to his own use. Last year, he began serving a 3 1/2-year term in a federal prison for tax evasion and bank fraud. The scandal spurred Morgan to reassign a half-dozen senior officials.    Senior Morgan executives accept some responsibility for Mr. Gebauer's actions. &quot;Clearly, we had some tightening up to do in our controls,&quot; Mr. Weatherstone says. &quot;We tried to learn from it in the broadest sense.&quot;    Morgan last year sustained losses estimated at $20 million to $80 million in London's perpetual floating-rate note market. The Bank of England, Britain's central bank, had encouraged banks to drop market-making in the notes, and many banks heeded the warning. But Morgan was still in the market when the Japanese banks, the biggest buyers of the notes, withdrew.    Mr. Preston says Morgan erred. &quot;We had trading limits. We had underwriting limits,&quot; he says. &quot;My perception is that our mistake was that we should have been more concerned what the market was. We should have recognized (that) when the Japanese move, they move in a herd.&quot;    Despite stressful times, past and current Morgan executives speak glowingly of the institution. One corporate finance executive says, &quot;Morgan still has a set of values that isn't seen on Wall Street -- it's an atmosphere of people working with each other rather than against each other. A lot of people are still happy to be here.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>