<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880617-0181 </DOCNO><HL> Mobutu, Take Early Retirement </HL><AUTHOR> Michael G. Schatzberg </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><IN> FIN </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Zaire's President Mobutu Sese Seko received a warm welcome at the White House last week. And why not? Zaire is one of Africa's most populous and important countries. South Africa excepted, no other African country has absorbed more high-level U.S. attention. Centrally located, Zaire borders on nine states and is a storehouse of strategic minerals.    Moreover, Mr. Mobutu's anti-Soviet credentials are impeccable. His troops fought the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola and the Cubans in Angola in 1975, and he aided the Central Intelligence Agency in providing covert assistance both to Holden Roberto's National Front for the Liberation of Angola in the 1970s and to Jonas Savimbi's Unita in the 1980s. Zairian forces twice rallied to the colors in Chad, showing that Mr. Mobutu opposes Libya's actions there. Such moves score points with the administration, and Mr. Mobutu is an honored visitor.    Congress sees things differently, however. For the past 10 years the House Subcommittee on Africa, first under Stephen Solarz (D., N.Y.) and now under Howard Wolpe (D., Mich.), has annually assaulted White House requests for aid appropriations. It has highlighted Zaire's extraordinary corruption and Mr. Mobutu's disdain for human rights and democratic values. Last September Ronald Dellums (D., Calif.) introduced a resolution calling for the prohibition of all but humanitarian aid to Zaire. The primary purpose of the Dellums bill, which has little chance of passage, is to educate Congress and the public. The administration opposes it.    Some background is necessary to evaluate properly this disagreement between Congress and the administration. When Mr. Mobutu seized power in 1965 the U.S. facilitated his coup, thinking he was the one man who could end proliferating rebellions and secessions. After all, a friendly, resurgent state intent on development would be the best insurance against Soviet involvement.    From 1965 through the early 1970s, Mr. Mobutu enjoyed both popularity and legitimacy. Weary from years of unending strife, many Zairians applauded Mr. Mobutu's coup. Mr. Mobutu rapidly consolidated power by ending legislative autonomy, subordinating highly politicized provinces to the central government, instituting single-party rule, and naming all key officials in both state and party. These were years of economic rebirth and relative domestic peace.    But the moon had a dark side. By the mid-1970s the glowing tributes had degenerated into a personality cult, and Mr. Mobutu's judgment could no longer be questioned. The president's words became the law of the land. Dissent was not tolerated; opposition was suppressed. Ill-advised economic policies, grandiose and unnecessary development schemes, the neglect of agriculture, skyrocketing international debt (today at least $6.3 billion), and a precipitous decline in the price of copper (since reversed) all combined to create a staggering economic decline. As Mr. Mobutu and his cronies used the power of the state to amass personal wealth, corruption flourished.    With the decline in the legitimacy of his regime, Mr. Mobutu has come to depend increasingly on coercion to maintain power. The army, civil guard, party youth wing and political police have created a reign of terror. Arbitrary arrest, detention without trial, and extrajudicial executions are all too common. An opposition movement, the Union for Democracy and Social Progress (UDPS) , has grown but is harried ceaselessly.    In 1977 and 1978 Zairian dissidents based in Angola invaded Shaba Province and nearly toppled the regime. Mr. Mobutu was saved only because his friends in the West, the U.S. included, provided troops and logistical support. The U.S. wrongly perceived the invasions as part of the East-West struggle, not as a local conflict resulting from Zairian dissatisfaction with Mr. Mobutu's oppression.    U.S. policy toward Zaire has long been counterproductive. The valid goal of countering Soviet expansion has led to two errors of political analysis. The first is the overestimation of Soviet capabilities and intentions while confusing opposition to Mr. Mobutu with communism. Mr. Mobutu's anti-Soviet credentials enable him to paint his opponents, falsely, as Kremlin-inspired revolutionaries.    Policy makers have assumed correctly, however, both that instability impedes socio-economic development and that a decent life is the surest defense against Soviet expansionism. Their failure -- the second error -- has been an inability to pinpoint the source of Zaire's instability. Since the mid-1970s, Mr. Mobutu's tyranny has been far more responsible than the Soviet Union for promoting instability and poverty in Zaire.    Since the opposition faces West, not East, the U.S. has the opportunity to distance itself from Mr. Mobutu without fearing a pro-Soviet regime. The U.S. should recognize that Mr. Mobutu's periodic attempts to clean house are mere window dressing, and reform has no future while he remains in power. It should therefore encourage Mr. Mobutu to take early retirement as an &quot;elder statesman.&quot; (Sierra Leone's Siaka Stevens and Senegal's Leopold Senghor provide the prototypes.) As part of the retirement &quot;package,&quot; U.S. policy should pressure Mr. Mobutu to permit genuine elections and legalize the UDPS.    Failing this, the U.S. should terminate all aid and push the international financial community to do the same. It should also encourage its allies, especially Belgium and France, to adopt similar measures. The Dellums bill is thus a step in the right direction.    There are limits to what U.S. policy can accomplish. Mr. Mobutu is unlikely to retire gracefully, and Belgium and France probably will not cooperate. Moreover, Mr. Mobutu's dependence is far from total. From 1981 to 1985, for example, arms transfers to Zaire totaled $150 million, with the U.S. supplying only $30 million.    Ultimately Zairians will have to solve their own problems, but U.S. policy should help them do so. At present, U.S. political, military and economic support limits the range of possibilities Zairians enjoy. Rightly or wrongly (but most often rightly), Zairians believe they can do nothing about their plight because Mr. Mobutu's friends in Washington will stifle any initiative in the direction of political change.    Assuming Mr. Mobutu rejects the proposals listed above, the U.S. must recognize that perhaps the best thing it can do after terminating support is, quite simply, nothing. Since it remains in America's long-term interests to maintain cordial relations with Zaire, the U.S. urgently needs to disengage itself from Mr. Mobutu's embrace. In this manner it may yet avoid an anti-American backlash and establish credibility with Mr. Mobutu's successors. Let us not repeat the mistakes of Iran in Zaire.    ---   Mr. Schatzberg, who teaches African studies at the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins, is author of &quot;The Dialectics of Oppression in Zaire&quot; (Indiana University, 1988). </TEXT></DOC>