<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880427-0096 </DOCNO><HL> High-Tech Gear Draws Cries of 'Uncle' --- Electronic Goods Are Loaded With Extras Few Can Understand </HL><AUTHOR> Paul B. Carroll (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ELE AUT </IN><TEXT>   BMW's top-of-the-line 735i cars are loaded with slick electronics. But they're so complicated that BMW of North America Inc. provides a 40-minute videotape on how to use them. Instructions for locking and unlocking the car alone take more than three minutes of the tape.    A turn or two of the key can lock all the doors, the trunk and the gas cap without closing the sunroof or windows; lock the doors, trunk and gas cap while closing the sunroof and windows; or lock the car so it stays locked even if a thief smashes the window and lifts the lock button. (The tape cautions against using this last feature with passengers inside.)    People pay good money for such exotic features all the time. They buy microwave ovens that can be programmed to start cooking when no one is around, even though the whole point of the appliance is that it can cook anything in minutes. They buy TV sets that can show nine channels simultaneously. They buy videocassette recorders that can be programmed to record shows a year in advance or move through a tape a frame at a time -- useful, no doubt, for the viewer who wants to study the directorial nuances of &quot;The Flintstones.&quot;    Who really needs all this? Who even understands it? Companies add such features to outglitz their competitors and, quite simply, because it's easy to add them. All it takes is rejiggering a few of the tiny connections in the powerful microprocessors at the heart of the electronics. The results, however, are often beyond the skills of even the most technically adept.    &quot;The product designers have pushed the technology out to the frontier, but it's way ahead of the consumer,&quot; says R. David Pittle, technical director at Consumers Union of U.S. Inc., the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine. Adds David Horowitz, the host of a syndicated television show on consumer products, &quot;The level of frustration out there is incredible.&quot;    Some companies, particularly makers of VCRs, have recognized the problem and are starting to compete based on how easy their products are to use. Panasonic Co., for instance, sells a device that lets people program their VCRs by running a scanner over the appropriate bar code on a weekly calendar. A number of other makers have their VCRs run users through a series of questions that appear either on the TV screen or on a remote-control device.    But for most people, product researchers say, the typical new gadget might as well be a Rubik's cube. Peter McWilliams, an author who has written books on consumer electronics, says that for years he would ask his mother to tape television shows for him when he traveled. Eventually, he discovered that she knew how to tape something only as it was being broadcast. &quot;She would stay home or set alarm clocks to wake up in the middle of the night to tape these things and send them to me,&quot; he recalls.    Leonard Goldberg, president and chief operating officer of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., confesses that, while he thinks electronic devices are great stuff, he doesn't have a clue about how to use the array of videocassette and stereo equipment in his office. &quot;It's my job security,&quot; jokes his assistant, Randee Trabitz, noting that Mr. Goldberg's position requires him to view tapes all the time. &quot;I actually know how to use the stuff.&quot; She adds that her predecessor tried to show her how to use the equipment, &quot;but she didn't know how to use it, either.&quot;    Among cars, the Buick Riviera and Reatta have drawn abuse in the automotive press for their computerized dashboards, which have touch-sensitive screens that let the driver call up menus to control everything in the car. Critics say the buttons on the screens are small and the menus complicated, and point out that the user is usually otherwise occupied. Csaba Csere, technical director at Car and Driver magazine, says drivers of the cars will sometimes try to lower the air conditioning and wind up turning on the radio.    And on the subject of car radios, Mr. Csere says they drive him crazy because they now can have as many as 20 or 30 similar buttons, added in the name of increasing the radios' capabilities. He says that, while merely trying to tune in a station, he has drifted off the road.    Personal-computer companies, facing criticism about the complexity of their machines, say they want to make them as easy to use as telephones -- but telephones may soon meet them halfway. A common refrain these days among otherwise self-confident executives at the end of a phone conversation is: &quot;I'll try to transfer you to my secretary, but I really don't understand how to use this thing and I may lose you. Here goes nothing. . . .&quot;    Newcomers to this newspaper's New York bureau get a 3/8-inch-thick manual on using their phones and are told to get training from an operator. It's possible, for instance, to forward calls to another extension and have that phone ring; to forward calls and have it not ring; to have a call placed automatically when a busy extension becomes free; or to have one's own phone ring when the extension becomes free. This reporter's phone has 52 buttons, half of which have never been touched.    Answering machines provide another level of confusion, bewildering users with their array of codes and remote-call-collection features (and by assigning such functions as fast forward to buttons with labels like &quot;Memo&quot;). In addition, as answering machines have recently found their way into personal-computer systems, the potential has been created for even more mischief.    Alice Kahn, an author and syndicated columnist, says she once tried sending information from her computer over the phone line to a colleague of her husband's. When Ms. Kahn, a computer enthusiast, failed, her husband told her to give up. When she persisted, an argument ensued that &quot;called into question our whole marriage,&quot; she says. &quot;The guy called my husband the next day and said, 'Well, you didn't access my modem, but you did access my phone-answering machine, and I have an hour of you and your wife arguing.'&quot;    Customers tend to take these defeats quietly, blaming themselves rather than the machines. Norman Lear, the television executive who created such hits as &quot;All in the Family,&quot; says his Act III Communications bought two movie chains partly because he thinks people are getting fed up with all the electronics they deal with at home and will start going to more movies. Asked about his own experience, the outspoken Mr. Lear responds meekly: &quot;When I use my camera three times a year, someone has to show me how to use it, and VCRs are impossible. But it's not that they're not simple. It's that I'm simple.&quot;    Mr. Horowitz, the TV-show host, argues that companies add features more to justify price increases than to help the customer. He says these electronics complicate devices so much that he has been forever repairing his own phone system, answering machine, alarm system, pool heaters, stereo, dishwasher, typewriter and heating and air-conditioning system.    &quot;I'm ready to say, 'Let's go back to the Conestoga wagons,'&quot; he says. &quot;Put in a little grease, make sure the spokes are tight, and let's roll.&quot;    Companies respond that additional features offer more options to customers, and that if customers don't want the features they don't have to buy them. (Even consumer activists concede customers let themselves get sucked into buying more goodies than they need.)    Manufacturers also contend that, as such items as phone-answering machines mature, they will become more standard, so learning to use one will enable people to use other models. And as people become more familiar with the technologies, they'll handle them better.    But consumer researchers say that modern devices can, and will, continue to defeat even the most technically oriented for years to come. Witness what happened when a dozen of the personal-computer industry's leading technonerds went bowling at a conference in February. None of them -- not even Bill Joy, the technical wizard at Sun Microsystems Inc., or Steve Ballmer, the Microsoft Corp. executive responsible for its complex operating-system software -- could figure out how to use the automatic scoring system. The woman who ran the lanes had to show them how to program it. </TEXT></DOC>