<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880510-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Texas Air's Track Record </HL><SO> </SO><CO> TEX </CO><IN> AIR </IN><TEXT>   Re your April 7 front-page story &quot;House of Mirrors&quot;: The major theme is that Texas Air has created a one-way financial street running from the subsidiaries to the parent company and thereby advantaged itself at the expense of its operating subsidiaries. A thorough analysis produces a much different picture.    Texas Air is a traditional holding company -- very similar to holding companies of other airlines and hundreds of U.S. corporations. Texas Air was established to facilitate the expansion of its subsidiaries in the rapidly changing environment brought about by airline deregulation.    There are numerous examples of Texas Air's financial assistance to the subsidiaries that controvert the article's thesis. Texas Air has, for example, provided the financial backing for Continental to acquire more than 100 new quiet, fuel-efficient aircraft at prices below those available to Continental alone and at a time when Continental itself could not acquire the aircraft. In the process, Texas Air committed to guarantee more than $790 million of Continental's debt and leases.    Texas Air invested $365 million of equity capital in Continental during 1987; these funds were expended upon capital projects to restore Continental's service levels to those for which Continental has been justly proud. Texas Air invested another $130 million in Continental during the first quarter of 1988. Previously, Texas Air had guaranteed $110 million of Continental's debt, which allowed it to emerge from Chapter 11 in 1986 as one of the most successful reorganizations ever.    Financial assistance has not been limited to Continental. Pointedly, the article refers to the fact that Eastern just raised $200 million in cash but fails to note that Texas Air guaranteed $70 million of debt service.    ---   These facts illustrate that the article's main thesis -- that Texas Air has disregarded the needs of its subsidiaries -- is inaccurate. Texas Air has in fact structured its financial activities specifically to be able to assist its subsidiaries.    Let me turn to the article's fascination with &quot;upstreaming&quot; cash. Of the $150 million that Texas Air received from its subsidiaries in 1987, $120 million is for aircraft leased from Texas Air; virtually this entire amount is passed through by Texas Air to the owners of this equipment.    An additional $19 million of the fees to Texas Air are fuel-management fees. In 1987, Texas Air formed a fuel-management subsidiary that is reducing noticeably the cost of buying fuel for both Continental and Eastern. The bulk of that $19 million amount is earmarked for future capital programs such as the acquisition of inground oil reserves or refining capacity to benefit both Continental and Eastern.    Of the fees to Texas Air, all that remains is $14 million. These fees consist of standard holding-company charges for services rendered to the subsidiaries.    The article next chooses to classify $7 billion in lease-related liabilities as &quot;invisible&quot; on the balance sheet. These liabilities are disclosed in Note 4 to Texas Air's consolidated financial statement. Equally important, the story fails to point out that this type of treatment is standard in our business and approved by the accounting profession. USAir has, for example, approximately $5.8 billion of such obligations. These are not &quot;invisible&quot; to any knowledgeable financial institution.    There is also a theory espoused in the article that management is not subject to challenge. This conclusion seems to be premised on the fact that Jet Capital holds 1% of Texas Air's equity but 34% of the voting control. Based upon this fact, the authors conclude that Texas Air has a &quot;corporate defense that makes poison pills look like candy.&quot;    ---   There are a number of relevant points that this conclusion doesn't take into account. A 34% voting arrangement doesn't prevent a party from putting forth an attractive, bona fide financial offer for taking control of Texas Air. The provision in question simply prevents someone from assuming a minority position that would not be in the best interest of our shareholders. It ensures that in the event of a takeover attempt, shareholders will receive value when the stock is undervalued.    The Jet Capital voting preference was specifically approved by a majority of the Texas Air common stock voted on the subject -- other than those shares held by Jet Capital. In short, the voting preference is a hurdle to be gotten over in any takeover attempt; it is not a bar to a takeover attempt.    The authors make a point of classifying Frank Lorenzo's personal investment in Texas Air as &quot;virtually nil.&quot; This assertion overlooks the fact that he has a substantial investment in Jet Capital and thus indirectly in Texas Air. I would add that the other officers of Texas Air also hold significant investment positions in Texas Air that, of course, have sharply declined in value over the past year.    The authors claim that Mr. Lorenzo &quot;quietly&quot; pleaded for a better bond rating at a Standard andamp; Poor's presentation. As chief financial officer of Texas Air, I have attended every presentation that we have made and can't recall any such alleged occurrence.    The authors also intimated that asking debt holders of People Express to accept reduced terms was somehow an &quot;iron fist&quot; approach. It is a standard business practice to ask debt holders to accept a reduced amount when contemplating the acquisition of a failing company. The proposition is straightforward; if the acquired company is to shoulder the risk of the failing company, then its debt holders who would otherwise lose most, if not all, of their investment are better off entering into an agreement to receive less than the face value owed them. The federal government sanctioned a similar procedure in the recent First City Bank bailout.    The authors are critical of certain route transfers including the Miami-London route to Continental from Eastern. They fail to note that Eastern had lost millions of dollars on the route and ceased service for eight months before Continental applied for the route. In those intervening eight months, any carrier could have claimed the route; none did so.    There is one other notable route transfer -- Continental assumed Eastern's routes to Mexico. Eastern had not served Mexico for 18 months before Continental took over the service because of a dispute between Eastern and a Mexican union. This dispute and attendant service cessation (October 1985) predated Texas Air's acquisition of Eastern. After several trips to Mexico by Eastern executives, it was determined that there was no settlement in sight. Accordingly, service over these routes was undertaken by Continental.    Related to the route-transfer question is aircraft transfer. Contrary to popular expectation, there has been a net of only two aircraft transferred from Eastern to Continental. (Five DC-9-51s to Eastern, and one DC-10-30 and six A-300s to Continental.) All of these transactions were at fair market value.    One of the most noticeable inaccuracies is the description of the sale of System One. The authors claim that System One generated &quot;profits&quot; that merely subsidized Eastern's huge overall deficits prior to Texas Air's acquisition. System One was an integral part of Eastern, not a separate profit center. As best as can be determined, System One was not profitable at the time it was owned by Eastern. In the short period of time that System One has been owned by Texas Air, its net income has been $2 million.    The article also makes reference to $130 million in fees that Eastern now pays System One. The actual number is closer to $120 million but the more relevant point is that this is essentially only a pass through of expenses previously borne by Eastern. When Texas Air Corp. acquired System One, it also acquired System One expenses in the form of more than 2,000 employees, computer leases and other items. Thus, the $120 million is simply expenses that Eastern would have borne itself had it retained System One. It is merely an expense transfer not a windfall to Texas Air as the story implies.    ---   The authors next describe the transaction so as to leave the impression Texas Air underpaid for System One. It is true that these properties were valued by studies commissioned under Eastern's former management at $200 million based upon breakup value, but this assumed that Eastern no longer had a marketing and usage preference -- that it would no longer use the system.    Texas Air's purchase price was lower than $200 million because Eastern needed to maintain the operational preference and marketing relationship. The $100 million valuation and the method of payment were approved by one appraisal firm and two major investment houses. Also, the Texas Air note was convertible upon issuance into Texas Air stock. This issue was similar to securities that previously had been issued publicly and were routinely traded on the public market.    The article also makes critical reference to $25 million in debentures that Eastern purchased from Texas Air. In fact, the investment had a $30 million base value and a $25 million fair market value at the time of acquisition. Underlying this transaction is an investment bankers' opinion and the fact that Eastern could have sold these debentures at any time and realized full market value. Recently, these debentures have traded at a value of approximately $24 million and it is not to be forgotten that these securities had a 12% to 13% yield to maturity at the time of the transaction. (Lately, these securities have had a 20% current yield.) As such, this makes it an attractive investment for Eastern.    Finally, the article refers to the fact that Continental acquired Bar Harbor for $1.5 million and that Eastern made a $1 million payment to Continental in conjunction with this transaction. What is missing is the fact that Eastern, because of its route system, is the primary recipient of feed revenue from this relationship. The $1 million payment was in fact based upon the realization of this relationship.    Texas Air is a dedicated airline builder with a substantial track record. To date the 66,000 employees of the airlines whose jobs have been saved by Texas Air and the public who have saved billions in air fare on Continental have been principal beneficiaries of Texas Air's investment in its subsidiaries.    Robert Snedeker   Senior Vice President   Texas Air Corp.    Washington</TEXT></DOC>