<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880128-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID he would consult Central American leaders on Contra arms aid.    The president's proposal appears aimed at winning support for a $36 million package of aid to the Nicaraguan rebels that was presented to Congress. Included in the request is $3.6 million for arms and ammunition that would be held in abeyance until March 31. The president said he would consult with the leaders of Costa Rica, Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador on Nicaraguan compliance with a cease-fire before releasing the aid. Costa Rican President Arias said he opposes new aid to the rebels.    Sandinista and Contra leaders are to hold talks today. Rebel leaders unveiled a proposal calling for a cease-fire and formation of a provisional government.    ---   A SENATE PANEL VOTED, 14-0, for Kennedy's Supreme Court nomination.    The Judiciary Committee recommended that the full Senate vote to ratify the California U.S. appeals court judge's nomination to succeed Justice Powell, who resigned last year. Senators on the panel praised Kennedy as open-minded and an advocate of the constitutional right to privacy in contrast with last fall's acrimonious defeat of Judge Bork, the first of three Reagan nominees to fill the Supreme Court vacancy.    Senate Majority Leader Byrd said he would be willing to waive procedural requirements to allow a Senate vote on the nomination by tomorrow or Monday.    ---   Shultz met with two Palestinian leaders who urged him to back an international force to keep peace in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The secretary of state also discussed peace proposals with Egypt's President Mubarak and met with an envoy from Israeli Prime Minister Shamir, who urged him to help bring Jordan into peace talks.    ---   Shevardnadze said Moscow will have no say about who governs Afghanistan after a Soviet troop withdrawal. The foreign minister also said members of the Afghan leadership are free to move to the Soviet Union. Separately, a U.N. envoy seeking to arrange Afghanistan-Pakistan peace talks reported no progress following a visit to Kabul.    ---   A legal group charged that the FBI conducted a six-year investigation of organizations opposed to U.S. policies in Central America. The Center for Constitutional Rights said it obtained FBI files under the Freedom of Information Act. The FBI admitted an investigation into one group, but said it involved alleged criminal activity.    ---   A West German was kidnapped in Beirut, allegedly by a brother of TWA hijacking suspect Mohammed Hamadi. Another Hamadi brother is being tried in West Germany for two previous Beirut kidnappings. A Bonn official has told the court that a U.S. request to extradite Hamadi was refused because of the previous kidnappings.    ---   North Korea has emerged as the biggest threat to the Seoul Olympics following the easing of political tensions in South Korea and agreement by most Communist countries to attend the Games. One Asian diplomat says it is &quot;safe to assume&quot; there will be trouble from the North, possibly even terrorist incidents.    ---   Colombia's President Barco announced emergency measures to battle guerrillas and cocaine traffickers, who killed his attorney general this week, and mobilized the army to quell lawlessness. Barco said he would add 5,000 posts to the judiciary and act to stop criminals from gaining release from prison through legal stratagems.    ---   Taiwan's Lee Teng-hui was named acting chairman of the ruling Nationalist Party. The move ends speculation that a member of the party's old guard might get the job and leave Lee as a figurehead leader after he assumed the presidency following the death of Chiang Ching-kuo two weeks ago.    ---   NASA said it plans to launch the first post-Challenger space shuttle mission Aug. 4, two months later than it had previously planned. The space agency also said it plans to test-fire the rocket boosters three times before launching the Discovery.    ---   Medical researchers reported more evidence that a cancer virus is contaminating the nation's supply of banked blood. Some New York City hospital patients who had received multiple blood transfusions had been infected with HTLV-1. The presence of the virus in the blood supply poses a public health dilemma.    ---   A Soviet newspaper said public protests following the Chernobyl disaster have halted construction of a nuclear plant in Krasnodar, a city in the northern Caucasus.    ---   Strikes by air traffic controllers were ruled out by leaders of a new union that has enrolled 5,000 of the nation's 12,500 controllers. Union leaders, meeting in Atlanta to draft a constitution, said labor disputes would be settled within the &quot;legal framework,&quot; not through actions such as the 1981 strike that led to mass firings by Reagan.    ---   Two former secretaries of state endorsed the proposed treaty banning intermediate and shorter-range nuclear missiles and told a Senate panel weighing its ratification that it shouldn't be linked to cuts in conventional forces. Sen. Helms (R., N.C.) continued his attack on the accord, saying it allows Moscow to continue stockpiling warheads. </TEXT></DOC>