<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0154 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Jacob M. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just a few years ago, the idea that a major manufacturing company would guarantee its workers' jobs seemed ridiculous.    But in April 1986, National Steel Corp. did just that. It promised the United Steelworkers it wouldn't lay anybody off during the life of a new labor agreement, barring an economic &quot;disaster.&quot; In August, a Pacific Telesis Group unit made a similar guarantee to the Communications Workers of America, providing training for new positions if necessary.    And last month, the United Auto Workers secured what appeared to be the strongest job-security pact in this country yet: an agreement with Case IH, an agricultural and construction equipment maker and a unit of Tenneco Inc., to protect all of its current workers during the life of the contract no matter what happens, and a guarantee to replace most workers who retire.    Job-guarantee contracts are becoming more and more common, as unions increasingly shift their priorities to employment security from wages and working conditions. &quot;It's an important change in the nature of bargaining,&quot; says Harry Katz, an associate professor of collective bargaining at Cornell University. &quot;The work force is demanding it as a quid pro quo for pay concessions or work-rule concessions.&quot;    But while unions step up the campaign for that assurance, such pacts might not really give workers much in return for their sacrifices. Many companies offering job guarantees have scaled back so much that they probably don't plan any more cuts, anyway. Besides, a simple job guarantee treats the symptom while failing to address the fundamental economic changes eating away at those jobs.    Worse, some analysts say a job-guarantee contract could actually be counterproductive to a union's goal of preserving jobs. &quot;What may take place,&quot; says Harley Shaiken, a labor professor at the University of California at San Diego, &quot;is that the (companies) will maintain a relatively small core employment. If sales go up, they will farm out more work (to outside contractors). If sales go down, they will pull back&quot; from those contractors.    The idea of a job guarantee isn't new. Major Japanese manufacturers have long promised workers lifetime employment. A few U.S. corporations also have held that view; most notably, International Business Machines Corp. boasts that it hasn't laid off an employee in decades.    But the idea has spread quickly since the early 1980s recession and the continued erosion of the U.S. industrial base. Unions want to change the fundamental way companies look at workers to a fixed cost from a variable cost. If jobs disappear, they say companies should put workers in training, or give them non-traditional work in the plant or in the community. They argue that companies will get more cooperation from workers if those employees are assured that efforts to enhance efficiency won't eliminate their own jobs.    &quot;I think it's shortsighted for employers not to realize this is a mutual concern rather than (a concern) just for workers,&quot; says Stephen Schlossberg, a deputy undersecretary at the Labor Department and a former UAW official.    The UAW has had the most varied experience in job-security pacts over the past three years. In 1984, the union emerged from negotiations with General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. with a &quot;job bank.&quot; This essentially guarantees workers, whose jobs were eliminated for technology and productivity improvements and some other reasons, their full pay and benefits until another job opens up through attrition. If there is no job for them in the plant, they may end up doing jobs as diverse as charity work in the community. The union subsequently signed similar pacts with American Motors Corp. and Mack Trucks Inc.    At GM alone, more than 10,000 workers who otherwise would have lost their jobs have been placed in the &quot;bank&quot; over the past three years. But many union members complain it is too complicated. &quot;There's too much bureaucracy,&quot; says Stephen P. Yokich, the UAW vice president in charge of the union's Ford department. &quot;We have it set up on software on computers in some of the (union) locals to keep it current.&quot; He says that, rather than relying on a complicated program covering some workers when their jobs disappear, he would like a more direct guarantee such as maintaining a set number of jobs.    Strengthening and simplifying job security was the tack the UAW took after the auto negotiations, during its round of talks with agricultural equipment makers. In 1984, it signed an agreement with Navistar International Corp., ensuring that each machine produced has a set level of UAW content. Last year, the union signed a contract with Caterpillar Inc., guaranteeing 90% of the jobs in each plant, except for events such as plant closings. It got a similar contract earlier this year with Deere andamp; Co. after a long strike.    Last month, the UAW secured its strongest agreement yet, at Case. In that contract, the company agreed to protect all of its workers at each plant under all circumstances and said it wouldn't set a cap on how much the company would spend to keep workers active. Case also said it would, in most instances, hire one new person for every two that leave the company, and increase the number of protected employees if business picks up and it hires more people.    The union views those last two points as crucial because, unlike most other job-security programs, they protect the number of jobs, not just the people currently working for the company.    But job guarantees come at a price. In a 1984 agreement between the International Union of Electronic Workers and GM's Packard Electric division, the company promised current workers at the Warren, Ohio, plant their jobs for life. But the union local had to accept something that has long been anathema to unions -- a multi-tiered wage system, where new workers start out earning 55% of the amount veterans are paid, and reach parity only after 10 years.    In the Case agreement, the union gave up its traditional wage increase, and cut cost-of-living payments, in part to help offset directly the costs of the job-security programs. That contract also required substantial changes in work rules, such as eliminating job classifications. While many union officials say such rules often are antiquated and don't really help workers, some workers say the rules are important, hard-earned protections against what unions characterize as management abuses, such as so-called speed-ups in which a company tries to boost output by increasing the pace of production.    In part because of those trade-offs, the Case contract, hailed by the union leadership as a landmark achievement, received approval by the rank and file by the relatively thin margin of 56% to 44%.    Even with those sacrifices, workers still question the effectiveness of the programs, because most pacts themselves have clear limitations. For example, the &quot;job bank&quot; programs don't cover workers affected by market downturns. And earlier this year, when Caterpillar announced it would close a UAW-represented plant by 1988, some industry officials felt the job-security contract may have actually encouraged the action. This is because the job-guarantee contract requires extra payments for workers who are laid off, but not for workers affected by plant closings.    The Case contract, which has the fewest loopholes, still allows all plants to close for six weeks a year for &quot;inventory adjustments,&quot; which, along with regular vacation shutdowns, amounts to a potential production cut of more than 10% each year.    Similarly, most of the job-security provisions negotiated expire with the current contract. Consequently, some union officials fear companies will save up needed job reductions and simply implement them in one fell swoop at the end of the contract, rather than phasing them in gradually. For example, Ford in 1984 signed a no-plant-closing promise. That didn't prevent it, however, from announcing that three plants will close after the contract runs out this September.    It also isn't clear that, in a time of profound economic change, workers would be able to hold onto their &quot;guaranteed&quot; jobs. Audrey Freedman, an executive director of the U.S. Conference Board, an industry-supported, nonprofit economic research concern, says she once studied companies that adopted job-guarantee programs after World War II, and found that none of those programs still exists, because the companies' markets had changed so much. Even in Japan, the rise of yen in relation to the U.S. dollar has forced some companies that had promised otherwise to lay off workers.    Insisting that job guarantees can make a difference, unions are likely to keep pushing for them at other manufacturers. The UAW, for one, has made it clear that it would like stronger programs in national contract negotiations beginning next month at GM and Ford. &quot;We think the auto companies can handle it,&quot; says Bill Casstevens, the UAW vice president who negotiated the agreements with the agricultural equipment makers. &quot;They already have to set aside a reserve for capital expenditures and other things.&quot;    But the companies argue that job guarantees can only come from manufacturers with employment already at rock-bottom. Even the Case job-security provisions excluded 2,400 workers at three plants previously scheduled for closing. A Case official emphasizes that the agreement &quot;at this point in time made sense for Case. . . . We have just gone through a great deal&quot; of cuts. Adds one executive at a domestic auto maker, &quot;I don't feel we're at the bottom level of our employment -- Case could give this contract because they are.&quot;    Despite the potential flaws and limited applicability, many workers say, job-guarantee contracts are worth the peace of mind. &quot;Before, we were in limbo,&quot; says Tony Green, president of the UAW local representing the Caterpillar plant in Peoria, Ill. &quot;It makes a big difference to us.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>