<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890905-0086 </DOCNO><DD> = 890905 </DD><AN> 890905-0086. </AN><HL> The Politics of Waste Disposal@  ----@  By William D. Ruckelshaus </HL><DD> 09/05/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   The problem of solid-waste disposal in America is not that the industry does not know how to solve it. We know how to operate a system that would satisfy the most ardent environmentalist, and still allow us to make money. No, our problem has to do with values, public priorities and tradeoffs. Private enterprise is trying to mesh with a set of public processes, and there is sand in the gears.    More than a third of the nation's landfills will be full within the next decade. New York will exhaust its capacity in nine years, Los Angeles in six, and Philadelphia is out of capacity now, and must engage in continuous negotiations to dispose of its 800,000 tons per year. Why? Nobody wants garbage put down anywhere near where he lives, the &quot;not-in-my-backyard&quot; syndrome -- the dreaded NIMBY.    It has been argued that we can recycle waste and reduce waste at the source to such an extent that our need for disposal facilities will disappear. But this is pie in the sky. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that by the year 2000, 55% of municipal wastes will still have to be landfilled. That's down from 77.5% now, but that still means finding a place for an estimated 107 million tons of waste. Ten years ago landfill disposal commonly cost $5 to $10 a ton. Today, fees of $50 a ton are common and $140 is not unknown.    One response is to control costs by regulation -- that is, by treating the disposal industry like a utility and subjecting it to rate regulation. This is an even worse error than supposing we don't need more disposal capacity. In New Jersey, the state that has pursued the public-utility option most aggressively, the number of waste haulers has declined from about 2,300 in 1970 to less than 650 this year, demonstrating the truth that people will not stay in business if they can't make a living. Much New Jersey waste is going out of state. A recent governor's task force there has recommended deregulation of collection.    Free markets are not perfect, but they are efficient allocators of services. The U.S. waste-disposal system is such a system. But it is being blocked by the other great hinge of our free society, the right of our citizens to determine their own fate.    Why do Americans so resist disposal facilities? And why haven't officials responded more energetically to the NIMBY problem?    The questions are more complicated than they seem. Granted, a landfill is not a rose garden, but neither is a tire factory or a steel mill, and towns fight to get those. Perhaps it is the implied degradation associated with the word &quot;garbage.&quot; You often see letters in rural newspapers asking why those city folks can't take care of their own garbage. Less subtle is the fear that a nearby site will lower property values.    These problems are not helped by the typical absence of any substantive benefit offered to a community in return for accepting a waste-disposal facility, particularly from the standpoint of the community's elected leaders. Politically, there is no upside to supporting an incinerator or landfill in your district or town.    From the standpoint of the state there is a definite benefit -- indeed a necessity. Yet state governments have been extremely reluctant to use the brute-force approach, one without which we would have no interstate highway system. State officials don't want to seem like a Goliath beating down some rural David over garbage disposal.    But this does not explain why the states have not set up a workable process for selecting sites, explaining risks, and distributing benefits. This inaction means the states have delegated responsibility to localities without providing the incentives to make waste management possible.    There are a number of reasons for the absence of a political solution. Most important, it is hard for people to believe in the reality of the problem as long as the garbage is picked up every day and fees are a relatively small fraction of the average person's income.    A related reason is that much of American politics has become a kind of demonology. We are ever ready to tar the villain. It is much harder to find solutions when everyone shares a little of the blame, as is the case with waste generation. For example, while it was relatively easy to place air-pollution controls on factories, it has always been hard to influence individuals' driving habits -- now a more significant source of air pollution in many areas.    To get anything done in a free society three things are needed. First there has to be agreement on a set of values, some public consensus that there is a goal worth pursuing. Next must come a set of incentives, by which society can be seen to reward those who pursue the values and sanction those who do not. In market economies incentives usually involve money. Finally, institutions must be able to adopt the values and administer the incentives.    In the waste business, the values are in conflict, the incentives push mainly in the wrong direction, and the institutions are weak or nonexistent. We value, for example, the convenience of products such as disposable diapers and we value attractive packaging. We show this at the checkout counter, which is a powerful incentive for the people who supply such products. We also value the right of local people to make local land-use decisions, and we show this in public meetings and in the voting booth, which is a powerful incentive for people in political office.    The value of an efficient and fair waste-disposal system has not been as well articulated, and there are few incentives that support such a value. Disposal costs are rarely included product costs. People who produce lots of trash rarely are charged more than those who produce little -- and if they are, it's usually not enough to make them change their behavior.    Nor has the consumer faced much social pressure to generate less waste. Producers, on the other hand, give high priority to reducing the generation of waste -- especially hazardous waste. This again shows the power of appropriate incentives: in this case the money lost in the form of liability when the hazardous waste is improperly discarded.    The federal government's response to municipal waste has been focused almost exclusively on design standards for disposal facilities. Aside from these regulations and some research and technical assistance, the federal government believes that its major contribution will be in encouraging source reduction and recycling. This makes some sense, since it is the nation's single largest customer, and changes in its procurement standards could stimulate markets for recycled materials.    But after source reduction and recycling are implemented to their fullest, new capacity for the residue will still be needed. In a remarkable display of both humility and generosity, the federal government has decided to let the states and localities deal with the siting issue by themselves. They -- or, in the breach, industry -- can improve the way this is done.    Mechanisms must be established for local choice. The public, politicians and the media must be told of the risks of waste disposal or incineration and how they would be controlled, and the host community must share in the benefits from the facility. It should not be surprising that people are perfectly willing to endure something unpleasant if you pay them for it.    These principles were applied by ECOS Inc., a company (with which I was affiliated) based in Washington state. The state needs a hazardous-waste-handling facility -- as do many states. The company conducted a statewide screening that eliminated almost 80% of Washington's area, based on such criteria as sensitive lands and land uses, natural hazards, transportation accessibility, and historical or archaeological importance. Communities in the remainder of the state were then publicly asked if they might be interested in hosting the facility. A good number responded. After some initial discussion, informational meetings were held in nine of them.    The company helped interested communities form citizen advisory committees to represent the community at large and serve as liaisons to the firm. These committees negotiated proposals that included stringent environmental safeguards and substantial economic benefits for the community. This March, two towns put the proposals to a vote. In both places more than 60% of the voters favored accepting the proposal and allowing the facility to be opened in their community. The company is now doing the detailed geological workups, on the basis of which a single site will be selected. Only then will it begin work on a permit application. While this was done for a hazardous waste facility, a similar process would work for a municipal waste facility.    Here we have an example of a private firm making imaginative use of what is essentially a political process. Political leaders at the state level might well do the same. You may be able to take the garbage out of politics, but you can't take the politics out of garbage.    ---   Mr. Ruckelshaus, twice administrator of the EPA, is currently chairman and CEO of Browning-Ferris Industries, a world-wide waste-disposal company. </TEXT></DOC>