<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0140 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:Reclusive Archer Bags Prize Buck---By Michael Pearce</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Columbus, Ohio  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The walls in Max Shipley's suburban taxidermy shop are literally covered with big-game mounts, mostly white-tailed deer, all artistically preserved down to the most delicate detail. All are beautiful but all are overshadowed by a mount that hangs in the center of one wall. It instantly takes your eyes away from the rest, like a sparkling diamond on a tray of pearls.    The mount of the white-tailed buck is massive, starting at its broad shoulders out to where its 24-inch neck meets its head. And then there are the antlers that curve forward nearly 30 inches out over the coal-black nose, stopping a scant six inches from tip to tip.    The two main beams are thick, the color of old ivory and nearly two feet across at their widest. The rack sports a dozen well-sharpened points, some well over a foot long.    It is the kind of buck that fills the dreams of America's million-plus deer hunters, yet the magnitude of the animal is more than a matter of size. It is the story of the hunter, Bill Kontras, more than the hunted that makes this giant of a whitetail such a monument.    Bill Kontras was a very happy man a year ago. Mr. Kontras, a quiet man with simple tastes, was riding the crest from the previous bow season. He had taken an 11-point whitetail; the mount was hanging on the wall and venison still stocked his freezer.    But more important there was the feeling of satisfaction that swelled within the 34-year-old avid hunter. It had taken nine months of intensive scouting, often in subzero weather, to discover the buck's behavior patterns.    Unlike some sportsmen who boast of making long shots, Mr. Kontras reveled in the fact that the buck had passed a mere nine steps from his stand. Countless hours of practice had rewarded him with a humane, one-shot kill on the trophy whitetail.    For many hunters it could have been the buck of a lifetime. For Mr. Kontras it almost was.    Last May Mr. Kontras, whose tall, athletic physique shows his dedication to good health, noticed a swelling on his upper back. It was totally numb to the touch.    Tests were run and Mr. Kontras' fears confirmed. It was a malignant cancer. The doctors felt that his life could be saved but there were no promises about his left arm. Even if the limb, the one that held his coveted hunting bows, could be saved, its usefulness was in doubt.    &quot;I was scared going into surgery,&quot; recalls Mr. Kontras. &quot;I tried not to think about bow hunting but couldn't. I love my wife and kids dearly but being in the woods is second only to them.&quot;    The first thing Mr. Kontras remembers after his surgery is looking over and seeing his left arm was still intact but basically useless. Even in his groggy, semiconscious condition Mr. Kontras vowed that he would bow-hunt the following fall. Three weeks after surgery Mr. Kontras tried, and failed, to lift his daughter's tiny target bow. Finally after a week of trying he raised the lightweight weapon. It was a slow, painful process, with excruciating pain where four pounds of flesh and his left scapula had once been.    The bows and the thought of bow hunting were his therapy, physically and mentally, pulling him out of depression and rebuilding his maimed body. By early September he could shoot three arrows from his hunting bow before the pain stopped him.    His illness, twice-a-day shooting sessions, a regular job and the selling of his home left Mr. Kontras precious little time for pre-season scouting. Luckily he had the knowledge of several past seasons to rely on.    &quot;I knew of one good buck that I had been watching since 1983 and I had little choice but to go after him,&quot; said Mr. Kontras. &quot;I had seen him every year in about the same area and I knew he was probably still using the same bedding area.&quot;    Things looked good last fall when Mr. Kontras walked into his hunting ground roughly 30 miles from his home, on a wooded site bordering a farm pond. The big buck's tracks were where they had been the previous years and pressed-down circles in the grass showed where he had been bedding. Mr. Kontras was confident he would at least see the buck.    Midafternoon the following day Mr. Kontras was in a pine tree working hard to erect his shooting stand. What had been a relaxed 45-minute job the year before was now two-and-a-half hours of hard labor for the basically one-armed man. The strain of climbing the tree and installing the platform had drenched him with sweat. Now he stood shivering in below-freezing temperatures and a raw, winter wind.    Within the hour, two white-tailed does darted from the cover to his left. Both deer were acting nervous, checking their back trail and pacing. Mr. Kontras knew the buck was on his way.    The three whitetails moved back and forth across the soybean field for what seemed like an eternity. Three times the huge whitetail was within 25 yards of Mr. Kontras, and each time he passed up the shot, waiting for a range at which he felt comfortable.    Finally the does passed within 16 yards of the hunter. When the buck followed, Mr. Kontras made the shot that will forever enshrine his name in the sport of trophy deer hunting.    According to the Boone andamp; Crockett scoring system, a method that judges antlers on total points, for length, thickness and symmetry, Mr. Kontras's buck was given a score of 201 1/8. It is the largest bow-killed whitetail taken in more than two decades and the second-largest arrow-felled deer of all time.    For Mr. Kontras it was a triumph but also possibly a parting shot. &quot;My bow-hunting days may be numbered,&quot; he said. &quot;The pain has been so bad the past two months. But I guess that's fine. If at all possible I'll hunt, if not with a bow, then with a camera.&quot;    The best reward Mr. Kontras could get would be one more hunting season, a chance to be an average bow hunter once again. But his big buck has made him an unwilling and unhappy public figure.    The man who has had &quot;a lifelong passion for solitude&quot; wants little more than to complete the house he's building for his wife and three small children near his beloved deer woods at the end of a quiet country lane. But lately he has been awakened in the middle of the night by people he has never met and hunting-equipment companies badgering him to endorse products he has never used.    And there have been the painful, mindless accusations of poaching brought on by simple jealousy. &quot;There are times when I think that if I had it to do all over again I wouldn't even get the deer measured,&quot; said Mr. Kontras. &quot;The attention is hard for me but I keep telling myself that if it helps one person make it through what I've been through, then it will have been worth it.&quot;    ---   Mr. Pearce is a free-lance outdoors writer. </TEXT></DOC>