<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880428-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A JUDGE ACCUSED the administration of withholding Iran-Contra documents.    Saying he would dismiss charges against Lt. Col. North and three others if the documents aren't provided, Judge Gerhard Gesell said the White House and Justice Department built a &quot;stone wall&quot; by withholding items necessary for a legal defense. A Justice Department spokesman denied any effort to impede the trial. The judge also ordered expanded hearings on whether prosecutors obtained evidence improperly.    The stalemate threatens to delay the trial, which was to begin in July. Gesell said the pretrial hearings would last at least through May.    ---   POLISH LABOR UNREST SPREAD as thousands struck for higher wages.    Striking steelworkers at the Lenin mill near Krakow rejected a big pay raise and demanded higher wages and reinstatement of fired Solidarity activists. Solidarity leader Lech Walesa called for nationwide pressure on the Communist government to improve the economy. The unrest is the worst since the 1981 martial-law crackdown and poses the sharpest challenge yet to government reforms.    A Solidarity leader called for a strike beginning tomorrow at an 18,000-worker heavy machinery plant at Stalowa Wola in southeastern Poland.    ---   Israeli troops killed two Arab guerrillas after they had crossed the border from Lebanon and wounded a truck driver. It was the second day in a row that troops clashed with guerrillas inside Israel. Separately, an army inquiry has concluded that a settler guard accidentally killed an Israeli girl during an attack by West Bank Palestinians April 6.    ---   The administration notified Congress that it had approved a $325 million transaction to maintain Saudi Arabia's AWACS planes. There was widespread congressional opposition to the transaction following Saudi purchase of missiles from China, but the White House said the Saudis have agreed not to arm the missiles with nuclear warheads.    ---   Reagan strongly defended Meese, and said he didn't know of plans to oust the attorney general. The president said a Wall Street Journal article describing plans by some of his closest advisers to force Meese's resignation was &quot;completely inaccurate.&quot;    ---   Dukakis and Bush traded barbs, with the Democratic presidential front-runner questioning the vice president's foreign policy experience and the likely Republican nominee accusing Democrats of past corruption. Final results from Tuesday's Pennsylvania primary gave Dukakis 67% of the vote to Jackson's 28%. Bush won with 79%.    ---   A bomb exploded in Kabul on the 10th anniversary of Afghanistan's Marxist revolution, killing six and injuring 49. The bomb was believed planted by Afghan rebels in a truck or bus. Kabul's police commander displayed what he described as a Pakistani license plate from the vehicle and said the owner and driver were Afghan nationals.    ---   Prime Minister Mulroney pressed Reagan for resolution of the acid-rain dispute between Canada and the U.S. during a Washington meeting, but at talks in Geneva the U.S. said it wanted to increase emissions of an acid-rain component. Reagan, however, offered to cooperate in Canada's effort to acquire nuclear-powered submarines.    ---   A business group launched a vigorous lobbying campaign and is soliciting corporate contributions in a drive to stop Congress from imposing harsh new economic sanctions on South Africa. The proposed sanctions would require U.S. companies to terminate nearly all investments and end trade within a year.    ---   South Korea's ruling party is faced with the necessity of compromising with the opposition after its setback in National Assembly elections, but that may prove healthy for the democratization process. President Roh's party will have 125 seats, more than any other party, but not a majority in the 299-seat legislature.    ---   Navy salvage workers boarded the submarine USS Bonefish and recovered the bodies of three crewmen killed in an explosion and fire during a training mission Sunday. Recovery efforts off the coast of Florida had been delayed while the workers pumped toxic gases from the 30-year-old vessel.    ---   The House approved two arms-control measures, rejecting White House criticism that the moves might hurt next month's U.S.-Soviet summit. The measures ban tests of the administration's space-based missile defense system that violate the 1972 ABM treaty, and bar the U.S. from weapons spending that violates the SALT II treaty.    ---   A U.S. judge approved the extradition to Argentina of a general charged with murders of civilians during the former military government's 1970s &quot;dirty war&quot; against suspected leftists. The judge ruled that Carlos Suarez Mason could be tried in Argentina in connection with 39 murders allegedly committed by soldiers under his command.    ---   A U.S.-escorted convoy sailed north into the Persian Gulf, the first since last week's clash with Iran. The four Kuwaiti tankers flying the U.S. flag and four Navy warships sailed through the Strait of Hormuz at night, gulf shipping sources said. They had attempted to enter the gulf the day before, but a storm hampered mine-clearing efforts.    ---   Died: Max Feldberg, 90, co-founder and chairman emeritus of Zayre Corp., Tuesday, in Boston. </TEXT></DOC>