<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0056 </DOCNO><HL> Technology -- Medicine: New Technique to Allow Rapid Diagnosis of Diseases </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> INGN CTUS AN </CO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   A new &quot;gene-amplification&quot; technology for quick diagnosis of viral, bacterial and genetic diseases is under development by a small biotechnology company and academic scientists.    The technique, which is expected to go into use late next year, would give doctors the results of various blood, urine, throat and vaginal tests in less than an hour, instead of the days currently required.    The new technology promises to broaden the use of gene amplification in medical and diagnostic testing. It differs basically from a gene-amplification technology developed by Cetus Corp., Berkeley, Calif. The Cetus technology is now being used primarily by research scientists but is being adapted to medical-diagnostic testing. Exclusive rights to the new technique have been granted to Gene-Trak Systems in Framingham, Mass., a joint venture of Integrated Genetics Inc. and Amoco Corp.    The new technique is known as the &quot;Q-beta replicase&quot; technology. The Cetus technology is known as the &quot;polymerase chain reaction,&quot; or PCR technique. Both techniques involve taking infinitesimally tiny bits of genetic material from cells, viruses or bacteria, and chemically copying them until enough is available -- in an hour or less -- to make a diagnosis.    One of the first possible commercial uses of either technique is to diagnose infection with the virus believed to cause acquired immune deficiency syndrome. At present, diagnosis of AIDS in people without symptoms is based on detection of antibodies against the AIDS virus circulating in the bloodstream. Many people, however, don't develop such virus-fighting antibodies until months after they have been infected. Thus, the conventional antibody test misses an unknown segment of AIDS-infected people.    The new gene-amplification techniques could make possible rapid blood tests for the AIDS virus genes, a far more reliable test.    Cetus's PCR technology already has astonished geneticists and molecular biologists. Recently, British scientists reported the PCR technique enabled them to diagnose women carrying the cystic fibrosis gene within two hours, using only a few cells rinsed out by a mouth wash. Normally, such a diagnosis would take two weeks or so.    Similarly, the gene-amplification techniques could make a genetic diagnosis of an unborn fetus within hours after removal of cell samples from the placenta of a pregnant woman, instead of the two to three weeks currently required.    Gene-Trak will concentrate on developing the new Q-beta replicase technique for diagnosing infectious diseases, Patrick Connoy, Gene-Trak president, says. The company hopes to market its first diagnostic kits in late 1989 and an automated version a year later, he says.    The Cetus PCR technique is better suited for diagnosis of genetic diseases, Mr. Connoy says, but the Q-beta replicase technique could be adapted to genetic diagnoses. Rights to use it for genetic diagnoses will go to Integrated Genetics, which is already in the field, the executive says.    Though both techniques amplify or multiply genetic material, they are basically different. The Cetus PCR method rapidly duplicates a segment of DNA, the strand of molecules that comprise the genes. The rapid multiplication is triggered by an enzyme called DNA polymerase. Within an hour or two, millions of copies of a gene or any other DNA segment are available, enough to produce a detectable result when a genetic probe for a particular gene is added.    The new Q-beta replicase system deals with a different genetic material, RNA. In the cell, RNA is the strand of molecules that copies the genetic message on DNA and takes it to the cell areas where proteins are made. The RNA copy of the message determines the protein to be made.    A few years ago, Fred R. Kramer, Paul M. Lizardi and their colleagues, then at Columbia University, found an enzyme called Q-beta replicase that triggers the copying of an unusual type of natural RNA. They also found that they could snip open this unusual RNA, insert an additional genetic message and sew it back together, and that the new message would be copied whenever the RNA was copied.    In the technique being developed now, Q-beta replicase is used to create in a halfhour as many as a billion copies of the unusual RNA that contains a spliced-in RNA copy of a gene. The copies then can be used as genetic probes to seek out the gene that matches the spliced-in RNA. If the RNA probes carry a copy of, say, an AIDS virus gene, they will cling to those AIDS virus genes when they encounter them.    The basic difference in the two techniques is that the Cetus PCR method amplifies or multiplies genes so that probes can detect them, whereas the Q-beta replicase technique amplifies or multiplies the probes to detectable levels.    Gene-Trak licensed five patents on the technique from Columbia and the Salk Institute, whose scientists modified it. The company also obtained rights to future developments from the nonprofit Public Health Research Institute in New York, where Drs. Kramer and Lizardi are continuing their work. </TEXT></DOC>