<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Opposition to Plastic Packaging Is IntensifyingAs the Nation's Solid-Waste Problem Grows Acute---By Elliott D. LeeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MCDENVIRONMENT (ENV)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Plastics and fast-food companies are circling the wagons around a multibillion-dollar market as government attacks on nondegradable plastic waste intensify.    In Berkeley, Calif., certain plastic containers for take-out coffee and hamburgers have been banned. New York's Suffolk County may outlaw plastic convenience-store bags and certain food packaging. New York state has asked McDonald's Corp. to phase out plastic packaging. And many state and local governments are also considering measures to ban certain plastic products.    The big reason for the push is that the U.S. is running out of space in which to put its solid waste. More than half of the nation's municipal landfills are nearing saturation, according to Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.). New York state, for example, has mandated the closing of landfills on Long Island, on which Suffolk County is situated, by 1990.    In this context, some chemists and environmentalists regard plastics as particularly problematic because they resist decomposition for years or even centuries. Plastics are also generally more difficult and expensive to recycle than paper, glass or aluminum. Most of the new and proposed legislation is designed both to reduce the amount of solid waste and to push plastics recycling.    &quot;Clearly, a crisis is upon us and many states are going to be scrambling for answers,&quot; says Kenneth F. Lane, an official with the Society of the Plastic Industry, a trade group. &quot;We're on the firing line.&quot;    Many state and local governments are studying whether to ban or tax such nondegradable plastic products as disposable diapers and grocery bags. Eight plastics bills have been introduced in Congress. One, proposed by Sen. Chafee, would ban nondegradable beverage loops. To date, 11 states have required that the loops be degradable. Sen. Chafee's bill also would direct the Environmental Protection Agency to study the feasibility of requiring that all plastic products posing a threat to fish and wildlife be degradable or recyclable.    International concern is also growing over harm to marine life from ocean-dumped plastic fishing nets, packing bands and beverage loops. A federally sponsored study estimates that millions of fish and other marine animals are trapped and killed annually in these nondegradable plastic webs. The Senate Nov. 5 ratified an international accord to ban open-sea plastic dumping. U.S. adherence will trigger world-wide enforcement of the ban.    Plastics companies and their fast-food industry customers contend they are being unfairly targeted as the main culprits in the nation's solid-waste disposal problem. No dollar value for U.S. plastics packaging has been calculated, but nearly a third of the raw material used by the $138 billion-a-year industry goes into packaging, the Society of the Plastic Industry says.    &quot;We don't believe it serves a purpose to single out any particular kind of packaging because there are trade-offs with all packaging,&quot; says Stephanie Skurdy, a spokeswoman for McDonald's, the Oak Brook, Ill.-based restaurant chain.    Suffolk County's proposed legislative ban focuses on convenience-store sales of fast-food packaging made of polystyrene and polyvinyl chloride, two plastics that have no developed recycling market, according to the author of the proposal. &quot;Greater recycling is certainly one of the big goals of the legislation,&quot; says Steven Engelbright, the lawmaker who wrote the legislation, which may be voted on by the end of the month. The bill would also ban convenience-store plastic bags.    Plastics industry officials say the Suffolk County bill, by zeroing in on just a part of the plastic-waste picture, doesn't address Suffolk's overall solid-waste problem. &quot;We feel it would have no net effect of dealing with the solid-waste problem in Suffolk, so what's the point?&quot; says the Society of the Plastic Industry's Mr. Lane. Nonetheless, the proposed legislation worries industry officials because &quot;Suffolk has been out front on a number of issues that blossomed nationwide -- bottle-return bills, no-smoking laws,&quot; says Mr. Lane.    Berkeley, another city in the forefront of environmental legislation, passed a three-part plastic-waste ordinance in September. City Council members say the law is in line with a 1984 voter mandate to reduce solid wastes by 1992. But the ordinance is also aimed at saving the earth's ozone layer. Many scientists believe certain chlorofluorocarbon, or CFC, compounds used in air conditioners and refrigerators as well as in foam packaging, deplete the ozone layer that protects the earth from cancer-causing ultraviolet rays. The U.S. and about 25 other countries signed a treaty last month pledging to halve CFC emissions by the mid-1990s.    Berkeley itself will cease to use CFC-made food containers by Jan. 31., and will require merchants receiving more than 20% of their revenue from food sold in takeout containers to use non-CFC containers by as early as Feb. 1. The City Council also asked the merchants to voluntarily halve their use of all non-biodegradable packaging by 1990.    Many of Berkeley's 400 fast-food merchants see problems in replacing plastic containers used for hot foods. Non-CFC foam containers aren't readily available, and the paper ones, besides being much more expensive, can be messier and more dangerous because they make hot foods harder to handle, they say.    &quot;I agree with concerns about the ozone layer and use of biodegradable products, but I don't think there's a good substitute for some of the foam products with real hot items like coffee or soup,&quot; says Frank Kalmar, an owner of Lox Stock andamp; Bagel.    But Wallace Brooks, owner of Sufficient Grounds, a coffeehouse and bakery, says he switched to paper cups nearly two years ago, and hasn't lost customers. &quot;I don't think the law will wreak havoc with merchants' business,&quot; he says.    McDonald's, which has two restaurants in Berkeley, announced in August that in all of its 7,600 outlets it was voluntarily phasing out the use of plastic foam containers made with CFCs.    New York state's request, however, seeks elimination of all foam packaging by the fast-food chain and a switch to paper packaging that could be recycled. McDonald's said it is developing a response to the New York state request, and will &quot;make the right decision for our customers, the environment and our business.&quot;    Richard M. Kessel, executive director of the state's Consumer Protection Board, said &quot;If the company doesn't comply, we would consider proposing legislation that would ban unnecessary styrofoam packaging.&quot;    Both sides of the issue generally agree that recycling is a major part of the solution. But recycling has yet to catch on. Unlike glass or aluminum, plastic can't legally be recycled into new food containers because of the possibility of contamination. It can be used in many non-food industrial products, but economics don't yet favor recycling because customers can buy new material for less than they would pay for recycled products, says Mr. Lane. Nonetheless, the trade group says it strongly favors measures to make recycling easier, such as a proposal the industry is making to voluntarily label products with the type of plastic used in their manufacture.    Plastic containers that aren't recycled or put in landfills are burned. Some environmentalists say that certain plastics such as PVCs, when burned, may emit poisonous chemicals such as dioxin. Mr. Lane counters that incineration can not only be made environmentally acceptable but can also produce energy.    Some plastics companies have responded to the problem by starting to develop products that break down in a few years from bacterial agents or ultraviolet light. Photodegradable technology is already in use for some beverage loops. And some small concerns are experimenting with biodegradable plastics made with cornstarch. Industry officials point out that these plastics may have less strength than nondegradable ones, but Britain's Imperial Chemical Industries PLC says it has developed a durable biodegradable plastic made with glucose or molasses.    Mr. Lane, however, says most major companies have resisted biodegradable technology because there's no demand for it. &quot;What these bills are trying to do,&quot; he says, &quot;is to create a market.&quot;    And both the supporters and opponents of plastic-waste legislation say that developing products that break down rapidly may pose a new set of environmental problems. &quot;Degradability is tricky; it could increase the litter problem and complicate the chemical makeup of the waste,&quot; says Mr. Engelbright, the Suffolk County legislator.    &quot;We don't look at biodegradability as environmentally desirable&quot; because of the possibility of ground water contamination, for example, says Mr. Lane.    But arguments against biodegradability won't stop the legislative push to do something about the solid-waste problem, industry officials believe. &quot;I'm afraid knee-jerk reactions, such as banning specific products, will not cease,&quot; says Mr. Lane. </TEXT></DOC>