<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880307-0010 </DOCNO><HL> Soviet-Bloc Troops Prowl in West Europe --- Spetsnaz Commandos Are Said To Spy by the Thousands </HL><AUTHOR> Victoria Pope (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><DATELINE> HELMSTEDT, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Trucks with Polish and East German license plates roll down the autobahn here and throughout West Germany, carrying ham, pickles and other Soviet-bloc products. In 1985 alone, more than 100,000 East-bloc trucks crossed into West Germany.    But Western defense officials suspect that thousands of the drivers are really elite Soviet commandos casing targets in territory they may one day invade.    The commandos are Spetsnaz, an acronym for Spetsialnoye Naznacheniye, or &quot;special purpose&quot; troops. Among their operations since World War II, when their duties included assassination and sabotage, Spetsnaz troops helped facilitate the landing of Soviet troops at Prague, during the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia, by donning local guards' uniforms and seizing the airport. And, according to a Pentagon report, they assassinated the president of Afghanistan on the eve of the 1979 Soviet invasion of that country.    Today, as superpower agreements eliminate whole classes of nuclear weapons in East and West Europe, North Atlantic Treaty Organization planners are turning their attention to the conventional arms balance. And some Western defense analysts, already concerned by the preponderance of Warsaw Pact conventional arms, have concluded that if the Spetsnaz are as active in Western Europe as they believe, NATO could lose a non-nuclear conflict with the East bloc before it begins.    Not everyone is that alarmed, of course. Werner Hoyer, a Free Democrat and defense expert in the West German parliament, contends that some Western officials are raising the Spetsnaz issue now because they want to throw cold water on further moves toward disarmament. &quot;We must stay away from illusions,&quot; he says. &quot;There is a threat, and we must invest in future security. But there is no need to turn the direction of the boat.&quot;    Obviously, NATO itself gathers intelligence in the Soviet bloc. And U.S., British and French special forces, as well as West Germany's Fernspaehtruppe, train for unorthodox wartime operations behind enemy lines.    But NATO has no comparable active behind-the-lines operations, Western defense experts say. For one thing, penetrating the East bloc isn't nearly as easy. In Western Europe, all trucks, including those from the East bloc, can travel freely without having to stop for border checks. But while more than 600,000 trucks bearing Western license plates entered the East bloc in 1985, West German statistics show, travel in the East is strictly controlled and monitored. Eastern sites with even vaguely military overtones, including railroad crossings, are guarded. Unlike in the West, taking photographs at train stations, airports or bridges is strictly forbidden. Even road maps sold to travelers contain printed distortions to foil military use.    West Germany, on the other hand, is ideal Spetsnaz territory. It bristles with relatively observable military installations, and NATO troops, including many U.S. units, are stationed on its soil. In a pre-invasion situation, West Germany would be a likely place for Spetsnaz troops to infiltrate NATO armies by impersonating Western units. East German operatives, estimated at 10% of all Spetsnaz in West Europe, would have little trouble taking on the jargon and characteristics of the West German Bundeswehr, defense experts say.    Last fall, not far from Helmstedt, NATO tanks maneuvering in the remote countryside passed numerous East-bloc trucks parked on the roadside. The trucks loitered until the war games ended. During these same exercises, NATO helicopters spotted unusually large groups of fishing boats in the region's narrow inland waterways, many of them outfitted with extra-long antennas not seen on ordinary boats. The boats and trucks weren't disturbed because East-bloc citizens can travel freely in West Europe, making it easy for Spetsnaz to do its work.    The Stockholm International Peace Institute estimates there are as many as 20,000 Spetsnaz roaming Western Europe. West Germany puts the number at 8,000.    Those who monitor the Spetsnaz say the commandos usually work for Soviet military intelligence, known as the GRU, or for the KGB, the Soviet secret police. In addition to posing as civilian drivers, some masquerade as seamen, airline stewards and other professionals. Some are &quot;sleepers,&quot; East-bloc operatives who immigrate to the West and live normal lives while they wait, sometimes for decades, for a signal to carry out their mission. Spetsnaz assignments include tracking civilians and military personnel, photographing military exercises and compiling information on militarily sensitive sites.    In Sweden, for example, defense officials say East-bloc agents, posing as art students selling their work, went door to door in certain areas. But the &quot;students&quot; confined their canvassing to the homes of senior military personnel. Swedish officials concluded that the students were Spetsnaz mapping the homes of key officers marked for capture or assassination just before or at the moment war breaks out.    Jane's Defense Weekly of Britain reported in 1986 that a detachment of female Spetsnaz infiltrated a group of women anti-nuclear demonstrators camped out at Britain's Greenham Common Air Base, where U.S. ground-launched Tomahawk cruise missiles are deployed. Jane's said the infiltrators not only goaded the anti-nuclear demonstrations on, but also were able to monitor missile convoys going in and out of the base. Soviet intelligence then built full-scale replicas of cruise missile launchers and mockups of the Greenham Common defenses for the training of Spetsnaz troops, Soviet defectors and informants told Jane's.    Some Western officials say such spying gives the Warsaw pact a decided edge in any conventional war, and they want to make the disbanding of Spetsnaz units a priority issue in arms-control talks. Moscow should be challenged to give up these special forces, some West German politicians believe, to prove its contention that Russian military doctrine is defensive, as Moscow maintains.    ---   Marcus W. Brauchli contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>