<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0144 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:Eagle Aid: Tracking Endangered Birds in the Tetons---By Ruth Rudner</HL><DD> 09/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Jackson Hole, Wyo.  </DATELINE><TEXT>    I have lately been trackingendangered eagles with Al Harmata, principal investigator ofthe Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem Bald Eagle Study. Eaglesand men find the same kind of territory attractive. The SnakeRiver running through Jackson Hole, for instance, is superbeagle habitat. But float-trip entrepreneurs and real-estatedevelopers find it equally superb. Although within certainlimits eagles and men can share the space, precisely what thelimits are is open to question.   The Bald Eagle Study's objectives are to figure out what the eagle really requires for its habitat; to measure how much disturbance it can actually tolerate; and to find a way to safeguard space enough for the bird to be an eagle. Data collected by the study will be used to set up management plans for the area around the nest site of each individual breeding pair of bald eagles.    Mr. Harmata, an eagle specialist, is adjunct assistant professor of wildlife management at Montana State University, a master falconer, a Vietnam veteran seriously wounded in that war, and caretaker of two eagles, one golden and one bald.    Both eagles had been found poisoned, then given to Mr. Harmata to maintain. Neither could survive in the wild. But both get in a lot of travel, accompanying Mr. Harmata in his VW van as he drives back and forth between Jackson Hole, the Eagle Project's base, and his home in Bozeman, Mont. These are working birds, used for education, as lures to trap the wild eagles for banding and radio-tags and as test subjects for trapping, banding and radio gear.    In early April, a radio-tagged wild eagle was shot through the beak. A tracker noted faint signals coming from the solar-powered transmitter the eagle wore, which spelled trouble. A healthy eagle, soaring, spends time enough in the sky for the signal to remain strong from exposure to the sun. The eagle was found on the ground, bloody and weak, at the foot of the tree where he had perched. He was half of a pair, with eggs in the nest.    The eagle was force-fed for two days until he was strong enough to travel, then Mr. Harmata brought him to Bozeman and put him on a plane to St. Paul and the Raptor Rehabilitation Program at the University of Minnesota. There was hope he could be saved. But not much was left of his beak, nor was there anything left on which to attach an artificial beak. The eagle, who would have developed infections and infestations because he was unable to preen, was euthanized. And $12,000 was put up as a reward for information leading to the arrest of the person who shot the eagle.    What was actually lost was far more than one eagle. The eggs died when the female was forced off them to hunt for the food her mate would have brought to her. Future generations were obliterated.    One rainy Sunday morning, I went on a banding expedition with Mr. Harmata, Michael Whitfield, one of his associates on the project, and representatives from two of the national forests within the Yellowstone Ecosystem. We made our way up a sage-covered slope near Hebgen Lake, just west of Yellowstone Park, to an old spruce. Mr. Whitfield, the group's climber, stepped into his climbing harness, uncoiled the climbing rope and, on belay, began the climb. The tree was tall and straight and without branches for its first 10 feet, then thickly branched to the top. At the nest, he put a pillowcase over the five-week-old youngster, placed that in a large white sack that he tied with a rope, and gently lowered down the tree. At the base, Mr. Harmata opened the bags.    The young eagle stood there, gray down poking out from under his first feathers, his eye still dark. (The eagle's eye turns golden gradually, becoming fully light by about 4 1/2 years.) He did not move except to bring one, slightly extended wing closer in to his side. Even wet, his feathers matted, he seemed wrapped in dignity. Elegant and almost fierce, he was a baby, yet a presence, both regal and dear.    Mr. Harmata measured the length and depth of his beak, the length of a wing feather, talon and tail length. All this information goes onto a &quot;Nestling Bald Eagle Banding Data Form&quot; along with information about nest size (huge) and what food was in the nest (the remains of three whitefish). The eagle's head was covered to keep him from becoming frightened while blood was drawn from a wing to be analyzed for the mercury, selenium, lead and DDT too frequently found, and to provide a sample for genetic analysis.    The Bald Eagle Study operates out of two simple cabins in Jackson Hole, courtesy of both the Park Service and Forest Service. When I drove out to the one in the little settlement of Kelly, I came upon Al Bath, a young wildlife technician, with an eagle on his gloved fist.    This was a wild eagle, found all beat up in a Wisconsin yard a couple of months ago, blind in one eye and missing a toe. Treated at the Raptor Rehabilitation Program, he was sent to Mr. Harmata for use in the project when it was clear he could not return to the wild. As the still-traumatized eagle was placed inside the small A-frame that provides it the hiding place it badly needs, I became aware of a great horned owl perched a few feet from me. Languidly, rather seductively, actually, he lowered and raised his eyelids over round yellow eyes, enormous in his great, round head. As I passed near him, he puffed himself up, showing me, I suppose, how commanding a presence he is. &quot;Don't worry about him,&quot; Mr. Bath said. &quot;He's a wimp.&quot; The owl had been hit by a car and his shoulder permanently damaged. He, too, will be used for education.    The late afternoon was soft, warm. A few gray clouds gathered over the Grand Teton. A small herd of Texas longhorns grazed the sagebrush flats on the far side of a split-rail fence. A red pickup truck drove by, its radio sending a scrap of country sound across the expanse of sagebrush and arrowleaf balsam root separating us from the road. I heard the cry of an eagle.    Mr. Harmata's bald eagle, in full sun, opened her wings away from her body to cool off, her eyes watching everything. There is nothing subtle in an eagle's watching. Its eye is a fierce one. I first encountered it up close when I went out to see Mr. Harmata's eagles in Bozeman, tethered in his backyard. (It's a large backyard, with nothing behind it but miles of hills rolling up to the Bridger Range.) His golden eagle returned my curiosity, but the bald screamed angrily, stretching her neck forward, then tossing her head backward so that it lay on her back. &quot;She doesn't like to be looked at directly,&quot; Mr. Harmata told me. &quot;Raptors mostly look at something directly when they're about to kill it, so she sees your look as threatening.&quot; I turned my back on her at once. I am not about to challenge any eagles, tethered or not.    Tracking eagles is another story. By using the radio telemetry equipment to follow a bird you cannot see, to know when it perches or takes to the air -- it is as if the bird exists without existing. It is like finally being able to hear the tree fall when you are not in the forest. Plotting, charting, triangulating, watching through scope and binoculars, noting times and locations of the birds, makes the vital work of the project seem almost a game, the war-room preparation for a battle, all the current technical knowledge brought into use, the language a private one for the use of participants. Hours of sun and heat and cold and rain are endured. Arms ache from holding binoculars or telemetry equipment, watching, searching, waiting, listening to pick up the eagle's frequency or catch the bird in its strong and gorgeous flight.    We followed one eagle with the radios until she broke out of some secret distances into a nearer sky. I watched her soar above Jackson Lake, rising higher and higher so that she reached beyond the clouds. She ranged far to the south from where she had first appeared, rising higher still as she soared above the Tetons, disappeared in clouds, emerged along the face of clouds, rode the sky as if the sky were easy.    ---   Ms. Rudner is an outdoor writer based in Bozeman, Mont. </TEXT></DOC>