<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870806-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN PROPOSED a plan to end hostilities in Central America.    The initiative calls for the U.S. to end all aid to the Contras if Managua agrees by Sept. 30 to a cease-fire, cuts in Soviet aid and internal political changes. The plan has only a slim chance for diplomatic success, but could bolster the administration's case for more aid for the Nicaraguan rebels if it fails. President Ortega offered to discuss the plan with Washington, but Managua has in the past refused to negotiate changes in its internal affairs.    Five Central American foreign ministers meeting in Guatemala reacted coolly to the proposal and said work on their own plan would continue.    ---   Iran said it launched its first submarine and would practice locking its missile radar onto targets as part of its &quot;Martyrdom&quot; naval maneuvers. The U.S. is sending high-speed patrol boats to the Persian Gulf for possible use against Iranian suicide squads. Three Kuwaiti tankers that will be escorted by the Navy arrived in the Arabian Sea.    King Fahd said Saudi Arabia would defend Islam's holy places after Saudi officials said an Iranian plot to seize the Grand Mosque in Mecca led to the weekend deaths of 402, mostly Iranian pilgrims. Separately, the U.S. said it would lower its profile in the region.    ---   Sen. Biden said the Senate Judiciary panel scheduled an Oct. 1 vote on Judge Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court, which reconvenes Oct. 5. The Delaware Democrat and panel chairman said he told committee Republicans there would be no delays. The panel will first consider Judge Sessions's nomination to be FBI director.    ---   The Air Force awarded a $245 million contract to Grumman Corp. to re-equip Chinese jet fighters with sophisticated U.S.-made cockpit instruments, the largest U.S. military sale to China thus far. The award came on the same day that China announced the purchase of two Lockheed Corp. L-100-30 airlift planes.    ---   The House defeated a move to block a Nuclear Regulatory Commission plan to ease licensing requirements to allow New York's Shoreham reactor and New Hampshire's Seabrook plant to open. Separately, PS of New Hampshire, Seabrook's principal owner, asked for an emergency 15% rate increase.    ---   The Senate Labor panel rejected Reagan's nominee to head the Labor Department's mine safety agency, former House aide Dorothy Strunk.    ---   Pope John Paul II will meet with U.S. Jewish leaders to try to defuse anger over his recent meeting with Austrian President Waldheim, an accused Nazi war criminal.    ---   Shevardnadze said a Soviet-U.S. agreement to scrap short-range and medium-range nuclear missiles is almost complete. The statement by the Soviet foreign minister was echoed by the State Department. The chief arms negotiator for the Soviets said, however, that 72 U.S. nuclear warheads in West Germany must be destroyed.    ---   A Pentagon guard killed a gunman who demanded to discuss missiles and rushed past a security station toward the offices of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The man was identified as Dwain Wallace of Youngstown, Ohio. Secretary of State Shultz and Secretary of Defense Weinberger were in the building at the time and heard the shots.    ---   Tamil rebels surrendered five truckloads of arms in a brief ceremony at the Sri Lanka headquarters of an Indian peacekeeping force sent to end separatist fighting between the Hindu Tamil minority and mostly Buddhist Sinhalese majority. Most of the weapons handed over by the largest rebel group were described as broken and rusty.    ---   Meese failed to comply with financial disclosure requirements in a recent ethics filing, the General Accounting Office said. The agency, the second to make the accusation, said the attorney general failed to list details of assets controlled by a business partnership he formed with a former director of the scandal-plagued Wedtech Corp.    ---   Panama ordered the arrests of five opposition leaders, including the president of the chamber of commerce, accusing them of plotting to overthrow the military-backed government. The order was issued following a raid on the chamber's headquarters and came on the eve of a large protest rally planned by the opposition for today.    ---   Israel lifted a blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip following the killing Sunday of a military police commander. Residents were confined to the area during the period.    ---   A Lebanese delegation arrived in Stockholm to present evidence to a judge supporting the extradition of a suspect in the June 1 assassination of Prime Minister Karami.    ---   Roh was formally elected to the No. 1 post in South Korea's ruling Democratic Justice Party. He succeeds President Chun, who resigned the party post last month.    ---   Fiji eased emergency restrictions on food, private property, ships and road transportation imposed after a May 14 military coup in the South Pacific island nation.    ---   Died: Jesse Unruh, 64, California state treasurer and Democratic leader, Tuesday, in Marina del Rey, of prostate cancer. </TEXT></DOC>