<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880817-0010 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Big Stakes: Bush Takes a Gamble By Picking Dan Quayle As His Running Mate --- He Bypasses Kemp and Dole, Choosing Brash Indianian With a Limited Record --- Youthful Contrast to Bentsen </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry and Jeffrey H. Birnbaum (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Cautious George Bush took the biggest gamble of his political life and chose as his running mate a relatively obscure senator from Indiana more noteworthy for his good looks than his achievements.    In selecting the conservative, 41-year-old Dan Quayle, Mr. Bush passed over two powerful party figures, Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas and Rep. Jack Kemp of New York. For weeks, top Bush campaign strategists have been saying that Mr. Bush's running mate should be widely perceived to be a political heavyweight. That isn't likely to be the initial reaction to Mr. Quayle.    &quot;I'm looking forward to comparing our records of accomplishment,&quot; Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, the Democratic vice presidential candidate, said pointedly.    Although Sen. Quayle, who defeated liberal Sen. Birch Bayh in 1980, has improved his initially low reputation with his colleagues -- he is a hard worker and has established some credentials as an expert in defense matters -- he has rung up few major successes in his 12 years in the House and the Senate. Almost immediately, one crack making the rounds in political circles here christened the new GOP ticket &quot;Bush Lite.&quot;    In 1982, the faculty at Mr. Quayle's alma mater, DePauw University in Greencastle, Ind., voted not to award him an honorary degree because many argued he didn't deserve it. Robert Sedlack, a professor of English who was among those voting, says Mr. Quayle was &quot;a smashingly undistinguished candidate for an honorary degree.&quot; Later, however, the faculty reversed itself on a narrow vote under prodding from the college president, who said he had promised the award to the young senator.    And his selection immediately revived memories of the Florida weekend he and two of his male House colleagues spent in 1980 with a lobbyist named Paula Parkinson, who appeared nude in Playboy magazine. Mr. Quayle insisted he was playing golf most of the weekend, and the incident didn't keep him from winning a huge re-election victory in 1986.    The vice president obviously believes that his choice has many more pluses than minuses, and that Mr. Quayle, with his youth and Robert Redford good looks, will compare favorably with the 67-year-old Sen. Bentsen.    In announcing his choice at a rally here yesterday, Mr. Bush said that Sen. Quayle is &quot;a man of the future . . . a young man born in the middle of this century and from the middle of America. He's a dynamic young leader for the future of our party, the future of our nation.&quot;    A fiscal and social conservative and a hard-liner on national defense, Mr. Quayle is generally acceptable to just about all elements of the party. He has long had excellent relations with the religious right, and the Rev. Pat Robertson praised his selection as &quot;a tremendous choice.&quot;    Moreover, Bush strategists are counting on Mr. Quayle to help in the critical Midwestern industrial and farm areas that are up for grabs in this election. But his home state of Indiana has only 12 electoral votes, and it almost always goes Republican anyway. By contrast, Sen. Bentsen's Texas offers the Democrats the chance for a bigger prize, the state's 29 electoral votes.    Like Mr. Bush, J. Danforth Quayle is a descendant of wealth. He is an heir of the rich and conservative Pulliam family, publishers of the Indianapolis Star and the Arizona Republic. After graduating from DePauw, he received a law degree from Indiana University. He was an associate publisher of another family newspaper, the Huntington (Ind.) Herald-Press, before his election to the House in 1976.    He is something of a young suburban professional. His wife, Marilyn, is a lawyer, and they have three attractive young children.    The Republicans think that, with these qualities, Mr. Quayle will help address their gender-gap problems -- the fact that Mr. Bush runs much more poorly among women than among men. &quot;I can't believe a guy that is that handsome wouldn't be good for the ticket,&quot; declares Sen. John McCain, the Arizona Republican.    Mr. Quayle has eagerly sought the role of &quot;hatchet man&quot; against the Democrats in the fall, fitting in with the overall negative thrust of the Bush campaign. &quot;There is so much, I would have a field day,&quot; the senator told NBC News.    Mr. Bush also plainly feels more comfortable with Sen. Quayle than he does with the more experienced Sen. Dole or Rep. Kemp. The Indiana Republican seems to meet Mr. Bush's criterion that his running mate should be as loyal to him as Mr. Bush has been to Mr. Reagan. Mr. Quayle clearly would play a subordinate role in a Bush administration.    But the choice of Mr. Quayle may not be seen by voters as the bold, presidential stroke many Bush supporters had hoped for. And Democrats were quick to paint Mr. Bush's running mate as anything but a strong choice. &quot;He doesn't have the richness of experience and breadth of knowledge to be president,&quot; claims John Brademas, the president of New York University and Mr. Quayle's former House colleague from Indiana. &quot;Like George Bush, he is pleasant, affable, decent and conservative,&quot; Mr. Brademas says.    And Louisiana Gov. Buddy Roemer, a conservative Democrat, expressed &quot;surprise he would take someone who was not well-known. George Bush needs to be more well-known himself, and now he's going to spend the next 10 days talking about who Dan Quayle is.&quot;    And there could also be some political problems for the ticket. Recently, Mr. Quayle led the Republican effort in the Senate to defeat a bill requiring employers to give advance notice to workers about plant closings and big layoffs. This issue -- hit hard at the Democratic convention -- became such a loser for Republicans that President Reagan eventually abandoned the fight, and the legislation became law.    Sen. Quayle also was a vocal critic of the Reagan administration's U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating intermediate nuclear forces. Although, in the end, he voted for the treaty, he charged that the administration &quot;subordinated what made sense to what was politically clever.&quot; Vice President Bush has characterized that arms agreement as one of the administration's major accomplishments, and he sharply assailed Republican critics of the pact during the primary season.    But the Bush plan is to try to run to the right of Mr. Reagan on national-security issues, and thus Mr. Quayle's service on the Armed Services Committee may actually be a plus. &quot;He's an intense, hard-working, roll-up-your sleeves legislator,&quot; says James McGovern, the undersecretary of the Air Force and a former staff director of the Armed Services Committee. &quot;Dan is a scrappy street fighter, which is what this ticket needs to invigorate it.&quot;    Despite his decidedly conservative record on fiscal, social and national-defense issues, Mr. Quayle isn't a rigid ideologue. He has sought accommodation with liberals, such as Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, on job-training issues important to workers in blue-collar Indiana.    And despite his tough stance on defense matters, even criticizing the Reagan administration for not pushing for early deployment of its strategic defense initiative, he has proposed changes in defense procurement policies to promote more competition among defense contractors.    On national-security issues, Sen. Quayle recently has been a champion of causes that seem arcane to most laymen but are important to conservative defense hardliners. During deliberations over the INF treaty, he became a lonely advocate of hanging on to conventionally tipped, ground-launched cruise missiles, which would have been banned by the pact. Finally, the commander of Western forces in Europe said there was no military requirement for preserving these conventional weapons, and they were banned along with nuclear-tipped cruise missiles.    Sen. Quayle also has faced off with Georgia Democratic Sen. Sam Nunn, the influential chairman of the Armed Services Committee, over the proper interpretation of the 1972 anti-ballistic missile treaty. Sen. Quayle opposed Sen. Nunn's ultimately successful policy of holding the Reagan administration to a strict interpretation of the treaty, which prohibits developing space-based missile defense systems.    At home in Indiana, Sen. Quayle is a popular figure, rolling up 61% of the vote in his 1986 re-election. He runs so well because he has made himself acceptable to many independents and moderates, building on his base among conventional and Christian-right conservatives.    Just the other day, New Hampshire GOP Sen. Gordon Humphrey said Mr. Quayle is &quot;almost a movement conservative -- close enough.&quot;    But it still remains to be seen whether Mr. Quayle will be effective in attacking the Democratic ticket. Yesterday, in his first appearance after being chosen, he seemed almost too eager, jumping up and down and waving his arms as he attacked Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis.    He has seemed hyperactive in the past. In a 1986 debate over the nomination of conservative jurist Daniel Manion to be a federal appellate judge, he angrily sought to change the vote of Kansas Sen. Nancy Kassebaum, a fellow Republican, on the Senate floor, by jumping around shouting at her. The fight left bitter feelings within the party.    Last night, Bush campaign chairman James Baker said the selection of Mr. Quayle &quot;represents a bold stroke across generations,&quot; noting that he will be &quot;the first baby boomer on a national ticket.&quot;    Mr. Baker dismissed the stories about Mr. Quayle and the party in Florida with Ms. Parkinson, the lobbyist and Playboy model. The three congressmen in attendance all later opposed a crop-insurance bill Ms. Parkinson lobbied against, but they all denied having been influenced by her.    &quot;That's been looked into, and there's absolutely nothing to it,&quot; Mr. Baker said.    ---   David Shribman and David Rogers contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>