<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0149 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: How Cuba's 'Paid' Prisoners Become Modern Slaves </HL><AUTHOR> Rolando Cartaya </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   A delegation from the United Nations Human Rights Commission is due to arrive in Havana next Friday to investigate longstanding charges against Cuba's one-party dictatorship. After years of unrelenting challenges from the U.S., the commission was finally convinced that Cuba is at least as worthy of such an investigation as other dictatorships visited by U.N. teams.    This week, Amnesty International reported that although Cuba continues to imprison citizens who speak out against the government, it has released many and improved the treatment of others over the past 18 months.    However, Fidel Castro and his minions are masters of deception. They spent years successfully hiding their political intentions from the world and years more covering up what they were actually doing on the island. As well-equipped as the Human Rights Commission is for such a task, this assignment will be unique, and researchers should prepare carefully for the deceptions they are likely to encounter.    One of the basic rules of human-rights research is to remain personally removed from any political stream or goal. It's been very hard for us, in the Cuban Committee for Human Rights, to preserve this golden rule, being as we are both victims and umpires of Mr. Castro's repression in Cuba. Nevertheless, such objectivity is possible and can be seen, for example, in a film produced by Nestor Almendros and Jorge Ulla called &quot;Nobody Listened.&quot; Rather than forcing a political statement, the film merely describes, through the words of several dozen former political prisoners, conditions in Cuba's prisons and events that led up to their imprisonment. A screening of the film should be required for the U.N. investigative team.    In contrast to &quot;Nobody Listened&quot; is a report recently issued by the Washington-based Institute for Policy Studies (IPS). Since the U.N. team is likely to bone up on its task by reading this report, it would be good to see exactly where the IPS team went wrong.    In the second paragraph of the preliminary IPS report on the conviction and treatment of prisoners in Cuba one reads: &quot;This visiting program is an early part of an IPS project to explore possibilities for bettering relations between Cuba and the United States.&quot; Rather than placing human rights above everything else, this political goal apparently became the primary consideration before all others.    When the IPS group decided to go to Cuba earlier this year, the visit was coordinated by a puppet organization of the Cuban government, the Union of Cuban Jurists (one might say the project was polluted from the beginning). Nevertheless, at the time, we dissidents were on the receiving end of a furious campaign of slander orchestrated by Mr. Castro. Articles in the official press referred to members of our group as &quot;sellers of their homeland&quot; and &quot;Frankenstein creations of the CIA.&quot; The idea that neutral observers would be allowed to investigate our claims was an answer to a prayer.    I was in Havana at the time and met with Aryeh Neier, one of two human-rights observers from Americas Watch who accepted an invitation from IPS to go along on the trip. I felt confident that the Americas Watch representatives would fulfill their duties as professionally as possible. But as for their colleagues at IPS, I became skeptical the moment I saw IPS Vice Chairman Diana de Vegh on Cuban television and wondered, as I still do, how Mr. Castro manages to make visitors smile over so many Cuban tears.    The IPS commission's visit to Cuba marked the first time in 30 years that the Cuban government has granted outsiders permission to inspect any place within the prisons. But household improvements can be made in a few prisons at a comparatively low cost, and the Ministry of the Interior's office is one of the few in Cuba with no budgetary constraints.    U.N. emissaries should take a hard look at what the IPS delegation calls &quot;the humane and constructive features of the {penal} system.&quot; The IPS report says &quot;. . . prisoners work a regular work week, at productive jobs under conditions similar to those of workers not serving sentences.&quot;    In the late months of my two-year sentence (my crime was to write a letter critical of the government's handling of emigres during the Mariel exodus), I was transferred from La Cabana to Vallegrande, one of those working camps known as &quot;open fronts.&quot; According to my own experience, prisoners always work extra shifts. I never worked less than 11 hours a day, and I spent about five months working 16 hours a day. When one of the buildings we were working on was behind schedule, prisoners were forced to work more than 20 hours a day. I remember the building of the Dinamo Club in 1982. It was a multisport field for Cuba's elite troops, located on the shore of the Almendares River, in the middle of Havana. We were forced to work a whole week from 7 a.m. till 2 a.m. Then it took an hour to get back to the barracks. At 5 a.m., the &quot;on your feet&quot; call was broadcast once again through all the speakers of the camp.    What does the IPS preliminary report conclude about prisoner compensation for this backbreaking work? &quot;The remuneration is the same as for civilians before certain discounts for cost of living. . . . The amount remaining to them after these discounts is sufficient to help to provide support for families.&quot; And now the truth: To start, $30 on the first $100 a prisoner earns is immediately deducted, supposedly to cover living expenses. After that, whatever you make over the original $100 is docked 50%. That's one reason why inmates agree to work so many hours a day; what they could earn in a regular work shift is not enough to feed their families, so they become a kind of modern slave. That's why the government is trying to put a higher percentage of the penal population to work. They're the cheapest labor in the country, and their complaints about work conditions go unheard.    Elsewhere, the IPS report states: &quot;We did not find any policy of extra-judicial executions or disappearances. . . .&quot; Of course not! Everything in Cuba is perfectly legal. But that in no way means it's perfectly fair. State security police take the role of the grand jury, almost invariably getting a rubber-stamp approval from nodding jurists if the case ever goes to trial. Trials are compromised by the lack of procedural guarantees. Defense attorneys actually work with prosecutors. In most cases, crimes against state security may be punished with the death penalty. So an execution in Cuba is nothing but a &quot;legal&quot; murder. And, according to dissident Ricardo Bofill, about 36,000 prisoners have been executed (or have died as a result of mistreatment while in prison) since Mr. Castro came to power.    Prisons everywhere are unpleasant things. But Cuban jails are particularly barbaric. They are also filled with people who don't belong there. Many jailings in Cuba are &quot;legal&quot; kidnappings. It would be of great value if the U.N. team emphasized the reasons why people are arrested as well as the conditions they suffer from while in prison.    ---   Mr. Cartaya, a journalist and vice president of the nonofficial Cuban Committee for Human Rights led by Ricardo Bofill in Havana, came to the U.S. in May. </TEXT></DOC>