<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0001 </DOCNO><HL> North Testifies He Acted With ApprovalOf White House in Iran-Contra Affair---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North testified that he acted with White House approval throughout the Iran-Contra operation and sent at least five memos &quot;up the line&quot; describing the funneling of arms-sale profits to Nicaraguan insurgents in 1986.    The former National Security Council aide said he never discussed the diversion with President Reagan, but said the secret operation underwent far closer review within the NSC than previously indicated.    For each of the arms shipments to Iran last year, Col. North testified that he wrote a memo seeking presidential authorization and never proceeded before getting approval through former National Security Adviser John Poindexter.    The testimony heightens the importance of scheduled testimony next week by Adm. Poindexter, who has emerged as the key link to President Reagan.    The White House wouldn't comment on Col. North's testimony. But a senior official said the White House isn't aware of the five memos. He added that the only memo the White House knows of indicating that funds were diverted to the Contras was the April 1986 document found by Attorney General Edwin Meese, and revealed to the president and the news media last November.    Appearing before House and Senate committees investigating the controversy, the Marine officer also revealed that a secret finding authorizing the Central Intelligence Agency's role in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran had been signed days later by Mr. Reagan. The document is believed to have since been destroyed as part of an effort to cover up the administration's part in the 1985 transaction; Col. North testified that Mr. Meese knew both of the finding and of the preparation last fall of false testimony to Congress regarding the November shipment.    Col. North also confirmed a determined effort beginning last fall to shred documents relevant to the Iran-Contra affair. The former White House aide said as early as last October he had begun destroying documents &quot;in earnest&quot; after a discussion with former CIA Director William Casey. &quot;Director Casey and I had a lengthy discussion about the fact that this whole thing was coming unraveled and that things ought to be 'cleaned up,'&quot; Col. North said. &quot;And I started cleaning things up.&quot;    Wearing his Marine uniform and combat ribbons, the officer was defiant through much of his testimony, which ended months of silence on his central role in the Iran-Contra affair. The boyish-faced officer, whose credibility has been damaged by prior witnesses, didn't hesitate to contradict important elements in the testimony of former colleagues and drew in a wider circle of officials whom he described as being informed of the secret activities.    Mr. Meese knew more about the November 1985 arms shipment to Iran than previously indicated, Col. North said, and was aware of the false testimony being prepared last fall. The Marine officer denied claims by former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane that he had instructed Col. North not to solicit funds on behalf of the Nicaraguan insurgents. And Col. North asserted that other CIA officers, besides the late Mr. Casey, were aware that the NSC was running a covert operation to support the Contras.    &quot;There's a lot of folks around that think there's a loose cannon on the gundeck . . . at the NSC,&quot; said Col. North. &quot;That wasn't what I heard while I worked there . . . People used to walk up to me and tell me what a great job I was doing.&quot;    The weapons in the November 1985 shipment were U.S.-manufactured Hawk surface-to-air missiles taken from Israeli stocks. Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, a central figure in the Contra arms network, became involved, as did the CIA. Col. North confirmed that most of the $1 million initially deposited by Israeli middlemen to transport the Hawks was used for the insurgents.    The secret finding that accompanied the CIA involvement spoke bluntly of the arms sale as a transaction with Iran aimed at gaining the release of American hostages held in Lebanon. Col. North is the first witness to say publicly that he has seen a copy of the authorization signed by the president, but Adm. Poindexter is believed to have given corroborating testimony to the committees during closed-door questioning.    No copy of the signed finding has been found, suggesting it was destroyed, but the controversy over the memo is severely damaging to the White House's repeated claims that it wasn't pursuing an arms-for-hostages policy.    In a series of often combative exchanges with John Nields, counsel for the House committee, Col. North acknowledged the political sensitivity of the finding as well as concerns in the administration that the 1985 sale may have violated the Arms Export Control Act. The paper trail left by his memos referring to the diversion was also potentially damaging, but Col. North denied that the documents he began destroying last October included any notations, such as the president's initials, leading directly to the Oval Office.    Among the five memos, two were for sales never carried out. One of those two memos matched the document that tipped Justice Department attorneys to the diversion when it was found in Col. North's files last November. The three others, all of which were apparently destroyed, corresponded with the three arms sales carried out in 1986, said Col. North, who added that each referred to &quot;residual&quot; funds being used for the insurgents.    All took the form of seeking presidential approval with boxes to be marked in case of a decision. Col. North said he proceeded only when so informed by Adm. Poindexter, but his testimony was vague in describing how this notice was given. When pressed by Mr. Nields, the Marine officer testified he had no recollection of seeing check marks on the approved memos he later destroyed, and he said Adm. Poindexter later told him the president wasn't aware of the diversion.    Col. North said he didn't &quot;preclude&quot; that some classified documents were destroyed in anticipation of Mr. Meese's preliminary inquiry into the Iran-Contra operation, but his testimony generally set an earlier date for the most important shredding of documents. Last Nov. 21, when the attorney general began his internal inquiry, Col. North said he told Adm. Poindexter all the relevant memos were already destroyed as part of the &quot;clean up&quot; effort.    Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.), a member of the Senate panel, called Col. North's allegation about Mr. Meese &quot;very serious.&quot; Mr. Meese and other Justice Department officials have said they weren't aware that the November 1985 shipment to Iran contained arms prior to beginning their informal investigation of the Iran-Contra affair in November 1986.    Col. North told the committees he didn't discuss the shipment with Mr. Meese, but he offered circumstantial evidence that the attorney general was aware that the CIA had created a potentially serious legal problem by helping deliver the missiles without a presidential directive. Col. North said he believed Mr. Meese had been instrumental in remedying the problem by helping shape the intelligence finding that retroactively approved the CIA's participation in the transaction.    &quot;All findings are reviewed by the attorney general,&quot; the fired NSC aide said, adding that he personally delivered to Mr. Meese two January 1986 findings authorizing U.S. arms sales to Iran.    Throughout his testimony, Col. North insisted, sometimes passionately, that he kept his superiors informed of all his activities, that he never acted without their approval, and that several of his colleagues were aware of what he was doing. &quot;I never carried out a single act -- not one -- in which I did not have authority from my superiors,&quot; Col. North said.    &quot;He was not, in his own view, a loose cannon,&quot; said Sen. Nunn. &quot;He was a cannon that was pointed in certain directions by his superiors.&quot;    Col. North said Mr. McFarlane directed him to take charge of aiding the Contras in the spring of 1984, six months before Congress suspended government aid to the insurgents. He repeatedly described his Contra-aid efforts as part of a covert operation, and fiercely defended his and other officials' efforts to conceal their activities from Congress and the public. &quot;I didn't want to show Congress a single word on this whole thing,&quot; Col. North told the committees.    Col. North said that after Congress and the news media began investigating his role in supporting the Contras, he and Mr. McFarlane stopped communicating about Contra aid in official memos and began relying on private communications and computer messages, which Col. North said he tried to destroy last year.    But he said he had several unrecorded conversations about the secret Contra-aid operation with the late Mr. Casey and with the late Vice Adm. Arthur Moreau, who was a top aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He testified that after Congress voted to resume official U.S. aid to the Contras, he ticked off a long list of his activities, &quot;item by item by item,&quot; at a Pentagon meeting attended by officials from the CIA and the State and Defense Departments.    &quot;These people knew what I was doing,&quot; he said. &quot;They knew it was a covert operation being conducted by this government in support of the Nicaraguan resistance.&quot;    Congressional investigators said they haven't found an intelligence finding authorizing a covert operation to keep the Contras afloat after Congress cut off aid. Although he insisted his actions were part of such an operation, Col. North took care to deny that he solicited any military aid for the Contras from foreign countries or from American citizens -- both actions for which he could be indicted.    &quot;I do not recall ever asking a single, solitary American citizen for money,&quot; he said, claiming that Colorado brewer Joseph Coors and other Contra supporters offered donations without being asked.    Col. North's testimony followed recent legal maneuvering over the conditions governing his appearance, and the sparring continued into yesterday morning. House and Senate committees had compelled him to answer questions under a grant of limited immunity approved by the courts last month, but a frustrated Senate Committee Chairman Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) denied a late request by Brandon Sullivan, Col. North's attorney, that his client be permitted to make an opening statement.    Neither side knows much about the other's intentions, since the committees were effectively denied the opportunity to extensively cross-examine Col. North behind closed doors beforehand. It now appears certain the former White House aide will remain on the stand into next week. And Mr. Sullivan seems to be reaping the fruits of having demanded an early appearance by his client, which didn't allow documents on Col. North's role to be reviewed fully.    For the first time yesterday, the committees referred to secret tapes made by U.S. intelligence agencies of meetings between American officials and Iranian representatives linked to the arms sales. The recordings show that Col. North last fall sought to impress Iranian negotiators by saying that Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had warned the president he would be &quot;impeached&quot; if the American public learned of the transactions.    &quot;That is a bald-faced lie told to the Iranians,&quot; Col. North said of his remarks. &quot;And I will tell you right now, I'd have offered the Iranians a free trip to Disneyland if we could have gotten Americans home for it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>