<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0120 </DOCNO><HL> The Banking Tradition That Never Was---By William M. Isaac</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Some people, including my friend Gerald Corrigan of the New York Fed, contend there is a longstanding Anglo-American tradition favoring the separation of banking and commerce and that this separation is necessary to protect against unsound banking practices. This view is erroneous on all counts.    As for Anglo-American tradition, England does not have a Glass-Steagall law and does not prohibit the ownership of banks by non-financial firms. The U.S. did not concern itself with the ownership of banks by nonfinancial firms until the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 and the amendments of 1970. Though we are a comparatively young nation, 17 years or even 31 years can hardly be characterized as a tradition.    Moreover, the Bank Holding Company Act was not adopted out of any concern about unsound banking practices. The father of the Bank Holding Company Act, Federal Reserve Chairman Marriner Eccles, was concerned about the Transamerica financial empire being assembled throughout the Western states by A.P. Giannini, a structure others were beginning to emulate. The act was intended to guard against undue concentration of economic power, not to correct any safety and soundness problems. There were none to speak of.    The wall between banking and commerce remains rather porous even today. Real-estate developers, auto dealers, insurance agents and others from all walks of economic life own and operate banks throughout the nation. They are prohibited only from placing their banks and other business interests under a common corporate umbrella where they can't be seen and regulated. Some of our strongest savings and loan associations have been owned by non-financial firms for many years. The FDIC insures numerous industrial banks owned by far-flung commercial enterprises. The FDIC has permitted a number of non-banking firms to acquire non-bank banks since 1969. As of the date I left the FDIC, not one FDIC-insured industrial bank or non-bank bank had ever been designated a problem bank, much less failed.    The 1970 Amendments to the Bank Holding Company Act directed the Federal Reserve to review the operations of any grandfathered company whose bank exceeds $60 million in size, and the agency is permitted to order divestiture if it finds any conflicts of interest or unsound practices. More than 100 situations have been reviewed by the Federal Reserve without divestiture being ordered.    My point is that we do not have a complete wall between banking and commerce and do not need one to promote safety and soundness. Banks are special, and we do not want them to fail. We want banks to be operated only by people with integrity, managerial acumen and financial strength. I do not believe bankers have a monopoly on these traits; indeed, at a time of record problems, the banking and thrift industries no doubt could be strengthened by allowing industrial companies and non-bank financial firms to bring their managerial and financial resources to bear. The Change in Bank Control Act, as well as examination and enforcement powers, give the banking agencies the tools they need to keep undesirable people out of banking.    Certainly we do not want the resources of a bank to be tapped to support, or transfer a competitive advantage to, an affiliated company. Rather than prohibit the affiliation, however, we could require that the commercial activities be conducted in a separately capitalized and funded company with stringent limitations imposed on intercompany transactions. Stronger laws against tying practices could be enacted if that were believed desirable.    Neither American tradition nor modern-day reality requires the separation of banking and commerce to promote soundness and stability in banking. It is American tradition to fear, even loathe, concentrations of economic and political power. We do not need a Bank Holding Company Act or a Glass-Steagall Act to avoid such concentrations. These laws are poor and inefficient substitutes for strong and effective antitrust enforcement.    Misinformation and myths abound concerning deregulation, and they are impeding sensible, long overdue reform. At the very least, Congress ought to move quickly to permit banks and other financial firms to compete head-to-head across the full spectrum of financial-service activities. To do otherwise will only perpetuate an inequitable system that is harmful to both the financial-service industry and consumers.    ---   Mr. Isaac was chairman of the FDIC from 1981 to 1985. </TEXT></DOC>