<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890816-0046 </DOCNO><DD> = 890816 </DD><AN> 890816-0046. </AN><HL> Rafsanjani May Not Be Able to Deliver@  ----@  By Ehud Ya'ari </HL><DD> 08/16/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   The key to solving the hostage problem that has been haunting the U.S. ever since 1984 lies with a group of 50 to 70 largely anonymous, crude toughs, few if any of whom are over the age of 30. They are the same men who were behind the bomb attacks on the American Embassy in Beirut and the Marine headquarters south of the Lebanese capital in 1983. They pass themselves off as devout Moslems, having &quot;got religion&quot; -- in the form of Shiite fundamentalism -- in their teens or early 20s.    Yet the interests and thinking of these men, who control the fate of the hostages in Lebanon, are not necessarily consonant with those of their Iranian patrons or even of the Shiite clerics who speak on behalf of Hezbollah. They have been known to reject religious rulings issued by Hezbollah's religious mentor, Sheik Mohammed Hussein Fadlallah, and they have the power to foil any understanding that may be negotiated between Washington and Tehran. The workings of this group remain largely a mystery, not least because these men are almost totally insulated from the public branches of Hezbollah and adhere to the strictest rules of compartmentalization within their own ranks.    All belong to the Special Security Apparatus of Hezbollah. It was formed under Iranian guidance in the wake of Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon, when Iran sent 1,500 Revolutionary Guards to Lebanon's Bekaa Valley and supervised the merger of the various Shiite fundamentalist groups in Lebanon into Hezbollah.    The Special Security Apparatus, modeled after similar organs of both Amal and the Palestine Liberation Organization, was never formally established by the Hezbollah leadership. It was Colonel Awa'i, the dynamic Iranian commander in Lebanon, who insisted on the need for a special counterintelligence arm to protect the new organization. Sheiks like Fadlallah and lesser clerics had neither the experience nor the inclination to engage in this type of work; what interested them was building their flocks into a new type of militia. So the task fell to younger men who lacked religious credentials but had the experience that disposed them to engage in &quot;special operations.&quot;    These young Shiites had been recruited into Fatah, the main component of the PLO before its withdrawal from Beirut in September 1982 and its expulsion, by the Syrians, from the Bekaa Valley and Tripoli a year later. Bereft of their source of livelihood after the PLO's withdrawal, they began flocking to prayer houses, where they first heard the sermons of Sheik Fadlallah, who preached and wrote extensively about the role of force in Islam. By then Sheik Fadlallah had become the spiritual guide, though not the actual leader, of the newly created Hezbollah.    For the most part they were young men in their teens and early 20s, devoid of political sophistication but fervent in their hate of Israel and the U.S. They hailed from impoverished villages in south Lebanon and had resettled in the slums of south Beirut after their families had fled the constant violence there. Starting out as errand boys in Fatah, a few rose in the ranks of its most ruthless arm, the infamous Force 17.    The man who introduced Lebanese Shiites into Fatah was Mahmoud a-Natour, better known by the nom de guerre, Abu Tayeb. His reason for doing so was tactical: Shiites, he believed, would be less prone to defect to his rivals within Fatah. From that standpoint he regarded them as mercenaries who could be employed to do much of the organization's dirty work.    It should be recalled that Abu Tayeb was in charge of the personal security of many Palestinian leaders and institutions, but he quickly developed ambitions of building his own power base by expanding the intelligence and military capabilities of Force 17. And Mr. Arafat, the master of &quot;divide and rule,&quot; was perfectly happy to let him get close to Fatah's intelligence czars, Abu Iyad and the late Abu Jihad. Under Abu Tayeb, Fatah experts taught the young Shiites all there was to know about tactics, firearms and explosives.    The irony is that in the past year the Special Security Apparatus has taken under its wing Mr. Arafat's most menacing Palestinian rival: the Islamic Jihad, which emerged in the occupied territories during the course of the intifada. Thus the worm has turned: Shiites who were trained by Fatah are now guiding Palestinian fundamentalists who pose the greatest threat to Fatah within the Palestinian camp. It has not escaped the attention of the American intelligence community that the latest messages concerning the hostage Joseph Cicippio were accompanied by expressions of support from the Islamic Jihad in Palestine.    The most prominent figure in Hezbollah's Special Security Apparatus is Immad Mughniyeh, who recruited his younger brother Fuad and other members of his clan (one of whom is still serving a prison term in Kuwait for terrorist activities despite all Mughniyeh's efforts to gain his release by conducting further terrorist actions). The family, which comes from the village of Tir Daba in southern Lebanon, has produced several locally known religious leaders, but Immad Mughniyeh himself was not a devout man until he fell under the spell of Sheik Fadlallah. Only 22 or so at the time that the Special Security Apparatus began to take shape, he became the brains behind its operations.    Always dressed in a &quot;jalabiyeh&quot; (traditional robe) and with a Kalashnikov rifle slung over his shoulder, he became known as The Haj. Understandably, he has shied away from publicity; his picture (or what was purported to be a photograph of him) has been published only once -- in an obscure Paris-based Arabic-language weekly. Mughniyeh passed through France in 1985, but the French let him slip out again after the CIA suggested they take the opportunity to arrest him.    Without question it is Immad Mughniyeh who has been responsible for most of the kidnappings of foreign hostages in Lebanon. He perfected the art of kidnapping and devised the system of holding the hostages in the maze of alleyways that makes up the southern suburbs of Beirut. He always operates with very small squads and takes great pains to obtain intelligence on his targets. Western experts now believe that in some cases American hostages were installed in hiding places within 10 minutes of being snatched. To move them from one hide-out to another, they are wrapped in adhesive tape, like mummies, and tied to the chassis of a pickup truck.    Two other people known to be associated with these operations are Sheik Hussein Ghabris and Hussein Khalil. Sheik Ghabris took charge of Mughniyeh's network when The Haj felt that his presence in Beirut was no longer safe and withdrew with his family to Tehran (though he is occasionally still to be seen in South Beirut). Khalil, as Hezbollah's chief of security, has often acted as the go-between for whoever wished to establish contact with the Special Security Apparatus.    Since the outbreak of the civil war in 1975, kidnapping has been practically a conventional weapon of the warring sects. Everyone has indulged in it -- the Christians being no exception. Mughniyeh's innovation was in taking American and then other foreign hostages and using them as an insurance policy to protect Hezbollah.    For more than two years the U.S. has repeatedly urged Israel not to bomb Hezbollah bases for fear that the hostages were being held there. Such immunity to the sting of the Israeli air force is a luxury enjoyed by no other faction that mounts terrorist operations against Israeli soldiers and civilians. Thus secure in their strongholds, Mughniyeh and his cohorts pioneered a new method of terrorism -- the suicide bombers first tested out against the Americans in Beirut and then quickly turned against the Israelis in the south.    The Special Security Apparatus has had some rather heated disputes on this issue with Hezbollah's religious leadership. On the face of it, these theological polemics revolved around hair-splitting on the purposes for which it is permissible to send a pious Moslem to his death. Mughniyeh had few qualms about sending people off on suicide missions in explosive-packed cars, but some of the sheiks held that it was against the tenets of Islam to squander human lives for political gain. They forced Mughniyeh to keep the names of his suicide bombers secret, and only recently has Hezbollah allowed these drivers to prepare a videotaped &quot;last will and testament&quot; to be released after the operation is completed. Such differences do not extend to the realm of hostage-taking, however. The sheiks ruled that all foreigners in Lebanon, regardless of their reason for being there, were enemies of Islam and therefore fair game.    Of the many quarters that have tried to exert pressure on the Special Security Apparatus, the Iranians are in the best position to get their way. President Hashemi Rafsanjani recently was able to show the U.S. that his word carries considerable weight in south Beirut. But the people holding the hostages have been cultivated for years by the rival faction of the Iranian leadership led by Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mokhtashemi, who attended the birth of the security apparatus and financed it while serving as Ayatollah Khomeini's ambassador to Damascus. Since the Israeli abduction of Sheik Abdul Karim Obeid, Mr. Mokhtashemi has been urging his Lebanese allies to hang tough and to mount new attacks against American targets wherever possible. The tone and message of his public statements have been very different from those of Mr. Rafsanjani and his clique.    Since Mughniyeh enjoys the patronage of the radical faction in Tehran (though that could well be changing), one of the main concerns today is that the fate of the hostages will become a weapon in the struggle for control of the new government in Iran. So far it is believed that Mr. Rafsanjani has managed to win the allegiance of the top echelon of the Lebanese Hezbollah, including Sheik Fadlallah.    But to the people actually holding the hostages, Mr. Rafsanjani's signals to Washington may well smack of betrayal. Indeed, why should they give up the captives who provide them with both safety and status? They know that once the hostages are released, they will either have to leave Lebanon or be stalked by an array of &quot;bounty hunters&quot; eager to ingratiate themselves with the West. For people like Mustafa Khorshid and Abed Yunis -- two of the hostage-holders -- a deal for release inevitably means exile.    Thus the early indications are that the toughest nut to crack in the effort to engineer the release of the hostages will be these Fatah-trained &quot;born-again Shiites&quot; who care far more about their own future than the potential of Mr. Rafsanjani's political maneuvers.    ---   Mr. Ya'ari, Arab affairs correspondent of Israel Television, is author of &quot;Israel's Lebanon War&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 1984). </TEXT></DOC>