<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0020 </DOCNO><HL> California Politicians Smart After FBI Employs a 'Sting' to Pursue Corruption </HL><AUTHOR> Richard B. Schmitt (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MKT </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   In San Francisco, a man who lobbies the state legislature on behalf of several well-known national corporations, sifts through a three-inch stack of invitations to fund-raisers that just arrived in the mail.    He sighs. &quot;California politicians are nonpareil in terms of their expectations,&quot; he says. &quot;I alternate between sympathy and revulsion for them.&quot;    The good news for lobbyists weary of palm-out pols is that the Federal Bureau of Investigation is trying to bust up the pay-as-you-go plans that some say are now prevalent in Golden State lawmaking. The huge and influential California legislative system has been compromised, critics charge, by the exploding cost of getting elected, and perhaps a little old-fashioned greed. To prove it, the FBI has returned to a controversial undercover tactic: Abscam, California style.    This time, instead of oil sheiks seeking favors, the feds posed as a number of dummy corporations, one of them holed up over a women's clothing store a block from the capital. To keep under wraps, the companies filed false or incomplete financial reports with state regulators, and according to one report, gained credibility with legislators by obtaining a loan guarantee from a state-sponsored business development corporation. Federal agents paid lawmakers more than $50,000 in contributions and other payments, partly in an effort to get phony legislation approved, according to state records and legislative sources.    So far as is currently known, the feds' ploy to trade campaign contributions for influence centered around legislation aimed at benefiting a phony Mobile, Ala., company called Gulf Shrimp Fisheries Inc. Gulf Shrimp, it was said, wanted to build a new shrimp-processing plant in West Sacramento, just a few miles from the statehouse. To finance the plant cheaply, the undercover agents sought legislation permitting banks and thrifts to purchase company bonds.    Such a bill was passed earlier this year. The subsequent revelation of the probe has created no small embarrassment for state officials. State attorney general John Van de Kamp said he was never told about it. One major newspaper reported that Gov. George Deukmejian was told only at the last minute -- so he wouldn't sign any trumped-up measures into law.    The governor declines to comment.    Late last month, FBI agents rifled through the files of four legislators and two aides, looking for evidence of wrongdoing in a late-night search of the state capitol building. The raid, as it turned out, culminated a nearly three-year federal investigation of corruption in Sacramento, which included the sting operation.    Nobody has been charged yet. But the investigation has touched some of the most prominent politicians in the state, including a recent proponent of state campaign reform, and everybody seems more than a little nervous about where it may head next. California newspapers have recently turned up additional evidence of potential corruption, while lobbyists, weary of the arm-twisting, may be helping the feds out as well.    Says the San Francisco lobbyist: &quot;The range of people communicating with {federal officials} is probably much broader than is known. If people weren't calling before it appeared in the papers, they sure are calling now.&quot;    The Los Angeles assemblywoman who introduced the bill favoring the bogus fishery, Gwen Moore, received $5,500 in contributions from FBI companies, and $5,000 more that she returned. Ms. Moore, whose office was one that agents searched during the Aug. 24 raid, said in a statement that she was cooperating with federal officials but declined to comment further.    Other officials who received campaign funds from the FBI firms, state records show, included Patrick J. Nolan, the Republican leader of the Assembly, who this newspaper identified last year as one of the ten rising stars in the national political firmament. &quot;He knows he will be vindicated,&quot; says a spokeswoman.    &quot;Corruption in the state legislature is pervasive,&quot; says Donald Heller, a Sacramento attorney who is representing a legislative aide turned federal informant in the case. &quot;It has been going on for years, and no one did anything about it.&quot;    Terry Knowles, special agent in charge of the Sacramento FBI office, declined to say why California was targeted or provide other details. The six search warrants were later sealed under court order. Mr. Knowles said the matter is still being investigated, and that information will be turned over to a grand jury. He said the government may have more to say on the inquiry in late October or early November -- election-time.    Accepting campaign contributions, of course, isn't a crime. The fact of federal involvement suggests that the government is at least investigating possible violations of the Hobbs Act, which bars efforts by state and local officials to extort funds for political favors.    Agents got one foot in the capital door with the help of Mr. Heller's client, John Shahabian, a state-senate aide who, according to Mr. Heller, &quot;got caught up in the sting and went forward to cooperate.&quot; Secretary of State records show that former state senator Paul Carpenter, Mr. Shahabian's former boss and now a member of the powerful state Board of Equalization, received a $20,000 campaign contribution from the FBI-organized companies. Mr. Carpenter couldn't be reached, but through a spokesman he denied any wrongdoing.    Some of the agents' efforts appeared to bear less fruit than others. The phony companies paid $11,500 for tickets to fundraisers sponsored by Assembly Speaker Willie Brown. According to Mr. Brown's spokeswoman, agents tried to make contributions in cash or at the capitol itself, clear violations of state campaign laws, but aides for the speaker rejected the overtures. One undercover agent, the spokeswoman asserts, tried to slip ten $100 bills in an envelope under the door at the home of a Brown aide, but she says the cash was returned the same day. The FBI has denied using the tactic.    Mr. Brown's spokeswoman says she saw no problem in accepting funds from a corporation that turned out to be bogus. &quot;We do not have the capacity to do a Dun andamp; Bradstreet {report} on every company,&quot; she says.    Federal law-enforcement involvement in California politics isn't unprecedented. In March 1985, an Orange County fireworks magnate pled guilty to mail-fraud charges relating to state political contributions, an episode that also led to the conviction last year of a former state senator on Hobbs Act and other charges.    Using stings in law enforcement has also been controversial. Any eventual defendants are likely to assert that they were entrapped into participating in the scheme. But law-enforcement officials believe such tactics are sometimes the only way of nabbing politicians predisposed to crime.    &quot;A properly conducted sting operation can be one of the most effective ways of investigating political corruption,&quot; says Richard Drooyan, a partner in the Los Angeles office of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom, and a former chief assistant U.S. attorney. &quot;It may be the only way to investigate that kind of illegal activity.&quot;    Certainly, California politics has become big business in recent years. This year alone about $80 million will be spent in the state's legislative campaigns, compared with $48 million four years ago, according to the good government group Common Cause. The figure is expected to exceed $100 million, or a little under $1 million a seat, by 1990.    The result, critics charge, has been about the best lawmaking -- or lack thereof -- that money can buy. Major reform efforts, including reducing runaway insurance rates and alleviating an overburdened worker compensation system, have repeatedly failed.    As a result, reform efforts are frequently made through a voter initiative process that has been described as Athenian politics at its worst. A ballot initiative last June approved limits of $1,000 a person on individual campaign contributions. But the proposal set no cap on total spending, an omission that some believe still leaves the system open to abuse. Ironically, the initiative was framed by southern California state Sen. Joseph Montoya, whose office was searched by the FBI, and who, along with Assemblyman Frank Hill, reportedly received several thousand dollars in &quot;honoraria&quot; from the sham companies. Neither man could be reached.    &quot;I'm not sure it will take any money out of the system,&quot; Chip Nielsen, a San Francisco lawyer and a former chief of staff for then Gov. Ronald Reagan, said of the June initiative, which takes effect Jan. 1. &quot;Most people will live within the rules but work on maximizing the potential under those rules.&quot;    Others are even more cynical. Says Steve Barrow, a Sacramento-based legislative advocate with Common Cause: &quot;The room up here is so full of smoke that you can't see the gun.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>