<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880711-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Scientists Are Hunting a Vital Blood Cell --- Search for the Stem Cell Advances at Stanford </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Scientists are hot on the track of what is unquestionably the most important -- and most mysterious -- blood cell in the human body.    Known as a stem cell, it is the grandmother of all the body's blood cells -- from the oxygen-carrying red cells to the armies of infection-fighting white cells. Produced somewhere deep in the bone marrow, stem cells migrate to other parts of the body's blood-forming tissues, such as the spleen or thymus gland. Depending on where they land, the stem cells then produce progeny that become either red blood cells or any of a variety of white blood cells.    For more than 35 years, scientists have been trying to identify the stem cells among the body's tens of millions of blood cells. Finding them would open new and more powerful methods of treating cancer, radiation sickness, immune disorders and other illness. Pure stem cells might also be the vehicles for inserting new genes into victims of various genetic diseases, researchers say.    A major step toward finding human stem cells has been taken by scientists at Stanford University medical school, near San Francisco, according to a recent report in the weekly magazine, Science.    The Stanford researchers successfully used a new technique to isolate stem cells of mice. The cells were then implanted into mice whose blood-forming bone marrow had been completely destroyed by lethal doses of radiation. Following injections of as few as 30 stem cells, half the mice survived and formed a new blood system complete with all varieties of blood cells.    Other research groups had previously isolated mouse stem cells, notes Malcolm A.S. Moore, an experimental hematologist at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. The Stanford researchers, however, &quot;kind of put the icing on the cake&quot; by showing that a mouse's blood system could be completely reconstituted by implanting just a few stem cells, Dr. Moore says. &quot;They showed that the stem cells actually work when put back into the whole animal,&quot; he says.    The Stanford scientists are now teaming up with bone-marrow specialists at the university's medical school to use their mouse experience to track down human stem cells, says Irving L. Weissman of the school's Laboratory for Experimental Oncology. Dr. Weissman and two colleagues, Gerald J. Spangrude and Shelly Heimfeld, carried out the mouse experiments.    Cancer patients likely would be among the first to benefit from discovery of human stem cells, say Drs. Weissman and Moore. At present, the use of drugs and radiation to treat cancer is limited by the damage these treatments cause to the bone marrow. If human stem cells were available, it would be possible to give a cancer patient far higher doses of radiation or chemicals, enough to ensure complete destruction of the cancer cells. The patient's destroyed bone marrow and blood system could then be reconstituted by injections of a few of the patient's own stem cells that had been extracted earlier and stored.    Transplants of bone marrow from donors also could be made safer for cancer patients as well as for children who suffer immunological defects and other blood-system disorders. Although bone-marrow transplants from one person to another are occasionally done today, they are risky. As much as a pint of bone marrow from a donor has to be transplanted to a recipient. Because the donor's bone marrow consists of a complete spectrum of all the blood cells, the marrow tries to &quot;reject&quot; the recipient's body as &quot;foreign&quot; tissue.    This &quot;graft-vs.-host&quot; reaction is a major complication of bone-marrow transplants and limits their use to specialized teams in major medical centers. Such a reaction would be avoided, however, if only the donor's stem cells were transplanted. The stem cells wouldn't attack the recipient's tissues but, instead, would migrate to various parts of the recipient's body and churn out a complete line of progeny blood cells that would be compatible with the recipient's body. Thus, stem cells could make transplants of donor bone marrow widely available.    Victims of radiation accidents like the Chernobyl reactor disaster also could be aided, Dr. Moore explains. There have been suggestions that it might be prudent for atomic energy workers to have some of their own bone marrow extracted and stored in case they are accidently exposed to lethal doses of radiation. But storing a pint of bone marrow for each of tens of thousands of workers poses an impossible logistics problem, he explains. &quot;If you could isolate stem cells, you would only have to store less than a quarter of a teaspoon of each person's stem cells&quot; to have enough to reconstitute his blood system should it be destroyed in a radiation accident, he explains.    Identifying stem cells isn't easy, however. At least nine or 10 major types of blood cells circulate in the body. Besides the easily identified, plate-shaped red blood cell there are a variety of white blood cells, or lymphocytes, many of which look identical under the microscope. They perform different jobs, however. Some produce antibodies that engulf viruses, others attack cancer cells or foreign tissues and still others regulate the immune system, alternately suppressing or enhancing its battle against disease.    As early as 1956, animal experiments hinted that all these blood cells may be descendants of the same small population of stem cells. Each stem cell had the potential of producing any of the different blood cells, the theory went. If a stem cell migrated from the bone marrow to the spleen, it would soon churn out progenitors of red blood cells. If it went to the thymus gland, it would churn out progenitors of any of several so-called T (for thymus) lymphocytes, whereas if it migrated to another region of the bone marrow, it would produce B (for bone marrow) lymphocytes.    To find the mouse stem cells the Stanford researchers used a process of elimination. Researchers in Toronto and in West Germany had found that many of the fully developed blood cells, such as the B and T lymphocytes, carry distinctive proteins on their surfaces. These proteins can be spotted by so-called monoclonal antibodies, laboratory-made versions of the antibodies the body produces to fight off viruses and other &quot;foreign&quot; invaders.    Using the Toronto and German discoveries, the Stanford researchers took a population of mouse bone-marrow cells and pulled out all the fully developed T and B lymphocytes. The scientists then sifted through the remaining cells with a monoclonal antibody that the German researchers had discovered and which, they believed, would home in on mouse stem cells. They eliminated all cells that failed to react to this antibody. That left them with a tiny population of bone-marrow cells that clearly weren't fully developed blood cells.    Proof that these residual cells were true stem cells came when they were injected into mice whose bone marrow had been destroyed by radiation. The mice in a matter of weeks developed a complete panoply of fully developed blood cells, most of which were clearly descended from the injected stem cells.    Although mice aren't humans, the same tactics might be adapted to tracking down human stem cells, Dr. Weissman says. &quot;The mouse model tells us we're going in the right direction,&quot; adds Dr. Moore in New York.    The main problem to overcome, Dr. Weissman says, is that the mouse experiments involved the use of whole animals. &quot;Obviously, it would be unethical to do the same with humans,&quot; he says. &quot;Perhaps we can develop a whole-animal experimental model for the human, for example, with baboons,&quot; he adds.    Scientists at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle already have begun experiments with reconstituting blood systems in baboons given lethal doses of radiation, according to a report in Science. </TEXT></DOC>