<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880128-0140 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Lest Ye Be Judged </HL><SO> </SO><IN> FIN </IN><G> JUS SUP EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   As Judge Anthony Kennedy rolls on toward confirmation, the Bork fallout continues, not least in raising the issue of whether the organized bar has any special role to play in judicial selection. For the net result of its split decision on Robert Bork was to give a patina of professional and intellectual respectability to the scurrilous campaign being run against him.    At one time everyone officially recognized Judge Bork's true pre-eminence. When he was appointed to the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, the ABA rating committee unanimously rated him &quot;exceptionally well qualified.&quot; Subsequently he participated in 400 decisions and wrote 100 opinions as a member of the nation's second most important court. Not a single one was reversed, while several of his dissents were upheld on appeal.    After which, the ABA committee approved him by only a 10-4 vote. His nomination drew outright opposition from the Association of the Bar of the City of New York. It is ludicrous to suppose that Judge Bork's professional qualifications in 1987 were less impressive than they were before his five years of service on the bench. What changed was the political context; the political stakes were higher and the Reagan administration was weaker. The Bork-Reagan foes launched a political-advertising campaign against the nomination -- at a cost of $10 million to $15 million according to the estimate of Suzanne Garment in her superb article in the current Commentary. Suddenly Judge Bork's professional capabilities became a matter of debate within the bar.    What then is the meaning of the bar's supposedly technical and professional judgment? We do not need this judgment when, as in the Anthony Kennedy nomination, there is no controversy. But if at the first smell of blood the bar is going to play politics like everyone else, why should its opinions have any special status? Indeed, is it wise for the bar to lend its name to such an exercise? If a professional assessment becomes mere politics, will not this discredit the notion that there is something more regal to the law itself?    ---   Some in the bar are asking these questions. Indeed, a group of dissenting New York lawyers has sued the City Bar Association seeking an injunction against further ratings of Supreme Court nominees, noting that the group's carefully drafted charter authorizes only the assessment of local judges and federal judges who sit in New York City. Judge Edward Greenfield denied a temporary restraining order, but asked the executive committee to wait until he ruled on the suit's merits before announcing its conclusion on Judge Kennedy.    The association responded by rushing out its recommendation of Judge Kennedy in direct defiance of the judge's request. Such is the respect for the judicial process displayed by the same lawyers who objected to Judge Bork on the grounds of &quot;judicial philosophy.&quot; The dissidents will continue their suit, but nothing in the episode suggests that the bar enjoys any status that commands deference from the rest of us.    ---   Several senators expressed similar doubts during the Kennedy hearings, questioning Harold Tyler, head of the ABA federal judiciary committee. They wanted to know, for example, why the committee votes in secret. Why don't the four anti-Bork members go before the public to defend their views, as senators do every day of the week? Indeed, there is a law, called the Federal Advisory Committee Act, which requires that advisory groups reach their recommendations in the full light of day. Mr. Tyler asserted his committee was exempt from the act, and needs confidentiality so that it can interview numerous sources, including sitting judges who would not be able to express themselves in public.    Senators also were testy about an anonymous quote from a member of the ABA committee in the Washington Post, calling Judge Douglas Ginsburg a &quot;Borklet&quot; even before the rating process. The Washington Post's leaker said something interesting: &quot;There are concerns that Ginsburg shares many of the conservative ideological beliefs that doomed the Bork nomination.&quot; We certainly would like to know what member of the committee said Judge Bork was defeated over ideology, not professionalism.    On the broader question, Mr. Tyler's explanation was recorded back during the Bork hearings. &quot;We cannot be unrealistic about what we are,&quot; he said. &quot;I have admitted to this committee, my committee -- they all knew it anyhow -- my prejudices or biases as best I can. Others have done the same. But we cannot divorce ourselves and be 15 people who live a neutral, sheltered, irrational, non-worldly life.&quot; In other words, the members' assessments can't be counted on to be purely technical and professional after all.    ---   The ABA committee had been shrouded in controversy even before the Bork nomination. The question of its status under the Federal Advisory Committee Act is at issue in two lawsuits pending in Washington. They started back in September 1985, when a Congressional Quarterly article reported that the ABA committee gave names of people &quot;under consideration&quot; to Susan Liss, head of the Judicial Selection Project, so that &quot;Member groups such as the NAACP Legal Defense Fund then may conduct their own investigations and send information to the ABA.&quot; The Washington Legal Foundation, a conservative legal group that didn't get such supposedly confidential names in advance, asked the ABA why.    The ABA committee said it would stop the practice, but the Washington Legal Foundation filed suit for the group's minutes under the FACA. WLF, joined by Public Citizen Litigation Group, a Ralph Nader affiliate, also has sued the Justice Department for asking a group for its views without enforcing FACA.    ---   We referred to this controversy during the Bork battle, in a 107-word item concerning John D. Lane, a Washington lawyer who served on the ABA committee when the WLF suit was filed, was not reappointed when his term expired, and has again been appointed after a new position was created. This elicited from Mr. Lane a letter full of such words as &quot;false and malicious&quot; and other litigious language we wouldn't have expected from someone who presumes to veto judicial nominees for &quot;judicial temperament.&quot; This was followed up by a letter from Mr. Tyler to the chairman of Dow Jones assuring us among other things that Mr. Lane &quot;certainly does not have any desires to sue the Journal or anyone else.&quot;    The burden of Mr. Lane's complaint is that we suggested he had been accused of &quot;leaking&quot; the names and had been removed from the committee as a result. Both Mr. Tyler and Mr. Lane assure us he was not &quot;removed&quot; from the committee, and certainly we ought to make clear we hold Mr. Lane no more responsible than other members of the committee for the revelations to Ms. Liss. Our complaint is not with an individual, but with a process that invites politicization, then masks its results under the guise of objective, professional judgments.    ---   The process invites the politicization not only of the bar, but, we are increasingly coming to suspect, also of the bench itself. The ABA committee sought opinions on Judge Bork from 77 Federal Court of Appeals judges and five Supreme Court justices, as well as other lower-court judges. A minority of these sitting judges opposed Judge Bork in these private hearings, no doubt encouraging the minority on the ABA panel, again lending a professional patina to the opposition.    What was the basis for these clandestine judgments? The judges making them offer no opinion that must withstand the scrutiny of either their peers or the public. Is it a good idea even to invite sitting judges to participate in such a process?    The back rooms of the D.C. Circuit Court are still buzzing with an anecdote. Just after Ronald Reagan went on television to announce his surprise Ginsburg nomination, Pat Wald, the liberal chief judge, ushered visitors out of her chambers to take a call from Senator Teddy Kennedy. Judge Wald told us that she took the call &quot;out of courtesy's sake,&quot; that it lasted less than a minute and that she told Senator Kennedy that in Judge Ginsburg's &quot;relatively few opinions, his positions were in most cases in conformity with those of the more recent Reagan appointments.&quot;    Then Senator Kennedy headed for the floor of the Senate to dismiss Judge Ginsburg as &quot;an ideological clone of Judge Bork -- a Bork without a paper trail -- instead of a real conservative.&quot; This was a very different view than Senator Kennedy took of Douglas Ginsburg in 1986 when he introduced the former Cambridge, Mass., resident to the Judiciary Committee for unanimous approval as a circuit judge.    ---   Several decades of activist judges already have diminished the law in the eyes of many people, who see it as essentially a political exercise in which the legal spoils go to the most effective special interest. The status of the law will be restored by restraint on the bench and by an ABA that restrains itself from claiming special competence to judge nominees. Certainly the executive branch ought not accord the ABA that status. Presidents don't let the American Bankers Association pick Fed chairmen, the Seven Sisters pick energy secretaries or the AFL-CIO pick labor secretaries. Why should lawyers have a quasi-constitutional role in picking judges? </TEXT></DOC>