<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880606-0015 </DOCNO><HL> Boys on the Bus Missed the Boat </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Hunt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Political experts and scholars worried that this year's presidential election would be distorted by the media's inordinate power. &quot;The media stand in a position today, especially in the nomination phase, where the old party bosses used to stand,&quot; Republican strategist John Sears declared last year.    These new bosses had the year all mapped out. The front-loaded primary system would create an almost irresistible momentum for the winner of Iowa's caucuses. Vice President Bush was a political hemophiliac; an early loss and he would bleed to death. The odds favored a protracted struggle, and conceivably brkered conventions, for both nominations.    The scholars needn't have worried. Here's how the all-powerful media fared: The Iowa winners, Dick Gephardt and Bob Dole, were eliminated as serious contenders a month later. George Bush suffered a huge setback in Iowa but bounced back to devastate his opponents. Instead of there being a drawn-out struggle, the two party nominations were settled earlier than any contested race in years.    As the primaries officially draw to a close, one conclusion is clear: The press isn't all-powerful, after all. Still, this year's coverage has generated more than its share of controversies. There are the quadrennial debates over whether the media are biased, or spend too much time on the horse race and too little on issues. In addition, there are new questions -- concerning the treatment of Jesse Jackson, for instance, and the role of the press as character cops.    The horse-race lure remains powerful for most of us -- myself certainly included. Before February, I vacillated on the likely GOP nominee -- between Jack Kemp and Bob Dole. Last August, I wrote about the two probable Democratic finalists: Michael Dukakis -- and Dick Gephardt.    At least I had lots of company. Columnist George Will suggested that a Bush defeat in Iowa would be more devastating than Ronald Reagan's loss in the same state in 1976 -- a defeat that caused him to drop 18 percentage points of support in Florida. The vice president did lose Iowa this year; a month later he swept the Florida primary with 62% of the vote.    The New York Times, meanwhile, continued its New Hampshire primary-day jinx. Four years ago, citing national polling data, the Times declared in a front-page primary-day story that Walter Mondale &quot;holds the most commanding lead ever recorded this early.&quot; That day, he was clobbered by Gary Hart. On primary day this year, the Times reported that &quot;Mr. Bush has no chance of the sweeping victory here,&quot; as &quot;the best he can hope for is a result that will send him into the 16 Republican primaries on Super Tuesday, March 8, with little momentum.&quot; Mr. Bush scored a sweeping New Hampshire victory, picking up enough momentum to win 15 of the 16 Super Tuesday contests.    But for all our fixation on the horse-race aspects of the campaign, it's nonsense to charge that the media has ignored substance. Never have there been more stories on more positions taken by more candidates -- nothing, for instance, received more laudatory coverage than Bruce Babbitt's issue-oriented Iowa effort.    &quot;I know that newspapers like the Boston Globe, Wall Street Journal, New York Times and Washington Post have done long and thoughtful pieces about issues,&quot; says Marvin Kalb, the former TV newsman who directs Harvard's Joan Shorenstein Barone Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy. &quot;Yet I run into even very intelligent people who constantly ask, 'Why is the press so shallow?'&quot;    Similarly, allegations of bias, usually said to be anti-conservative, continue to surface despite little evidence to support them. Bob Dole recently charged that the press focused on &quot;gossip and nitpicking&quot; rather than real issues, and that since reporters &quot;see the world through liberal-colored glasses,&quot; they gave Republicans &quot;far more negative treatment.&quot;    On Sen. Dole's complaint, ABC's Jeff Greenfield jests: &quot;I agree with what he said but disagree with his right to say it.&quot; There is too much time spent on gossip, and the national press corps arguably may have a slight liberal bias. But few candidates ran a more content-less campaign than Bob Dole, the darling of the inside-the-Beltway politicians and media; it was Mr. Dole's own churlishness and gracelessness in his interview with NBC's Tom Brokaw after losing New Hampshire that sealed his fate. Actually, the toughest coverage this year probably was meted out to Dick Gephardt; highly paid television correspondents, in particular, seemed infuriated by his populist rhetoric.    There's no doubt that Jesse Jackson has been treated differently from his rivals. A survey by media analyst S. Robert Lichter contended that about three-quarters of Mr. Jackson's television coverage was favorable, compared with about 50% positive for his rivals. The charge that the media haven't examined Mr. Jackson's positions is hollow; many stories noted that some of his views are pretty far-out. But the media generally have neglected the tougher task of analyzing just how qualified Mr. Jackson is to govern.    This failure to treat the Rev. Jackson as a potential nominee doesn't always work to his advantage. Any white candidate who dominated debates, excited crowds and set agendas the way Jesse Jackson has this year would have been hailed as the most charismatic politician since Robert Kennedy. And when Benjamin Bradlee, executive editor of the Washington Post, is asked whether Mr. Jackson has had an easier press because of his race, he turns the question around: &quot;If George Bush were black, he'd be a waiter in the country club.&quot;    Perhaps the press's most discussed controversy of the campaign has been its new role of character cop. After the Miami Herald broke the story of Gary Hart's philandering, fears abounded that the media would spend more time on candidates' bedroom habits than on their views on the economy or the Russians. But that hasn't occurred; meanwhile, it may be a healthy thing that politicians are on notice that character issues may be more deeply examined.    There have been some disquieting new elements to 1988 campaign coverage. One is the influx of pundits trained not in journalism but in politics or other businesses, who have been brought in to liven up political coverage. Sometimes, these analysts can bring a fresh eye and more sparkle to the proceedings. More often, however, they debase journalistic standards.    An example: Last fall, Joseph Biden's campaign was destroyed after a leaked videotape showed similarities between his speech and one given by British Labor Party leader Neil Kinnock. Speculation raged on who did in Sen. Biden. John McLaughlin, an ex-priest turned talk-show host, flatly declared on his TV show that the villain was Gephardt media consultant David Doak. The evidence: &quot;He also was a political consultant to Neil Kinnock.&quot;    As it turned out, of course, the Dukakis campaign eventually owned up to the leak. Not only did Mr. Doak never work as a consultant to Neil Kinnock, he'd never even met him.    Another disquieting development this year is a daily computer-delivered publication called Campaign Hotline, which summarizes political reports from newspapers and TV stations around the country. Some papers even phone their stories to the Hotline the night before. Despite its superficiality, it's a political junkie's delight. But Eugene McCarthy once likened political reporters to blackbirds -- when one flies off the pole the others follow -- and the Hotline reinforces pack journalism. &quot;It produces a real mimic effect in political coverage,&quot; worries James P. Gannon, editor of the Des Moines Register.    Finally, too much political news has been driven by public-opinion polls. When coverage of candidates and issues is determined by poll standings, it can become a self-fulfilling prophecy, and daily tracking surveys dominated much of the early primary coverage.    Looking ahead, tough challenges face the media in the general election. The temptation to paint the election principally as one between two dull, vanilla-flavored candidates ignores some very real differences between George Bush and Michael Dukakis in terms of issues, temperament and advisers. My guess is that the news coverage, while flawed as always, will be better than last time. Even the cutbacks at the powerful TV networks may be a plus; a more selective approach may actually improve the quality.    But however good or bad the coverage, chances are that the media will play only a minor role in the campaign's actual outcome. The public isn't nearly as manipulable as critics fear -- which is good for the public, the politicians and the press.    ---   Mr. Hunt is chief of the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>