<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880517-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   MEESE FIRED his chief press aide, adding to turmoil in the Justice Department.    The unceremonious departure of Terry Eastland, an outspoken conservative who had been a trusted and influential aide to the attorney general for three years, shocked even Meese loyalists and drew immediate fire from Capitol Hill. Meese complained Eastland wasn't aggressive enough in defending him from critics. The move raises new questions about Meese's ability to continue running the Justice Department and is bound to boost continuing efforts to force his ouster.    Within a few hours of the announcement, William Schambra, the attorney general's chief speechwriter, resigned because of Eastland's departure.    ---   SEN. BYRD SCHEDULED an arms-control treaty debate today, ending a dispute.    The Senate Majority leader acted after three Senate committees concluded, following testimony from Secretary of State Shultz, that a dispute over the on-site inspection provisions of the U.S.-Soviet treaty banning medium-range nuclear weapons has been resolved and no longer prevents opening debate on ratifying the pact. Byrd had postponed the ratification debate last week after the verification dispute emerged.    The scheduling of debate opens a race to ratify the pact before Reagan meets with Soviet leader Gorbachev at a summit in Moscow later this month.    ---   Surgeon General Koop released a report condemning tobacco as addictive &quot;in the same sense as are drugs such as heroin and cocaine.&quot; Health groups immediately called for a wide range of new regulations on tobacco while the Tobacco Institute, an industry group, said the report &quot;contradict(s) common sense.&quot;    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that police may search discarded trash without a warrant. The 6-2 ruling reinstated 1984 drug charges against two Californians arrested after police uncovered evidence of narcotics in their trash. The court said constitutional protection didn't apply because people have &quot;no expectation of privacy&quot; for trash.    ---   A Kentucky man was charged with 27 counts of murder after blood tests showed he was drunk when he drove his pickup truck the wrong way on a highway Saturday and hit a bus, killing 27 members of a church youth group. Larry Mahoney was served with warrants at a Louisville hospital, where he is listed in serious condition.    ---   Beirut militias defied a cease-fire order from the Syrian army, which has massed 7,500 troops outside the southern part of the Lebanese capital, and continued heavy fighting for control of Shiite slums. Amal fighters were reported to be regaining ground against Hezbollah in fighting that has killed 14 and wounded 120 in the past two days.    ---   Israeli troops killed two Palestinian youths and wounded at least nine protesters in widespread Gaza Strip clashes. Separately, the army opened an investigation into charges that an Israeli teen-ager in a paramilitary youth corps beat an Arab prisoner at the urging of an army sergeant.    ---   Indian troops bombarded lookout towers at the Golden Temple in Amritsar in an attempt to force the surrender of about 50 Sikh separatists. At least 35 people have been killed as the siege enters its second week.    ---   A Singapore justice upheld the government's decision to cut The Asian Wall Street Journal's circulation in the country to 400 copies a day from 5,000. An appeal is to be filed. The decision to curtail circulation was based on a government finding that the paper was &quot;engaging in the domestic politics of Singapore.&quot;    ---   A Honduran diplomat was arraigned in Miami on charges of trying to bring 28 pounds of cocaine into the country. Rigoberto Regalado Lara is Tegucigalpa's envoy to Panama and is believed to be the half-brother of the Honduran military chief.    ---   Denmark's political crisis deepened as a neutral mediator declared an impasse in talks on forming a new government. A snap election was held last week over Denmark's non-nuclear policy and its ties to NATO.    ---   Black South African unions called for three days of peaceful protest in June against restrictions imposed on anti-apartheid organizations. Under emergency restrictions, the 700,000-member Congress of South African Trade Unions can't specify what action the workers are to take.    ---   Iraq reported its 12th oil tanker attack in 18 days and shipping sources in the Persian Gulf said there were reports that 10 crewmen were killed in the air raid. The identity of the ship wasn't immediately known.    ---   A Soviet court sentenced an Azerbaijan man to 15 years in a labor camp for homicide during ethnic rioting in February that killed 32. His was the first sentencing among 80 people charged in what officials acknowledge was an anti-Armenian pogrom.    ---   Died: Arthur F. Long, 61, president of D.F. King andamp; Co., in New York, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>