<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): Financiers---Who Gets These Jobs Anyway?Missionaries, Rock Climbers and SongstersBecome the Global Finance Specialists of the '80s---By Peter Gumbel</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE MORMON CHURCH sent Michael P. Goodson to Japan as a missionary in the mid-1970s. And the experience proved invaluable: Mr. Goodson now works as a well-paid Japanese securities analyst at First Boston Corp. in New York.    &quot;It was great training for the job,&quot; says Mr. Goodson, who devotes most of his spare time to his pastoral duties as a Mormon bishop in Brooklyn. He says it wasn't hard to move from the pursuit of holiness to the profits of Hitachi. &quot;As a missionary, I was dealing in concepts, showing people that my ideals and values are worth listening to,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm doing the same now.&quot;    Of course, you don't have to be a missionary to get a prestigious job on Wall Street in the post-Boesky era, but every bit of international experience helps.    As big financial institutions in the U.S., Japan and Europe join the rush to &quot;go global,&quot; their efforts to set up world-wide operations all run into difficulty at the same point: hiring people with the right qualifications. There is a chronic shortage of talented securities analysts, traders and portfolio managers with knowledge of equity and bond markets around the world.    As a result, salaries have soared and poaching is rife. In London, which many institutions use as a hub for international finance, no self-respecting trader would consider changing jobs unless offered some incentive -- a Porsche perhaps. &quot;In the U.K.,&quot; says one headhunter, &quot;people are trading bodies.&quot;    Because the pool of international talent is too small and expensive to meet the growing staffing needs of the big international investment houses, most firms are stuck with two options. They can try to broaden the scope of their domestic market experts, who probably don't know the difference between zaibatsu and zabaglione. (One is a type of family-run conglomerate that once dominated Japanese business; the other is a frothy Italian dessert.) Or they can seek to train some of the exotic types who have roamed the world soaking up foreign culture but who might think that zero-coupon bonds have something to do with Sean Connery or Roger Moore.    Thus the people who end up in these jobs are often anything but faceless finance types. They have names like Roelfien A. Kuypers, Carlton Poon or Bibiana Yow. They have exotic hobbies and unusual skills.    R. Steven Wunsch climbs rocks. Now a vice president in the financial futures department at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. in New York, he majored in English at Princeton and then spent eight years scrambling up sandstone pinnacles in East Germany and peaks in the U.S. and United Kingdom. He finally came down to earth to work on the floor of the New York Futures Exchange and, in 1981, joined Kidder. &quot;I didn't have anything on my resume except for rock climbing,&quot; he says.    Mr. Wunsch was introduced to the firm by someone from its bond trading department -- whom he had met at a rock-climbing class he gives on weekends. Now he is involved in Kidder's push to go global, putting together and marketing equity futures and program-trading plans around the world. His steady balance may have helped him get the job, but, he says, &quot;I never took any economics or business or math, the sort of things I need now.&quot;    Fluency in foreign languages is one of the most sought-after skills. Dagmar Bottenbruch studied anthropology and philosophy for a year at Cologne University in West Germany before moving to the U.S., where she graduated with a degree in biological psychology at Berkeley. She soon discovered her knowledge of English and German opened many doors.    After a stint at Harvard Business School, the German-born Ms. Bottenbruch now works as a European equities analyst for First Boston in New York. &quot;This is a really great opportunity for me,&quot; she says. &quot;I thought it challenging to present European companies to U.S. investors in a U.S. research style.&quot;    Then again, languages aren't everything. &quot;I speak extremely bad French, restaurant Italian and Spanish,&quot; jokes Nicholas T. Allan, a 29-year-old senior vice president at Kleinwort Grieveson Securities in New York, who writes pop songs in his spare time. A former junior building-industry analyst in London, he was sent to New York to help set up the British firm's securities operations.    While he may not yet have hit the big time with his music (his greatest success to date is a song that reached No. 127 in the British charts), he is much in demand in his profession: He says he gets called with job offers as often as two or three times a week. &quot;They're there all the time,&quot; Mr. Allan says.    All this means work for headhunters. &quot;Everybody needs more good people,&quot; says Windle Priem, managing director of the executive search firm Korn/Ferry International. He says good equity traders can easily double their previous salaries if they have international expertise. And a portfolio manager with a few years' experience and a solid track record can earn anywhere from $300,000 to $1 million a year.    The flurry of international activity, however, doesn't delight everyone. Old-timers such as Reginald Duquesnoy of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., who has traveled the globe in search of ways to invest in Danish assets in Swaziland or Turkish textile stocks in London, frets about the stampede into what was once the province of a handful of internationalists.    With the kind of money the big institutions can throw around, smaller markets such as Finland that have provided many bargains could be overwhelmed by heavy-handed traders, he worries.    So far, such fears haven't been justified. But for a number of the big U.S. investment houses, setting up international market operations and meshing them with their domestic operations hasn't gone altogether smoothly. Companies such as Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. lost several frustrated employees to other companies in the past two or three years because of difficulties in integrating their domestic and foreign operations.    As the new boys and girls on the block, some international analysts and traders complain about the problems of having to prove themselves to skeptics back home. Rosemary Sagar, a European equities analyst who worked briefly for Morgan Stanley and Drexel Burnham before moving to Baring Securities Inc., a U.K. firm, in April, says she was at times exasperated by the narrow U.S. focus of some colleagues at the two U.S. companies.    She also complains about delays of as long as five weeks in getting her research reports edited and published at her previous employers. &quot;There are too many bureaucratic obstacles,&quot; she says.    While the start-up pains are probably transitory, there may yet be trouble around the corner for some of today's young, enthusiastic globalists. The great boom on world financial markets that has encouraged the trend to go global continues. But what happens when boom turns to bust? At the very least, some predict, those Porsches will be put up for sale. &quot;Everybody's investment record is up in this market,&quot; Mr. Priem of Korn/Ferry says. He reckons a downturn will quickly lead to a shakeout in the industry and to staff cuts. &quot;Only 20% of people out there can add value, really make a difference,&quot; he estimates.    That gloomy assessment hasn't deterred many would-be players of the global markets game. Mr. Goodson, the former missionary, says the attractions of earning a high salary at a good company are even inducing some people to learn Japanese. Being able to speak Japanese is &quot;no longer as bizarre and unusual as it used to be,&quot; he grumbles. &quot;It dilutes my uniqueness.&quot;    ---   Mr. Gumbel is a foreign business editor based in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>