<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870130-0122 </DOCNO><HL> War Center:How Iranian DealersBuy Arms of All SortsThrough British Office---They Spend $3 Billion or MoreA Year on Iraq Campaign,Much for U.S. Weaponry---An Alleged Israeli Connection---By John J. FialkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   What may be the largest network of private arms dealers in history operates here out of a modern office building at 4 Victoria St., next to Britain's Department of Trade and Industry.    In it is the Logistics Support Centre for Iran's military services -- an agency whose secretive business has involved a wide spectrum of weapons dealers, ranging from thieves and confidence men to agents of the British government.    Spending what U.S. intelligence people estimate at $3 billion to $4 billion a year, Iran's arms buyers have faced repeated policy foul-ups, chronic problems with overpriced or faulty equipment and highly publicized Western embargoes on Iran-bound arms shipments. Nonetheless, they have managed to ship Iran a mountain of military supplies, which now are being used in a major attack on Iraq.    &quot;It has been a crazy sort of war, where they've had to save up for every battle,&quot; explains Hamilton Spence, the managing director of Interarms, Britain's largest private dealer in military weapons. He adds that Interarms itself decided to stay out of the Iran arms trade to protect its arms-dealing licenses here and in the U.S.    Mr. Spence and other arms dealers who have seen the monthly shopping lists circulated here by Iran's Logistics Support Centre say they have been amazed at the amounts of weaponry that Iran has been able to buy despite the embargoes imposed by the U.S., Britain and other European countries.    One item that appears every month is an order for 150,000 rounds of 155-mm artillery shells, nearly $40 million worth. &quot;That has to come from a NATO country,&quot; another arms dealer says. &quot;You can't ship such large amounts of material unless the governments concerned are involved, either actively or by turning a blind eye to what is going on.&quot;    Western intelligence estimates say the Logistics Support Centre, in a building primarily known as the headquarters of the National Iranian Oil Co., buys as much as 70% of Iran's arms. Very little of the Iran-bound weaponry actually goes through Britain, however, because most of the deals are handled through telexes with offshore dealers, who then ship directly or indirectly to the Mideast. The dealers use shipping brokers, who sometimes mingle arms bound for Iraq and Iran on the same freighter.    Iraq also employs a network of private arms dealers, but Iran's weapons-buying efforts in Western Europe and the U.S. have been much more extensive because most of Iran's arsenal consists of fighter planes, helicopters, radar and missile systems, artillery pieces, tanks and naval ships bought by the former shah from the U.S. and the U.K. during the 1970s.    The Khomeini regime's initial plunge into arms buying here was disastrous. In 1981, the Logistics Support Centre announced that it would require arms dealers to put up 10% of the cost of each order and that the money would be repaid only after Iranians had inspected the weapons.    Most legitimate weapons dealers found the terms harsh and unusual, but Behnam Nodjoumi, an Iranian expatriate, agreed to sell the center 8,000 American-made TOW antitank missiles. According to government prosecutors, the deal was an elaborate fraud. Three Iranian colonels sent to Belgium to inspect the &quot;missiles&quot; were kidnapped, along with two Iranian diplomats and a banker in London.    Scotland Yard broke up the swindle a few hours before the center was supposed to send a multimillion-dollar bank draft to a numbered bank account in Switzerland. Mr. Nodjoumi, who was described by one British investigator as &quot;an old-fashioned con man,&quot; was later convicted of fraud and sentenced to 10 years in prison.    At about the same time, the center allegedly established ties with another expatriate Iranian, Saeid Asefi Inanlou. According to affidavits filed by U.S. prosecutors in San Diego, Mr. Inanlou developed a ring of U.S. Navy civilian employees and paid them to steal parts for the Navy's F-14 &quot;Tomcat&quot; fighter from various Navy storerooms, including one on the carrier USS Kitty Hawk.    After F-14 parts valued at more than $500,000 were allegedly shipped through Mr. Inanlou to Iran, a curious U.S. Customs inspector in Los Angeles opened a box labeled &quot;auto parts&quot; and found an inertial navigation unit for the Tomcat, which is used only by the U.S. Navy and the Iranian air force. The U.S. is seeking to extradite Mr. Inanlou, who lives here and has been indicted on charges of violating U.S. export controls. An attorney for Mr. Inanlou says he won't comment.    Iran insists that it doesn't buy weapons in London. &quot;We don't have any people who handle this business,&quot; an embassy spokesman says. In reality, observers say, as many as 50 officers are negotiating deals in the center at any given time.    Abby Ghobadian, a spokesman for the National Movement of the Iranian Resistance, an anti-Khomeini group that keeps a close watch on the center, says Iran has occasionally paid as much as 500 times the normal price for weapons parts. He adds, however, that &quot;procurement has become much more sophisticated.&quot; In the past three years, he says, Iran has obtained a computer similar to one used by the U.S. Air Force to keep track of parts. The center he says, now orders U.S. weapons parts by their computer code numbers.    Many of the so-called private arms dealers that Iran has been dealing with lately, according to Mr. Ghobadian, are really agents for governments. For example, his group believes that Israel, despite its denials, has been supplying large quantities of weapons to Iran since 1980. Yaacov Nimrodi, the Israeli dealer who was involved in the U.S. arms sales to Iran, is simply a conduit for the Israeli government, Mr. Ghobadian charges. &quot;No Israeli arms dealer could have dealt in such large quantities without permission of the Israeli government,&quot; he contends.    Mr. Nimrodi, who has an apartment here near Iran's embassy, couldn't be reached for comment. He has been named in congressional hearings and press accounts as one of several key foreign middlemen in the clandestine American arms shipments to Iran. The others include Adnan Khashoggi, a Saudi promoter, and Manucher Ghorbanifar, an Iranian businessman with a murky past.    Two years ago, Mr. Ghobadian's group exposed a large sale of tank and armored-car parts to Iran from Britain's Ministry of Defence, which had shipped them to Iran in boxes marked &quot;vehicle parts.&quot; A spokesman for the ministry said the shipment, which included Chieftain tank engines, didn't violate the embargo because &quot;these spares are not connected with the lethal systems of the vehicles&quot; and because they had been ordered in 1979, before the Khomeini regime took power.    According to diplomatic sources, Iran's arms dealers have approached every country that uses American-made weapons -- including North Vietnam, which acquired a huge arsenal of U.S. arms in 1975 when South Vietnam collapsed. Last November, Jane's Defence Weekly, a British newsletter that follows weapons sales, reported hearing from &quot;Arab sources&quot; that North Vietnam signed a $400 million deal with Iran last July that included 80 U.S. M-48 tanks and 200 M-113 armored personnel carriers. The report couldn't be confirmed.    Several arms merchants say middlemen posing as arms dealers are often used to conceal government-to-government deals, usually orchestrated by intelligence agencies. Middlemen are also used to conceal the bribery that seems inherent in large weapons sales in the Mideast.    &quot;Within a month after contacting a government, you are likely to get letters from three agents in that country wanting to serve you,&quot; explains one arms dealer who asks not to be identified. The agent, he says, estimates bribes needed for officials who must approve the deal. Then, the middleman offers an opportunity for the arms seller to take a bribe. &quot;He will say, 'How much do you need for local expenses?'&quot; After these calculations, a price is agreed on, and formal negotiations with the government begin.    Although the U.S. arms deal with Iran -- which appears to have generated an unexpected windfall for U.S.-backed Contra forces in Nicaragua -- appears to have some of these characteristics, watchers of the Logistics Support Centre here say they are baffled by the number of middlemen involved. At the time, in 1985, the center was desperate for electronic parts for the U.S.-built Hawk surface-to-air missile and for wire-guided TOW missiles. According to arms dealers here, orders for the two systems had been on Iranian weapons circulars for months, apparently without being filled.    Some other Iranian arms deals have used long daisy chains of middlemen. Gerald McDevitt, a former aircraft mechanic who operates a small aircraft-parts business in a London suburb, says he discovered that he was involved in one of them in January 1984. According to Mr. McDevitt, he was to receive a box of American F-5 fighter parts, which he had ordered from a U.S. company for delivery to a second London concern that was supposed to deliver it to a third. When the U.S. seller abruptly demanded a large advance payment, Mr. McDevitt says, he was about to withdraw from the deal when the money was suddenly wired by an unknown party to the U.S. company. &quot;I said, 'Well, this is all a bit odd,'&quot; Mr. McDevitt recalls.    Things got odder when the box arrived. It contained, not parts, but 52 pounds of granulated dog food -- substituted by a suspicious U.S. Customs inspector acting on a tip that the parts were bound for Iran.    Mr. McDevitt told British customs investigators, who arrived shortly after the dog food, that he had no idea where the parts were going. He has since been indicted by a federal grand jury in Chicago for violating U.S. export controls, but he insists that he is blameless. &quot;I know numerous companies that are doing a lot of business with Iran,&quot; he says, &quot;but I decided not to.&quot;    Once weapons are located and purchased, according to arms dealers, they are often shipped to intermediate points with forged documents called &quot;end-user certificates&quot; showing that the ultimate destination is an acceptable, nonbelligerent country. Portugal is often used as a way station.    From there, according to arms dealers and intelligence sources, the weapons are taken to the Mideast. This is usually arranged through Danish ship brokers, who have a long tradition of shipping arms around the world. Officials of the Danish sailors' union have estimated that as many as 40 Danish cargo ships are involved in the Iran-Iraq trade, including some ships that transported U.S. arms to Iran from Israel. Denmark is among the nations banning weapons exports to Iran and Iraq.    This last segment of the arms trade is also the most hazardous. Just ask Capt. Thomas Screech, the former owner of the British merchant ship Sarah Jane.    According to his ship's documents, his last trip began in July 1982 at the port of Setubal, Portugal, where he picked up a crate holding 2,000 fuzes for 500-pound bombs. The crate was stamped with U.S. markings and shipped from a Long Island company called Western Dynamics Inc. The destination: Iran.    He then went to Valencia, Spain, to pick up 300 tons of artillery and mortar shells and small arms destined for Iraq. Then it was on to a small port in Greece to take on 90 tons of hand grenades bound for Iran.    At Qadhima, a Saudi Arabian port on the Red Sea, Capt. Screech says he watched a fleet of 250 Mercedes trucks set off for Baghdad with Iraq's weaponry. Next, the Iranian weapons were taken to Bandar Abbas, at the mouth of the Persian Gulf, where he recalls seeing thousands of tons of weapons and some Danish ships.    Iranian soldiers unloaded the grenades from the Sarah Jane, but they began kicking and spitting at the crate of bomb fuses when they saw its U.S. markings. Despite Capt. Screech's protestations that Iran's bombs couldn't explode without the fuzes, he says, an Iranian army colonel told him that the soldiers wouldn't unload it. Finally, Capt. Screech says, he was ordered at gunpoint to leave.    But at his next stop, in Dubai, authorities found the fuzes in the ship's hold, and he was arrested for illegally importing weapons. A telex to Western Dynamics produced a reply that the company accepted no liability for the shipment. (The Western Dynamics office has since been closed, and the company couldn't be located for comment.) After five months in Dubai, partly spent in jail, Capt. Screech says he was forced to sell his ship for a fraction of its value to pay a $55,000 fine and port fees.    When he complained to Iran's Logistics Support Centre here, he received a reply suggesting that he take up the matter with authorities in Tehran. &quot;Since this office has not, in any way, been involved in the subject transaction, we are regrettably in no position to make any comments,&quot; the center said. </TEXT></DOC>