<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Titanic Battle:GM Plans Offer to Pay$700 Million to Buy OutIts Critic H. Ross Perot---Whether He Accepts or Not,GM Still Faces ProblemsIn and Out of EDS Unit---A Texas Vs. Michigan Scenario---By Doron P. Levin and Dale D. BussStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GM GMEAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   General Motors Corp. plans a $700 million offer to buy back all of H. Ross Perot's GM shares to settle their acrimonious feud.    Chairman Roger B. Smith has been lining up support from directors, and the board is expected to give its approval at its regular monthly meeting in New York today. Mr. Perot, who became a GM director two years ago and who has been a constant critic since last summer, would leave the board as part of the agreement. Mr. Perot isn't expected to attend today's meeting, to let the board consider the proposal.    Whether Mr. Perot, the billionaire founder and chairman of Electronic Data Systems Corp., will accept the offer isn't yet known, but GM executives hope he will agree today. EDS, which was purchased by GM in 1984, plans a press conference at its Dallas headquarters this afternoon. Thus, today's events promise to climax the struggle that has been building for months as Mr. Perot has publicly criticized GM and Mr. Smith at every turn.    Whatever decision Mr. Perot makes poses significant potential problems for GM. If Mr. Perot accepts the buy-out and leaves EDS, it will raise knotty questions about the future value of EDS to GM, because many top EDS executives probably will eventually leave the company as well. But the proposed offer in itself indicates how much Mr. Smith is fed up with being criticized by Mr. Perot. So if Mr. Perot says no, the stage could be set for an all-out public struggle between one of the world's wealthiest men and one of its most powerful industrialists.    The impending buy-out bid follows the collapse of negotiations last month to sell all or part of EDS to American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. Those negotiations, which ended when GM and ATandamp;T couldn't agree on price and other issues, also offered Mr. Smith a possible way to get rid of Mr. Perot. It was after those talks fell through, a source close to GM says, that Mr. Smith proposed buying out Mr. Perot, GM's largest individual shareholder.    A GM spokesman said yesterday, &quot;There is just nothing to say&quot; about the buy-out plan. But both GM and EDS apparently are preparing to explain the situation to securities analysts. Analysts who follow the automotive and data-processing industries have been invited to a meeting with top EDS and GM officers in New York tomorrow.    GM also is proposing to buy back the Class E GM shares issued in the EDS purchase to three other top EDS officers and longtime associates of Mr. Perot -- Morton H. Meyerson, J. Thomas Walter Jr., and William K. Gayden -- for about $100 million, the sources say. The four men would leave EDS immediately, although Mr. Perot would retain a figurehead post as EDS's founder. He also would agree not to start a company that competes with EDS for a period of time. The offer wouldn't be made to other Class E holders.    The tentative proposal also calls for EDS's top 200 employees to agree to stay with the company for about a year before they would be free to leave. If they depart earlier, they could forfeit some lucrative benefits.    The showdown at EDS climaxes a difficult year for GM. Every other piece of Mr. Smith's self-proclaimed program to push GM into the 21st century has encountered significant setbacks. The company's year-old &quot;factory of the future&quot; in Detroit operated at half speed for months, because many sophisticated machines were running awry, or not running at all. Business slumps have forced layoffs at both Hughes Aircraft Co., which GM bought a year ago for $5.1 billion, and GMF Robotics, GM's factory-automation affiliate. And GM recently decided to scale back Saturn Corp., its highly publicized project to profitably produce small cars in the U.S., after deciding its original goals were far too ambitious.    But GM's clashes with Mr. Perot and EDS pose more fundamental problems than the others. Mr. Smith billed the EDS acquisition, GM's first plunge into high technology, as a partnership that would catapult GM into the electronic age, and infuse its smug middle-management ranks with hard-charging entrepreneurial spirit. But Mr. Perot has given Mr. Smith more spirit than he counted on, loudly criticizing GM for changing too slowly and declaring, &quot;We've got to nuke the GM system.&quot;    Meanwhile, GM and EDS have become dependent on each other. EDS provides GM offices and factories with a broad scope of data-processing and telecommunications systems, while GM has provided EDS with spectacular growth, and about three-fourths of its total revenue.    What's more, it's increasingly clear that even if GM solves its &quot;Perot problem,&quot; it won't immediately solve its problems with EDS. Managers at all levels of both organizations are constantly clashing over the prices EDS charges GM for services.    GM managers are under increasing pressure from higher-ups to cut costs. But EDS managers are paid to maximize EDS's profits, and thus the value of GM's Class E stock. Class E shares don't represent ownership of EDS; instead they entitle holders to a dividend based on EDS's earnings, even though GM actually owns EDS. Both GM common and Class E shares are traded on the New York Stock Exchange.    The total amount of the buy-out offer being discussed indicates Mr. Perot would receive about $60 for each of his 11.4 million GM Class E shares, about double the current market value. However, that may be because Mr. Perot and the other holders of EDS stock were guaranteed a price of about $125 for each Class E share seven years after the merger date. The stock has split two-for-one since then, so it appears GM is giving Mr. Perot nearly the full guaranteed price four years early.    GM wouldn't have a problem financing the proposed buyback -- it had $3.9 billion in cash and marketable securities on hand Sept. 30, for example. But it is unclear how GM might account for the transaction and unclear how its various classes of shareholders might react.    All this is posing a difficult dilemma for Mr. Perot, sources close to him say. The entrepreneur, who quit his job as a salesman for International Business Machines Corp. in 1962 and launched EDS with $1,000, has become a business legend for not backing away from a fight.    In 1979 he organized a team of EDS officials to rescue two colleagues from a Tehran jail during the Iranian revolution -- an episode that prompted a best-selling book and a recent television mini-series. Now he runs the risk of appearing to desert the company he founded and the people who work there, and of being willing to take on Iranian revolutionaries but not Mr. Smith -- even after declaring it his personal mission to spur reform at GM.    But staying at EDS and fighting Mr. Smith poses equally grave risks. A protracted struggle could hurt the price of Class E shares, and thus hurt the financial position of many EDS executives and employees. What's more, Mr. Perot and his cohorts believe that even if they should somehow topple Mr. Smith, GM itself won't change. Mr. Perot recently called top EDS officials to Dallas to discuss GM's buy-out overtures, sources say, and a majority of the seven advised him to accept the GM offer.    GM's problem isn't any easier. If Mr. Perot rejects a buy-out bid GM will be stuck with a hostile EDS. But that could happen even if Mr. Perot leaves, and meanwhile GM conceivably could face hostile shareholder reaction to the terms of any deal.    Mr. Smith can say, however, that buying back Mr. Perot's Class E shares will enhance the value of the others, as he owns almost 10% of that class outstanding. And Mr. Smith can argue that Mr. Perot's criticism has become a distraction for his managers. Indeed, one middle manager recalls &quot;almost driving off the road&quot; last Monday when he heard a radio report about the disclosure of GM's effort to sell EDS to ATandamp;T.    What Mr. Smith could also say, but probably won't, is that he himself has enough problems without H. Ross Perot. GM has been publicly insisting that its current earnings slump is the necessary cost of investing for the long term, but privately executives have been saying that the company's spending got so out of hand that it amounted to simply throwing money at problems.    &quot;I fully support the need for updating and modernizing all of our facilities,&quot; President F. James McDonald told a conference of GM's 800 top officials last June. &quot;But unless we interrupt this alarming rise in fixed costs, we could be improving ourselves right out of the competitive ballpark.&quot; Then he told the group: &quot;I can't really say I'm proud of you.&quot; Last month, after it had posted a third-quarter operating loss of $338.5 million, GM announced it would close nine plants and parts of two others.    The Smith-Perot conflict reflects differences in values, temperament and perspective between the two men. It is Texas vs. Michigan, high-tech vs. smokestack and an entrepreneurial leader vs. a professional manager.    While the EDS and Hughes acquisitions and the launching of Saturn have made Mr. Smith the most innovative GM chairman in half a century, he remains a creature of a GM system that respects rank and tradition. Mr. Perot, in contrast, created a more freewheeling culture at EDS, and doesn't understand why GM shouldn't accept it as superior.    All these differences came to the fore in an incident that sources say was a watershed between the two men. Last fall GM and EDS were disagreeing over the formula for compensating top EDS executives, and Mr. Smith flew to Dallas to mediate. About an hour into the meeting, during a presentation by EDS chief financial officer J. Thomas Walter, a red-faced Mr. Smith exploded into a shouting tirade, and &quot;was talking so fast I couldn't understand him,&quot; recalls one EDS executive.    &quot;I've never seen anything like that in a business meeting,&quot; this executive says. &quot;We knew from that day on that we were dealing with something different {than we were used to}.&quot; GM yesterday declined all comment on such matters.    Last December Mr. Perot was the only GM director to vote against GM's acquisition of Hughes Aircraft; he said he would take his opposition public, sources say, but GM and his own underlings talked him out of it. By last summer, however, Mr. Perot began publicly criticizing GM. &quot;Brains and wits will beat capital all the time,&quot; he told interviewers. &quot;GM is the largest, wealthiest car maker in the world . . . but has failed to capture the full potential of its people.&quot;    That was just the beginning. His statements grew increasingly barbed over the next few months, as he criticized GM for being a bloated bureaucracy excessively focused on such management perks as executive dining rooms and chauffeured cars. &quot;You've got to move Roger and the rest of those people out of the 14th floor of the GM building,&quot; he told trade publication Ward's Auto World a month ago, &quot;and down to the real places where people are doing the real work of building cars.&quot;    All the while a surprised Mr. Smith, who rarely hears internal criticism, turned the other cheek. &quot;We get along fine,&quot; Mr. Smith said in an interview last summer. &quot;He's trying to encourage us along the lines of what we want to do. I don't think he criticizes us. He doesn't call up and say, 'Gee, you're doing a lousy job somewhere.'&quot;    Last week, however, Mr. Smith started to strike back publicly. &quot;We are all trying to change the corporation, the reorganization we actually started before we even knew how to spell Ross Perot,&quot; he said in an interview with the Detroit Free Press. Mr. Perot &quot;has an office that makes mine look like shantytown,&quot; he added. &quot;He has Remingtons; he has a Gilbert Stuart painting hanging on the wall. Nobody runs around saying, 'Get rid of Ross's office.'&quot;    The public verbal jousting, however titillating, turns out to be just part of the story. On a more practical level, EDS and GM are both growing increasingly frustrated with their customer-owner relationship. Because of their frequent clashes over pricing, the two sides haven't been able to agree on contracts for most of the work EDS does for GM.    A mid-level manager at one of GM's car groups voices complaints about EDS typical of veteran GM officials. He says EDS charges significantly more than did GM's own data processors for identical services, a practice that he says hinders his staff at a time when GM is slashing costs across the board. &quot;We're getting fleeced,&quot; he charges.    This manager says, for instance, that as a &quot;captive market&quot; for EDS, his department must order even the simplest computer equipment and software -- such as connector cables and basic word processing and graphics packages -- through EDS at much higher costs and with more delays compared with the previous system.    &quot;I used to just have somebody pick up a spreadsheet at ComputerLand overnight on the way home from work and take it out of petty cash,&quot; the GM manager says. &quot;Now I have to do it through EDS, and if they don't have it, it can take months.&quot;    Another longtime manager in a GM car operation complains that EDS's rapid growth shows up in a lack of technical competence among many new EDS employees freshly graduated from college. &quot;Since I have a master's degree in computer engineering,&quot; he says, &quot;I've had to end up training a number of them myself when they were the ones who were supposed to be helping us.&quot;    Sources also say that EDS's lack of specific expertise in industrial automation, an area in which GM has needed a lot of help in the last few years, has hindered the auto maker. For instance, about 18 months ago, EDS officials had accepted a bid for production-monitoring equipment at a GM plant in Indiana. EDS surprised bidders by selecting a small, relatively unknown company that had offered to do the job for significantly less than what some other suppliers had bid -- despite the protests of competitors that it would be impossible for the winner to execute the task at such a price.    As it happened, only a few months into the contract, the supplier was faltering. GM managers injected themselves into the affair. After more than a half-year delay and EDS's apparent mishandling of a key portion of the plant's automation, last spring the auto maker went back to one of the higher-priced, but established unsuccessful bidders to get the job finished.    One top executive of a non-GM customer of EDS supports such assertions. His company balked recently when EDS bid on taking over all of the company's computer operations, parts of which EDS already handled. &quot;Their pricing was out to lunch -- two to three times what it would have cost us to do it alone,&quot; says the executive.    Subsequently, the company tentatively decided to begin phasing out its existing EDS contracts. Faced with a possible loss of business, the executive adds, &quot;now our EDS guy is even proposing going outside EDS to service some contracts&quot; because EDS's pricing is &quot;absurd.&quot;    EDS officials acknowledge that growing to 40,000 employees from 15,000 since the acquisition caused them to hire &quot;some inexperienced kids,&quot; as one executive puts it. &quot;We said we'll just have to train them.&quot;    This executive also acknowledges that GM managers often are frustrated because they had to order cheap or simple items like Lotus 1-2-3 or a computer cable through EDS. &quot;The reverse of that,&quot; he adds, &quot;is that I installed 10,000 personal computers in GM in one year, and folks were buying 75 different kinds of spreadsheets. The price we pay could be cut in half if we'd just decide on five spreadsheets. We've saved GM $350 million on hardware since coming in on just these kinds of decisions.&quot;    As for pricing, since GM owns EDS, the question of contracts and profits might not seem to be a serious problem. In fact, internal pricing between divisions of the same company is a classic business-school case-study problem, and one with which GM, which owns an extensive network of auto-parts suppliers, has lots of practical experience.    But EDS was the first GM unit to have its profits represented by a separate class of stock. EDS's profits support the dividend on GM Class E common shares, which were distributed by GM in connection with the acquisition and now are traded publicly. The shares allowed GM to pay for the acquisition without laying out cash and, GM said, provided independence and a performance incentive to EDS workers, many of whom own Class E shares. GM liked the idea so much that it used it to acquire Hughes Aircraft, and combined it with GM electronics operations to create GM Class H stock.    Now, analysts estimate, EDS earns 14 cents before taxes on every dollar's worth of services it provides to non-GM commercial customers, while earning no more than 9 1/2 cents for each dollar of its GM business. Sources say Mr. Perot was preparing to sue GM to sign long-term fixed contracts guaranteeing EDS profit margins he deems appropriate. Mr. Perot may still file a suit, if he rejects GM's buyout and stays with EDS.    The message in all this may be that the &quot;alphabet-stock&quot; concept, however convenient for financing, is an operational mess because it creates inherent conflicts throughout the two organizations. &quot;The pricing is really confusing, and it shouldn't be that way,&quot; complains a young EDS programmer at one of GM's parts operations. &quot;That's something they should have worked out at the top, but instead we have to deal with it all the way down here.&quot;    Conflicts or no, however, GM absolutely needs the data-processing networks that have become an increasingly important part of its daily operations. In turn, in the first nine months of 1986 it paid EDS $2.4 billion. That's up 47% from a year earlier and some three times the amount of EDS's full-year revenue of $786.1 million in the year prior to the 1984 acquisition. EDS now gets only 26% of its revenue from customers other than GM -- and some of those customers are GM suppliers who use EDS because GM does.    Would the GM-EDS relationship work better without Mr. Perot? If Mr. Perot takes GM's offer, will he lose the loyalty of the thousands of EDS employees whom he persuaded to leave their Texas homes and move to GM locations all over the country? Or would many of them who worked for EDS before the merger bail out of GM to follow him in starting a new company from scratch -- thus leaving GM stranded, in a sense?    &quot;I still have as much respect for him as ever,&quot; says one top EDSer, who might or mightn't be typical. &quot;I think he'll take the money and start a new EDS with it. And I think all or most of his people will follow him there.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>