<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0091 </DOCNO><HL> White House Decisions on Policy, Staffing DelayedAs Officials' Energies Are Diverted by Iran Affair---By Ellen HumeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Advocates of the controversial Midgetman missile got a boost for their position from an unusual source: the Iran-Contra scandal.    The $45 billion proposal to deploy the missile, which is backed by many Democrats in Congress, has aroused considerable opposition within the Defense Department; many senior officials had hoped to redesign the single-warhead missile. But according to a senior Pentagon official who was involved in the deployment decision, the Reagan administration was too preoccupied with the Iranian scandal to devise a cost-effective alternative to the proposal in time to meet the deadline for submitting the deployment plan to Congress.    The handling of the Midgetman was only one of the ripple-effects of the 10-week-old Iran-Contra crisis. While White House officials argue that they now are back on track after months of disarray, the crisis has affected policies and actions ranging from personnel and pay to trade and nuclear test treaties.    &quot;We're getting total flip-flops from one thing to another. There's schizophrenia across the board,&quot; laments Edwin Fuelner, president of the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank here.    The scandal has drained officials' time and delayed policy decisions, including the filling of important jobs that have been vacant or are about to become so: head of the Justice Department's Antitrust Division, White House domestic policy chief, secretary of the cabinet. Explaining President Reagan's slowness in choosing new members for the Federal Reserve Board, a senior White House official said: &quot;Perhaps you've heard -- we've been preoccupied.&quot;    On Capitol Hill as well, there are signs that the crisis has caused some issues to fall through the cracks. GOP Senate staff aides complain that this week's clash with the Reagan administration over two unratified nuclear testing treaties in part reflected the failure of a preoccupied White House staff to consult closely with Republican allies.    To be sure, many agencies report that their dealings with the White House have continued pretty much as usual. Deborah Dean, Housing and Urban Development Secretary Samuel Pierce's liaison with the White House, says &quot;They've been as responsive as ever. . . . I haven't noticed a change at all.&quot; And the Cabinet's secretary, Alfred Kingon, insists, &quot;Frankly, I don't think the outlook is any different within the administration or on the Hill because of Iran.&quot;    But many other officials say the scandal has had indirect, and sometimes direct, impact on Reagan administration decision-making. For instance, Reagan administration aides say that, following the recommendations of a federal commission, President Reagan initially intended to give big pay boosts to members of Congress, federal judges and other top-level officials. But Mr. Reagan's cabinet members and advisers argued that such a move would set off a major political firestorm -- one he couldn't afford in the midst of the Iran-Contra scandal. So, two weeks ago, he backed off. The raise, the first for top federal officials in a decade, was dramatically reduced.    Some argue that the controversy hasn't really stymied much, because the Reagan administration already had run out of steam and new ideas after six years of successes on Capitol Hill on the tax overhaul, MX missile, Contra aid and other programs. &quot;The Iran business has just brought into clearer focus the void that was already there,&quot; says one White House official. &quot;People are paralyzed, and now they have an excuse for it.&quot;    Yet some suggest that the White House's search for new themes to divert attention from the nagging crisis has sparked action on other issues. &quot;What is forcing them to do something is Iran, because they need to take away the headlines from that,&quot; says House Democratic Whip Tony Coelho (D, Calif.). The administration now is pushing for legislation on trade, education and other programs they wouldn't touch before, officials say.    &quot;In a curious sense, the Iran crisis helped those who wanted a trade bill. It helped them convince the others,&quot; says Robert Hormats, a former Reagan administration official who now is a vice president at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. Congressional aides detect signs that cabinet agencies are taking advantage of the White House's weakness to reestablish their own clout. Labor Department officials have already contacted House Education and Labor Committee aides to work on a $900 million worker-retraining program as part of the trade package. &quot;It appears they want to cooperate,&quot; says one Democratic leadership aide. &quot;They came to us.&quot;    John Roberts, a former White House official who now is a political consultant, believes the Iran affair also sparked Reagan administration support for an education program allowing student loans to be repaid according to the student's post-graduation income. &quot;It's been percolating along and it's always been an uphill battle to get anyone to take it and embrace it,&quot; he says. &quot;This year the logjam broke, and I credit Iran with the whole thing.&quot;    Some also suggest that the crisis may have papered over some budget fights, because White House aides were too busy dealing with the Iran scandal to wage fights on all the issues they otherwise might have. Says agriculture consultant Randy Russell: &quot;If anything, it may be expediting things because the White House staff is too busy to get in the way, leaving cabinet officers free to negotiate with the principals.&quot;    At the same time, with White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan still on the firing line, his hopes for a major presidential initiative to change the federal budget process and install a capital budget, as he was advocating last summer, seem dim. White House Counsel Peter Wallison, who headed the task force on the project, has been absorbed with going over all the White House's documents on the Iran-Contra policy. The budget-overhaul proposal had stirred little enthusiasm outside the chief of staff's office in the first place, and the scandal has sharply curtailed Mr. Regan's ability to promote the idea.    The appointment of the former ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, David Abshire, to become the White House point man on the scandal is supposed to help free Mr. Regan and other officials to get things moving again on other fronts. But one result may be that a complex effort to get allies to collaborate on weapons research and development may actually be slowed down. The reason: Dennis Kloske, the Pentagon official who has been spearheading the effort, has been diverted to the White House to help Mr. Abshire.    Meanwhile, officials say, the scandal is also delaying high-level Reagan administration discussions on whether and how to to redefine the president's Strategic Defense Initiative to allow for phased deployment of the antimissile system. &quot;If the Iran problem continues to fester,&quot; this effort will be stalled still further, one official concludes.    Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger warned in a speech yesterday that the Iran affair may cause more than temporary distractions. &quot;I think we should all be concerned that overreaction to the Iran controversy could lead to another dangerous period of American withdrawal, isolationism, and confusion about its proper role in the world,&quot; he said. &quot;Foreign and domestic policy should not be held hostage to these investigations.&quot;    With Congress only recently convened, the scandal's full effect on the Reagan administration's clout has yet to be seen. Mr. Kingon, the Cabinet secretary, argues that even if there were no scandal, issues like the budget, trade and agriculture policies &quot;would be difficult anyway. Some of these issues were very difficult to begin with, and Iran doesn't make them any more difficult.&quot;    But others acknowledge that, as one official put it, &quot;Our weakened position makes it that much more difficult to get the legislation we want and to stop the legislation we don't want.&quot;    Democrats in Congress agree. &quot;The White House, if not irrelevant, will be much less of a force in town than anyone would have anticipated,&quot; says Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont.). &quot;The American people and Congress are starting to look at who will lead the country&quot; in the future, he says, and &quot;the Iran affair has hurried that process.&quot;    And congressional staff members say the toll on White House officials is apparent. &quot;You can see the strain,&quot; says one Republican aide. &quot;We know they're under duress. They're trying to make humor of it when they come to the Hill, saying things like, 'I don't know anything, and I can't remember when I knew it.'&quot; </TEXT></DOC>