<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880525-0171 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Moscow Summit: Why Rush Talks? </HL><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Re your editorials on the summit and arms-control treaties: After eight years trying to learn what to do about Soviet arms-control violations while continuing to negotiate new treaties, there suddenly arises an urgent need to ratify the INF treaty and reach agreement on START in time for this week's Moscow summit. Is this wise?    In 1972, there was much scurrying around to reach agreement on SALT, again in time for a May summit. The results have not been pleasing. In the rush for agreement, the U.S. negotiators were unable to resolve known problems. They failed, for example, to insist on a definition for a &quot;heavy&quot; missile. This one very simple, yet obvious, failure by itself caused the agreement to limit strategic arms to be meaningless, insofar as the Soviet stockpile was concerned. The Soviet stockpile increased by a factor of five over the remainder of the decade.    Similarly, in 1972 the Nixon administration explained that biological weapons were not strategically significant, swept aside the unresolved verification problem, and went ahead and signed the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention. When, within two years, evidence of Soviet violations surfaced, U.S. spokesmen dismissed the evidence saying that there was no reason for the Soviets to violate the agreement; the weapons were not significant. But the U.S. failed to consider the impact of genetic engineering, which was so important that it was precisely the reason that U.S. scientists had pressed hard for a treaty, hoping to cork the bottle before the new chemical and biological horrors emerged. But the rush for agreement did not stop the course of history, or even delay it. It only served to close the eyes of the U.S. security advisers to what was happening in the U.S.S.R.    In 1979, notwithstanding the mounting evidence on Soviet SALT I noncompliance, there again was a rush to achieve agreement; presumably to show the U.S. citizenry how well the Democrats could continue the arms-control process. The SALT II agreement that resulted was so lopsided to the Soviet advantage that it was informally rejected and pulled back by the Carter administration before it could reach the floor of the Senate for what would have been an embarrassing debate. Yet the Reagan administration still adhered to the terms of the &quot;treaty,&quot; which says something about how deadly the arms-control momentum can become, even to the limit of riding roughshod over the Constitution.    This past December, after six grueling years of negotiation, suddenly an Intermediate Nuclear Forces agreement was in the making, and again there was a rush to conclude the treaty in time for a prematurely scheduled summit. The U.S. negotiators were instructed to cave in on all their contested or &quot;bracketed&quot; items, all 100 of them. The treaty signed on Dec. 8 was incomplete. It still is incomplete. Numerous questions have emerged. What does an SS-20 do that an SS-25 cannot do? Is on-site inspection a good thing, or a bad thing? (It was considered good when it appeared to stand in the way, but when the Soviets agreed and set forth the terms, it rapidly became clear that it would be expensive and yield little verification information while providing the Soviets yet another base from which to conduct espionage in the U.S.)    The START negotiations, even if they were 10 times better and more intensive than the INF negotiations, would still be in sad shape, because the problem is 100 times harder and 10,000 times more important. New problems are identified even before old ones are solved. Today the terms do not seem to be much better defined than they were in 1972, and probably the most important knowledge we have gained since SALT II is how limited our intelligence is (mainly because of poor security and good Soviet espionage) and how little we really know about Soviet capabilities.    Soviet arms-control strategy since 1963 has been very clear. Feed the demand in the Western peace movements and news media for arms control by fanning the fears of nuclear war. Force the U.S. to make concession after concession. And most important, sit back and let U.S. domestic politics force the U.S. political authorities to increase pressure on their negotiators to reach agreement in time for the next summit. After all, to use a current-day example, what can be so hard about negotiating a simple, across-the-board 50% reduction? The question, however, reflects a lack of appreciation of history and Soviet intentions.    The history of past agreements, as represented in the seven White House reports over the past five years on Soviet noncompliance, is one good indication of Soviet intentions. Another indication is the testimony of former Communist officials, who have stated unequivocally that the Soviets have no interest in what the U.S. considers arms control. In light of this history, Soviet doctrine and ideology, and America's obvious desire to remain a free and independent nation, one has to wonder why there is such a big rush to ratify a questionable treaty let alone sign another agreement -- especially when the president himself has stated repeatedly that the topic was too complex to reach agreement in the near future, which is a correct statement if one is interested in an agreement that might help preserve security and enhance stability.    One has to wonder if there is not some hidden agenda that is operating. Any business that was run the way the U.S. arms-control process is run would go out of business rapidly. It is hard to believe that anyone serious about arms control is naive enough to believe the process benefits from inadequately prepared agreements. And, how can anyone speak of agreements where there is no meeting of the minds, which has been the situation since the nuclear-test moratorium of the late 1950s?    Perhaps if we slowed down we could make more significant progress over the long term and arms control might begin to make strategic sense.    Joseph D. Douglass Jr.    McClean, Va.    (Mr. Douglass's latest book is &quot;Why the Soviets Violate Arms Control Treaties,&quot; Pergamon-Brassey's, 1988.) </TEXT></DOC>