<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Iran Hearings Show Conflict on PoliciesReagan Inspired Top Advisers to Follow---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Iran-Contra hearings ending this week in Congress leave a record of conflict in the Reagan administration and the president himself toward the policies he inspired his top advisers to follow.    Mr. Reagan is preparing to speak to the nation on the affair before leaving for a California vacation next week. Though expected to avoid details, he is under pressure to address the ambivalent picture drawn by the testimony and written notes of men who all thought they were fulfilling his wishes.    A leader prone to sweeping pronouncements, the president emerges from this record as a semanticist given to fine distinctions. He was a scriptwriter as well as a script-reader when the Iran-Contra operation unraveled last fall. And however victimized by misinformation, he appears to have demonstrated little anger or sense of betrayal toward those who plunged his administration into chaos by diverting the Iran arms-sale profits to Nicaraguan insurgents.    Attorney General Edwin Meese testified that Mr. Reagan was &quot;quite surprised&quot; to learn of the secret transfer of funds. Former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan described the president as &quot;distressed.&quot; Only Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who will conclude his testimony this morning, has used the word &quot;angry.&quot; He did so last Friday even as the president was telling reporters that he hasn't heard &quot;a single word that indicated, in any of the testimony, that laws were broken.&quot;    Just two days before, Mr. Meese testified he saw &quot;probable cause&quot; to investigate lawbreaking in connection with the diversion. Former White House aide Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North admitted July 8 to purposely misleading members of the House Intelligence Committee &quot;face-to-face&quot; last year, and Mr. Meese testified that it was a felony to lie to Congress whether under oath or not.    Former National Security Adviser John Poindexter is cast as the heavy by many of his past colleagues in the administration, but it remains unclear how poorly the naval officer actually read what Mr. Regan called &quot;the presidential mind.&quot;    The day after learning of the diversion, President Reagan offered a qualified defense of the action, according to notes of a White House meeting, and both Mr. Meese and former Chief of Staff Regan testified that the president never questioned his security adviser on the authority that had been assumed by the National Security Council staff.    Mr. Weinberger and Secretary of State George Shultz complained that Rear Adm. Poindexter isolated them from President Reagan, but the same testimony shows the president himself didn't inform the two cabinet members of actions he had authorized during the months of the Iran initiative.    Notes of White House meetings indicate President Reagan shared Adm. Poindexter's penchant for turning words. The naval officer testified that even Col. North had difficulty &quot;drawing the fine line that the president was drawing&quot; in defending a plan that encompassed selling weapons to a nation that had supported terrorists holding American hostages in Lebanon.    &quot;Terrorists have not profited,&quot; the president argued last November, according to notes kept by the former Chief of Staff Regan. &quot;We let Iranians be supplied and they influenced . . . have not dealt with terrorists, don't know who they are.&quot;    Having condemned the policy from the outset, Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger have been free to puncture this line of thinking. But the more telling description came from Mr. Regan, who was close to the president on a daily basis and found himself drawn into supporting an idea he saw as repugnant. In a raspy voice, the former chief of staff provided a graphic account of men &quot;led down the garden path.&quot;    As to the diversion, all the testimony by the president's men backs up his claim that he didn't authorize the scheme, but there remain questions over what the president was told in the final days of last November by William Casey, director of the Central Intelligence Agency, who died in May.    As Justice Department attorneys discovered a memo Nov. 22 outlining the secret transfer of funds, Mr. Casey moved in the background, initiating meetings with the president's advisers at critical junctures.    Adm. Poindexter said Mr. Casey called him and came over for lunch on Nov. 22. The director called Mr. Meese hours later and arranged for the two men to talk at Mr. Casey's home that evening. Soon after Mr. Regan and the attorney general told the president of the diversion Nov. 24, Mr. Casey urgently called the chief of staff to CIA headquarters, and the next morning had Mr. Meese stop by again at the director's home.    Mr. Meese testified that Mr. Casey knew nothing of the diversion. Mr. Regan is less certain. Adm. Poindexter says he never discussed the matter with the director, though the naval officer doesn't directly dispute Col. North's testimony that he had kept Mr. Casey informed throughout the operation.    To believe Col. North is to believe, too, that Mr. Casey thought, like the Marine officer, that President Reagan had approved the scheme. When the operation began to unravel in October, Col. North testified, Mr. Casey told him to clean up his files and later to get a lawyer, raising questions then as to whether the director somehow warned the president as well.    CIA officers, who will testify privately this week, may provide more information regarding Mr. Casey's knowledge. In connection with the Iran initiative, the committees have shown increased interest in the origins of intelligence provided to the president.    Though supportive of the CIA, Mr. Weinberger touched on this issue Friday, and Mr. Shultz alleged earlier that the late director selectively used intelligence to advance his position on policy issues.    Mr. Regan's notes show that as late as last November, the president was operating under the assumption that Iraq was stronger than Iran in the Mideast war. This assessment was contrary to the analysis of much of the U.S. intelligence community; but it was pushed by Col. North, who predicted privately last November that Iran's Khomeini regime risked a revolt in its army analogous, he said, to a battle that weakened Czar Nicholas II's regime at the outset of World War I.    During the Iran initiative, the White House sought to keep intelligence information from Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger, according to testimony, and it remains unclear what role, if any, Mr. Casey played in this action.    Mr. Weinberger -- in an apparent reference to intercepted communications collected by the National Security Agency -- testified he learned in the fall of 1985 that information was being withheld from him and bluntly reminded the NSA command that it was required to report to him as defense secretary.    Mr. Weinberger said he was told that the White House had directed that the information be withheld. Mr. Shultz, who apparently never succeeded in countermanding such an order, has said that cables were withheld from the State Department as well.    This occurred as a lower-ranking officer at the NSA was providing Col. North in early 1986 with encryption devices to establish a private communications network to direct not only the Iran initiative but also the secret airlift carrying arms to Nicaraguan insurgents. </TEXT></DOC>