<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870527-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Kodiak Compromise:Man Does His ThingAnd Bears Do Theirs---The Secret Is Give and Take,Though Giant Bears SeemTo Do Most of the Taking---By Ken SlocumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> KODIAK, Alaska  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Gregory Furin won't soon forget the time he met a brown bear up close and personal.    Hunting deer, he had shot and field-dressed a buck when he noticed the bear about 150 yards away. &quot;I'd always been told bears want no part of you and I thought it was a good idea to scare him off,&quot; the local dentist says. He took a deep breath and, in his most threatening tone, shouted &quot;Hey.&quot; The bear stood up, stared and charged.    Shaken, Dr. Furin fumbled through his pack for more rifle shells. But when the bear galloped out of the nearby bushes, the hunter revised his survival plan, and &quot;came off that hill in three great leaps.&quot; From a distance, he watched the intruder eat most of his deer and bury the remains for a later snack.    Such scrapes are a normal part of the adjustment process on an island that 14,000 people share with 2,500 of the world's largest carnivores. Brown bears, variations of grizzlies, may weigh 1,500 pounds and stand eight feet tall when they rear up.    Considering what could happen, the accommodation between bear and man is remarkably harmonious. Kodiak, in fact, is something of a modern-day wildlife success story, where local industries have been inconvenienced but not destroyed and where wildlife has thrived despite a growing population and surging tourism.    This mountainous island is a bear's Eden: 100 miles of steep slopes luxuriant with vegetation, roots and berries, and sliced by streams where salmon spawn. Almost two-thirds of the island is dedicated to the Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge, where hunting is permitted but the bears' welfare comes first.    There are only 87 miles of roads, none into the interior. Island development is strictly regulated, as is hunting of the brown bears. As a result, their population is believed to be at its highest in 30 or 40 years.    The industry most cramped by the bears is cattle ranching, which dates back to Russian ownership of Alaska. Touches of bitterness aren't hard to find among ranchers. DeWitt Fields has raised cattle here for 38 years and says he once lost 16 head to bears in a single night. &quot;Bear refuge is a misnomer,&quot; he says. &quot;It's a bear hatchery producing bears for the wealthy to hunt.&quot;    In the 1960s, the state fought the bears with an arsenal that included a plane outfitted with a semiautomatic rifle and flown by an ex-fighter pilot. But sympathy for the cattle industry has ebbed, partly because bears provide quite an industry themselves. A single tourist will pay $7,500 for a 10-day guided hunt, while spending more money during his stay. Now, official bear control is minimal.    So ranchers adapt to the bears. William Burton, who has access to some 21,000 acres of Kodiak range, is gradually switching from cattle to buffaloes. He says bears annually kill 20 to 30 head of his cattle but have yet to take so much as a newborn calf from his herd of the quick and aggressive bison. (As livestock, the buffaloes do have their drawbacks; so far they have gored to death four of Mr. Burton's ranch horses at roundup time.)    One thing that worries bear overseers is an increasing number of confrontations involving deer hunters. Beyond regulated hunting, state law permits killing bears if they threaten a person's life or certain property (not including deer carcasses); in recent years the number killed under the law has jumped from an average of four annually to 11 a year, most of them shot by deer hunters.    The problem isn't so much the numbers; after all, licensed hunters bag about 190 bears a year. But about two-thirds of those are males, thanks to the timing of hunting seasons. The ones killed by deer hunters tend to be females protecting cubs. Their loss affects the bear population without returning any economic benefit.    One reason deer hunters are having more bear trouble is that there are more hunters now. They have multiplied sixfold in the past 15 years as Kodiak has become a playground for Anchorage, less than an airline hour away. But bears also are getting wiser to the ways of the hunter.    It doesn't take a bear long to sense that the easy way to get hold of a deer is to muscle in on one a city slicker has just shot. The smell of a deer carcass being field-dressed can draw a Kodiak bear from far away. And now, some hunters claim, the bears have another cue.    &quot;Like Pavlov's dogs, which began salivating when he rang a bell, those bears are conditioned to know that a rifle shot means a free meal,&quot; contends Donald Brenteson, a 41-year-old vocational counselor. &quot;There's absolutely no doubt in my mind they come to a rifle shot.&quot;    Though state game biologists are skeptical, Mr. Brenteson tells of a hunt in which he and two friends shot two deer and began dressing them, one hunter standing watch. A bear soon approached. While the hunters dragged one deer away and hid it, Mr. Brenteson fired two shots over the visitor's head. It ignored them and kept coming, first devouring the dressed deer and then following the scent trail to claim the one hidden away.    &quot;To a bear,&quot; notes a veteran guide named Joe Want, &quot;possession is ten-tenths of the law.&quot;    Despite such encounters, no one has been killed by a bear on Kodiak Island in more than 30 years. In the past 15 years, seven people have been chewed to varying degrees.    Few people anywhere live as intimately with giant predators as the 200 residents of Larsen Bay, a string of little houses along Kodiak's western coast reachable only by air or water. A stream runs through the village, and in late summer the bears gobble up spawning salmon as residents go about their business as close as 50 feet away.    When the bears aren't fishing, says safety officer August Aga, &quot;they wander around the village like cats and dogs.&quot; Yet in residents' memory, the only villager even slightly hurt was a drunk who one night fell over a bear sleeping in the street. It slapped him and left.    Bears, though, sometimes get hurt themselves. Alberta Aga, August's mother, recalls the night she heard something beating on her house, shined a flashlight out the window and looked directly into the face of a brown bear. While she was out the next evening, it broke through a window, thoroughly trashed the house and left through the front door carrying a box of groceries. Her son, passing by, came upon the looter and shot it.    Normally, &quot;bears walk past my house like cattle,&quot; Mrs. Aga says. &quot;that bear was crazy.&quot;    As there are survival rules for the bush, there are specific elements of bear etiquette for Larsen Bay, Mr. Aga says. Among them:    &quot;If you leave the house and there's a bear directly in your path, you wait till it leaves.&quot;    &quot;If you're walking up the road and a female is on one side and her cubs are on the other, you don't walk between them.&quot;    And if a bear decides to chase you, as they sometimes do?    &quot;You run like hell.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>