<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871020-0099 </DOCNO><HL> States Given Leeway for Low Income Tax---By Bernard L. Weinstein and Harold T. Gross</HL><DD> 10/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES </IN><TEXT>   This decade will be remembered for a profound transformation in federal-state fiscal relations: a great reduction in aid from Washington accompanied by a flip in the preferred forms of taxation. The national government has abandoned high rates of income taxation and must look to revenue sources long exploited by the states, which in turn ought to move to the income tax.    According to the U.S. Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations, federal aid, though fairly constant in absolute levels, has dropped as a percentage of state-local outlays from 25% in 1981 to an estimated 19% for 1987.    The signal event of the latter half of the 1980s was the passage of a federal tax bill that sharply reduced personal and corporate income-tax rates and repealed the deductibility of state and local sales taxes in computing federal taxable income. This legislation continues a two-decade trend that has seen the maximum federal income-tax rate fall from 90% to 28%. The inducement it provides to states to shift their tax base is clear: Income taxes paid to them remain fully deductible on federal forms.    Washington, meanwhile, will likely turn to excise and consumption taxes -- perhaps even a value-added tax -- the next time it decides to &quot;enhance&quot; revenue.    Surprisingly, the states seem oblivious to the revolution currently under way. An unusually large group of them -- predominantly in the Southwest, Midwest and Rocky Mountain regions -- spent fiscal 1987 cutting budgets and raising taxes in response to structural and cyclical economic downturn. A smaller group -- mostly on the East and West coasts -- was preoccupied with disposing of &quot;windfalls&quot; received as a result of the 1986 federal tax changes. Neither group, however, took cognizance of the fundamental changes occurring in the intergovernmental system that effectively establish new, and rather narrow, parameters for state tax policy.    Texas provides a textbook example of how not to raise revenue under the new regime. Facing a huge budget deficit brought on by falling severance-tax revenues, the legislature recently passed a $5.7 billion tax bill, the largest single state tax increase in the history of Texas or the nation. This was achieved by raising the sales tax rate from 5.25% to 6%, broadening the sales tax base to cover certain business and consumer services, extending a motor fuel tax and boosting excise taxes. The sales tax's nondeductibility has made this increase an extremely costly one for Texas taxpayers. Indeed, in large metropolitan areas, the combined state-local sales tax is now 8%, putting Dallas and Houston in the same league as New York and San Francisco.    Worse yet is Florida, which, in its last regular legislative session, levied a 5% sales tax on services, including those provided by out-of-state companies. Florida's version of tax reform represents an unabashed effort to shift a sizable proportion of the state's sales-tax burden to out-of-state residents, ostensibly sparing in-state taxpayers the cost of nondeductibility while at the same time managing to avoid state income taxes.    This is not the first time Florida has reached beyond its borders to raise revenue. Several years ago the state enacted the nation's most severe unitary tax on the world-wide earnings of multinational corporations. But 18 months later, after a number of companies doing business in Florida pulled up stakes, the unitary tax was repealed. In the wake of convention cancellations and withdrawals of national advertisers, the Florida legislature is now meeting in special session and will probably repeal or amend its new service tax.    Some would argue that the lesson to be drawn from Florida's experience is simply don't tax advertisers. But a much more serious issue is at question: How can states such as Florida and Texas modify their fiscal structures in a nondiscriminatory way to capture activity in the rapidly growing service industries without resorting to income taxes? In fact, they can't.    Proposals to hit business and personal-service industries with broadened sales and franchise taxes, or even a state valueadded tax, will inevitably entail complex and expensive administrative and compliance procedures for both taxpayers and tax collectors. In contrast, profits-based taxes are fair, efficient and easy to administer and collect. And they afford the best mechanism for maintaining revenue adequacy over the long term.    States without income taxes must realize that today this can be a competitive liability rather than an advantage. Ironically, Louisiana -- notorious for regressive, inefficient tax policy since Huey Long's administration -- recently has been among the most progressive in this regard: The Louisiana legislature is currently considering a proposal, endorsed by all the gubernatorial candidates, to significantly lower the state's sales-tax levy while raising its income-tax rate. It bears noting that support in Louisiana for an income-tax increase at the expense of sales taxes has come largely from the state's corporate leadership. Similar business support for an income tax ultimately will materialize in Texas and Florida as well.    At the same time, states should relentlessly pursue the holy grail of the lowest possible tax rates levied across the broadest possible base. While empirical evidence demonstrates conclusively that moderate taxes broadly based and fairly administered are no detriment to economic growth, it's just as clear that relatively high taxes administered inefficiently or unfairly are destructive.    Finally, the reality of what John Shannon of the Advisory Commission on Intergovernmental Relations has branded &quot;fend-for-yourself federalism,&quot; the hallmark of which is continued reductions in federal assistance to other levels of governments, argues for a renewed focus on budget containment at the state-local level to obviate the need for frequent tax increases. Facing these tough choices, governors and legislators shouldn't have to dissipate their energy, capital and political ambitions in tedious and protracted wranglings over tax structure.    ---   Mr. Weinstein is director and Mr. Gross is associate director of the Center for Enterprising at Southern Methodist University. </TEXT></DOC>