<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880729-0146 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: A View From the Inside of Colombia's M-19 Guerrillas </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Nares </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   Are Colombia's M-19 guerrillas about to lay down their arms? The question is being asked in Bogota, where today, at a peace conference, the left-wing insurgents are seeking the reopening of peace negotiations with the government of President Virgilio Barco. This follows the M-19's release earlier this month of former Conservative presidential candidate Alvaro Gomez, whom the rebels kidnapped in May.    During his nearly eight weeks of captivity, Mr. Gomez gained an unparalleled insight into the thinking of the rebel movement that won international notoriety with its dramatic 1985 assault on Colombia's Supreme Court. Nearly 100 people were killed -- including 11 Supreme Court justices -- before the building was recaptured by the security forces. Summarizing his impressions of the M-19 in a Wall Street Journal interview, Mr. Gomez comments: &quot;I think their illusion is to convert themselves into a civilian force. They don't see their destiny to continue as guerrillas all their lives.&quot;    The director of a Bogota newspaper, the politician looks back on the experience with the dispassionate calm of the seasoned journalist. Indeed, prior to his Journal interview, he had been conversing tranquilly in his apartment with Ramiro Lucio -- a former guerrilla who will be representing the M-19 at the peace conference. Despite his kidnapping, Mr. Gomez evinces no hostility toward the M-19. He describes them as &quot;very motivated,&quot; and he believes now that &quot;they are not communists.&quot; In his view, the M-19 rebels, though influenced by communist doctrine, are radical nationalists rather than Marxists.    Mr. Gomez himself will probably be at the peace conference, and fittingly so, because it was his kidnapping that gave rise to the meeting. After Mr. Gomez was taken hostage in Bogota, the Barco government secretly dispatched Interior Minister Cesar Gaviria to Havana for talks with Cuban officials, who are said to have paved the way for the subsequent negotiations that led to Mr. Gomez's release.    Mr. Gaviria flew to Havana despite the fact that Colombia broke off diplomatic ties with Cuba during the government of President Julio Cesar Turbay (1978-82), who accused the Cubans of supporting Colombian rebels. Today, the Cuban regime still exercises influence over Colombian guerrilla movements, and the Barco administration, with its decision to send a minister to Havana, chose to acknowledge this.    Shortly after Mr. Gaviria's visit to Cuba, M-19 leaders met in Panama with representatives of Colombia's opposition Conservatives. A second meeting in Panama was attended by delegates of Colombian political parties, unions and business associations. They discussed the M-19's conditions for releasing Mr. Gomez, and the rebels agreed to free the politician subject to the convening of a peace conference later in the month in Colombia. The Barco government itself was not represented at the Panama meetings, however. And it may not send a delegate to today's conference because it is reluctant to attend talks under duress from the guerrillas. If the government doesn't send a representative, the peace conference may resemble a wedding at which the bride or groom refused to show up.    The Barco administration, which assumed office in 1986, has taken a hard-line stance on the guerrilla question. It is prepared to discuss a peace accord with the rebels, it has stated, only if the insurgents first lay down their arms and demobilizea stipulation that most guerrillas regard as a demand for unconditional surrender.    The guerrillas, too, have their hardliners. The Cuba-aligned ELN Liberation Army, for example, has rejected all truce offers in the past and may never engage in peace talks with the current government. This year the ELN has launched dozens of raids on Colombia's main oil-export outlet, the Cano Limon pipeline. The forays have paralyzed oil exports for days at a time and, in the first half, material and dollar-income losses topped $200 million.    Of course, the situation in Colombia is far from hopeless. In fact, new foreign investment actually increased in the first half of this year to $105 million ($32 million of which came from U.S. investors). And very shortly Drummond Co. of Birmingham, Ala., is expected to sign a deal with the government to explore for coal in the north of the country. This deal has the potential to bring more than $600 million of investment into the country over the life of the project.    And there is some progress in the area of negotiation. Representatives of the country's three other principal rebel movements -- the M-19, the Maoist EPL Liberation Army and the pro-Soviet FARC Revolutionary Force -- are less inflexible. They will be represented at today's peace conference. All three organizations signed cease-fire accords with the Betancur government (1982-86). But the M-19 and EPL later returned to the battlefield after accusing the authorities of failing to honor the peace agreements. Only the FARC still abides by the truce terms, or at least in theory. In practice, FARC combatants clash frequently with the army.    Against this background of continuing violence, Mr. Gomez is surprisingly sanguine about the likely outcome of today's peace conference: &quot;I think it could produce results.&quot; Colombians, he argues, are weary of the unending guerrilla war. For this reason, many rebels now want to renew peace talks. As for the government, says Mr. Gomez, it, too, is fatigued and incapable of solving problems such as the insurgency. He says that all segments of Colombian society are suffering from a sense of &quot;impotence&quot; over their inability to control events around them.    Colombian politicians, industrialists and trade unionists all have a fatal trait in common: They are as expert in identifying problems as they are inexpert in resolving them. For instance, Mr. Gomez cites the case of the chaotic legal system. &quot;We have a very serious problem . . . the public service of justice has disappeared.&quot; The situation in fact is now so hopeless, he adds, that he merely would be wasting his time if he testified before a judge regarding the murder of his police bodyguard, shot by the M-19 guerrillas who kidnapped him. &quot;Nothing would result,&quot; he says.    Though Mr. Gomez does not spell it out, the legal structure is close to collapse largely because of a terror campaign by drug traffickers who have murdered dozens of judges and officials. As a result of the gangster campaign, influential cocaine dealers are occasionally freed by intimidated judges on spurious grounds.    Couldn't the justice system be revamped simply by enforcing emergency legislation or by applying an authoritative hand? Evading the question, Mr. Gomez, the resolute conservative, chuckles. But clearly if ever he were to stand again for the presidency and if he were to be elected, his model would be Margaret Thatcher rather than Neville Chamberlain. Sighs Mr. Gomez: &quot;She isn't impotent.&quot;    ---   Mr. Nares is a free-lance writer based in Bogota. </TEXT></DOC>