<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0126 </DOCNO><HL> Small Business (A Special Report): Essay --- Life in the Hot-Sauce Lane: Our Man Strives To Be A Big Enchilada </HL><AUTHOR> Ronald G. Shafer </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   FEVER IS SPREADING across the land that can cause you to lose weight, maybe your hair and possibly your shirt.    It's called starting your own business.    I know, because four years ago I opened my own Tippy's Taco House restaurant in Arlington, Va., and it has been life in the hot-sauce lane ever since.    Owning a small business is like eating our fiery salsa: It can bring tears to your eyes, but it's also tremendously enjoyable. Every year, more than one million new businesses are started in the U.S., the Small Business Administration estimates. For every two of the 600,000 businesses with employees that open each year, one closes. But if a business-of-your own is what you want, the odds are that the odds against you won't stop you.    For my wife and me, both Tex-Mex food fans, it all began in 1983 during one of our visits to a favorite Tippy's restaurant, where we had noticed a &quot;For Franchise Information&quot; sign. Flush with a modest windfall from a home-buying book that I had co-authored, we decided to take the entrepreneurial plunge. Barbara would run the place with her brother, Charles Lucas, who was ready to leave the corporate life for a crack at co-ownership.    We were accepted as a franchisee of Tippy's, a small, national chain of inexpensive Mexican-food restaurants. Barb and Chuck trained at Tippy's restaurants in the area while we sought a site. Finally, we settled on a shopping strip with a multi-windowed storeroom that could be converted into a Tippy's. To save money, we decorated, painted and wallpapered the place ourselves. The result: a 2,100-square-foot eatery with 75 seats, located one mile from the Pentagon. Our motto: Make tacos, not war.    Along the way, we have learned a few lessons.    The first is that while many banks are in big trouble for lending big bucks to big borrowers with too little security, most don't want to spare a dime for a small business. After committing about $20,000 of our own money, we finally got a bank to give us an SBA-guaranteed loan of about $90,000. That is far less than the entry cost for a franchise with a big fast-food chain. But by the next year, the paper-work expenses and other costs of the SBA loan prompted us to replace it with a regular bank loan. Even though our restaurant was off to a promising start, the only way we got the loan was to back it, not by the business, but dollar for dollar by hocking our house.    The next thing you quickly learn in a new business is that money goes out faster than it comes in. And when the cash flow is low at the start, you dive deeper into debt. This is where you begin to tear out your hair.    Our first winter was almost our last. Sales dropped with the temperature, but the bills didn't. It was then that we experienced one of the benefits of ownership: Our business losses provided a tax shelter from the storm. My wife and I plowed all of our tax refund, including our personal refund, back into the restaurant. It carries itself now, but what seem like modest costs to outsiders can be life and death for a small business. This perverse sense of reality is exemplified by one recent bill for $3,900, &quot;payable in 10 days.&quot;    Once you start a service business, the next hurdle is to find -- and keep -- somebody to work there. With today's baby-bust generation, workers are scarce and teenagers have more job opportunities than MIT engineering graduates. These days, the most sure-fire business to enter would be to sell &quot;Help Wanted&quot; signs.    There is always somebody, though, who will work days, nights and weekends for low pay -- that's you, the owner. During one busy stretch, Barb lost 30 pounds. Including her bookkeeping for our enterprise, she is the only employee who works for the minimum wage. To help run the seven-day-a-week operation, we recruited her other brother, Darrell Lucas. Flouting child-labor laws, our children, Katie and Ryan, joined in. My main assignment was critical: to remain gainfully employed at my full-time job at The Wall Street Journal.    After a while, the triumphs overcome the tribulations. There is no feeling like walking into a business and knowing it's yours. And mine has fringe benefits. When nobody is home for dinner, there is always a place where I can get &quot;free&quot; enchiladas.    The biggest joys are our customers, especially when they respond, as ours do, with &quot;Holy guacamole!&quot; and other praise for the food and service. At our mom-pop-and-brothers restaurant, we treat customers like we always wanted to be treated. The result is an eclectic atmosphere of a friendly Tex-Mex pub with tasty food on the table and Bob Dylan on the jukebox. Gratification is a note in the suggestion box that reads: &quot;Don't change anything.&quot;    Eventually, we also found a core of good workers whom we can trust at the cash register. And with the low-cost Tippy's franchise, our risks are reduced. Tippy's provides recipes and spices, plus guidance on a proven operating system, but allows us plenty of freedom.    The bottom line is that like many tiny businesses, we are still struggling to dig out from under our burden of start-up costs. But sales have gone up every year, and the future looks bright. Two years ago we bought the Tippy's where we saw the franchise sign. We now employ more than a dozen people at the two restaurants, whose total 1987 sales exceeded $400,000. And we've learned a new respect for small-business owners everywhere.    A business of their own is a dream that burns inside many who work for somebody else. Despite the frustrations, our message to be-your-own-boss dreamers can be summed up in three little words:   Go for it.    ---   Mr. Shafer is a features editor in The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>