<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880204-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Put Agriculture Policy Out to Pasture </HL><AUTHOR> James Bovard </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> MON CMD </IN><G> AGD EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   &quot;Exporting&quot; currently is a hypnotic word in agriculture-policy discussions -- something so wonderful that it is justified at any cost. In recent years, only massive dumping of American crops on world markets has prevented the U.S. from being a net agricultural importer. Thanks to decades of self-defeating farm policy, agricultural exports increasingly are a Pyrrhic victory for taxpayers.    According to department estimates, the U.S. in 1986 spent up to four times the world price for each additional hundredweight of rice exports. The U.S. is spending three times the world price to dump butter on world markets. And, thanks to the 1987 Budget Reconciliation bill, the U.S. will pay up to four times the world price for sugar exports.    Yet, to those who look only at export statistics and neglect the cost, these are success stories. Though the Reagan administration is bragging about the success of the &quot;market-oriented&quot; 1985 farm bill, the Agriculture Department rarely mentions that last year roughly 75% of wheat, 60% of corn, and 100% of barley, cotton and rice were exported with federal subsidies.    Export policies epitomize the senseless contradictions of federal agriculture policy. At the same time that the Agriculture Department prohibits the sale of millions of cartons of fresh California lemons and oranges to Americans, the department is spending $10 million a year to promote U.S. citrus fruits in Hong Kong, South Korea, and elsewhere. While the Agriculture Department forces California almond growers to abandon 18% of their crop each year, it is spending $6 million a year advertising American almonds abroad.    According to Pro Farmer, an agricultural-policy newsletter, the U.S. sold wheat to Turkey at a big loss -- and Turkey promptly re-sold the wheat to Iran and Iraq at a profit. The Agriculture Department's Foreign Agriculture Service admits that generous subsidies for wheat exports have displaced unsubsidized American corn exports. The General Accounting Office reported in October that the Agriculture Department was paying bonuses of up to 150% of each dairy cow's market value to persuade foreign countries to accept American cows.    Our agricultural export statistics are designed to mask reality. Food dumping under the so-called Food for Peace program is counted the same as unsubsidized cash sales. Thus the more handouts the U.S. gives, the greater our export sales appear to be.    The U.S.'s net agricultural trade balance in 1986 was $5.4 billion ($26.3 billion exports, $20.9 billion imports). In that year, the U.S. donated $2.2 billion in food abroad; spent $400 million for the Export Enhancement Program, $2.9 billion in marketing loans to boost rice and cotton exports, $4.6 billion in federally guaranteed subsidized loans for exports, and $235 million to pay off defaulted export credit loans. Thus, export subsidies easily exceeded the surplus of exports over imports.    In 1987, the net agricultural trade balance rose to $7.9 billion. Total food donations were $2 billion, Export Enhancement bonuses were $1.6 billion, Targeted Export Assistance was $110 million, rice and cotton marketing loans were $2.7 billion, government guaranteed credit equaled $3 billion, and payments on defaulted export loans were $373 million. The Agriculture Department also lost more than $100 million dumping butter, nonfat dry milk and other dairy products on world markets.    On top of the direct export subsidies, the U.S. paid farmers a bonus for each bushel of corn or wheat that was produced and exported. This added over $3 billion a year in 1986 and 1987 to the total federal subsidies for exported food items. In 1987 the Agriculture Department paid farmers $4.38 a bushel for growing wheat, yet received only $1.35 a bushel net after subsidies in the wheat sale to the Soviets. Only $9 billion of 1987's $27.9 billion in agricultural exports consisted of heavily subsidized federal crops. Yet, in order to gain these &quot;sales,&quot; the Agriculture Department probably spent over $9 billion in subsidies to exporters and producers.    According to the Agriculture Department's Foreign Agriculture Service, &quot;U.S. Department of Agriculture economists calculate that, at the very least, each dollar received from exports stimulates another $1.51 worth of business activity for the rest of the economy.&quot; The department and Congress are always implying that the U.S. benefits from losing money giving crops to foreigners.    The premise behind export subsidies is that U.S. profit margins are so low that exporters cannot afford to cut prices in order to gain sales. Yet, if the profit margin is so low, then a high subsidy would mean that the U.S. is selling at a loss. The average cost of Export Enhancement Program subsidies in 1987 exceeded 65% of the value of the exported product.    Since 1986, the Reagan administration has provided over half a billion dollars in subsidies for agricultural sales to the Soviet Union, China, Bulgaria, Poland, Hungary and Romania. American wheat is cheaper in Moscow than in Kansas City, and traditional American customers such as Japan are being discriminated against in order to benefit hostile governments.    Even though Poland effectively defaulted on previous Agriculture Department loans, it benefited from almost $100 million in U.S. government subsidies last year. The department will provide almost a billion dollars in subsidized credit for Iraq this year, thereby allowing American taxpayers to underwrite the Iraqi war effort.    Massive export subsidies are the only way to hide the profound anti-export bias of existing agricultural programs. Politicians have always tried to conduct foreign agriculture trade with bribes and bluster -- subsidies and threats -- while rarely considering how farm programs undercut the American farmer.    Current farm programs were created in the 1930s -- when the Roosevelt administration explicitly decided to abandon agricultural exports and balance domestic supply and demand. Between 1931 and 1934, U.S. wheat exports fell from 131 million bushels a year to zero. While U.S. wheat exports disappeared, other countries maintained or increased their exports of that grain.    Even today, Congress and the Agriculture Department are more interested in controlling domestic production than in maximizing exports. A North Carolina State University study estimated that abolishing the tobacco program with its feudal restrictions on growing would more than double tobacco exports to $3 billion a year from $1.4 billion. The Agriculture Department restricts exports of peanut butter, lemons and oranges to Canada in order to safeguard the department's domestic supply programs.    The Agriculture Department currently is reducing the domestic production of key crops with quasi-mandatory acreage controls (most wheat and corn farmers cannot survive outside of the government-destabilized market) and boosting export demand with subsidies. The department paid farmers not to grow crops on 68 million acres last year in an attempt to enrich farmers by driving up crop prices.    Every government program that boosts the cost of production will tend to reduce long-term exports. By paying farmers to idle the best cropland, the Agriculture Department decimates American farmers' comparative advantage in world trade. Every set-aside, every senseless federal regulation that decreases farm efficiency is a de facto export tax.    By setting government-guaranteed payment rates far above world prices for wheat and corn, the government encourages farmers to raise their cost of production to the point of diminishing returns. The recent Farm Credit bailout was designed to boost farmland values. But, in the same way that unions often destroy their members' jobs by driving wages too high, the federal government drives up farmland and makes it appear that American farmers cannot profitably produce and sell at world market prices.    Throughout the 1980s, the proliferation of new seed varieties and other innovations have sharply decreased crop production costs around the world. Yet, American policy is based on the assumption that the only reason that U.S. farmers are not exporting more is because of European Community subsidies. Thus, instead of reforming agricultural policy, the solution is always to sacrifice more American taxpayers on the altar of agricultural exports.    American agricultural exports would likely be far higher and more profitable if the Agriculture Department had been abolished long ago. If it were not for the department's programs, most of the crops it dumps on world markets could be grown and exported without a subsidy.    Exports are the lifeblood of the American farmer. If American agriculture is to be efficient, it must be oriented to world markets.    For over half a century, federal policy has sapped the productivity of the world's strongest agriculture industry. The real issue is not the dollar amount of U.S. food exports -- but whether those exports are sold at a profit or a loss. The sooner politicians stop trying to help farmers, the better off the most efficient, productive farmers will be.    ---   Mr. Bovard is a Cato Institute associate analyst whose book, &quot;Farm Fiasco,&quot; will be published this spring by the Institute for Contemporary Studies. </TEXT></DOC>