<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871103-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV APPEARED to retreat from glasnost in a Moscow speech.    In an address marking the 70th anniversary of the Bolshevik revolution, the Soviet leader said Stalin had subjected thousands of people &quot;to wholesale repressive measures.&quot; But Gorbachev, whose speech was widely awaited as an event that would clear away some past official falsifications, failed to describe the scope of Stalin's terror. Diplomats said the Kremlin leader had come under increased internal pressure to proceed cautiously in his drive to modernize the Soviet Union.    Gorbachev, who has agreed to sign a treaty scrapping some superpower missiles, reaffirmed his commitment to pursue arms accords with the U.S.    ---   ZHAO ZIYANG ASSUMED the leadership of China's Communist Party.    The 68-year-old technocrat was confirmed as the party's general secretary, a post he has held on an acting basis since January. Zhao also was named first vice chairman of the powerful Central Military Commission. The appointments solidify the power base of Zhao, designated by Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping as his heir apparent. Zhao also retains the premiership, but he said he would relinquish the post next month. His successor is likely to be Vice Premier Li Peng.    Beijing's new Central Committee, selected at the eight-day Communist Party Congress that ended Sunday, immediately elected a 17-man Politburo.    ---   WEINBERGER IS EXPECTED to announce his resignation soon, sources said.    The defense secretary, who has served in Reagan's cabinet for seven years, will be succeeded by National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci, sources close to the White House said. The departure of Weinberger has been rumored for weeks, amid reports that he is unhappy with an impending arms control agreement with the Soviet Union and is concerned about the continued poor health of his wife.    Weinberger, at a meeting of NATO defense ministers in Monterey, Calif., cautioned against halting deployment of intermediate-range missiles until the superpower arms treaty is ratified.    ---   The White House was aware that Supreme Court nominee Ginsburg had about $140,000 invested in a cable-TV company when he supervised a Justice Department effort to win First Amendment protection for cable-TV operators, a Reagan spokesman said. The Senate is expected to raise questions about a possible conflict.    ---   The Pentagon said a U.S. frigate in the Persian Gulf fired machine guns to chase off three vessels on an &quot;apparently hostile run.&quot; The two speedboats and a dhow involved in the Sunday incident were believed to be Iranian. Separately, an anchorage in the Gulf of Oman, closed since August, was reopened after being cleared of mines.    ---   William Sessions was sworn in to a 10-year term as FBI director, and was praised by Reagan as &quot;very tough, but very fair.&quot; The ceremony for Sessions, who was unanimously confirmed by the Senate in September, had been twice postponed because of the hospitalization of the West Texas judge for treatment of a bleeding ulcer.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to review barriers encountered by lawyers who live in one state but want to practice law in another. The justices said they would hear an appeal of a Virginia rule under which the state bar exam will be waived for lawyers previously licensed in another state only if they take up residence in Virginia.    ---   Opponents of Arizona's governor filed petitions to prompt an election that could oust Republican Evan Meacham. The petitions reportedly contained nearly 388,988 signatures, nearly twice as many as needed for a recall election. The recall campaign grew out of Meacham's cancellation of a holiday to honor Martin Luther King.    ---   Costa Rican President Arias urged Nicaragua to agree to allow a third party to mediate a cease-fire with the U.S.-backed rebels. Arias said a Central American peace plan, which has a Thursday deadline, was at an &quot;impasse&quot; because of Managua's refusal to negotiate with the Contras.    ---   U.S. officials have subpoenaed records from interstate van lines and local affiliates as part of a criminal investigation into suspected bid-rigging on military moving and storage contracts. The inquiry by the Justice and Defense departments involves about 80 military bases and 12 federal grand juries.    ---   Deaver was discharged from a Washington hospital following emergency treatment over the weekend for kidney stones. A lawyer for the former White House aide said Deaver would be in court today for the resumption of his trial on charges that he lied to a House panel and a federal grand jury investigating his lobbying activities.    ---   A remote-control mine exploded under an army jeep in northern Sri Lanka, killing at least five Indian soldiers. Earlier, a government spokesman in New Delhi renewed an offer for a cease-fire in the fight with Tamil guerrillas. Indian peacekeeping troops were sent to Sri Lanka to enforce a July 29 truce aimed at ending ethnic strife.    ---   Died: Rene Levesque, 65, former premier of Quebec, Sunday, in Montreal, after a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>