<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890731-0065 </DOCNO><DD> = 890731 </DD><AN> 890731-0065. </AN><HL> Cleaning Up the Justices' Messes@  ----@  By Forrest McDonald </HL><DD> 07/31/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><GV> SUPREME COURT (SUP) </GV><TEXT>   Of all the arguments that have been advanced for and against a flag-burning amendment, the most persuasive, in my opinion, is one offered by Patrick Buchanan and William F. Buckley. Both columnists have suggested that such an amendment should be adopted as a means of telling the Supreme Court it has gone too far.    Their proposal has been denounced by civil libertarians as being at once frivolous and a grave departure from the American Way, but in fact court-bashing by amendment is a hallowed tradition in America, almost as old as the court itself. Indeed, one-fourth of all the amendments that have been adopted since the Bill of Rights were framed to overturn specific Supreme Court decisions, and hundreds of others for the same end have been proposed unsuccessfully.    The game began at the beginning, with the court's very first major decision. In the 1793 case of Chisholm v. Georgia, two South Carolinians sued the state of Georgia on behalf of a British subject, and the court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs. Amid an enormous popular outcry, an amendment was introduced to deprive the federal courts of jurisdiction in suits brought against a state by a foreigner or a citizen of another state. The proposal was passed by the necessary two-thirds majority of Congress in 1794 and ratified as the Eleventh Amendment four years later.    As if insufficiently chastened by that experience, the Supreme Court in 1803 handed down its celebrated decision in Marbury v. Madison, in which for the first time it declared a congressional enactment unconstitutional. Though the case is conventionally cited as having established the principle of judicial review, it did not at the time establish much of anything except that the justices had best watch their steps.    President Jefferson was infuriated and called for the popular election of justices who would serve limited terms. The members of his party in Congress had what they thought was a better idea, namely to purge the bench by the impeachment process. They did impeach Justice Samuel Chase but failed to obtain a conviction in the Senate, whereupon Virginia Rep. John Randolph, who had managed the prosecution, proposed a constitutional amendment making federal judges removable by the president on application of a simple majority of both houses of Congress. That failed passage, as did upwards of 30 similar amendments, but the Supreme Court got the message: It did not venture to strike down another act of Congress for more than half a century.    The court did, during the long tenure of Chief Justice John Marshall (1801-1835), strike down a number of state laws, the states being less formidable adversaries than Congress. Though the states generally tended to ignore the court's orders, the decisions elicited repeated proposals to alter the Constitution. That was among the many reasons that 1,300 amendments were introduced in Congress during the Constitution's first hundred years. One of the more interesting came from President Andrew Jackson. Angered by the tenor of Marshall's rulings, and believing (as Jefferson had) that the presidential veto, not court decisions, was the proper instrument for defending the Constitution, he called for de-fanging the jurists by establishing two Supreme Courts -- one for the states east of the Appalachians, one for those to the west.    It was under Marshall's successor, Jackson-appointee Roger Brooke Taney, that the court again dared to declare an act of Congress unconstitutional. This was the infamous Dred Scott decision (1857), which held, among other things, that blacks were not and never could become citizens of the U.S., even if they were free. Most Southerners were jubilant, most Northerners outraged. Abraham Lincoln spoke for the rank and file of the nascent Republican Party when he voiced the hope that the ruling might be reversed, inasmuch as it had been decided by a five-to-four vote. No one considered trying to overturn it by amendment, however, for the southern states had enough votes to block such a maneuver.    But the South was soon to secede. After the Civil War triumphant northern radicals could and did force civil rights amendments through Congress and the states, and the first sentence of the Fourteenth Amendment explicitly overruled the Dred Scott decision.    The next amendment adopted to overturn a Supreme Court decision was the Sixteenth. In 1895, though it had previously upheld the constitutionality of a federal income tax levied during the Civil War, the court ruled in Pollock v. Farmers' Loan and Trust that such taxes were unconstitutional. Almost immediately an amendment authorizing income taxes was introduced, only to be defeated. Thirty-three subsequent efforts failed, until finally, in 1909, the proposal cleared Congress. Four years later it had been ratified by the requisite three-quarters of the states.    On several occasions the mere threat of amendment has stimulated the court to rethink its direction. During and shortly after World War I, the court struck down a pair of congressional enactments designed to prevent the exploitation of the labor of children. More than 50 separate amendments were introduced to grant Congress the power to regulate or prohibit child labor; in 1924 an amendment for that purpose passed both houses. Twenty-eight states had ratified when, in the late 1930s, the Supreme Court made the amendment irrelevant by reversing its stand.    A similar fate befell the court's innovations in the field of foreign relations. In 1920 it decreed that treaties need not be constitutional and could, in fact, override the Constitution. A decade and a half later it declared that executive agreements had the constitutional force of treaties. This meant that the president could bargain away the rights of Americans simply by agreement with another head of state.    Franklin Roosevelt did precisely that, turning over to Stalin the assets of Russian emigres who had become U.S. citizens; the court approved the action. After the war, the court went so far as to invalidate a California law on the ground that it violated Article 55 of the UN charter. In response, Sen. John Bricker of Ohio introduced the Bricker Amendment, which would effectively have annulled all these rulings. The amendment failed in Congress by one vote; but the call was close enough that the court found it prudent to stop hearing cases on foreign relations and direct its attention elsewhere.    The most recent constitutional override of a decision of the Supreme Court came as something of an anti-climax to many years of politicking. Back in 1937, in the case of Breedlove v. Suttles, the court upheld a poll tax, despite arguments that it was &quot;patently a device of disfranchising Negroes,&quot; in violation of the Fifteenth Amendment. Bills and amendments to outlaw the poll tax were introduced in every session of Congress for the next 25 years. Then the Twenty-fourth amendment was passed by Congress and was ratified in 1964. By that time, however, only two states were actually affected, since all the others had already abolished poll taxes.    Now we come to the flap over the flag. Whatever the substantive merits of the proposal to remind the court once again who is boss, it cannot be said that to do so would be un-American. It is as American, as mom, apple pie, and -- well, the flag.    ---   Mr. McDonald is a professor of history at the University of Alabama. </TEXT></DOC>