<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:When Foster Homes Foster Religion</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Sen. William Armstrong's article (editorial page, Jan. 14) criticizing an American Civil Liberties Union lawsuit reflects an astonishing misunderstanding of how foster care works in New York City, as well as a careless disregard for the U.S. Constitution, federal law and the principles on which this country was founded.    Foster-care agencies in New York have historically given preferential treatment to children of their own religion, even though publicly funded. While Catholic and Jewish agencies have had enough beds to accommodate children of those religions, Protestant agencies have not. That has meant that non-Catholic and non-Jewish children have had to get at the end of the line for acceptance into agencies, solely because of their religion. In New York City, most of these children are black. They've either been relegated to public placements of last resort or have not gotten services.    Many of the agencies are racially segregated in ways that are hard to attribute to anything but discrimination. One large Jewish agency, for example, has more than four times as many white children as the overall child-welfare population. Religious preference, even if it were acceptable, could not explain that discrepancy; fewer than half of those white children are Jewish.    Finally, many of these agencies impose the practices associated with their own religion on children of other religions, while at the same time not making religious opportunities available for these out-of-religion children. Non-Catholic children have been required to attend Mass, Pentecostal children have been unable to attend their own churches even when they have wanted to.    Sen. Armstrong says our lawsuit will drive religious values out of foster care. That is not true. The issue is the imposition of certain religious values and practices on children of other religions.    While religious values are undoubtedly important, the New York City foster-care system has long been one in which only certain religious values -- Catholic and Jewish -- have been protected. Children not associated with those religions, largely black children, have been made second-class citizens. These troubled children, already deprived of their own families, have been victimized further by a system in which their religion -- and sometimes their race -- has determined what kind of services they were going to get and whether they were going to be deprived of their own religious heritage.    Sen. Armstrong says he believes in the importance of traditional values, and of restoring a sense of the difference between right and wrong. But understanding the difference between right and wrong means that neither religion nor race should determine access to services, and that everyone should be free to practice -- or not to practice -- his or her own religion, and not to have someone else's religious practices imposed upon him.    The Constitution both prohibits the establishment of religion and guarantees the free exercise of religion, and it prohibits racial discrimination. The ACLU lawsuit charged that the New York system violated all of these principles and that these violations were harming children. The lawsuit has been resolved by a delicate compromise based on two principles: that all children will receive services on a first-come, first-served basis, and that the religious freedom of all children will be protected. It is supported by an impressive array of diverse parties -- the city, Protestant and non-sectarian foster-care agencies, religious leaders of every faith, and civil-rights leaders. It is difficult to believe that anyone would disagree with the principles on which the settlement is based unless, of course, one thinks it is more important to further sectarian religious interests, at government expense, than to fairly serve all children in need.    Marcia Robinson Lowry   Director   Children's Rights Project   American Civil Liberties Union   New York</TEXT></DOC>