<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861222-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/22/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE WHITE HOUSE HAD ORDERED a detailed account of the Iran arms affair.    Administration aides said the chronology, compiled last month by Lt. Col. North and others, absolves Reagan of any responsibility for Israeli arms sales to Iran last year, or for the diversion of the sales' profits. The document, prepared after the scandal broke and used by Chief of Staff Regan and CIA Director Casey as a basis for much of their congressional testimony, contradicts the sworn statements of some participants, omits parts of the story, and may contain factual errors.    A former federal judge, Lawrence Walsh, was appointed Friday as the independent counsel who will investigate the Iran-Contra operation.    ---   SHANGHAI OFFICIALS URGED an end to pro-democracy demonstrations.    Authorities in China's largest metropolis called for thousands of student demonstrators, who have been demanding greater democracy, to get off the streets. The officials accused some students of attempting to disrupt society with their demands. The appeal came on the third day of protests in Shanghai. The official Xinhua news agency, in its first detailed account of protests, said students beat 31 police officers Friday. It also said hundreds of students broke into municipal government offices.    The rallies in Shanghai were the latest in a series of demonstrations this month in a half dozen major Chinese cities, and the biggest in over a decade.    ---   The White House faces resistance in Congress over its $65 billion, multiyear plan for the MX and Midgetman missiles. Under a Pentagon plan, proposed Friday, the U.S. would build 500 mobile Midgetman missiles, and begin work on a system to insulate MX missiles from attack by ferrying them in railroad cars.    ---   The Pentagon has asked for a postponement in negotiations between NASA and foreign participants in the space agency's proposed space station. The Defense Department is interested in possibly using the multibillion-dollar orbiting post for research on Reagan's space-based antimissile project.    ---   Chad said its troops and recently allied rebel forces killed as many as 400 Libyan soldiers and recaptured the town of Bardai in fighting in northern Chad. Western intelligence sources confirmed the report. Officials in Tripoli, however, denied involvement in the fighting, despite reports that 8,000 of Libya's troops are in Chad.    ---   Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov said he and his wife, Yelena Bonner, had been freed from exile without condition and he intends to continue speaking out once back in Moscow. Sakharov, a nuclear physicist and Nobel Peace laureate, said he would leave the city of Gorky and return to Moscow Tuesday. His release was announced Friday.    ---   The U.N. General Assembly agreed to procedures designed to give wealthy countries far more control over U.N. spending. The move followed pressure by the U.S. whose refusal to pay $110 million of its annual assessment pushed the U.N. to the brink of bankruptcy-and other nations with high assessments.    ---   A labor federation in Manila voted to campaign against President Aquino's proposed constitution. The leftist May 1st Movement, the largest labor group in the Philippines, previously had said it would back the charter. Meanwhile, Marcos said in a radio broadcast that he would try to return to Manila &quot;as soon as possible.&quot;    ---   Voyager crossed the Atlantic, riding tailwinds along the coast of South America in an attempt to circle the globe without stopping or refueling. The experimental aircraft was expected to encounter headwinds in the Caribbean, but the ground crew in California said there was enough fuel.    ---   Chirac forced a law through France's Parliament over the weekend that allows employers greater flexibility in setting work hours. The bill, which Socialist President Mitterrand refused to sign, was added by the conservative premier as an amendment to another measure.    ---   Pakistani opposition leaders dismissed as cosmetic the resignation of Islamabad's cabinet. Prime Minister Junejo disbanded the cabinet Saturday following a week of riots in Karachi in which at least 166 people were killed. The opposition leaders called for the firing of the Sind provincial government.    ---   Iraqi jets bombed residential areas in western Iran, killing at least 86 people, Tehran said. An Iraqi military communique, however, said that the targets were an air base and military camps, and that a number of Iranian soldiers were killed.    ---   India called out its troops in Goa after at least two people were killed and 14 wounded in battles between rival groups. The violence was prompted by demands for statehood for Goa and making Konkani its official language. The protesters were opposed by rival Marathi-speakers.    ---   The U.S. urged restraint by NATO allies Greece and Turkey following a border clash Friday in which one Greek and two Turkish soldiers were killed. Each side has lodged a protest over the clash.    ---   Syrian troops patrolled the Lebanese port city of Tripoli following house-to-house battles with the pro-Iranian Sunni Moslem Tawheed militia. At least 30 people were killed. In Beirut, Palestinian rebels battled Shiite Amal militiamen at two refugee camps. </TEXT></DOC>