<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Borrowing MillionsWithout CollateralTakes Ingenuity---But John Grambling KnowsHow to Appeal to BankersAnd How to Fake Assets---By Ed ConyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   A couple of years back, two businessmen on the make tried to steal $36.5 million from four banks and a savings and loan association. And without pointing a gun at anybody, they actually made off with $13.5 million. Their .370 batting average wasn't bad, but they got caught.    The story of John A. Grambling Jr. and Robert H. Libman, one of the most bizarre in recent banking history, came to light in 1985 and 1986, as the Manhattan district attorney's office in New York was investigating and prosecuting the partners.    Court records and interviews with investigators and bank officials show that the tale begins at the end of 1984, when Messrs. Grambling and Libman heard that Husky Oil Ltd. wanted to sell its U.S. refineries and gas stations for tax reasons. Their acquisitive instincts aroused, the two men set out to buy what Husky was selling.    Never mind that they were broke and that Husky's asking price approached $100 million.    Messrs. Grambling and Libman weren't well known in the business world, either, though Mr. Grambling's father had once been the president of the Texas Bar Association and the family is prominent in El Paso.    The partners' scheme involved hitting up Bank of Montreal for $75 million. With their loan application, they submitted a detailed balance sheet for Mr. Libman, who is 57 years old, showing his net worth to be $23 million. His listed assets ranged from $17.5 million in marketable securities to two Jaguar XJ6s valued at $68,000.    The bank refused them the $75 million but did agree to lend Mr. Grambling $7.5 million in interim financing after he offered as collateral 375,000 shares of Dr Pepper stock with a market price of $8,252,992. The shares were to be delivered to the bank.    The closing of Mr. Grambling's loan took place Dec. 28, 1984, in New York, where Mr. Grambling's former employer, Lazard Freres andamp; Co., was supposedly holding his Dr Pepper shares for him. Mr. Grambling, who is 36 years old, had been an associate investment banker at Lazard.    The document assigning the stock to Bank of Montreal bore the signatures of Peter Corcoran, a longtime Lazard partner, and Robert Wilkis, a Lazard vice president.    At the end of the loan closing, when everything seemed to be in order, a call was placed to Ivor Hopkyns, the Bank of Montreal official handling the loan in Canada. And before he would release the $7.5 million to Mr. Grambling, Mr. Hopkyns wanted to chat with Mr. Corcoran. Mr. Grambling said that he would have to get Mr. Corcoran's phone number in Florida, where the Lazard official was on vacation. That done, Messrs. Hopkyns and Corcoran spoke briefly, and Mr. Grambling got his $7.5 million.    Bank of Montreal didn't yet have possession of the promised collateral, which under the terms of the transaction didn't have to be delivered to the bank until Jan. 22, 1985, more than three weeks after the bank let the money loose to Mr. Grambling.    On Jan. 15, Ivor Hopkyns phoned Mr. Wilkis at Lazard to ask after the Dr Pepper stock. And Mr. Wilkis seemed to be irritated by the call. He said that this was the first he had heard about any such deal.    To the consternation of Mr. Hopkyns, the conversation went something like this (according to both men involved):    Mr. Hopkyns: But you signed the loan agreement.    Mr. Wilkis: I didn't sign any agreement.    Mr. Hopkyns: But I've got the document right in front of me, signed Robert W. Wilkis.    Mr. Wilkis: You've got a problem. My middle initial is M, not W.    Mr. Hopkyns, alarmed, then phoned Mr. Corcoran at Lazard and got another shock. When he heard the voice, he realized at once that the Mr. Corcoran he was talking to sounded not at all like the Mr. Corcoran he had phoned in Florida.    The truth was that Mr. Grambling didn't own a single share of Dr Pepper. The documents were forged; so were the signatures of Messrs. Corcoran and Wilkis. The Libman balance sheet was made out of whole cloth. The Peter Corcoran that Ivor Hopkyns had phoned in Florida was, in reality, Robert H. Libman doing an impersonation.    Before the day was out, a worried Mr. Hopkyns phoned Mr. Grambling, who did his best to reassure him. Mr. Grambling told him that there had been an administrative foul-up. His Dr Pepper shares had mistakenly been transferred to Coronado Bank in El Paso.    He promised to straighten things out. And, as a gesture of good faith, he volunteered to send Bank of Montreal an unscheduled payment of $2 million, even though the bank wasn't due to get its $8 million in collateral for another seven days.    However, among the facts Mr. Grambling failed to disclose to Mr. Hopkyns was that, to keep other creditors at bay, he had spent nearly all the $7.5 million he had borrowed less than three weeks earlier. And, of course, he still faced the problem of producing the nonexistent Dr Pepper shares.    The $2 million Mr. Grambling then actually did send to Bank of Montreal compounded his financial problems because it came from the proceeds of a $6 million loan he had just obtained, fraudulently, from Colorado National Bank of Denver.    Initially, Mr. Grambling had asked Colorado National to lend him $100 million. Thomas Foncannon, a Colorado National vice president, said in an affidavit that a loan of $100 million was &quot;quite a bit larger than the bank was comfortable with.&quot;    Mr. Grambling promptly lowered his sights. He said he had interim financing requirements in the Husky Oil deal that the bank could help him with. Which is how Colorado National came to lend him the $6 million. He got the loan after giving the bank his personal financial statement, which was even more fanciful than Mr. Libman's. The statement reported total assets of $40 million, net worth of $39 million and annual income of $908,000.    Mr. Foncannon said in his affidavit that his calls to several banks inquiring about Mr. Grambling's reputation had turned up nothing to be concerned about. Indeed, several bankers actually praised Mr. Grambling. For instance, according to Mr. Foncannon, Charles Worth, a vice president of Arizona's Bank of Scottsdale, characterized his banking relationship with Mr. Grambling as &quot;super.&quot;    Boy and man, John Grambling was always popular. In high school, he was a member of the speech team. As an undergraduate at Southern Methodist University, he was elected president of his dormitory and an officer of his fraternity. He was bright, too. He earned an M.B.A. degree at the Wharton School of Finance. A schoolmate characterized him as the last person anyone would suspect of fraud.    But, with bankers, he had more than a winning personality going for him. In at least three instances, he had made loan repayments ahead of schedule. He repaid $708,000 to Bank of Scottsdale, $1.8 million to American Bank of Commerce in El Paso and $418,000 to First Financial Bank of El Paso.    These payments depleted the $7.5 million he had borrowed from Bank of Montreal by $2.9 million but made him look like a better risk.    What Messrs. Grambling and Libman were up to here was a Ponzi scheme, which works like this: You fraudulently obtain a loan from Bank A. You go on to Bank B and get another loan, using some of Bank B's proceeds to pay back some of your debt to Bank A. That keeps creditors satisfied temporarily and preserves your credit rating for a foray against Bank C.    Brian Rosner, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan who eventually prosecuted Messrs. Grambling and Libman for bank fraud, says of the Ponzi ploy: &quot;It's called robbing Peter to pay Paul, and as long as it works -- as long as the money comes in -- no one knows he's being victimized.&quot; Besides, he says, &quot;No one is more complacent than a banker who has been repaid.&quot;    But Bank of Montreal officials -- anything but complacent -- instructed their New York law firm, Shearman andamp; Sterling, to alert the Manhattan district attorney's office to possible crimes within its jurisdiction by Messrs. Grambling and Libman.    This warning came in early February of 1985, and it signaled trouble for the two freebooters, even though they were well on their way to pulling off three more swindles. Their targets and the amounts they sought to borrow (or steal):    First Security Bank of Utah in Salt Lake City -- $8 million. First Interstate Bank of Denver -- $5 million. Security Savings andamp; Loan Association, Jackson, Miss.$10 million.    Again, Mr. Grambling used his well-tested techniques for separating bankers from their money. He doctored loan agreements and other documents. Once more, he wildly misrepresented his net assets. And he got Mr. Libman to do some new impersonations on the telephone.    Mr. Grambling's effort to get millions from First Security Bank came within a whisker of succeeding.    He submitted a financial statement to First Security attesting that he owned 358,600 shares of Southern Union Co. stock, shares that had a market value of nearly $10 million. And he offered the stock, which, as usual, he didn't truly own, as collateral.    To further deceive First Security, he set up a conference call between the bank's loan committee and Mr. Libman posing as Blair Mullin, an actual official of Bank of Montreal. As additional collateral, the loan committee accepted the fake Mr. Mullin's assurances that the Utah bank would have recourse to funds from a loan Mr. Grambling was negotiating with Bank of Montreal. So assured, the First Security committee agreed to lend him the money.    But at the 11th hour, First Security got lucky. Scott Clark, a lawyer representing the Utah bank, phoned a man who supposedly was Ronald Keenan, the president of Coronado Bank in El Paso, where Mr. Grambling did some of his banking business. Mr. Keenan was portrayed for this occasion by an unidentified impostor (not by Mr. Libman this time).    Mr. Clark, who was looking for an agent to hold the 358,600 Southern Union shares and to arrange for their delivery to Salt Lake City, asked who currently had custody of the stock.    &quot;Mr. Keenan&quot; replied that the local Merrill Lynch office had the certificates. Mr. Clark agreed quickly on Merrill Lynch as the agent because it had an office in the bank's Salt Lake City building, which would facilitate delivery of the stock. That news jolted the ersatz Mr. Keenan, who knew the Southern Union stock was a figment.    He said that he had better confirm that Merrill Lynch did actually hold the certificates. He hung up and called back shortly to say he had been mistaken. The shares were in the hands of E.F. Hutton's El Paso office, Mr. Keenan said. That, too, was just fine with Mr. Clark, because Hutton also had an office in the building. At that point, Mr. Keenan said he would again have to check on exactly where the shares reposed.    He made another call and came back on the line with the news that the stock was at Eppler, Guerin andamp; Turner, a Texas brokerage firm with no offices whatever in Utah.    His suspicions aroused, Mr. Clark demanded to have the original Southern Union stock certificates sent directly to him. When Mr. Grambling couldn't deliver nonexistent shares, First Security slipped the swindlers' noose.    A few weeks later, Jim Conover, a First Security official, was reminded of how close the bank had come to losing $8 million. He remarked: &quot;It's like Vietnam, when you heard the bullets whistling by your head.&quot;    Mr. Grambling went back to the well again in trying to take First Interstate Bank for $5 million. His collateral consisted of phony Southern Union stock, falsely valued at more than $5 million. And when it came to staging his $10 million raid on Security Savings andamp; Loan, Mr. Grambling offered $12 million in bogus certificates of deposit.    &quot;That representation was false. The certificates did not exist. Mr. Grambling's Xeroxes of the certificates and other documentary proof of their existence were forgeries,&quot; said Mr. Rosner, the Manhattan assistant district attorney in a sworn statement.    The string ran out on Mr. Grambling and Mr. Libman in the spring of 1985, after Mr. Rosner presented evidence uncovered in the investigation of the two partners. On May 7, 1985, a New York County grand jury indicted Mr. Grambling on 32 counts of bank fraud involving Bank of Montreal, Colorado National Bank, First Security Bank of Utah, First Interstate Bank of Denver and Security Savings andamp; Loan Association of Jackson, Miss. Mr. Libman was indicted on two counts -- a conspiracy charge and a fraud charge. New York County got jurisdiction over the case because forged documents in the Bank of Montreal loan were submitted to the bank in Manhattan at the loan closing.    Initially, Messrs. Grambling and Libman pleaded not guilty. Then, last October, as their trials in a New York state court grew near, they changed their pleas to guilty. Mr. Grambling said in his plea that, at the urging of his family, he is seeing a Yale University psychiatrist once a week.    Mr. Libman drew a six-month term in New York's Rikers Island prison and has served his time -- four months, with time off for good behavior. The short sentence may reflect Mr. Libman's subordinate role, which Mr. Rosner described in a memorandum to the court: &quot;Although Mr. Grambling was the lead actor, Mr. Libman had more than a walk-on part.&quot;    Mr. Grambling has yet to be sentenced. He faces a maximum of 20 years in prison; fines and restitution could total $40.5 million.    But while free on bail, Mr. Grambling was doing business as usual, which turned out to be expensive for two new bank victims. It also further embroiled him with the law.    Last June, Colonial Bank andamp; Trust Co. in Chicago closed a loan of $350,000 with Mr. Grambling, secured again by phony collateral, this time American Brands shares with a supposed market value of more than $600,000. Mr. Grambling made off with $250,000 of the bank's money before Colonial caught on and denied him the remaining $100,000.    Mr. Grambling struck again in the fall, when he took CityTrust of Bridgeport, Conn., for $450,000, a loan secured by more than $7 million in such blue-chip stocks as J.P. Morgan, General Motors, Rockwell International, IBM and Standard Oil, all bogus. There, he himself posed as one Robert E. Smith Jr., a fictitious agent for an Arizona businessman.    None of the money Messrs. Grambling and Libman obtained fraudulently from the banks and savings institutions has ever been recovered, though much of the money borrowed from one lender was later repaid to another. Bank of Montreal, for example was repaid $2 million but, in the end, got stuck for $5.5 million. Colorado National Bank hasn't been repaid any of the $6 million it lent.    In December, Connecticut Bank andamp; Trust Co. of Hartford pondered whether to lend $450,000 to the same Robert E. Smith Jr. but turned him -- that is, Mr. Grambling -- down.    Undaunted, Mr. Grambling approached Great American First Savings Bank of San Diego. Again he misrepresented himself as the owner of IBM shares, which he offered as collateral for a $350,000 loan.    This time the gambit was disastrous for him. On Jan. 5, Mr. Rosner received an internal memo from Colonial Bank, which had been defrauded by Mr. Grambling more than six months earlier. (He has yet to be charged in the Colonial Bank case.) The memo, dated Dec. 31, 1986, said Mr. Grambling had called Colonial that day to say he was at Great American First in San Diego. He was there, he announced, borrowing $350,000, and he would be wiring Colonial Bank the $250,000 he owed. The Colonial memo ended: &quot;He continues to amaze.&quot;    Mr. Rosner promptly phoned the San Diego bank to warn of a fraud in progress. Four days later, Mr. Grambling entered Great American First, expecting to get his $350,000. Instead, he was arrested by an FBI agent impersonating a loan officer.    Unable to make bail of $2 million, Mr. Grambling was jailed in San Diego, where he pleaded guilty to federal bank-fraud charges involving the Great American First loan, and he is to be sentenced today on federal charges by the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of California. Then he will be flown to New York for sentencing by the state on April 1.    Banks that Messrs. Grambling and Libman defrauded or tried to defraud offer various explanations (or none at all) for how such swindles can happen. Mr. Clark, the attorney for First Security Bank of Utah, which narrowly escaped the scam, lays blame on competition and on trust. &quot;Banks are highly competitive in trying to place good loans,&quot; he says. In Mr. Grambling's case, he came to the bank in the company of an executive of the Husky Oil refinery in Salt Lake City that Mr. Grambling had hoped to buy. That association with respectability and Mr. Grambling's &quot;very nice social graces&quot; gave him credibility with First Security. &quot;There's an enormous amount of money banks have and want to lend out,&quot; Mr. Clark says. &quot;In New York, they want to lend it to Brazil. In smaller cities, they like to lend it to the local refinery.&quot;    A banker who did fall for the scheme and who consented to an interview on the condition that his name wouldn't be published, says he has two ideas about avoiding future rip-offs: &quot;We should tighten up our internal guidelines, and we should be sure we know our borrowers.&quot; He says that in many years as a banker he has grown accustomed to &quot;dealing with honest people 99% of the time.&quot; The banking system, he says, &quot;is built on trust.&quot; And a person intent on bank fraud &quot;is going to get it done.&quot; As for Mr. Grambling: &quot;He should be compelled to wear a bell around his neck.&quot;    James Bussitil, a lawyer for Bank of Montreal, said in an interview that &quot;the modern banking system is susceptible to fraud because banking basically operates on the basis of trust. We made all the standard checks, and nothing turned up on Grambling.&quot;    Peter A. Manson, a senior vice president of Bank of Montreal, praised &quot;the diligence of our account managers&quot; in bringing to light Mr. Grambling's fraud. He said the incident &quot;has again reminded this bank, and we expect other banks . . . of the need to know your customer.&quot;    At the end of his spree, Mr. Grambling was hoist with his own petard. The Great American First &quot;loan officer&quot; who nabbed him turned out to be an FBI agent. Thus, the teacher was taught a lesson he had been busy teaching bankers: Beware of impostors. </TEXT></DOC>