<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880421-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Monroe Doctrine Fails Again </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   One of the really impressive things about the Reagan administration is its sheer technical incompetence. Once upon a time Republicans prided themselves on their administrative ability. They might not have many ideas, but they really knew how to run things. When the nation was in trouble, so the argument went, Franklin Roosevelt had to call in Republicans to get the job done: Stimson and Knox, McCloy, Patterson and Lovett.    One wonders what has happened to the fabled Republican administrative tradition. The Reaganites are hardly in the mold. They are filled with ideas, if often of a weird sort, and they don't know how to run anything. They give us an attorney general whose nominees for judicial and executive office self-destruct and who is himself far busier as defendant than as prosecutor. They give us a national security adviser whose Iran-Contra scam is straight out of Rube Goldberg and whose operating methods bear the imprint of Inspector Clouseau. And they give us Elliott Abrams, an assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs who has compiled, even for the Reagan crowd, a remarkably consistent record of failure.    One can only suppose that George Shultz, generally a sensible man, must have decided to turn Central America over to right-wing ideologues in exchange for a free hand in more consequential parts of the world. No other theory can easily account for the survival of Mr. Abrams, an official with no visible qualifications for the job, who is both disbelieved on Capitol Hill and disliked by Latin Americans. Today we see Mr. Abrams's Central American policies in spectacular collapse: in Panama, in Honduras, in Nicaragua.    Mr. Abrams's attitude descends from the notorious pronouncement made nearly a century ago by Secretary of State Richard Olney: &quot;The United States is practically sovereign on this continent, and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it confines its interposition.&quot; This charming piece of self-hypnosis was not even true in 1895, and it is a hopeless basis for policy in 1988 -- among other reasons, because a policy founded on the expectation that Latin Americans will roll over and cry uncle just won't work any longer.    Nor does the Monroe Doctrine confer on the U.S. the right to work its will in the hemisphere. Few people who invoke the doctrine appear to have read it. Should they do so, they would discover it involves a reciprocal pledge: that European powers abstain from any effort to extend their system in this hemisphere and that the U.S. abstain from interference in the &quot;wars of the European powers&quot; or their &quot;internal concerns.&quot; The U.S. has not kept its side of the pledge since 1917, and the case can be made that the Monroe Doctrine is therefore null and void.    The doctrine was in any event only a unilateral declaration by a U.S. president. It was neither accepted by other governments nor affirmed even by other branches of the U.S. government. Its force comes from its incorporation into hemisphere agreements through the Act of Chapultepec in 1945 and the Rio Treaty in 1947 and therefore depends on collective hemisphere action.    The Monroe Doctrine in its unilateral form is extremely unpopular in Latin America, where it is remembered as an imperialist pretext for intervention. President Kennedy, who rejected the notion that the doctrine gives the U.S. special rights beyond the right of self-defense, forbade its mention during the Cuban missile crisis. U.S. officials and politicians would be wise to follow his example today.    Unilateral U.S. coercive action in the hemisphere, save in extremis, is always a mistake. Take Panama. So far as I can find out, Mr. Abrams made no effort to act in concert with Latin American countries or even to consult them before launching his campaign to overthrow Gen. Noriega. Indeed, this U.S. campaign interrupted and derailed a promising mediating effort by the Latin American section of the Socialist International to persuade Gen. Noriega to leave quietly.    Any intelligent person could have foreseen the result of U.S. unilateral action. All decent Latin Americans detest Gen. Noriega; but they detest U.S. intervention even more. Mr. Abrams has brilliantly succeeded in transforming this drug-dealing crook, despised by his fellow Latinos, into a champion of Latin American sovereignty against the colossus of the north.    At the meeting of the Latin American Economic System in Caracas two weeks ago, 22 Latin American and Caribbean nations, from Gen. Pinochet's Chile to Castro's Cuba, joined in condemning the U.S. economic sanctions against Panama and said they would consider a Noriega request for economic aid. Liberal senators who back Mr. Abrams in his misbegotten unilateral crusade are setting a terrible long-term precedent in the hope, probably delusory, of a short-term gain. Even if the crusade eventually succeeds, it will cost the U.S. heavily in the hemisphere.    Next, Honduras: A vital part of the Abrams anti-Sandinista strategy has been to convert Honduras into a military base and staging area for U.S. troops and spooks. Wiseacre U.S. operatives have moved into Honduras, distributing pressures, bribes and general Yanqui arrogance, and acting as if they owned the place. A conservative Honduran politician says that his country has been &quot;like the circus dog that jumps through the hoop when its master tells it to.&quot;    The Hondurans are poor, but they have pride, and eventually enough is enough. When a recent U.S. action violated their constitution, numbers of Hondurans evidently decided they were mad as hell and wouldn't take it anymore -- &quot;a popular response,&quot; a Latin American ambassador in Tegucigalpa observes, &quot;to six years of American impositions.&quot;    Of course, as the Reagan administration self-righteously points out, all Washington was doing when it violated the Honduran constitution was to kidnap a drug dealer. But the &quot;war&quot; against drugs doesn't justify everything. Even Mr. Abrams opposes the ill-judged Senate vote last week to impose economic sanctions against Mexico for failing to prosecute that war vigorously enough.    Latin Americans are not deeply moved by the U.S. &quot;war&quot; against drugs. They note the considerable discrepancy between rhetoric and action. They know that, long after the drug connections were known, Gen. Noriega continued to prosper as a CIA &quot;asset.&quot; Basically, they regard the U.S. international anti-drug crusade as a typical Yanqui alibi -- blaming U.S. drug addiction on wicked foreign suppliers. The real answer to the drug problem in the U.S., they say, lies in the control of domestic U.S. demand. So long as that demand grows, there will always be foreigners to supply it. The Americans cannot forever blame everyone except themselves for their own problems. So benighted Latin Americans think. Are we really so sure that they are altogether wrong?    Then there is Nicaragua, the Mighty Mouse menace that has kept Mr. Reagan and the Washington ideologues in continual fright since 1981. Contrary to administration expectations, the Sandinistas and Contras are now seeking a political accord. If Mr. Abrams had any political sense, he would have hailed the talks as a vindication of his policy. Instead, he sneers at the negotiations and issues predictions about their imminent breakdown.    &quot;We are teaching the world,&quot; President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica said last week, &quot;that Central Americans can solve their own problems if they are left alone.&quot; If the U.S. really wants the peace process to succeed, success would be reasonably certain. An intelligent administration would be doing its damnedest to guide the negotiations toward a democratic result, throwing its weight behind the Central American effort instead of deriding and undermining it.    Our Central American policy is in shambles. Undertaken by confident and ignorant ideologues scornful of local interests and local knowledge, it has overridden everything bitter experience should have taught us about Latin America and landed us in an entirely predictable mess. The cause of this particular foreign-policy collapse is the familiar Reaganite combination of rigid ideological dogmatism with sublime professional incompetence. Can anyone imagine Henry L. Stimson putting up with these bunglers for five minutes?    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>