<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Helping Hand:Catholic Church PlaysRole in ImplementingNew Immigration Law---Los Angeles Archdiocese AidsIllegals Seeking Amnesty;Criticism From the Right---The Archbishop's Media Skills---By Eileen WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/03/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM LABORCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It is around 8 p.m., and the last of the day's tourists are leaving El Pueblo de Los Angeles. Now it is time for visitors of another sort to straggle out of the shadows.    On this night here in the 19th-century remains of Spanish Los Angeles, 66 male illegal aliens have come from all over the city to sleep on the bare wooden pews of the district's historic Catholic church, Our Lady Queen of Angels. When the men awaken, priests and church workers will direct them through a network of church-sponsored programs offering food, housing, work, medical care, English-language classes and immigration counseling.    Like many who seek refuge in the church each night, these men also plead for information about la amnestia, the amnesty program for illegal residents that is part of the new immigration legislation passed in October. Under the law, illegal aliens who can prove continuous U.S. residence since 1982 can apply for legal residence.    The undocumented have come to the right place. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles is expected to be the most active player in the effort to legalize hundreds of thousands of undocumented aliens in its sprawling three counties. It is by population the largest diocese in the U.S. and by ethnicity the most heavily Latino, and its three million Catholics include many of the 500,000 to one million undocumented Southern California residents who are believed to qualify for amnesty.    The archdiocese's central role will stem from an Immigration and Naturalization Service plan to encourage the undocumented -- who fear deportation if they apply directly to immigration authorities -- to seek help from voluntary groups. The INS will give federal money to voluntary agencies, including the church, to process applications under the amnesty program. Here, where most illegal residents are Hispanic Catholics, most applicants are likely to gravitate toward the church.    &quot;The church is the one institution the people trust,&quot; says Armando Navarro, the director of the Institute for Social Justice, a local Hispanic political-organizing group.    Crucial to the archdiocese's effort to draw illegal aliens out of hiding and into greater civic and church involvement is Archbishop Roger M. Mahony, a social activist who became archbishop only last year. Drawn by his mesmerizing oratory delivered in Spanish and his youthful good looks, Hispanics already identify strongly with the 50-year-old archbishop. When the longtime champion of the rights of Latino farm laborers and undocumented workers appears at Hispanic gatherings, crowds cluster around as they might follow a sports hero, chanting his first name in Spanish: &quot;Rogelio!&quot; (ro-HEY-lio).    At least half, and probably more if illegals were counted, of the archdiocese's members are Latino. And by taking its role in the legalization process very seriously, the Catholic Church here is acknowledging that its future is tied to the future of Latinos.    The new law coincides with a highly publicized effort led by the archbishop to raise the church's profile in the Latino community and increase its membership. A new five-year program aimed at Hispanics, estimated to cost the archdiocese $2 million in its first year, includes Spanish-language Masses in the parishes, mandatory Spanish classes for new priests, bilingual education in parochial schools, scholarships for Latino students and programs to reduce youth-gang violence.    In addition, Archbishop Mahony has been encouraging Hispanic immigrants to take a more active role in local political issues through groups such as the United Neighborhoods Organization (Uno), a church-based, community-action group that represents about 93,000 families in the heavily Hispanic East Los Angeles neighborhoods. Along with other religious leaders, the archbishop appeared at a recent prayer service organized by Uno to denounce the eviction of undocumented residents from public housing. &quot;In the church, there are no illegal aliens,&quot; the archbishop proclaimed to the crowd.    The now-retired Los Angeles archbishop, 75-year-old Timothy Cardinal Manning, took a strong but low-key approach to Hispanic issues, lobbying legislators behind the scenes for immigration reform and government services for the undocumented. His successor -- the youngest Catholic archbishop in the U.S. -- is savvy at delivering the same message loudly to the crowds and the media. It is a skill Archbishop Mahony honed while serving in the 1970s as chairman of the state Agricultural Labor Relations Board during the vote over union representation of farm workers. At the time, he was the bishop of Fresno, in the state's agricultural center.    When Archbishop Mahony unveiled the five-year Hispanic plan, he followed it with a celebration at Dodger Stadium that drew 50,000 Latinos to pray, watch fireworks and view a videotaped message from the pope. From the flower-bedecked altar, the archbishop declared in Spanish: &quot;Los Angeles is your home, the Catholic Church is your home, and I am your pastor.&quot;    Seemingly assured by such public displays of interest in Latinos, many undocumented aliens called or appeared at churches and church organizations within days of the immigration bill's passage. &quot;We've been inundated,&quot; says the Rev. Joseph Pina, an East Los Angeles pastor.    An official count of illegal-alien Catholics here hasn't been taken, but church officials know they number in the hundreds of thousands because they attend Mass and seek church services. For example, Our Lady Queen of Angels, situated downtown, has so many illegal parishioners that it has no official parish roster. With eight priests in residence, however, it is the largest and busiest parish in the city. About 11,000 people attend its round-the-clock Sunday Masses, and about 200 children are baptized each weekend.    In the days following passage of the immigration bill, hundreds of the undocumented went straight to Catholic Charities of Los Angeles, a diocesan organization that works on immigration issues. Sitting in a counselor's office with his wife and two sons shortly after the bill passed, a man who identified himself only as Senor Bugarin told a visitor, &quot;The most important thing they've done is to give me confidence that they will help me.&quot;    The archdiocese has much experience as a buffer between immigrants and government immigration agencies. The Catholic Charities organization has spent more than $28 million on services for nearly half a million immigrants, legal and illegal, since 1971. It has a staff of eight accredited counselors, who represent aliens in deportation or naturalization hearings before federal immigration judges, and operates a state-financed program to locate and aid refugees. Using parish volunteers, the office has resettled more than 30,000 Cubans and nearly 43,000 Indochinese.    &quot;They do a lot of the legwork, filling out forms and putting cases together, and save us a lot of time,&quot; says Harold Ezell, the Western regional commissioner of the INS. Mr. Ezell's agency plans to rely heavily on church volunteers for the same services when the amnesty applications process begins, in about six months.    The Los Angeles archbishop's leadership in this effort has endeared him to liberal forces in the church -- including many priests -- who have long desired a more active role in social-justice issues. They give the archbishop high marks for allowing the pastor of Our Lady Queen of Angels to declare the church a sanctuary for undocumented aliens -- an action the Catholic hierarchy hasn't encouraged. &quot;He gives hope to those of us working down in the inner city,&quot; says the Rev. Michael Walsh, the pastor of a church in the city's predominantly black Watts district.    But some liberals criticize the archbishop for not publicly supporting the farm workers union's current boycott of California grapes and for failing to make a promised appearance at the ceremony declaring Our Lady Queen of Angels a sanctuary. The archbishop says in an interview that he supports that church's effort &quot;without saying the whole archdiocese has to do what {they} are doing.&quot;    Yet the archbishop faces the most criticism from the right. Although conservative Catholics haven't spoken out publicly against the popular archbishop, Richard J. Riordan, a partner in the law firm that represents the archdiocese, says some conservatives talk privately about feeling threatened by Archbishop Mahony's &quot;power-to-the-poor philosophy.&quot;    Still, the archbishop hasn't neglected the powerful. He established a series of advisory committees and filled them with wealthy members of the city's Catholic business community. He also impressed business leaders by appointing the first diocesan chief financial officer who isn't a priest. And, perhaps more comforting to the conservatives, he is no liberal on church doctrine, taking a hard-line position on issues such as birth control, homosexuality and the ordination of women.    However, he is equally unbending about human rights. &quot;There is an element of discrimination, racism in California, based on a great deal of ignorance of the people,&quot; he says. &quot;I find it so ironic, since we live in a Mexican milieu.&quot;    To counter this, he has urged well-heeled parishes in the suburbs to adopt inner-city parishes and regard themselves as &quot;missionaries&quot; to immigrants. They should &quot;live the gospel&quot; by becoming involved in social programs such as soup kitchens and counseling for runaway youth, he says.    Archbishop Mahony expects this missionary zeal to extend to helping undocumented residents apply for the legalization program. He says: &quot;Our presence is going to be so significant that in California {the success of} legalization will be in direct proportion to our involvement.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>