<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Insight:Fears That Soviets Will Harden StandCloud Optimism on Nuclear-Arms Talks---By John WalcottStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROP GOVMTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Negotiations on a treaty all but eliminating U.S. and Soviet nuclear missiles in Europe finally have reached the end game. But the Reagan administration may find that the toughest going is still ahead.    Four thorny, interrelated issues remain to be settled: Will the Soviets agree to give up 100 medium-range nuclear warheads in Asia? Will they also dismantle some 44 short-range nuclear missile launchers in Asia? Will West Germany be permitted to keep 72 aging Pershing missiles? And how will the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. ensure that the other side isn't cheating?    There is optimism in Washington that the U.S. and the Soviet Union will conclude a breakthrough agreement this year on Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces, or INF, clearing the way for a summit meeting between President Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. U.S. intelligence analysts believe Mr. Gorbachev wants a deal, and predict that he will make further concessions to get one.    American negotiators warn that the Soviets may try to stall to pressure the U.S. to make concessions. But they, too, believe that the Soviets eventually will give up their Asian missiles and agree to the toughest verification measures yet in an arms-control treaty.    A few American officials, however, worry that the Soviets may see things differently. One of the administration's top Soviet experts is concerned that the White House's obvious eagerness for an arms agreement to cap Mr. Reagan's presidency may prompt the Soviets to hang tough on the remaining issues. Other U.S. officials fear the Soviets may create last-minute hurdles to provoke tension between the U.S. and its allies in Europe and Asia.    Foot-dragging is a time-honored Soviet tactic. A 1979 Central Intelligence Agency report on Soviet negotiating behavior warned that among a number of oft-used tactics is &quot;Moscow's fabled 'waiting game' -- the assumption that time invariably works in its favor.&quot; In the current talks, &quot;What we may see is a short game of chicken,&quot; says Soviet expert Arnold Horelick of Rand Corp.    If Mr. Gorbachev wants to play chicken, he has a number of opportunities. For instance, there already is confusion in Washington about whether the Soviets have agreed in principle to dismantle all their three-warhead SS-20 medium-range nuclear missiles in Asia, as well as all their SS-20s and shorter-range nuclear missiles in Europe. A cable from the U.S. Embassy in Moscow last week reported that a senior Soviet diplomat said American officials may have &quot;misunderstood&quot; Moscow's position on the Asian missiles.    The U.S. and its North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies have agreed that the Soviets can keep 33 SS-20s with no more than 100 nuclear warheads in Asia, while the U.S. retains an equal number of warheads on American soil. American officials still hope they can talk the Soviets into giving up all their Asian missiles, both the SS-20s and about 44 shorter-range weapons.    But while those Asian missiles have limited military significance, the Soviets mightn't be willing to give them up without getting something in return. Mr. Gorbachev is campaigning to improve relations with China and Japan, and the Asian missiles could be useful bargaining chips.    &quot;There are political reasons why it makes more sense for the Soviets to give up the Asian missiles in a way that buys them something in Asia, rather than to give them up for nothing to the U.S.,&quot; says Mr. Horelick.    In the meantime, U.S. hard-liners argue that Soviet refusal to dismantle the last Asian missiles could complicate the already considerable difficulty of verifying an INF treaty. Former Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Perle and others argue that allowing the Soviets to keep even a few of the mobile SS-20s, along with the testing, training, spare parts and maintenance to support them, could make an INF agreement &quot;unverifiable.&quot;    If the Soviets retain any SS-20s, Mr. Perle argues, the U.S. must demand both a permanent American presence at SS-20 production, assembly and storage facilities and on-demand inspections of other sites. The Senate also is expected to look closely at verification provisions in deciding whether to ratify any INF treaty.    The Soviets haven't agreed to such a rigorous regime of on-site inspections and the Reagan administration is divided on whether to demand one. The CIA and the Federal Bureau of Investigation oppose giving Soviet inspectors such rights in the U.S., arguing that doing so would create new opportunities for Soviet spies.    Another unresolved issue could pose a political problem for West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government. The West Germans have 72 aging Pershing I-a missiles, for which the U.S. controls the nuclear warheads, and Soviet officials argue that they should be dismantled as part of an INF agreement.    But Mr. Kohl can't give up the missiles without jeopardizing his support from conservatives such as Defense Minister Manfred Woerner. So the U.S. may have to try to negotiate an agreement that allows the Germans to keep the missiles but fends off Soviet demands for a &quot;comparable right&quot; to let its East European allies field similar weapons.    In the end, however, NATO's habitual disunity may prove useful. The Soviets can change their positions much faster than the unwieldy alliance, and if the experts are correct that Mr. Gorbachev wants an INF treaty, he may have to make the last moves to get one. </TEXT></DOC>