<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Walsh Is Focusing on Arms-Money Trail,Say Officials Close to Iran-Contra Inquiry---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Independent counsel Lawrence Walsh is focusing increasingly on the money trail in the Iran-Contra scandal -- and the men who controlled it -- to build his case, according to law enforcement officials and others familiar with the investigation.    The court-appointed prosecutor, these individuals said, contends that central participants in the affair overstepped their authority as &quot;agents&quot; of the U.S. government by creating a secret, privately controlled financial network.    Mr. Walsh's legal theory about the flow of funds is likely to be the linchpin of an effort to bring broader conspiracy and other criminal charges. Central targets of the investigation include former National Security Adviser John Poindexter, former White House aide Oliver North and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord. A final decision on seeking charges could come in September.    Mr. Walsh's team of prosecutors is expected to argue that millions of dollars in profits from U.S.-sanctioned arms sales to Iran belonged to the U.S. government -- and therefore should have remained under strict federal control and accountability. Instead, the money passed through a tangled web of front companies and foreign bank accounts, and some of it was diverted to the Nicaraguan insurgents known as Contras.    Meanwhile, Mr. Walsh's staff is evaluating how it will gather information it needs from President Reagan. Prosecutors are considering whether to pursue a personal interview, or to submit detailed, written questions for Mr. Reagan to answer.    Almost from the start of the investigation, it has been clear that the potential defendants will rely heavily on the defense that they were carrying out Mr. Reagan's policies and wishes. In order to prepare an effective prosecution against such claims, Mr. Walsh and his staff must find a way to question the president about his knowledge of and participation in the affair, according to persons familiar with the issue.    A request for an interview could raise serious questions of executive privilege. Moreover, it would undoubtedly prompt questions about whether Mr. Walsh intends to delve more deeply into Mr. Reagan's personal involvement in the Iran-Contra affair.    In the past, members of Mr. Walsh's staff have suggested that their game plan is, among other things, to use evidence gathered from lower-level targets of the investigation in building a case against more senior participants. Prosecutor David Zornow explained the strategy in May, when conservative publicist Richard Miller pleaded guilty to one count of conspiring to defraud the government through a fundraising effort to arm the Contras. &quot;Our investigation is proceeding in stages,&quot; Mr. Zornow told reporters, with evidence gathered from lower-level witnesses laying the groundwork for an &quot;accelerating and expanding investigation&quot; encompassing more central players.    Such a move could receive a cool reception from a White House eager to put the Iran-Contra affair behind it. Just last Saturday, Mr. Reagan said in a nationally broadcast radio address: &quot;The issues involved have been examined from every angle and in every light. The mistakes that were made have been dealt with.&quot;    For now, though, Mr. Walsh and his prosecutors appear to be concentrating on more immediate legal issues.    According to people familiar with the federal grand jury investigation, Mr. Walsh and his top aides have made a preliminary decision to seek fraud, conspiracy and possibly obstruction of justice charges against some previously identified targets of the investigation.    Mr. Walsh's view of the handling of the arms profits appears to conflict with testimony by the men who authorized, set up and ran the controversial financial network. Adm. Poindexter, Col. North, Gen. Secord and Iranian-born businessman Albert Hakim, who had the largest day-to-day role in supervising the movement of funds, all testified under oath before congressional committees that the disputed money flowed through a web of bank accounts controlled by a private &quot;enterprise.&quot;    As a result, the four men asserted, the fund transfers were outside the purview of the U.S. government. They also maintained that no participants deprived the U.S. of any funds legitimately due the Treasury.    Gen. Secord said that, as the &quot;commercial cut-out&quot; -- a private individual working with a covert operation -- he had Col. North's personal approval to shift profits from the arms transactions as he wished. Col. North was &quot;apprised, in the macro sense, of where the dollars were going&quot; but &quot;never had any accounting&quot; of the precise movements of the money, Gen. Secord has said.    Col. North, calling the money trail &quot;the deepest and darkest secret of the whole activity,&quot; said he left it to Messrs. Hakim and Secord. Adm. Poindexter, who also tried to distance himself from the transactions, testified that he never asked for a breakdown of how much money was funneled to the Contras.    Although prosecutors could reach a final decision on charges as early as next month, according to attorneys familiar with the investigation, the timetable could be delayed if Switzerland's Supreme Court hasn't yet ruled on opening bank records of the accounts used in the covert initiative.    Such records are considered essential to prove the government's case in any criminal trial, so prosecutors may be reluctant or even unwilling to seek charges until the Swiss court gives them a green light. Prosecutors are optimistic that the court will, eventually, do that.    Mr. Walsh's investigators also are continuing to push for interviews of Israeli government officials and arms dealers involved in the Iran-Contra affair. One aim is to shed light on whether Col. North, Gen. Secord and others described themselves, in those early, confidential discussions, as agents or representatives of the U.S., according to attorneys familiar with the matter.    A federal district court judge here currently is reviewing whether David Kimche, a former senior Israeli intelligence official, and Al Schwimmer, an arms dealer who holds both U.S. and Israeli citizenship, can be required to answer Mr. Walsh's questions.    Throughout their investigation, Mr. Walsh and his staff have been careful to insulate themselves from information related to testimony of witnesses who were granted limited immunity from prosecution by Congress.    As part of that effort, the independent counsel and his aides didn't listen to the president's televised speech last week. Instead, they read a transcript of the speech that had been edited to leave out all references to immunized witnesses or their testimony. </TEXT></DOC>