<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871029-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN RENEWED a summit invitation, but rejected preconditions.    In a speech at the U.S. Military Academy in West Point, the president said he welcomed the opportunity to conclude an arms accord with the Soviets, but emphasized that &quot;a summit is not a precondition for progress on the agenda at hand.&quot; Soviet leader Gorbachev refused to set a summit date last week, insisting on U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative concessions. New signals from Moscow indicate progress continues toward a summit.    Shevardnadze visited Prague to brief Warsaw Pact partners on arms control talks before traveling on to Washington. He carries a letter from Gorbachev.    ---   THE WHITE HOUSE IS LIKELY to name a Supreme Court nominee today.    Anthony Kennedy, a U.S. appeals court judge in California, is the name most often mentioned in deliberations, White House and Justice Department sources said. White House officials said Reagan worked from a final list of three names, which also included U.S. Judges Ralph Winter and Douglas Ginsburg. Senate Democrats aren't fully familiar with his record, but initial readings suggest Kennedy would be less controversial than Bork.    The Senate Judiciary panel could hold hearings in mid-December, but it is unlikely that the full Senate would act on the nomination before January.    ---   Suspected communist rebels killed two U.S. Air Force sergeants, a retired U.S. serviceman and a Filipino near Clark Air Base in the Philippines. U.S. authorities warned Americans not to leave the base. The attacks came as the U.S. withdrew a military attache accused of meddling in an August coup attempt.    ---   A Northrop official admitted to a House panel that the defense contractor's management erred in the production of guidance equipment for the MX missile. The panel's chairman introduced internal Northrop documents stating that parts judged suspect by employees were used in at least seven active missiles.    ---   The White House said it may delay asking Congress for $270 million in aid for the Contras until January. Shultz said earlier this month that the request would be made before the end of November, but administration officials said pressure from Central American leaders and doubts about congressional support prompted a reassessment.    Central American ministers agreed at a meeting in Costa Rica that terms of a five-nation regional peace plan will go into effect next Thursday. Despite pressure, however, Nicaragua's foreign minister refused to agree to direct talks with the Contras.    ---   The Senate voted, 96-1, to authorize spending $15.6 billion for airport and air-traffic-control improvements over the next three years. The House passed similar legislation earlier this month, but that bill would authorize $28.6 billion over the next five years and the differences must be resolved in conference.    ---   China's Communist Party will announce major changes in its ruling Politburo next week, including the resignation of senior leader Deng Xiaoping from a political post, Chinese and Western sources said. Deng is likely to retain control of the military when a new Politburo is selected by delegates chosen during the current party congress.    ---   Iraq said its warplanes attacked three oil tankers in the Persian Gulf and struck Iranian industrial targets. There was no immediate confirmation of the raids from gulf shipping sources. Meanwhile, a Soviet envoy arrived in Baghdad on a tour to persuade Iran and Iraq to accept a U.N. cease-fire.    ---   Malaysian police arrested at least 63 government critics in a two-day sweep and closed three national newspapers. The government says the arrests, which included members of the Malay majority and the Chinese and Indian minorities, were necessary to keep racial and religious tensions from exploding into riots.    ---   GOP presidential hopefuls appeared together for the first time in a televised debate last night. The candidates tried to gain an advantage over Bush, who was assailed for supporting a proposed arms treaty with the Soviets.    ---   Tests show a new oral typhoid vaccine is more effective and has far fewer side effects than current vaccines, scientists at the National Institutes of Health announced. Testing indicates a single dose protects about 75% of those who take it. About 55 million typhoid cases are reported each year in developing countries.    ---   Ecuadoran police battled protesters in the capital of Quito during a one-day general strike held under a national state of emergency. No information on casualties or arrests was available, but police said a bomb wrecked a bank office in central Quito.    ---   Israeli troops opened fire on college students in Bethlehem, wounding three. One was in &quot;very grave&quot; condition after being shot in the head, a hospital spokeswoman said. The students were protesting Israel's occupation of the West Bank.    ---   Beijing said about 200 foreign and Chinese travelers marooned by snows along the Tibet-Nepal border were rescued. No foreigners were hurt in the blizzard, it said.    ---   Kidnappers in Beirut released a South Korean diplomat for a $1 million ransom after holding him for 21 months, according to the leader of the Shiite Amal militia. A spokesman for the South Korean Embassy said it had no information on the release. </TEXT></DOC>