<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Saudis' Return to Swing-Producer RoleIn OPEC Is Seen Sustaining Oil Price---By Youssef M. IbrahimStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST XON MOB TX CHVPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> ABU DHABI, United Arab Emirates  </DATELINE><TEXT>    After more than sixmonths of steady recovery, oil prices have stumbled in recentdays, undermined by some marginal cheating within theOrganization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.   But despite the dip, the $18-a-barrel price set by the cartel in its recent production-limitation pact is expected to hold firm for at least several months, bolstered by a quiet but remarkable reversal in the oil policy of Saudi Arabia. In effect, the Saudis, the world's largest oil exporters, again have become OPEC's &quot;swing producer,&quot; willing to sustain a decline to support the new fixed price.    The Saudis assumed that role for years, then angrily renounced it in October 1985, prompting a collapse in world oil prices. They effectively took it up again last week in an agreement with the four major U.S. companies that form a partnership with the Saudi-owned Arabian American Oil Co. -- Exxon Inc., Mobil Corp., Chevron Corp. and Texaco Inc. The contract calls for these companies to lift oil at a price tied to OPEC's decreed $18 a barrel, but if the Americans don't like that price, they needn't take the oil. In other words, if free-market prices fall below OPEC's fixed price, Saudi exports will decline.    That contract lends credibility to a hint of more production cuts dropped by a pivotal OPEC minister, Manei Saeed al-Otaiba of the United Arab Emirates. In an interview here, Mr. Otaiba said OPEC may consider further cuts if the cartel judges its current official ceiling of 15.8 million barrels a day no longer sufficient to hold prices around the $18 target.    Oil industry sources and traders said the recent price slippage, estimated at one dollar a barrel during the past two weeks, is upsetting, but not dramatic. &quot;We feel the pressure, but it isn't a shock,&quot; says Mohammed Anana, manager of Transoil Ltd.'s Paris bureau. &quot;We expected weakness after the steady rise since the summer.&quot;    Contributing to the weakness is a resurgence of cheating by OPEC members after a period of some discipline. Oil industry sources say the cartel's production is exceeding its ceiling by nearly one million barrels a day.    Mr. Otaiba said OPEC will wait until the end of the current quarter to assess the production and pricing levels. &quot;If we find that the current measures aren't enough to maintain stability in the market, then we will have to call for an emergency meeting and take new measures . . . including another cut in the production of OPEC countries,&quot; he said.    Mr. Otaiba spoke a day after six Arab oil ministers concluded a two-day meeting here under the auspices of the Gulf Cooperation Council, a military and economic alliance of Saudi Arabia, Oman, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Qatar. At the meeting, the six reaffirmed support for OPEC's December decision to fix prices by cutting production.    Four of the countries are leading members of OPEC, which hasn't scheduled any official meetings before June. Several officials here said they prefer to stick with the summer date to avoid the market turbulence usually associated with frequent OPEC meetings.    At the gathering, Saudi Arabia, the group's leader, reemphasized the desire for stability and maintenance of the $18 price, sources said. Saudi oil minister Hisham Nazer underscored King Fahd's belief that the $18 price is fair and conveyed the impression that Saudi Arabia will use its political clout in oil markets to make it stick for a long time, they said. Mr. Nazer's words reinforced the import of the sales contracts agreed last week. They also confirmed the reversal of Saudi oil policies that only a year ago, under ousted minister Ahmed Zaki Yamani, emphasized a price war.    According to the Middle East Economic Survey, a well-informed trade publication, the new fixed price contract, which the American companies had resisted signing since December, apparently was concluded only after the companies were granted &quot;wide flexibility&quot; without any &quot;fixed minimums or percentage limitation&quot; on what they lift at those fixed prices.    Thus, although the contract stipulates that the four American companies will take about 1.2 million barrels a day of Saudi oil until June, they can, in fact, decide to take nothing at all on a month's notice &quot;without any penalty,&quot; according to the publication, if the fixed price appears out of line with free market prices. Sources close to the transaction also say the companies lift as little as 50% of the contracted volumes at any time. The net effect is to force Saudi exports up or down in defense of the fixed price.    A well-informed Saudi source said the Saudis intend to help bolster the price, in addition, by encouraging other OPEC members to adhere to the agreed production limits. The source, who asked not to be identified, said Saudi patience with other members' cheating will be limited. He added that he expected King Fahd to use &quot;dialogue and conviction&quot; to end the cheating, suggesting that the Saudis' fuse may be several months long. &quot;It takes Saudi Arabia a long time to make a decision and a long time to reverse it,&quot; the source said.    The cheating reflects the political constraints on many OPEC countries' oil policies. For example, among those exceeding their output limits are Mr. Otaiba's United Arab Emirates, which is producing 1.2 million barrels a day, an excess of about 300,000 barrels a day.    Earlier this month, Mr. Otaiba publicly complained that the reason for his country's quota infractions is that Dubai, the second-largest of the union's seven emirates, continues to pump oil at close to its maximum capacity of nearly 380,000 barrels a day. This puts a heavy burden on the leading emirate of Abu Dhabi to curtail its own production in order to meet the overall OPEC quota.    In addition, Kuwait, Ecuador, Qatar and Iraq all have raised their production above assigned limits.    Kuwait is said by industry and OPEC sources to be pumping about 1.2 million barrels a day including its part of a neutral oil production zone it shares with Saudi Arabia. This represents an excess of 250,000 barrels a day above its quota. Despite their endorsement of the OPEC accord, Kuwaiti oilmen haven't expressed much enthusiasm for it. Kuwait has said publicly that it won't stick to OPEC agreements if others in the group flout them.    Iraq, which didn't agree to participate in the current OPEC pact, is said to have raised its output close to 1.8 million barrels a day, 200,000 barrels more than it produced last August, when the accord was formulated.    Most industry sources and analysts doubt the current price dip will last. They say that as long as the major OPEC producers, including Saudi Arabia, Nigeria, and Iran, are sticking to their alloted shares, chances are the oil market will pick up again. &quot;Things aren't all that bad,&quot; said Peter Gignoux, manager of the international energy desk at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.'s London offices. &quot;Barring any political development, like in the Iran-Iraq war, I see the market drifting along,&quot; he said.    For his part, Mr. Otaiba said the group has done well, considering the fact that OPEC was waging its price battle against &quot;the monstrous use of inventories to weaken prices.&quot; He estimated that what started out as a surplus stock of about 300 million barrels of oil early in the winter will be &quot;eliminated&quot; by the end of March. Furthermore, he said, it has become clear that consumers, as well as producers of oil, support price stability, which creates a political will to support OPEC. </TEXT></DOC>