<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880913-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. CALLED for wider testing in homes to detect hazardous radon.    The EPA advised all homeowners and renters to test their property for radon, following a study that found contamination by the gas was more widespread than earlier believed. The agency's administrator said one-third of the homes in seven states studied this year contained dangerous levels of the invisible, radioactive gas, which is produced by the natural decay of uranium in soil.    The agency estimated that about 20,000 lung-cancer deaths a year are caused by exposure to radon, second only to cigarette smoking.    ---   GORBACHEV WAS HECKLED during a trip to the Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk.    Angry Siberians complained of food shortages, poor living conditions and a lack of public transportation, and they urged the Soviet leader to visit stores in the area to see that they had nothing to buy. The scenes were shown on Moscow television. The heckling came within minutes of Gorbachev's arrival in the eastern industrial region to start a weeklong visit. It was the first time that he had appeared in public in six weeks.    A congressional report said that Gorbachev has been forced by economic concerns to seek military changes, but that they have had little impact.    ---   Dukakis asserted that Bush &quot;has failed&quot; three foreign policy tests: combating trade deficits, terrorism and drug trafficking. The Democratic presidential nominee, speaking in Philadelphia at the start of a three-day campaign swing focusing on national security, pledged a foreign policy that would &quot;restore respect for American leadership.&quot;    Bush won endorsements from former national security advisers to Presidents Nixon, Ford and Carter as he assembled a bipartisan team of advisers on foreign policy and defense issues. Meanwhile, five members of the GOP candidate's ethnic coalition resigned in the wake of reports of their connection with anti-Semitic activities.    ---   Shiite Moslem kidnappers freed a West German hostage in Beirut after declaring that they were ending the 55-year-old businessman's 20 months in captivity in response to Syrian and Iranian intervention. Separately, an American engineer who was abducted Sunday in Lebanon escaped from his captors with the aid of Syrian troops.    ---   A pilot testified that Mohammed Ali Hamadi killed an American serviceman during the June 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner. Capt. John Testrake identified Hamadi during the Lebanese's trial in Frankfurt on charges of air piracy and murder.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci directed the Pentagon to move toward development of a new nuclear weapon that would penetrate the earth and then explode underground. The weapon would be designed for use against underground Soviet command posts.    ---   South Africa's President Botha traveled to Mozambique and met with officials of the Marxist-ruled government, which has blamed Pretoria for supporting anti-Maputo rebels. Following their talks, Botha and Mozambique's President Chissano issued a joint communique that affirmed both countries' support for regional cooperation.    ---   Bangladesh's President Ershad appealed for additional foreign aid to feed more than 30 million people left homeless by floods, and doctors tried to halt an epidemic of diarrhea caused by tainted drinking water. One physician said about 5% of the diarrhea patients had contracted cholera.    ---   Hurricane Gilbert slammed into Jamaica with torrential rains and 115-mph winds that ripped roofs off houses, pounded beachfront resorts and spawned mud slides. Radio Cayman reported that 30 people were killed and said hundreds of families fled their homes because of rising floodwaters.    ---   Wind-whipped fires raced through the Sierra Nevada foothills, charring nearly 30,000 acres, destroying about a dozen homes and prompting about 4,500 people to evacuate. In Wyoming, firefighters took advantage of damp weather to strengthen lines around blazes that have burned nearly one million acres in Yellowstone National Park.    ---   Burma's government said the army would shoot people distributing leaflets claiming senior military officers had defected to the opposition. The warning came as thousands of anti-government demonstrators marched through Rangoon to demand that an interim government be appointed to supervise multiparty elections.    ---   Radio stations in Port-au-Prince reported that police and soldiers didn't make any attempt Sunday to intercede as assailants with guns and machetes attacked parishioners at a Mass celebrated by an opponent of Haiti's military regime. At least five people were killed and about 60 injured in the attack. The priest reportedly escaped unharmed.    ---   China has proposed a solution to the Cambodia conflict that would give Vietnam nine months to withdraw its troops, diplomats said. The offer was made during talks this month between China and the Soviet Union. In Hanoi, a U.S. military team arrived to discuss possible joint searches for missing American servicemen.    ---   Police in Chile said at least 50 people were injured and more than 200 were arrested during violent anti-government demonstrations Sunday marking the 15th anniversary of the military coup that installed President Pinochet. The protests included the stoning of Pinochet's motorcade as it traveled through a Santiago slum.    ---   Riot police in Panama fired tear gas at rock-throwing high-school students during an anti-government demonstration in the capital. The violence erupted as dockworkers at the port of Balboa went on strike to protest Panama's economic crisis. </TEXT></DOC>