<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880602-0042 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AND GORBACHEV ENDED their fourth summit with modest results.    At the conclusion of the four-day meeting in Moscow, the Soviet leader condemned the U.S. for blocking progress in arms control and other issues, and dismissed Reagan's charges of continuing Soviet human-rights violations. Nonetheless, Gorbachev said, &quot;We moved one rung, two rungs up the ladder.&quot; The president muted his criticism of the Kremlin, suggesting that emigration curbs were largely bureaucratic obstacles. The two leaders ended their formal session by exchanging documents of ratification of the superpower treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles.    Gorbachev said ousted Moscow Communist Party chief Yeltsin would be asked about his criticism of deputy Kremlin leader Ligachev. Gorbachev denied reports of a high-level rift.    ---   The National Academy of Sciences urged Congress to pass legislation to prevent bias against AIDS patients. In a report, the academy's Institute of Medicine also called for consideration of providing drug users with needles and faulted the &quot;gross inadequacy&quot; of U.S. efforts to reduce the spread of AIDS among addicts.    ---   An explosion in a coal mine killed at least 16 workers and trapped more than 40 others in a 300-foot shaft in Borken, West Germany. Officials at the site, about 70 miles northeast of Frankfurt, offered little hope of finding any survivors. The blast scorched the ground on the surface, where eight miners were critically injured, authorities said.    ---   Iran is building a new Silkworm missile complex in the Strait of Hormuz, the top U.S. commander for the Mideast said. The nearly completed launch site, near Kuhestak, would put Iran's missiles within striking distance of targets across the entire strait, gateway to the Persian Gulf.    ---   El Salvador's Duarte underwent a battery of medical tests at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington to determine if his condition could be cancer. The Central American president, an ally of the Reagan administration, arrived Tuesday in the U.S. for treatment of what he called an ulcer &quot;of a malignant nature.&quot;    ---   Japan's prime minister announced an international conference to help establish an international system to verify nuclear weapons tests. Speaking at the U.N. General Assembly, Takeshita said the meeting in Tokyo would aim to exchange seismological data used to detect nuclear blasts. He didn't disclose a date for the forum.    ---   Dukakis praised Jackson for &quot;great gifts and great strengths&quot; but said his Democratic presidential rival wouldn't be entitled to special consideration when it comes time to choose a running mate. Bush, meanwhile, met with a group of economists at his summer home in Maine and reaffirmed his opposition to increasing taxes.    ---   Israeli occupation authorities said Arab strikes and a failure to pay taxes are causing a breakdown of public services to Palestinian residents of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Separately, a U.N. official said tear gas fired by Israeli soldiers into enclosed spaces had killed 11 Arabs in the occupied areas and caused dozens of miscarriages.    ---   A senior U.N. official said the resettlement of Afghan refugees from Pakistan will begin in relatively safe areas on Afghanistan's border. In Moscow, Gorbachev condemned rebel attacks on Soviet troops leaving Afghanistan and said it &quot;should be absolutely clear&quot; that Red Army forces would respond to further assaults.    ---   Moslems in Lebanon staged a general strike that caused the closing of shops, schools and banks to mark the first anniversary of the assassination of Prime Minister Karami. Rival Shiite militias released prisoners taken in battles in southern Beirut. A car bomb exploded in the capital, but police said there weren't any casualties.    ---   Sinhalese extremists set fire to more than 15 Sri Lankan government buildings, stabbed a police officer to death and injured eight people with a bomb in attacks aimed at disrupting provincial elections. The Colombo government responded by ordering police and security forces to shoot on sight anyone causing a disturbance.    ---   A West German pilot said that bad weather caused him to fly his small plane over Soviet territory last weekend and that his incursion was a mistake rather than a political statement. The flight had been viewed as marking the first anniverary of Mathias Rust's trip into Red Square. Rust is serving a four-year prison term.    ---   Opposition leader Kim Dae Jung said only drastic changes in U.S. policy toward South Korea, which he termed interference, could stop a current wave of anti-American sentiment. In Ulsan, management locked out 20,000 striking workers at a Hyundai Motor plant and said there was little chance of settling the walkout for higher wages. </TEXT></DOC>