<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871120-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Softer Approach:Dow Chemical TriesTo Shed Tough ImageAnd Court the Public---It Pushes Its Ad Campaign,Gives Data to Regulators,Backs Ecological Moves---But Has It Really Changed?---By John BusseyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DOWCHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) </IN><DATELINE> MIDLAND, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Employees at Dow Chemical Co. know that beaten-down feeling all too well. First they went through the public outcry over napalm during the Vietnam War. Then came the discovery of dioxin contamination right in Dow's corporate back yard. Then Agent Orange, raging battles with environmental authorities and humiliating attempts to defend the company's integrity on national television.    Top management only made matters worse; it seemed to relish a good public fight. A string of combative chief executive officers angrily shouldered through controversy -- and drew lines in the sand, daring regulators and environmentalists to step across. By 1983, one manager recalls sadly, morale had sunk so low that longtime chemists and researchers removed their company pins before boarding business flights.    Today, corporate confrontation is out, or so Dow says, and a new age of sensitivity is in. In fact, the company is seeking nothing less than public redemption through an extraordinary image-makeover campaign.    The ingredients: a schmaltzy $60 million advertising effort; a performance-review system that takes into account a manager's public-relations skills; the sharing of more information with regulators; support for legislation that is pleasing even to environmentalists; and, not surprisingly, extra effort to cozy up to the media.    &quot;These folks were right out there with Attila the Hun,&quot; says Rep. Dennis Eckart, referring to Dow's early opposition to legislation to clean up hazardous waste (the company now supports the so-called Superfund). The Ohio Democrat says Dow has changed course &quot;180 degrees. The receptivity for its ideas has increased severalfold.&quot; Adds Gordon Britton, the editor of the Midland Daily News, long a Dow target: &quot;We're in imminent danger of being hugged to death.&quot;    Dow's bout with self-analysis was long overdue. &quot;We had made a lot of enemies who could influence our future,&quot; says Richard Long, then Dow's Washington public-affairs manager who headed a company task force to deal with its image problem. &quot;We recognized we had to clean up our act.&quot;    They also recognized a new fact of corporate life: Dow, once mainly a commodities chemical maker, has thrust itself into pharmaceuticals and consumer products, a move that may have made it even more sensitive to public opinion. Dow's campaign also reflects broader efforts by the chemical industry to buff up its image.    Skeptics scoff at Dow's campaign as glitz with no substance. Ralph Nader, just one of the consumer advocates watching the company, believes that Dow has got off easy during the conservative Reagan years; others say the truth about Dow's apparent enlightenment won't be known until the next crisis hits the company.    Indeed, old personas do die hard. In 1985, not long after Dow's image-switching campaign started, a manager was caught circulating results from a confidential blood test that incorrectly said a Greenpeace activist arrested on Dow property had a venereal disease.    And a few weeks ago, Frank Popoff, who on Dec. 1 succeeds Dow's fiery chief executive, Paul Oreffice, came out swinging. When a jury decided against Dow in a drug liability case, Mr. Popoff contended that the black plaintiff had won because the jury and judge were black. (The judge, in fact, is white.) Later, Mr. Popoff said he meant only that there was compassion between people of similar backgrounds. &quot;I did a dumb thing. I was just a little more descriptive than I had to be,&quot; he says. But the damage was done. People inside and outside the company glimpsed the old Dow, once again reflexively putting up its dukes.    Dow may have grown defensive over the years partly because it has so dominated its own surroundings. The company is still based in the small central Michigan town of 37,000 where a young entrepreneur named Herbert H. Dow set up shop in 1897 to exploit huge subterranean brine deposits. Eventually, Dow became this country's second-largest chemical company, behind Du Pont Co.    But despite its world-wide expansion, Dow clings to its small-town ways. Although the last three chief executives, including Mr. Popoff, are foreign-born, only three of Dow's 16 directors are from outside the company. The Dow name is everywhere in Midland: There is the Grace Dow Library as well H.H. Dow High School. &quot;This is a small town,&quot; plaintively says a young manager who recently moved to Midland. &quot;I went to the movies Friday; I knew the whole row!&quot;    Above all, though, Dow became a scientists' shop, an unsentimental sanctum sanctorum for chemical engineers. To employees, its sprawling buildings don't have names, just numbers (headquarters is 2030, research and development is in 1776). There is no glitzy executive dining room, just a spartan cafeteria with plastic trays where top managers, including the chief executive, can be found balancing the day's special at the steam table.    &quot;Dow's personality has always been very technical, very small town, very sure of ourselves,&quot; says Carl Gerstacker, a former chairman. &quot;We always thought that if you were technically right, you were right in the end.&quot;    Matters of principle fueled Dow's fights. Supporting the armed forces, for example, kept Dow in the napalm business in the 1960s, even though the contract contributed only a fraction of 1% of the company's net income and made Dow a target of the anti-war movement. In one instance, a Dow recruiter had to escape from a window after protesters set the university placement office afire. Dow still gets questions about napalm, even though it stopped making the flammable gel 17 years ago.    In 1977, Jane Fonda delivered a speech at nearby Central Michigan University and, among other things, accused Dow of making chemicals that caused sterility in workers. Again on principle, Mr. Oreffice fired off a letter to the university's president blasting those who would pay &quot;an avowed Communist sympathizer like Jane Fonda&quot; a speaker's fee to &quot;spread her venom against free enterprise.&quot; With that, he cut off Dow financing to the university.    When newspapers picked this up, Dow was flooded with supportive mail, but many people back at headquarters simply cringed. &quot;There was some feeling he had overreacted,&quot; says William Coffey, a former Dow public-relations manager.    Then there was the EPA. In the late 1970s, the agency wanted information on airborne emissions from Dow's forest of plants in Midland. Dow said no. So the EPA rented a plane to fly over them. Dow sued and took the case all the way to the Supreme Court before losing. And in 1981, an EPA official showed Dow a draft report holding the company responsible for much of the dioxin contamination in the Midland area. Dow edited out the most damaging conclusions before the EPA issued the report. Later, word got out, the EPA ran into heavy criticism, and Dow got another black eye.    &quot;Every time a battle came up, we took it on,&quot; one executive says. &quot;It was, 'We're right, we know more than you do.'&quot;    The company maintained that the only proven ill effect in humans from dioxin was a skin rash called chloracne, although other studies linked dioxin to birth defects and cancer. Dow's assurances didn't mute public alarm when dioxin showed up in the Midland area, just as Vietnam veterans were suing Dow over health problems that they contend they got from Dow's Agent Orange defoliants during the war. The case was settled just before going to trial.    Worn down, Dow turned introspective. Largely under the guidance of Keith McKennon, Dow's head of U.S. operations and government and public affairs, a company task force surveyed 213 employees, managers, directors and outsiders about Dow's public posture. Observed one respondent to the survey: &quot;Okay to stomp on a snake in your path, but don't go 30 yards out of your path to look for a snake to stomp.&quot; The internal report itself concluded: &quot;The current reputation of The Dow Chemical Co. with its many publics may well be at an all-time low. We are viewed as tough, arrogant, secretive, uncooperative and insensitive.&quot;    Meanwhile, a shift in business strategy, led by Mr. Oreffice, also invited change in the company's approach to the public. That shift is graphically evident at Dow's 1,600-acre Michigan division chemical works. There, amid dozens of plants, two 150-foot-high distillation columns, the remnants of a styrene operation, stand rusting; in a new building nearby, though, Dow is making a granular, super-absorbing substance called Drytech, the latest thing in diaper material.    Dow's cutback in basic-chemicals capacity and its increased investment in specialty and consumer products have prompted the company, since 1980, to shed $1.5 billion in assets, write down or off an additional $1 billion in plants and operations, and trim its world-wide payroll by 9,000 employees to 52,000 now. That strategy, many analysts believe, will cushion Dow against cyclical slumps in basic chemicals. Thanks to this recasting and a basic-chemicals boom, Dow's profit in the first nine months of this year soared to a record $888 million on sales of $9.8 billion.    Unlike tankers of chlorine, though, products such as Drytech, antihistamines and laxatives put Dow much closer to the buying public, an added impetus for better public relations, insiders say.    Shaken by its internal survey, Dow considered dozens of proposals, including even changing its name. It settled on a big &quot;outreach&quot; program. &quot;Openness is the single word I'd use: our desire to communicate&quot; with broad groups, Mr. McKennon says.    Dow has opened its plant sites around the country to hundreds of tours. It has invited, for example, a Texas state senate subcommittee to its Gulf Coast operations and has shown Rep. James J. Florio, a New Jersey Democrat and big backer of the Superfund, around its Louisiana facility. Its scientific &quot;road shows&quot; and its advice to line managers to join more community groups are raising its profile.    What's more, the company has sent out thousands of copies of its Public Interest Report, which lists Dow's philanthropic activities. It has made organ-donor education its public cause, and bowing to &quot;growing public concern,&quot; it begrudgingly pulled out of South Africa earlier this year. It set up a special 800 inquiry line for reporters, supported a science-journalism project and launched a &quot;Dow Lets You Do Great Things&quot; ad campaign. A Dow-commissioned survey says the campaign has raised positive reaction to the company six percentage points, to 29%, within a few months.    It also is trumpeting its expertise in hazardous-waste reduction, even joining last month with environmentalists at a news conference endorsing related new legislation. &quot;This is the first time the Sierra Club was on the same side of an issue as Dow,&quot; says Anne Woiwode, a member of Sierra's Michigan chapter.    Howard Zar, who heads an EPA dioxin task force in Chicago, says Dow now is voluntarily sharing more plant data. He believes that the company realizes it has more to gain by helping the EPA determine proper effluent levels than by having limits imposed unilaterally.    However, Dow hasn't changed its stance that dioxin's ill effects are limited, and it is resisting current proposals to make the Clean Air Act more stringent. And although Mr. Oreffice, who will remain chairman after Dec. 1, apparently heeded advice to take the stridency out of Dow's corporate message, he remains skeptical about how much the company erred in the past. An Italian immigrant possessed of disarming candor, Mr. Oreffice concludes bluntly: &quot;I think we got a bum rap. I think the whole chemical industry has been treated shabbily.&quot;    Better to take on government regulators than complain about them after the fact, he says. &quot;I'm a competitor. We just don't like losing without a fight.&quot; And as for the Jane Fonda incident: &quot;I would do it again. Here she was, spreading her venom.&quot; Mr. Oreffice adds that new people at the EPA, not just a change in attitude at Dow, are contributing to thawed relations.    &quot;Paul doesn't have it in his system to say we screwed up,&quot; says one manager who has worked with Mr. Oreffice, adding: &quot;It's commonly accepted among management that we went way overboard on these issues.&quot;    His successor, Mr. Popoff, is said to be readier to compromise. &quot;The form is to be less adversarial; the substance is still to defend the Dow Chemical Co.,&quot; he says. &quot;Oh, come let us reason together.&quot;    However, Mr. Popoff, who spent most of the past 20 years with Dow abroad, hasn't yet received his baptism of fire in domestic public-relations battles. Dow still prides itself on its science and is loath to appear a pushover; thus, Mr. Popoff will probably get his chance. So will the other apostles of Dow's new religion. Observes Mr. Gerstacker, the former chairman: &quot;The basic personality of the company hasn't changed.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>