<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880914-0025 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AUTHORIZED the restoration of U.S. funding for the United Nations.    Citing &quot;striking progress&quot; on political and budgetary changes by the world body, the White House said the U.S. would immediately release $44 million that was held in escrow from the fiscal year ending Sept. 30 and pay $144 million for fiscal 1989, which begins Oct. 1. Most of the more than $600 million owed from previous years will be paid under a multiyear plan to be developed by the State Department. The U.S. provides about 25% of the international organization's annual budget.    The announcement may defuse a potential presidential campaign issue. Dukakis has criticized Bush for the administration's withholding of the funds.    ---   Hurricane Gilbert headed toward Mexico's Yucatan Peninsula with 160 mph winds and torrential rains after lashing the Cayman Islands. The storm, considered one of the strongest hurricanes on record, has been blamed for at least five deaths in the Dominican Republic. There were unconfirmed reports of 30 deaths in Jamaica.    ---   Bush offered an outline of his economic policy. Speaking in Chicago, the GOP presidential nominee pledged to avoid tax increases, and to promote free trade rather than protectionism. At the same time, his staff tried to defuse charges by Dukakis that middle-class families have been squeezed economically.    ---   Poland's government accused the outlawed Solidarity trade union of setting unacceptable conditions for talks on the country's future, but said the negotiations involving Lech Walesa could still open this week. A Warsaw spokesman criticized union activists and others who had called for swift legalization of Solidarity before the talks.    ---   Gorbachev defended his plans for restructuring the Soviet political and economic systems as he faced a second day of haranguing in the Siberian city of Krasnoyarsk. Residents complained of food shortages, high prices and poor working conditions. The Soviet leader criticized local Communist officials for mismanagement.    ---   The U.N. informed Iraq that it wants to investigate allegations that Baghdad's military used chemical weapons against its Kurdish minority, a U.N. spokesman said. The U.S., Japan, Britain and West Germany have called for such an inquiry. In Washington, Shultz said the U.S. had &quot;conclusive evidence&quot; that poison gas was used.    ---   Three prominent apartheid foes fled a Johannesburg hospital and took refuge at the U.S. consulate. An embassy official said the U.S. wouldn't force them to leave against their will. Two of the three anti-apartheid activists, detained by South Africa for more than a year without charge, are officials of the banned United Democratic Front.    South African President Botha met with Malawi's President Banda and said Pretoria would donate 3,000 tons of corn to help feed refugees in Malawi. The announcement came as Botha completed a two-day official visit to Malawi and Mozambique.    ---   Guerrillas in Lesotho hijacked a bus carrying 60 nuns, schoolgirls and other people traveling to see Pope John Paul II, diplomatic sources said. Police refused to disclose any information. The pope is expected today in the tiny mountain kingdom, which is completely surrounded by South Africa.    ---   South Korea and Hungary announced that they will exchange permanent diplomatic missions, a breakthrough in Seoul's relations with Communist countries. The move to normalize ties, announced days before the start of the Olympics, stopped short of full diplomatic recognition.    ---   A scientific panel approved the space shuttle's redesigned booster rockets. The National Research Council panel's report said the rockets should result in &quot;considerably enhanced safety and reliability.&quot; NASA officials, meanwhile, met to set the shuttle Discovery's launch date, which could be announced today.    ---   Archaeologists described a 1,500-year-old tomb discovered in northern Peru as &quot;the richest tomb in the Americas,&quot; the National Geographic Society announced. The burial place for a warrior-priest of the Moche people has yielded gold ornaments and pre-Columbian ceramics, officials said.    ---   PLO leader Arafat opened talks with members of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France. Jewish groups protested his visit. In Israel, Prime Minister Shamir endorsed the military's new policy of mass arrests of Palestinians and tougher action by Jewish settlers against Arabs in the occupied areas.    ---   Christian militiamen kidnapped Lebanon's defense minister in eastern Beirut, but released him about three hours later under pressure from the army. Police said the incident could reignite the country's civil war. Meanwhile, a West German hostage, freed Monday in Beirut after 20 months, said he hadn't seen any other foreign captives.    ---   Persian Gulf peace talks adjourned in Switzerland without substantive progress, a U.N. official said. The foreign ministers of Iran and Iraq accepted an invitation to hold talks with Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar next week in New York, but Baghdad insisted that a definite date be set for the resumption of discussions in Geneva.    ---   Arsonists in Haiti destroyed a Roman Catholic chapel in a slum in Port-au-Prince. The blaze occurred after six self-proclaimed killers boasted on government television that they had participated in Sunday's attack on another church, where at least five people were slain and about 80 hurt.    ---   Troops in El Salvador battled leftist guerrillas in the eastern part of the country, and the rebels attacked a garrison in the north, the military said. About 80 guerrillas and soldiers were reported killed or wounded. The insurgents have been fighting the U.S.-backed government for nine years.    ---   Opposition leaders in Burma rejected elections that would be organized by the country's one-party government, and reiterated a call for an interim regime to supervise the vote. The opposition aides also met with student leaders in an attempt to form a united front against the ruling party.    ---   Died: William L. Mitchell, 76, former vice president, design, for General Motors Corp., Monday, in Royal Oak, Mich. </TEXT></DOC>