<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0037 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Copper Prices Are Boosted as SuppliesFor Near-Term Delivery Remain Tight---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   The dollar's gains yesterday didn't have an effect on copper futures prices, which drew strength from continued tightness in supplies of the metal for near-term delivery and advances in precious metals.    At the Commodity Exchange in New York, copper for July delivery rose 1.35 cents a pound to 69.75 cents. That settlement price was just under the day's high of 69.90 cents, which represents a hefty rise of 8.5 cents a pound since April 24.    Analysts noted that world-wide deliveries of copper globally in the first quarter rose 8 1/2 from a year earlier. Despite this, consumers are becoming concerned about supplies, and there has been what an analyst termed anxious buying.    &quot;Supplies are the tightest in over a decade,&quot; said Fred Demler, metals economist at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York.    And while new production capability will come on line later in the year, both in the U.S. and world-wide, the soonest the first copper from these plants could reach the market is late summer, analysts said.    It shouldn't be too surprising that copper is strong, said Bernard Savaiko, senior metals analyst at PaineWebber Inc. in New York. He noted that the industrial part of the Commodity Research Bureau price index, which includes copper, has risen 45% since last August and &quot;this points to a stronger economy in the months ahead.&quot;    The index, compiled by a unit of Miami-based Knight-Ridder Inc., tracks the prices of 26 raw materials, including materials such as crude oil, copper, and lumber that are used in industry.    An increase in copper capacity later this year won't have very much effect &quot;on the July contract or for deliveries during the summertime,&quot; said Robert Wylde, president of R.J. Wylde Metals Inc., New York metals broker. And while metal is being shipped to the U.S. from Europe, where it is also in short supply, it won't arrive until the end of this month, Mr. Wylde said.    Inventories in Comex warehouses as of Wednesday were down 1,879 U.S. short tons at 69,283 short tons. And stockpiles in London Metal Exchange warehouses as of the end of last week were down 3,925 metric tons at 109,900 metric tons.    A metric ton is equal to 1.1 short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds.    Tight supplies also extend to Japan, an analyst said. Consumers world-wide are restocking as the technical condition of the market appears strong, he said.    And the imminent economic summit in Venice, Italy, is playing a part in the demand for copper, said Donald Tierney, an analyst at Stanley Bell andamp; Co. in New York.    &quot;Traders feel nothing will result from the talks to stem the softness of the dollar,&quot; Mr. Tierney said. That sentiment caused traders to move into precious metals, and the strength was communicated to copper, Mr. Tierney said. In other futures markets today:    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Pork belly futures prices rose, some their daily limit of $2 a hundredweight, or two cents a pound. The July contract neared its lifetime high, closing at 77.02 cents a pound. &quot;The bellies came out like a house afire this morning,&quot; said Gerald Abbenhaus, an analyst at A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons Inc. in St. Louis. The market was said to be reacting to continued fears of tight supplies this summer. Hog futures also showed strength, and the bullishness spilled over into the cattle market, which ended higher.    PRECIOUS METALS: Gold and silver futures rose in light trading, while platinum prices fell. Traders said gold prices were supported partly by sporadic European buying, while the silver rally was triggered by demand from metals dealers and professionally managed commodity funds. Uncertainty about inflation in light of the pending leadership change at the Federal Reserve Board also is supporting prices, said Bette Raptopoulos, senior metals analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. Departing Fed Chairman Paul Volcker is known as a fervent inflation-fighter; many traders hold precious metals as an inflation hedge. Analysts and traders said they don't expect much activity until after next week's seven-nation summit in Venice, Italy.    ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices, after briefly hitting $20 a barrel, retreated amid profit-taking in thin trading. &quot;Psychologically, $20 still represents resistance to people,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc. in New York. The price decline was the first in five sessions. At the New York Mercantile Exchange, July crude slipped five cents a barrel to $19.81; heating oil and unleaded gasoline contracts also inched lower. Traders largely ignored a wire report quoting Arne Oeien, Norway's oil and energy minister, as saying he &quot;will not be surprised&quot; if his country continues to restrain oil production for the rest of the year. Norway, a major oil producer outside of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, has cut its output 7.5% since February and has said it will consider further cuts after OPEC's June 25 meeting. Mr. Oeien made the comment to reporters following talks with OPEC president Rilwanu Lukman, who said &quot;chances are quite good&quot; that the cartel will be able to maintain oil prices at their current level.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean meal prices rose early but lost some steam after the Agriculture Department denied rumors that the Soviet Union had bought 200,000 to 400,000 metric tons of meal, said Richard Loewy, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds. Conflicting weather reports brought a mixed close in the corn and soybean markets. The National Weather Service is predicting normal temperatures for the next six to 10 days, while private forecasters are calling for hot and dry weather. Wheat closed lower.    COTTON: Traders bought futures heavily in expectation of a strong export-sales report, and that caused most prices to rise the daily limit of two cents a pound. Traders weren't disappointed by the Agriculture Department report, issued after the close of trading. The report showed export sales of 55,400 bales for the week ending May 28 from the current harvest that will end July 31 and 283,700 bales from the new crop. Cumulatively, 3,544,800 bales have been sold from the current crop and 1,786,300 from the 1987-88 crop. The Agriculture Department last month estimated that exports during the current season would amount to 6.7 million bales. &quot;Today's figures indicate that not only are we likely to reach that total, but surpass it,&quot; said Nauman Barakat, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York. </TEXT></DOC>