<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871231-0037 </DOCNO><HL> He Stakes a Claim on IssuesLike Education, Asks CutIn Tax on Capital Gains---Arms Pact Gives Him a Boost---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> AMES, Iowa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   George Bush long has been a candidate with an identity problem: The problem is he doesn't have much of an identity.    Slowly and cautiously, he is changing that.    The vice president is working at it inside the Moose Lodge here, where he stands beneath a pair of stuffed moose heads and tells Republicans eating sloppy Joes that he wants to go beyond the Soviet arms treaty just signed. &quot;I'd like to be the follow-on president to complete a very broad and very aggressive arms-control agenda,&quot; he declares.    Besides cutting arms, he says, he wants to slice capital-gains taxes to spur investment in new businesses, even though his boss, President Reagan, doesn't favor the proposal. At other stops, he pledges to make better education programs the &quot;cornerstone&quot; of his administration, says &quot;we've got to do better&quot; at protecting the environment, and calls for more federal support for child care.    Through such careful steps, Mr. Bush is beginning the crucial process of distinguishing himself both from his GOP opponents and from President Reagan. His arms-control program is far more ambitious than that offered by any Republican foe, and he is stressing a few domestic issues on which, without directly criticizing the Reagan administration's record, he pledges to do more.    In the process, Mr. Bush increasingly sounds like a candidate of traditional Republicanism, while others play more to hard-line conservatives. &quot;These are the progressive subjects of the Republican party,&quot; says Iowa Rep. Jim Leach, a supporter. &quot;I think Bush has co-opted the mainstream agenda.&quot;    Mr. Bush enters 1988 as the clear leader of the presidential pack. But he must establish a sharper identity to answer the jabs of opponents, who deride him as a candidate with a dazzling resume but no real record and few ideas. Although considered competent in his many past jobs, he has seldom been accused of boldness or creativity. And he remains almost slavishly loyal to President Reagan, so that voters have trouble determining what he really believes in.    The campaign to sharpen his image has been slow going, however. Other than arms control, most of the subjects he is stressing aren't dramatic, gut-level issues that energize voters. And his presentation of his ideas often is uninspiring.    Moreover, Mr. Bush continues to have difficulty living down his preppy background and identifying with the concerns of average voters. Recently, he stumbled when, being questioned by David Broder of the Washington Post, he couldn't say how many Americans lack health insurance and unemployment benefits or are below the poverty line. Then he said he supported &quot;categorical health insurance&quot; when he apparently meant &quot;catastrophic.&quot;    Mr. Bush's effort to flesh out his identity began a year ago, when he sat down at a typewriter during his Christmas vacation and tapped out a memo detailing the issues he wanted to stress. He began talking about them in depth during the second half of 1987, always carefully avoiding any direct criticism of Mr. Reagan. &quot;What he is saying is he would build on what has been done and do some things differently in the future,&quot; says Craig Fuller, Mr. Bush's chief of staff.    But as often has been the case in his career, Mr. Bush got a big boost from someone else: Ronald Reagan, and specifically Mr. Reagan's agreement with the Soviet Union to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The vice president enthusiastically supports the pact, which polls indicate is widely popular among voters of both parties. His chief opponent, Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas, straddled the issue before finally endorsing the agreement, while other GOP contenders attack it.    As a result, Mr. Bush has a popular and high-profile issue with which he can separate himself from the field while remaining a Reagan loyalist. &quot;The behavior of all the five other Republican candidates has been the most effective instrument Bush has had in creating his own identity,&quot; says Richard Winters, a professor of government at Dartmouth College. &quot;He's been attacked by other Republicans, which makes him appear to be an independent, thoughtful, forceful person. That's the break he's been waiting for.&quot;    Mr. Bush has laid out his most detailed new agenda in education. For starters, he pledges to spend more money on it than has the administration he now serves. &quot;If we have to spend a little more money on our schools, well, what could be a better investment?&quot; Mr. Bush said in formally announcing his candidacy recently.    He has called for added financing for Head Start and other programs for needy preschoolers and wants to maintain financing for Pell college-student grants, which the administration has tried to cut. He endorses competence tests and merit pay for teachers.    In his most innovative proposal, he has called for college savings bonds, modeled after U.S. savings bonds, with which parents could accumulate tax-free savings to pay for their children's tuition. When the program reaches its full size in 20 years, aides estimate, it would cost the Treasury $1 billion a year.    Friends say Mr. Bush's interest in education stems in part from work his wife, Barbara, has done combating illiteracy. &quot;The more he began to talk about {education} publicly, the better reaction it got,&quot; says Robert Teeter, a Bush adviser and pollster.    On arms control, Mr. Bush has laid out an agenda touching virtually every area of U.S.-Soviet competition. He says he expects the Reagan administration to wrap up an agreement for 50% cuts in strategic, or long-range, nuclear weapons before leaving office. Then, Mr. Bush tells audiences, he will push for negotiated reductions in conventional forces.    He is particularly emphatic -- and almost alone among candidates from either party -- in placing high priority on negotiating a ban on chemical weapons. He tells audiences he was the administration figure who formally gave the Soviets a proposal to outlaw such weapons several years ago. (His record leaves him open to charges of inconsistency on this issue, though; he cast a vote in 1983 that broke a Senate tie and authorized production of new binary chemical weapons.)    Mr. Bush also pledges to do more to protect the environment, though he hasn't laid out a specific program. His interest in the issue was heightened by his behind-the-scenes role in working out a U.S.-Canada plan for cutting acid rain. When the Canadians felt a year or so ago that the administration was dragging its feet, they went quietly to Mr. Bush, who then worked to free funds to fight acid rain.    Now, on the campaign trail, he talks of expanding federal parklands. In addition, he is trying to appeal to both environmentalists and farmers with a pitch to expand the use of ethanol, which is made from corn and can be blended with gasoline. The resulting gasohol burns more cleanly, he argues, so greater use of it would keep the air cleaner while also reducing crop surpluses. The Reagan administration backs ethanol, &quot;but nobody's carrying the ball on it,&quot; says the vice president's spokesman, Peter Teeley.    Mr. Bush implies in other ways that the administration could do more to help the depressed farm economy. He says he would arrange an international agricultural summit meeting to discuss the gradual phasing out of farm subsidies, many of which hurt foreign sales of American farm products. He proposes a $1 billion federal retraining program for displaced farmers and calls for &quot;rural enterprise zones&quot; where companies would get tax breaks for establishing plants.    The vice president also has proposed another kind of tax break, on which he more openly defies the administration: his plan to cut the top capital-gains tax rate to 15% from the 28% of 1987. The idea is to encourage investment in stocks of new companies and make it easier for small businesses to raise money and create jobs. As for the budget consequences, he contends the lower rate would mean more federal tax revenue, not less, because it would generate so much added business activity. The administration opposes the rate cut because it doesn't want to reopen the 1986 tax law.    Aides say there is one other area where Mr. Bush would like to distinguish his stand a bit from the administration's: women's issues. He says he strongly supports equal pay for equal work, for instance, and endorses some federal grants and more efforts by the states to provide child care.    Mr. Bush continues to insist that in general he is a traditional conservative who rules out tax increases and opposes most big new spending programs. But he seems less and less interested in wooing the party's far-right wing, which dislikes his enthusiasm for arms control and has little use for issues like the environment. At a recent press breakfast, he laughingly said he had &quot;solidified the animosity of a handful of the extra-chromosome set,&quot; a derisive reference to far-right activists.    The vice president hopes to hold the support of other conservatives while using the issues he is discussing to appeal to Republicans in the party's mainstream. Thus, he would be the &quot;big-tent candidate&quot; who can draw in supporters from across the spectrum, says Mr. Teeter.    Thanks in large part to the arms-control boost, the effort seems to be working for the moment. &quot;Serendipitously,&quot; says Dartmouth's Prof. Winters, &quot;things seem to be falling into place for the vice president.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>