<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880922-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Send Most PACs Packing </HL><AUTHOR> Brooks Jackson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> MKT </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   &quot;The PACs,&quot; Rep. Guy Vander Jagt announced, &quot;are whores!&quot;    Rep. Vander Jagt of Michigan, head of the National Republican Congressional Committee, was finding that business-sponsored political action committees aren't the friends he once hoped they would be. Indeed, in their present form they are a blight that the GOP -- and the nation -- would be better off without.    What is now dawning on Mr. Vander Jagt and many other Republicans is that PACs short-circuit the electoral process. Because they give overwhelmingly to the incumbents they hope to influence, their money piles up in the war chests of sitting lawmakers, discouraging many promising challengers and helping to crush most of the brave or foolhardy few who still run. Like free mail and large staffs, PAC money has become a perquisite of office.    For the GOP, business PACs are a Frankenstein's monster. In the mid-1970s, Rep. Vander Jagt spoke to hundreds of corporate boards and business groups urging them to establish PACs, to compete with labor. The conservative Michigan Republican sometimes went so far as to suggest that a company without a PAC was un-American.    Business PACs sprang up by the hundreds. Republicans hoped and Democrats feared that their money would flow to GOP challengers. But their masters were more interested in short-term, after-tax profits than in any vision of Republican realignment. Ever since the GOP setbacks in the recession-plagued 1982 elections, business PACs have been giving more and more to Democrats.    Democrats got 63% of the $87.4 million that all PACs gave to House candidates during the 1986 election, including nearly all the labor money, 52% of the trade-association funds and an astonishing 48% of the corporate PAC money. Less than 3% of the corporate PAC funds in House races went to Republicans challenging incumbent Democrats.    Republicans fared better in the Senate races than they did in the House races, but only because their incumbents outnumbered the Democratic senators who were running by 2-to-1. Several Democratic senatorial challengers were also incumbent House members, however, able to claim $8 million in PAC funds. Overall, Democrats got 45% of the $45.3 million in PAC funds to Senate candidates, including 40% of the trade-association money and 25% of the corporate funds.    Republicans are faring worse this year. During the first 18 months of the current two-year election cycle, PAC donations to Democratic House and Senate candidates, at $52 million, were 44% higher than in the like period in 1985-86. But PAC giving to Republican congressional candidates declined nearly 7% from the earlier period, to $28 million.    The problem with PACS transcends party lines, however. They hurt everyone. To start, there is the economic waste: Moneyed lobbies are too often able to induce self-serving distortions in federal taxation, regulation and subsidies. And now PAC money has become such a dominant factor that it is disenfranchising citizens by transferring political power from voters to donors. Increasingly, elections are being settled before voters get a chance to cast a ballot. Selection occurs first on the K Street corridor in the capital, where lobbyists and PAC managers decide who will have the funds required to run for office, particularly for the House.    In 1986 House incumbents got 44% of their re-election funds from PACs, and additional sums from individual lobbyists and businessmen outside their districts. They outspent their challengers by $150 million to $49 million, and 98% won.    Too little money is getting to challengers, who are the essential instruments for holding government accountable. That may be one reason for the continuing decline in voter turnout: In 1986 only 33% of those of voting age participated in House elections. Why bother to vote when the outcome is certain?    Congress should outlaw PAC donations, on the same constitutional basis that it banned corporate political donations in 1907 and labor-union gifts in 1943. Most PACs would then fade away; the majority are just bank accounts for Washington lobbyists who are weary of lawmakers' incessant demands for money.    The largest PACs, which function almost as narrow political parties, would remain and seek ways around a ban. But the most obvious avenue for evasion -- getting PAC members to write checks directly to favored candidates -- would all but disappear if Congress also decreed that candidates could accept funds only from individuals in their home states.    Banning out-of-state money is a fundamental and easily enforceable reform that ought to be undertaken regardless of what is done about PACs. Donors become a second constituency, with interests often alien to those of the voters. Texas developers, Wall Street tax-shelter syndicators and Washington lobbyists pour money into the campaign accounts of incumbents from all over, influencing the choices available to voters back home.    Some PACs would still mount independent political campaigns to support favored candidates. As a matter of free speech, Congress can't constitutionally prohibit such spending. But while lawmakers live in fear of becoming a target, the evidence so far shows that these campaigns are miserably ineffective, and often backfire. They would be even less potent if Congress required the special-interest sponsors to identify themselves more clearly with big, bold disclaimers.    Some PAC activities are constructive and should be encouraged: grass-roots action, registering and turning out voters, and promoting wide discussion of issues. For those PACs truly interested in encouraging political involvement, there is plenty to do besides giving money to incumbents. Indeed, such reformed PACs would look somewhat like the tax-exempt political organizations -- from the religious right to the anti-nuclear left -- that currently engage in voter registration and thinly disguised electioneering.    Such spending necessarily encourages wider electoral participation and encourages discussion of issues. Unfortunately, under current law, tax-exempt political groups can keep the identities of their donors secret, even when raising millions explicitly aimed at electing friends and defeating political enemies. Reform legislation ought to require that tax-exempt groups engaging in voter registration or other election-related activities file the same thorough and timely disclosures now demanded of PACs, parties and candidates.    Outlawing PAC gifts is only part of what is needed. Running for office in an age of television and computers costs lots of money, and candidates have to get it somewhere. Arbitrary spending limits won't work; that pseudo-reform can't be enforced and, even if it could, would only give more protection to incumbents. The answer is to let candidates get more of their funds from their own parties. Parties should be deregulated. Currently, the law limits the amount of aid a party may give to its own nominee, a provision that serves no good-government purpose whatsoever. But at the same time, parties must be granted new sources of revenue, perhaps public funding or a payroll checkoff system for voluntary donations, or both.    Accomplishing real reforms won't be easy. Banning PAC donations in favor of deregulated, publicly subsidized parties raises a host of knotty questions, not the least of which is how to treat minor parties without encouraging a new rash of LaRouche-style nuttiness at the taxpayer's expense. But now that Republicans are becoming disenchanted with PACs, perhaps bipartisan discussions about such serious reform plans can at last begin.    ---   Mr. Jackson, of the Journal's Washington bureau, is the author of &quot;Honest Graft: Big Money and the American Political Process,&quot; due from Knopf Oct. 1. </TEXT></DOC>