<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev Economic Plan Called Radical---Despite Support, Manifesto'sFate Is Uncertain---By Mark D'AnastasioStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Despite staunch resistance, Mikhail Gorbachev issued at last week's meeting of the Soviet Communist Party leadership a manifesto calling for economic changes that Western experts say would be genuinely revolutionary -- if carried out.    The Soviet leader issued the document at a plenary session of the party's Central Committee, held last Thursday and Friday. But his ability to gain formal acceptance of the document as a statement of party policy from the Central Committee, which is composed of top party officials from all over the country, doesn't indicate that Mr. Gorbachev's chances of implementing reforms have significantly improved.    There also is no clear evidence that the addition, announced at the meeting, of three likely supporters of the Soviet leader to the ruling Politburo will substantially improve his prospects of overcoming what he calls saboteurs within a party deeply divided on economic reform.    Mr. Gorbachev didn't manage, Western officials note, to remove any of the five Politburo oligarchs who held seats on the ruling body before he took control in March 1985.    Moreover, as the Soviet leader himself noted at the meeting, high officials, once appointed, often tend to protect their own institutional power base rather than their original benefactor.    Thus, while the issuance of the manifesto and the new Politburo appointments represented greater success for Mr. Gorbachev at the plenum than some analysts had expected, his gains were limited.    At best, Western analysts say, Mr. Gorbachev has demonstrated that he retains authority to set a political course for radical economic change in the face of widespread opposition, and that he can exercise his prerogative to broaden the Politburo's membership.    But the Soviet leader now has to produce results in a hurry or risk forfeiting his authority. The document he issued sets 1989 as the deadline by which its proposed structural economic reforms &quot;must be completed.&quot;    &quot;Gorbachev is playing for broke,&quot; says one West German official. &quot;He's giving himself two years.&quot;    Analysts say Mr. Gorbachev's 37-page manifesto contains no essentially new elements. &quot;What it is, is not much more than the first coherent elaboration of what Gorbachev has been talking about for two years,&quot; says a Western analyst.    Nonetheless, if the proposed reforms are implemented, they would represent a significant restructuring of the country's economy and a step in the direction China has taken, toward economic decentralization.    Mr. Gorbachev's document details a long-range plan for wresting basic authority for economic management and decision-making away from Moscow's central planning organs and handing it over to the 48,000 local enterprises that comprise the Soviet economy.    The document, according to Western analysts, is in no way legally binding. These sources, knowledgeable about party practice, say it amounts to little more than a directive on policy, &quot;a declaration or map for party discussions on the economy,&quot; in the words of one source.    Further, there is no concrete evidence that Mr. Gorbachev's manifesto was actually supported by the Central Committee, whose members don't make party policy but do have the greatest responsibility for implementing it across the nation. Though the committee formally endorsed the manifesto in the final communique of the plenum, the debate on the document is kept secret.    Genuine economic reform will depend not on broad party declarations, such as the Gorbachev manifesto, but on the effective implemention of specific economic legislation.    A draft law on state enterprises, the centerpiece of Mr. Gorbachev's legislative program, was put into final form at the plenum and will be adopted by the country's rubber-stamp parliament today. It gives factory managers authority to set their own production plans and choose their own suppliers, while allowing them broad latitude in determining prices.    The law will take effect Jan. 1. But after heated debate at the plenum, the draft has emerged in a form that could reduce it to &quot;just another in a series of meaningless decrees,&quot; says one Western expert.    A key problem with implementation is that the new law &quot;contradicts all existing laws governing economic decision-making,&quot; says an economist at a leading Moscow research institute.    To overcome the contradictions, Mr. Gorbachev proposed at a June 8 party meeting to add an article to the new law that would declare invalid all existing laws that conflict with it. However, he failed to win approval for his proposed addition at last week's plenum.    At the plenum he demanded, in apparent angry frustration, that &quot;there must be no lack of clarity in the question of the legality or illegality&quot; of his proposed measures. Rather lamely, he said that all contradictory laws &quot;apparently should be annulled after the adoption of the law.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev also felt compelled to warn that &quot;one should not allow the new law, as it frequently happened in the past, to be accompanied by numerous instructions that may render it without meaning and let the reconstruction drive drop.&quot;    At a news conference following the close of the plenum, academician Abel Aganbegyan, among the Soviet leader's closest economic advisers, complained about the debate on the draft law at the meeting. &quot;Many proposals on the draft law were contradictory. I cannot say I am in full accord with everything,&quot; he said. &quot;But either we adopt a draft law, or we continue discussing everything for another half a year.&quot;    Another major hurdle for Mr. Gorbachev will be passage of a package of 11 draft decrees designed to take away from central economic organs the decision-making rights that the draft law on enterprises awards to local managers. Continuing disputes within the Politburo prevented Mr. Gorbachev from submitting the drafts to the plenum for endorsement.    Mr. Gorbachev has stated that &quot;the law on enterprises won't begin to function unless&quot; these draft decrees become law.    Mr. Aganbegyan expressed confidence that all 11 documents would be passed as joint decrees of the Central Committee and Council of Ministers by October. But all discussion of the controversial documents remains off limits to the public, so there is no way of independently determining what the prospects really are of overcoming high-level disagreement.    Even if the decrees are passed, implementation would be difficult. The decrees would require hundreds of thousands of entrenched bureaucrats to relinquish their power and privileges as the functions and personnel of their departments are radically cut back.    At the plenum, Mr. Gorbachev's chief domestic and foreign policy adviser, Alexander Yakovlev, and the party's top economic official, Nikolai Slyunkov, were elevated from candidate to full members in the Politburo, and Victor Nikonov, the party's leading agricultural official, was appointed to the ruling body.    But one Western diplomat says: &quot;Getting rid of potential opponents, not adding potential supporters, is the mark of a party boss's power.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>