<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Despite Unrest in Korea, OlympicsHave Big Incentives to Stay Put---By Hal LancasterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST GE </IN><TEXT>   What the world needs now is a modular Olympic Games.    Then, the recent unrest in South Korea wouldn't seem so bothersome. Got trouble in Seoul, site of the 1988 Games? No problem. Just disassemble the Games, ship to Los Angeles or Moscow, reassemble and plug in.    Unfortunately, the Olympics aren't that simple. There has been considerable talk about moving them to a calmer site in recent days, largely because of fears that the events in Korea will stain next summer's Games with the same turmoil that has characterized the past five Olympics. But Olympic officials insist that there are too many reasons why they probably can't -- or won't -- be moving.    Those who have endured the grueling experience of organizing the world's largest sporting event say the logistical and personnel problems alone may be too large to surmount -- even for Los Angeles, which played host to the 1984 Games and has been mentioned as the most likely alternative to Seoul. &quot;It takes much more than a year to put in the infrastructure,&quot; explains Robert H. Helmick, chairman of the U.S. Olympic Committee and one of two U.S. delegates to the International Olympic Committee.    And the National Broacasting Co., which will televise the Games, says the time and money it has spent so far make a change all but impossible -- even though Los Angeles would offer a greater potential for live prime-time telecasts and a larger advertising market. &quot;There is no other alternative for us,&quot; says Michael Eskridge, the NBC vice president in charge of the Olympic coverage. &quot;I don't think the Games could be moved.&quot;    Still, concerns are high -- among Korean organizers, who have spent an estimated $3 billion to showcase their nation's economic development; at NBC, which has about $450 million invested in the games and has sold about $350 million of advertising to date; and among corporate sponsors, who have spent millions to associate themselves with the Olympic image.    Recent history gives those involved reason for concern. The IOC has been plagued by almost 20 years of problems. Violence marked the Olympics in Mexico City (1968) and Munich (1972), while political boycotts tarnished the subsequent Montreal, Moscow and Los Angeles get-togethers. The 1992 games in Barcelona, Spain, hold the threat of Basque terrorism.    Equally troubling is the specter of North Korea, which wants half of next summer's Games. Olympic officials have offered a limited schedule to keep the North Koreans in the Games and avoid triggering a communist-bloc boycott. The IOC's darker fears involve North Korean attempts to disrupt the games, which will take place just a few miles from the country's border. Negotiations resume next month. &quot;It is very difficult dealing with them,&quot; Mr. Helmick says. &quot;We sent observers there last month and, at the last minute, they wouldn't let them go through the borders.&quot;    All of which make it likely that if Korean protests intensify, pressure will mount to move the games to a safer haven. Los Angeles, West Berlin, Indianapolis and the New York-New Jersey area have offered to fill in: Montreal, Moscow and Tokyo have also been mentioned as possibilities.    For now, though, Olympic officials claim that the show will go on in Seoul. Conditions were infinitely worse before the 1968 Olympics in Mexico, where hundreds of rioting students were shot, the officials point out. And Mr. Helmick, who just returned from Seoul, isn't too disturbed by what he saw. &quot;We would have no hesitancy to send (a U.S.) team to Seoul today,&quot; he concludes.    There are reasons to hope for peace in Korea, since the alternatives aren't particularly attractive. For instance, Los Angeles would seem the logical choice if another city has to be chosen as the site for the Olympics. It has the most recent Olympics experience, could probably reassemble much of the lauded Peter Ueberroth management team -- probably without Mr. Ueberroth, now the commissioner of baseball -- and has facilities galore.    &quot;I could probably assemble a team to do it quickly,&quot; says Harry Usher, the operations chief of the 1984 Games. &quot;If you haven't had the experience, it would probably be impossible.&quot; No wonder, since the Los Angeles Games required organizing 85,000 workers, including 40,000 volunteers.    But even Los Angeles presents possibly insurmountable problems. &quot;It would take tremendous cooperation from all government agencies, schools, stadia,&quot; he says. At the very least, the Games would have to be advanced to early August from September, before the local universities that served as Olympic Villages three years ago started their fall sessions.    &quot;Even if the community had all the facilities -- and it would take at least a year to put them in order -- that's only scratching the surface,&quot; Mr. Helmick says. &quot;Think about putting in food service for people from 160 countries. An immense transportation system has to be put in place. Credentialing. Security. A lot of these things aren't a problem if you're taking in a water polo team of 12. But we're going to take 600 athletes, 200 managers, trainers, coaches, doctors and administrative people, 100 to 200 U.S. officials and several hundred people from sponsors.&quot;    Then, there's television. &quot;Let me give you the statistics we had in L.A.,&quot; says Marvin Bader, vice president of Olympic operations for ABC-TV. &quot;We were covering 26 venues over 4,500 square miles. I had accredited 5,000 people. I was in 23 hotels, 2,700 hotel rooms. I had my own motor pool, a total of 1,016 vehicles.&quot;    NBC has made much the same effort in Seoul. For a year, NBC and the Korean host broadcaster have been mapping out detailed production plans custom-tailored to the Seoul facilities. &quot;Where do you put cameras, how do you get communications from the venues back to the international broadcast center?&quot; asks NBC's Mr. Eskridge about a new site.    The finals of many 1988 events have been scheduled, uncharacteristically, in the mornings so they could be shown during U.S. prime time; the South Korean government even mandated daylight savings time to give NBC additional live programming time. (That's why the thought of moving to Moscow makes NBC cringe; prime time in New York is the middle of the night in Moscow.)    Although Olympic officials say they believe the demonstrations in Seoul will end well before the opening torch is lighted, there are still other problems to contend with. While corporate sponsorship sales are winding down, ISL North America Inc., which is handling the corporate marketing program for the IOC, the Seoul and Calgary organizing committees, and 147 national governing bodies, still hopes to sell four or five more international product categories.    &quot;I guess I should say (the unrest) won't cause any problems, but I don't think that's true,&quot; says Richard Pound, an Olympic Committee vice president from Canada. &quot;I would think potential sponsors would hold back a bit to satisfy themselves that this thing will sort itself out.&quot;    The nine companies that have already signed up for the most expensive international sponsorship program -- which includes marketing rights to the summer and winter Games and in 147 countries -- shouldn't be affected too much, sports marketers say. Even though &quot;the summer Games are the largest single element of the total package, (corporate sponsors) still have the rest of the world and the winter Games to sell,&quot; says Joel Rubinstein, the top corporate sponsorship salesman for the 1984 Games. Moreover, most of the companies have refund clauses built into their contracts in case of cancellations or boycotts. &quot;I don't think anybody's running scared yet,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>