<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880331-0154 </DOCNO><HL> Iraqi Arms -- From Russia, With Love </HL><AUTHOR> Kenneth R. Timmerman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST MDEST LATAM </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><TEXT>   Earlier this month, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein told the editors of the Egyptian daily Al Ahram that Iraq was close to completing work on a successor to its Hossein missile that &quot;will be able to reach targets 800 kilometers {about 500 miles} inside Iran.&quot; Iranian reports suggest the Hossein itself has already caused as many as 3,850 deaths since this year's version of the &quot;War of the Cities&quot; began at the end of February.    The new missile campaign is Iraq's latest attempt to force Iran to the negotiating table. Previously, Iraq tried bombing Iran's oil-export facilities on Kharg Island and elsewhere. When that failed to break Iranian resolve, Iraq turned the might of its predominantly French-built fighter-bomber fleet against Iranian economic centers and oil refineries, forcing Iran to import most of the refined oil products it requires for domestic and military use.    Experts surmise that the Hossein and its successors are most likely derivatives -- either copies or upgraded versions -- of the Soviet Scud-B, a missile designed to have about a 175-mile range. The analysts also are reviewing evidence that these weapons may have been developed or upgraded by Brazilian firms with Iraqi funding.    Whatever their origin, however, these souped-up missiles pose questions that go far beyond the regional confines of the Gulf War. Their new 400-mile range means they can strike Israel. This range is also important because it falls precisely in the category of those that the U.S. and the Soviet Union will eliminate from Europe once the INF accord is ratified. Until now, Iraq has limited these missiles to carrying conventional warheads. But the threat of such missiles being equipped with chemical or nuclear warheads is what prompted the U.S., Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, Canada and Japan to set up a Missile Technology Control Regime last year to prevent such technology reaching Third World arms producers and customers.    This limited attempt wasn't enough. Missile programs like Iraq's are now under way in Egypt, Brazil, Argentina, Libya, Iran and Israel. Chinese ballistic-missile technology is so far advanced that that nation has begun exporting complete weapons systems to Saudi Arabia, and, perhaps, elsewhere.    The origin of Iraq's new ballistic missiles has been puzzling military observers and missile experts alike. Last week, the picture cleared somewhat when photographs of debris were released by Iranian authorities. The photographs, which originally appeared on Iranian television, showed liquid-fuel pumps stamped with Cyrillic characters. Western intelligence analysts positively identified them as parts from Soviet-built Scud-Bs.    Following vigorous Iranian protests, the Soviet Union admitted last week it has sold Scud-B missiles to Iraq, as well as &quot;the eventuality they might have been modernized by Iraq.&quot; A Soviet Foreign Ministry official, quoted by Les Nouvelles de Moscou, a Soviet French-language publication for foreign distribution, acknowledged that Iran was also using missiles of Soviet origin, &quot;probably supplied by Libya . . . in violation of the initial sales agreement.&quot;    That the Soviet Union has sold Scuds to Iraq has been known for years. What eluded analysts until now was how the Iraqis managed to double the missiles' 175-mile range in order to strike the Iranian capital, which is about 340 miles from the border. Some missile experts believed at first that Iraq had decreased the weight of the warhead to extend the range. But after viewing the above-mentioned Iranian TV footage, which shows scenes of impacts that could only have been caused by the full one-ton Scud warheads, the experts say it is more likely that Iraq chose another route: the use of strap-on boosters to increase range.    Iraq has been saying all along that it designed and built the missiles itself. Last Aug. 4 -- months before the current flare-up -- an Iraqi communique announced the first testing site of a new surface-to-surface missile, which &quot;reached its target 615 kilometers {about 380 miles} from the launching point.&quot; Most observers, however, discount Iraq's claims that it manufactured the missile alone.    Stockholm International Peace Research Institute analyst Aaron Karp, who tracks arms transfers world-wide, believes the Iraqis have been secretly funding Brazilian missile-research programs. Today, the Iraqis in return are likely receiving technology to boost Soviet weapons; in the long run they may receive new missile systems. Although Brazil is perhaps best known for its foreign debt, it also has climbed to the top of the list of Third World arms exporters in recent years. The nation has sold billions of dollars of hardware to both Iran and Iraq since 1982. The Brazilian projects are led by private defense contractors Avibras Aerospacial Brasil, Engesa Engenheiros Especializados S.A. and Empresa Brasileira de Aeronautica S.A. These include several categories of missiles with ranges of about 90, 185, 370 and 620 miles. All are liquid-fueled, says Mr. Karp -- &quot;not very advanced, but effective.&quot;    So far, however, no test firing of any of these missiles has been observed. And on Dec. 15, Avibras officials in Brazil denied their missile program was being funded by Iraq or even by the Brazilian army. Iraq, however, has financed other Brazilian weapons programs in the past, including the Astros II multiple-rocket launch system, a modernized and highly precise version of the Russian-built BM-21. The Astros II is made by Avibras.    For the time being, Iraq would appear to have limited its efforts to upgrade the huge stockpile of Scud-Bs (300 by some intelligence estimates) it received from the Soviet Union at the end of 1986. The actual work is being done in Iraqi weapons plants, probably with the help of Brazilian or Chinese engineers. &quot;They can get around the range-payload equations by adding strap-on boosters,&quot; one Western government analyst said, &quot;and even if the Iraqi weapons industry is not all that advanced, we know that with a little help from their friends, they are capable of at least that.&quot;    Both Iran and Iraq are believed to be several years away from fielding nuclear weapons. Both nations, however, are capable of producing chemical weapons now. Iraq hasn't hesitated to drop chemical bombs -- witness the gruesome reports that have filled the world press this week. The Iraqis could very well decide to escalate one step further and equip their Scud-Bs with chemical warheads. This would alter the very nature of the war. The Iraqis hope this would provide the lacking catalyst to provoke a world-wide arms embargo on Iran. More likely is that it could provoke an arms embargo on both belligerents.    ---   Mr. Timmerman, who edits Mednews, a defense newsletter on the Middle East, will publish a book in May on arms sales to Iraq and Iran. </TEXT></DOC>