<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870126-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A TERRORIST GROUP THREATENED to kill three kidnapped Americans.    An anonymous caller to the Christian Voice of Lebanon radio station claimed the weekend abduction in Beirut of three American teachers and an Indian professor in the name of an underground group linked to Iran. He threatened to kill the captives if the U.S. helps Iraq in the Persian Gulf war. An earlier caller said the educators were kidnapped to prevent the extradition to the U.S. of a Lebanese man who was arrested in West Germany and is wanted in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner.    A Church of England spokesman said envoy Terry Waite is in good health and was still negotiating for the release of Western hostages in Lebanon.    ---   KOHL'S COALITION WON a comfortable majority in West German elections.    The showing by the chancellor's ruling coalition ensures overall continuity in the country's economic and defense policies. The balance within the conservative coalition was altered, however, with support for Kohl's Christian Democrats dropping sharply. The junior coalition partner, the Free Democrats, showed strong gains. Within the opposition, the Social Democratic Party failed to even match its poor showing in the last election.    The FDP's gains are likely to give greater weight to the junior party's calls for sweeping tax cuts and greater deregulation of the German economy.    ---   South African police took into custody anti-apartheid activist Winnie Mandela and her daughter after confiscating some documents at their home in the black township of Soweto, a family member said. They were later released after questioning, and the documents returned, her lawyer said.    ---   Meese acknowledged that he had regular contacts with fired White House aide Lt. Col. Oliver North, but denied that any discussions involved aid to Nicaraguan rebels. A Meese spokesman said the two men discussed U.S. relations with Iran, efforts to free American hostages in the Mideast and other topics.    Congressional sources disclosed that a new draft report being prepared by the Senate Intelligence panel on the Iran-Contra affair says Reagan's primary motivation in approving the sales of weapons to Tehran was the release of hostages in Lebanon, rather than improving ties with Iran.    ---   Authorities in Peking arrested a Chinese student for allegedly giving intelligence data to an American reporter for Agence France-Presse. The arrest appeared to be the first move against the Western news media in China's anti-liberalization campaign. On Friday, the Communist Party expelled prominent journalist Liu Binyan.    ---   Pakistani and Indian troops manned positions along their common border as both sides attempted to defuse tensions that threatened to spark the fourth war between the two countries in almost 40 years. India had declared a military alert Friday and sent reinforcements to the border, accusing Pakistan of mobilizing its forces.    ---   Iran fired surface-to-surface missiles at the Iraqi city of Basra, and Tehran's troops continued their offensive against the southern port. Iraq said that it had repelled the ground attack and that its planes had raided three Iranian cities. Baghdad denied Iran's claim that three fighter jets had been downed over the Persian Gulf war front.    Moslem foreign ministers proposed a draft resolution for the start today of an Islamic summit in Kuwait, urging Iran to respond to Iraq's appeals for a negotiated end to the fighting in the gulf.    ---   The FCC sought comments on whether continuing to enforce the fairness doctrine would be unconstitutional and contrary to the public interest. The doctrine requires broadcasters who air controversial topics to give opponents an opportunity to express contrasting views.    ---   Guards were doubled at military camps and soldiers confined to barracks as the Philippines braced for unrest before next week's voting on a new constitution. Meanwhile, as leftists prepared for a rally today to protest the shooting of 12 demonstrators last week, Cardinal Sin blamed the killings on Manila's failures in agrarian changes.    ---   A black leader called for a drive to acquire farm land in Forsyth County, Ga., that he said had been taken from blacks in 1912. The appeal followed Saturday's march through the all-white county by as many as 20,000 people. At least 60 counterdemonstrators were arrested for attempting to disrupt the civil-rights march.    ---   Afghanistan formally ordered amnesties for imprisoned guerrillas and said that others adhering to a Kabul-backed truce wouldn't be prosecuted. The decree, announced by leader Najibullah this month, said people jailed for crimes against Afghanistan's security would be released.    ---   Scotland Yard said more than 150 police were injured in a weekend clash with about 12,000 demonstrators outside the Wapping, England, plant of newspaper publisher Rupert Murdoch. The violence erupted during a protest over the dismissal last year of about 5,000 workers after Murdoch moved his facilities from central London.    ---   The New York Giants won professional football's Super Bowl, defeating the Denver Broncos, 39-20, in Pasadena, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>