<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870403-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE VOTED to override Reagan's veto of a highway measure.    Despite a last-minute appeal by the president, who traveled to Capitol Hill in an effort to sustain his rejection of the legislation, the Senate voted 67-33 to enact the $87.5 billion highway and mass transit bill. The Senate action follows Tuesday's 350-73 vote in the House to override the veto. The legislation gives millions of dollars to each state, and allows states to increase the speed limit on most rural interstate highways to 65 miles an hour.    The roll call came a day after the Senate tentatively had voted to sustain the veto. The Democrats, however, won the right for the second vote.    ---   Pope John Paul II told 80,000 youths at an open-air stadium in Santiago that their faith could transform society. The pope, who held talks with President Pinochet, earlier urged a return to democracy in Chile while addressing the country's 31 bishops. The pope also traveled to a Santiago shantytown, where slum dwellers clashed with police.    ---   The U.S. suspected more than three years ago that Soviet spies had penetrated the American Embassy in Moscow, but serious security problems at the post were never resolved because of bureaucratic resistance and turf battles between agencies, according to intelligence sources and administration officials.    ---   U.S. officials said that another American was involved in the Pollard spy operation, but that the Israeli government had refused to allow him to leave Israel for questioning. The officials said prosecutors might be willing to grant immunity to the suspect, a lawyer who holds both U.S. and Israeli citizenship, in exchange for his testimony.    ---   The Kremlin announced that a U.S. soldier and his West German wife had defected to the Soviet Union and were granted political asylum. The Pentagon couldn't confirm the defection, which would be the first by an American serviceman to the Soviet Union since the Vietnam War.    ---   The Soviet Union denied a report that an Israeli consular delegation would be allowed to visit Moscow for the first time since the Kremlin severed ties with Israel in 1967. Soviet officials also rejected reports by American Jewish leaders that the Kremlin planned to increase Jewish emigration.    ---   A federal appeals panel upheld the attorney general's authority generally to determine the scope of criminal investigations conducted by court-appointed independent counsels. The judges rejected a request by prosecutor Alexia Morrison to expand her criminal inquiry of the 1983 EPA management affair.    ---   The Senate's Iran-Contra panel approved grants of immunity to compel testimony from two witnesses regarding the operation of offices used by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord. Investigators described the witnesses as secretaries for Secord, a central figure in the controversy.    ---   France ordered three Soviet diplomats to leave the country within 10 days for &quot;activities unconnected with their mission status,&quot; Paris's Interior Ministry said. The move followed the recent discovery of an espionage operation on the European Ariane rocket.    ---   Britain's Thatcher returned to London from Moscow and said that while her meetings with Gorbachev produced arms-control progress, world peace would depend on nuclear deterrence &quot;for the next 20 years.&quot; In Washington, Reagan met with NATO's Lord Carrington and lauded a U.S.-European effort to cooperate on arms development.    ---   The Justice Department has compiled additional information on the wartime activities of Kurt Waldheim to bolster a recommendation to bar the Austrian president from the U.S., sources said. The department reportedly found data showing that Waldheim may have been involved in Nazi atrocities against Yugoslav partisans.    ---   Israel's Supreme Court rejected an appeal by lawyers defending accused Nazi war criminal John Demjanjuk that the judges presiding at the retired U.S. auto worker's trial be disqualified for bias.    ---   Zimbabwe's Parliament suspended for a year former Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith for expressing opposition to anti-apartheid sanctions against South Africa. Harare, however, withdrew a motion calling for the immediate abolition of 20 parliamentary seats reserved for whites.    ---   A fire erupted in a copper mine in eastern Quebec late Wednesday, killing one worker. Officials of the Noranda Inc. mine said 54 miners who had been trapped by the blaze were brought to the surface hours later by rescue crews.    ---   A Reagan official disclosed that the administration continues to provide Iraq with intelligence data, but has rejected a request from Baghdad to purchase U.S. military planes and radar equipment for use in the Persian Gulf conflict against Iran.    ---   Died: Buddy Rich, 69, jazz drummer, in Los Angeles . . . Henri Cochet, 85, former tennis player, Wednesday, near Paris. </TEXT></DOC>