<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0120 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> REGIONS -- </IN><TEXT>Dividend From Tax Returns:Details on Migration Patterns---By Eugene CarlsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal05/05/87WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)GOVMTINTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)   THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE isn't the only federal agency peeking at your income-tax records. Sometime this fall, the IRS will hand over to the Census Bureau a massive computer file containing personal and basic income information for everyone who filed a tax return for 1986.    This sensitive transfer of tax records has been taking place annually since the early 1970s, when the aim was to determine how to divide billions of dollars of federal revenue-sharing money among communities.    But revenue sharing is dead. These days, the tax records are mostly used to trace movement of the American public from place to place. The migration figures, purged of names and income, can be purchased from the IRS. A bank in a high-growth area, for example, could use the figures to see precisely where its potential new customers are arriving from.    THE MIGRATION PROJECT is statistically awesome. Using your Social Security number, the Census Bureau will compare the address that you printed on your 1986 tax return with the address on your previous year's tax form. The idea is to see if you changed residence between tax filings and, if so, from where to where.    A similar address scan is done on every other individual tax return. Matching the estimated 103 million returns filed for 1986 with the roughly 99 million from 1985, adding the number of exemptions claimed, and charting where everybody moved down to the county level is no small data-processing chore. The project will tie up the bureau's huge Univac 1100/84 computer for some 700 hours, a computer run roughly equivalent to the first tally of the entire 1990 national census.    When the address information is combined with the number of exemptions claimed by the tax filer, the IRS data yield the single best picture of population migration available during the 10 years between national head counts.    This sort of intelligence is solid gold to market researchers, developers and planners who are forever seeking better ways of predicting and charting state or regional population growth. Migration data is vital in the local growth equation because what sets the growth rate of one area apart from another is almost entirely the movement of people. Birth and death rates, the other main population components, are relatively constant throughout the nation.    DEMOGRAPHERS USE voter registrations, auto registrations, school enrollments, and other social indicators to figure out whether a state is gaining or losing population through migration. What the IRS figures show in addition to this are the origins and destinations of these migrants.    The IRS numbers, for example, illuminate the strong population flow between Colorado and California and show how that stream has reversed in the last decade. At the end of the 1970s, some 5,000 more people were moving to Colorado from California each year than were leaving Colorado for California.    Over the next few years, Colorado's attraction for Californians gradually diminished, and by 1983 the migrant flow between the two states was about equal. The most recent IRS figures show that the flow has tilted steeply toward California with net in-migration of 5,400 Coloradans in the year ended April 15, 1985.    Arizona pulled a net 4,400 residents from Colorado in the latest reporting year. The states with the biggest net population losses to Colorado: Illinois, Iowa, Nebraska and Wyoming.    New Jersey massaged the IRS data and found that it is pulling in people from heavily populated Northern states such as Pennsylvania, New York, Illinois and Indiana, while losing residents, on balance, to increasingly urbanized states in the South and West, such as Florida, California, Texas, Virginia, North Carolina and Georgia.    ARMED WITH this knowledge, a New Jersey demographer assumes that most of those leaving for Florida are retirees, while most of the Illinois newcomers are in the active labor market. The makeup of these two migrant streams has very different implications for the state's future population.    The IRS data isn't a perfect migration mirror. Because it only catches tax filers, migrants below the income-filing threshold don't show up on the Census Bureau printouts. The 1986 tax law, which eliminates still more people from the tax rolls, will make the movement of low-income Americans, many of them elderly, even harder to trace.    The Census Bureau's migration methodology also assumes that all the exemptions listed on a tax form change residence when the tax filer does. That isn't always so, as in the case of divorced couples where one parent has custody of the children, and the other has financial support. A single person who marries, moves and the next year files a joint return, is also lost in this tabulation.    Addresses can be a problem for the Census Bureau, especially at the local level. Taxpayers sometimes list post-office-box numbers on their return from a different jurisdiction than their home.    Affluent taxpayers sometimes file from the offices of their lawyers or accountants. The world knows that President Reagan has been in residence in Washington, D.C., since 1981. But on their Form 1040 filed two weeks ago, President and Mrs. Reagan gave their address as 333 South Grand in Los Angeles. That's the office address of Gibson, Dunn andamp; Crutcher, the Reagans' attorneys.    When it comes to migration, the Census Bureau's computer thinks the First Family lives in California. </TEXT></DOC>