<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880930-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Lords of the Slums: Chicago Street Gangs Treat Public Housing As Private Fortresses --- The Black Gangster Disciples Menace Tenants, Use Units To Store Guns, Sell Drugs --- Co-opting Kids and Old Folks </HL><AUTHOR> Alex Kotlowitz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> REL </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Black Gangster Disciples have good sources of information.    Thus last week, when 60 uniformed officers raided a Disciple-controlled apartment building in a public-housing complex here, the street gang, tipped off, had already cleared out. For all their German shepherds and hand-held metal detectors, the police could find only one gun; they arrested no gang members.    As in other U.S. cities, street gangs have become a powerful presence in Chicago, menacing the lives of nearly every resident in the inner city. They prey particularly on the single women who occupy more than 70% of public-housing units here. Gang members move in on them and take over, using dwellings to store drugs and guns, and turning residents into virtual captives in their own homes.    Once entrenched, gang members convert buildings to private fortresses. To cloak their activities, they knock out lights in elevators and stairwells. They cut holes between apartments to make it easier to elude rival gangs and the police.    The gangs are even becoming adept at their own sort of public relations. They buy food for the elderly and sneakers for kids, making wary allies of both. They sponsor picnics, where they put up huge banners flaunting their names and colors.    &quot;If you live here, you had better learn to get along with them,&quot; says Arrie Martin, who lives in Ogden Courts, a west-side development ruled by the Disciples. Adds Vincent Lane, the director of the beleaguered Chicago Housing Authority: &quot;The gangs are the only formal structure out there that's effective. They control the social and economic environment of people in public housing.&quot;    Indeed, Mr. Lane and others talk about the need to win back the hearts and minds of tenants. He says his job now requires &quot;changing the spirit of people in public housing.&quot;    Though the police have special units to deal with gang crimes and though individual officers bravely do what they can, their manpower remains limited. Members of the gang crimes unit, for instance, often are pulled away to work parades and local festivals. Uncooperative tenants also hamper their efforts. &quot;The only way you get the gangs out is when the people get tired of them,&quot; says Hosea H. Crossley, the commander of the public-housing police unit. &quot;Meanwhile, all we can do is hold them down.&quot;    Gangs have so worked their way into the fabric of the community that no one -- the police, the housing authority or the tenants -- is certain how to get rid of them.    Says Irving Spergel, a University of Chicago professor of social-service administration, the gangs &quot;are an institution, and we're just beginning to recognize that.&quot;    An unmarked police car wends its way up the narrow fire lane of the Robert Taylor Homes, 28 high-rises that stretch for two miles.    The warning whistles of young boys precede the gray sedan; sometimes they shout the number &quot;seven,&quot; a signal that the police are nearby. Groups of teen-agers stand around in the dark breezeways of the buildings. Most wear their baseball caps cocked to the right, a sign that they are Black Gangster Disciples.    Were it not for the full moon, they would be barely visible; they have punched out lights so that they can operate in the dark. They wait for the police to pass, then resume selling their drugs, mostly cocaine and heroin.    The three northernmost buildings at Robert Taylor and the two southernmost buildings at the adjacent Stateway Gardens are virtually owned by &quot;Cold Black.&quot; The gang leader's real name is Robert L. Dordies. He served 11 years in prison for the murder of a 66-year-old man, from whom he stole $17. Now 32, he is a ranking member of the Black Gangster Disciples.    From his house on Chicago's far south side, Mr. Dordies exercises iron-fisted control over his territory. He is so feared by residents that a woman contacted for this story was begged by her child to hang up the phone. A tenant tells of how Mr. Dordies once came to her door looking for her son, who owed Mr. Dordies money. A Disciple member put a gun to the son's head. The mother paid the $300 her son owed for drugs. &quot;I've got grandkids, and I don't know what {the gangs} might do,&quot; she says.    Within the past year, police say, two men in their 20s have been slain by members of the Disciples for what police believe were actions that challenged Mr. Dordies's authority.    When a witness to one of the killings came forward, a would-be assassin shot at him from a rooftop with a high-powered rifle. The state's attorney's office moved the witness out of Illinois to protect him from further attempts on his life.    In recent years, Mr. Dordies has been charged with misdemeanors -- criminal trespass and a traffic violation. But in all cases, charges were dismissed. He is said never personally to handle guns or drugs. Stout and about six feet tall, he sports gold necklaces and carries a cellular telephone.    Incredibly, the managers and staff of the Robert Taylor Homes and the Stateway Gardens say they have never heard of Cold Black. &quot;No gangs have taken over any buildings in Stateway,&quot; insists Betty Walton, the former housing manager of the complex.    But residents here know otherwise. For Cold Black controls a small army of teenagers and men in their 20s, all members of the Disciples. He also recruits boys as young as 10, plying them with jogging suits and big radios. They run drugs for him and serve as bodyguards, according to tenants and the police.    The &quot;soldiers&quot; in Cold Black's army often commandeer apartments in the high-rises, where they sell drugs and store guns. Some of these are vacant apartments, but others aren't. One man, afraid to have his name published, recounted one such takeover. His girlfriend owed Mr. Dordies several hundred dollars for cocaine, so one day Disciples showed up and announced that they intended to sell drugs from the man's two-bedroom apartment.    The arrangement quickly became total occupation, and for a nightmarish two months, the couple stayed in one of the back bedrooms while gang members watched TV and weighed and sold drugs from the front room. The Disciples, in groups of four to six, were there in shifts, 24 hours a day. Occasionally, Mr. Dordies himself is said to have visited the apartment.    The rightful tenant says his 12-year-old son often asked: &quot;Daddy, why don't you make these men leave?&quot; But, he says, &quot;It wasn't my home anymore.&quot;    He feared retaliation if he called the police. He sent his son and two-year-old daughter to live with his sister's family while he gradually moved furniture and clothes out of the apartment. Late one night, he and his girlfriend left and didn't go back. The apartment, according to another tenant, now is boarded up.    While some families have lost their apartments to Mr. Dordies, others have lost their children. Tenants tell of one father who demanded that his 15-year-old son leave the gang. A group of Disciples told the man to mind his own business and then broke his arm.    But while Mr. Dordies is a loathsome presence to some, not everyone here wishes him ill. Some people believe the buildings have been safer under his control, police say. At night, they say, Mr. Dordies posts guards to protect his buildings. The police, meanwhile, continue to seek evidence that will help them put Cold Black back in prison.    Mr. Dordies couldn't be reached for comment. His attorney, William A. Swano, declined to comment on assertions in this story, except to say that two criminal-trespass charges and the traffic citation, all of which were dismissed, constituted &quot;harassment by the police.&quot;    One reason police find it difficult to build cases is that tenants are so closely watched by the gangs. That is why, when there is trouble, residents of public housing often won't call the 911 emergency phone number. In Chicago, the caller's address automatically flashes at police headquarters, and police will sometimes then appear at the caller's home seeking more information.    That happened once to Francine Washington, who lives in a part of Stateway Gardens controlled by a gang not affiliated with Mr. Dordies. From her second-floor apartment, she watched six gang members beat a young man with bricks and clubs. She immediately dialed 911, and within minutes, she says, six policemen were at her door.    &quot;I have nothing to say to you,&quot; she told the officers, as one of the assailants stared up at her window, his arms defiantly crossed. &quot;If you wanted to talk to me, you should have called me on the phone.&quot; The police do have a hot-line number, which promises confidentiality, but, they say, tenants rarely use it.    Witnesses to gang crimes typically refuse to come forward; if they do, retaliation is common. Even the most public and brutal of beatings go unreported.    Around 1 o'clock one steamy summer night, members of a gang called Vice Lords, police allege, beat 32-year-old Carl Maynard to death at Rockwell Gardens, using a baseball bat and belt buckles. It all happened in full view of tenants.    Within hours, detectives were knocking on doors looking for witnesses. The Vice Lords' leader, Roy White, sat on a metal kitchen chair in the center of the basketball court, 10 to 15 of his soldiers surrounding him. From this central location, says Detective Bob Grapenthien, the gang leader directed his henchman, who followed the police from floor to floor, standing in the hallway as a silent reminder to tenants that they were being watched.    The police have charged two gang members with the murder, but they worry that no witnesses will testify in court. Detectives concede that the case against the men may be iffy. &quot;No one knows anything about nothing,&quot; says Detective Gar Eveland, one of the first police officers to try to interview witnesses.    In mid-July, residents of Robert Taylor Homes, which is Chicago's largest public-housing complex, received invitations to a picnic. Fliers promised free food and drink and softball for the children and a car show and wet T-shirt contest for adults.    The sponsors of the third annual Players Picnic: some of the city's top drug dealers and gang leaders. The flier identified some of them by name -- Highsmith, Fat Cat, Bub and Disco.    Thus, on the last Sunday in July, about 2,000 Chicagoans convened in Dan Ryan Woods on the far south side. They danced to the funk rock of a live band and grilled hot dogs and ribs. Cars were so backed up going into the park that the police had to assign extra traffic details.    The kingpins showed off their glistening new Mercedes-Benzes, Rolls-Royces and Jaguars. They danced and drank until 10 p.m. when the police broke up the festivities.    These days, the gangs are working harder than ever to ingratiate themselves with the neighbors. They have learned from the El Rukns gang, previously known as the Blackstone Rangers, who in the late 1960s and early 1970s were a political force, conducting federally financed job-training classes and organizing social events. They even sponsored their own singing group.    Gangs have held picnics for residents of Cabrini-Green and Ogden Courts, two big housing complexes here. At Cabrini-Green, one gang leader has distributed more than 1,000 pairs of sneakers each summer to children, according to city employees who work with the gangs. At Robert Taylor, according to the police, gang leaders give money to elderly residents in need. In Henry Horner Homes, one gang lieutenant hands out dollar bills to the children.    Al Kindle, of the Chicago Intervention Network, a city agency that works with gangs, says that all the politicking by gangs &quot;makes it near impossible to fight them. People are hesitant to give information.&quot; The gangs, he says, have &quot;an aura of knighthood.&quot;    Shortly before sunrise one morning this month, Evelyn Walker and her six children awoke to the sounds of shattering glass. A Molotov cocktail came hurdling through the children's bedroom window, quickly igniting the mattress of her 15-year-old daughter's bed. The children ran screaming from the fiery room, a hail of bullets following them. No one was killed, although one of the children was shot in the leg.    Until after the firebombing, Ms. Walker lived in the same high-rise that was raided by the 60 Chicago policemen last week. Located at 2417 W. Adams, the 135-unit complex is home to a faction of the Disciples not directly related to Cold Black's operations. The gang's insignia, the six-pointed star, adorns the breezeway of the building.    As Ms. Walker's experience attests, Chicago gangs have anything but a peaceful existence. Crime is so high at Rockwell Gardens, which is home to 4,100 people, that in 1987 more than eight violent crimes were committed there for every 100 residents.    Ms. Walker, a large woman whose hearty laugh often echoed through the cinder-block halls, had tried to organize her neighbors and to work with the gang controlling the building. But she hated that she and her six children had to eat their dinners on the floor of the children's bedroom because her dining-room table was exposed to the almost daily gunfire. She hated what the gang did to her building. (Earlier this year, she seriously injured her hand in a fall in the pitch-black stairwell, where lights had been broken by gang members.)    But the gangs, at times, assisted Ms. Walker. When she organized a barbecue, she requested protection from housing-authority security guards and the police. According to tenants, neither showed up. So, on the dirt lawn out back, parents grilled ribs and their children swirled around Ms. Walker, who was dressed as a clown. Three Disciples stood guard with walkie-talkies in hand.    &quot;Since I can't get rid of them, I figured I might as well work with them and get some cooperation,&quot; she says.    Others who lived at the same address found that the only way to cope was to leave. One young woman, forced to pay protection money, fled the building on West Adams in terror, leaving behind dirty dishes in the sink and baby clothes drying on the balcony.    &quot;I watched her leave and didn't even ask if I could help,&quot; recalls Celeste Deanes, a neighbor. &quot;It happens so often that you fail to make normal reactions to abnormal situations.&quot; No one would help Ms. Deanes, either, when the gangs later came after her.    Members of gangs often try to move into the high-rise apartments as boyfriends of single women living there. Once ensconced, they start moving in their buddies. The housing authority estimates that 60,000 people, many of them gang members, are living in its facilities illegally; 144,000 are there legally.    Ms. Deanes, 28 and recently divorced, moved into a sixth floor, two-bedroom apartment at this Rockwell Gardens building 18 months ago, while attending Chicago State University. Ms. Deanes says she kept to herself, usually rising at 3 a.m., to get her two children, who are five and three, to the baby sitter and then making the 1 1/2-hour trip to school.    One day, a gang member in his 30s who lived illegally upstairs began making advances. When Ms. Deanes spurned them, she was harassed. First, her microwave oven was stolen. Then, about midnight one summer night, a pistol shot rang past her window, singeing her sheets. The next weekend her apartment was ransacked and her children's beds set afire. The washing machine and her Radio Shack computer also were stolen. Ms. Deanes finally packed and left.    According to residents, at least four other families fled the building during the summer because of gang harassment. Ms. Walker watched these tenants leave and felt an urgency to form a strong tenants' organization. If tenants didn't feel comfortable turning to the housing authority or the police, at least they have one another, she figured. &quot;Everybody has failed,&quot; Ms. Walker told neighbors. Her handwritten announcement of a tenants' meeting was one of the few things to survive the firebombing of her apartment.    The Vice Lords, enemies of the Disciples, apparently had been gunning for a 15-year-old boy called &quot;Pee Wee,&quot; who lived next door to Ms. Walker. They missed, hitting Ms. Walker's place instead.    They didn't let up, either. The firemen who arrived to put out the blaze had to take cover behind their trucks as the Vice Lords continued to shoot at the building. Ms. Walker herself took refuge under the fire truck.    When the shooting finally stopped and calm prevailed, the Disciples prepared for further battle. Members spent much of the day collecting money from tenants to buy guns. By early afternoon, they had filled a baseball cap with cash. They also put plywood in Ms. Walker's back windows because the housing-authority repairmen didn't show up until early afternoon. Even Pee Wee, for whom the attack was meant, came by to apologize to Ms. Walker and then helped sweep the water out of her blackened apartment.    Within the following five days, 21 windows on the first two floors of the building were shattered by bottles, bullets and Molotov cocktails. At least six people were assaulted. The shooting between 2417 W. Adams and other buildings was so frequent that the local elementary-school principal requested and got police protection for the children going home from school. A killing the following weekend in front of the building was the last straw. The police, at the behest of the director of the housing authority, stormed the building the next day.    Mr. Lane, the housing official, in his job only three months, had been making efforts to slowly win back the confidence of tenants. His assessment of how little control his agency actually has over its own real estate has been candid. But he has wanted to move cautiously, making every effort to assure tenants that his agency is on their side.    He held a series of public hearings at each of the city's 19 developments. Alleging that some of his own field managers have ignored problems or even cooperated with the gangs, he promised to transfer 22 of them. At least one manager is being investigated for possible drug ties.    But the urgency of problems at 2417 W. Adams pushed Mr. Lane to temporarily abandon his strategy and turn to an old tactic: police firepower. Mr. Lane led the police sweep: &quot;Either {gangs} were going to run that building or I was.&quot;    Despite the failure of the raid to produce any arrests, Mr. Lane hopes his invasion of the Rockwell Gardens high-rise will set an example. Currently, five private security guards and one housing official keep watch day and night. The housing authority is erecting a steel gate and has issued tenants identification cards, which they now need in order to enter the building. No one but tenants can be on the premises after midnight. Mr. Lane says he plans to evict tenants who have a history of drug arrests or whose children are gang members. He will move in more law-abiding families, he says, and help build a tenants' council. He says he intends to repeat what he is doing here at 15 other Chicago high-rises.    Still, 2417 W. Adams is just one of many public-housing high-rises in Chicago, and neither the police nor the housing authority has the money or manpower to fully protect all the buildings in the city. Moreover, with the departure of Ms. Walker, the housing authority is losing its best tenant in the building. Her neighbors are losing their best friend.    But there has been at least one noticeable difference at 2417 W. Adams in the past few days. Last Friday evening, the playground behind the building was full of children using the slides and hanging from the bars of the rusted Jungle Gym. That playground had been virtually abandoned, because children played indoors, afraid to be caught in the crossfire. </TEXT></DOC>