<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880106-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Who Owes Whom, and How Much? </HL><AUTHOR> Charles Wolf Jr. and Sarah Hooker </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><TEXT>   That the U.S. is the world's largest debtor has, by now, become a commonplace. The basis for this belief is the Commerce Department's report that the full accounting of international assets and liabilities of the U.S. showed a net negative balance of $264 billion at the end of 1986.    Despite the pervasiveness of this belief and the general acceptance of the underlying data, both the belief and the data are mistaken. The basic error arises from a failure to apply a proper economic valuation to all, rather than to only some, of the various components in the full international balance sheet of the U.S. When the appropriate valuation methodology is applied to all of the components, the full balance position of the U.S. at the end of 1986 turns out to have been a positive $50 billion, rather than a negative $264 billion.    Lest this surprising conclusion suggest greater precision than is warranted, it should be acknowledged that there remain many uncertainties and ambiguities in the underlying data. However, this caveat applies even more strongly to the original negative (&quot;debtor&quot;) figure than to the revised and positive (&quot;creditor&quot;) one.    For a proper economic valuation to be made of the U.S. international balance sheet, each of the principal components of the balance should be &quot;marked-to-market&quot; -- that is, evaluated at its current market value, as best this can be estimated. Of course, that is more easily said than done and it is admittedly more difficult to do for some components than for others.    The official estimates assess only securities holdings at their estimated current market value. (Securities holdings include both foreign holders of U.S. securities and U.S. holders of foreign securities.) The other major components -- direct investment (including reinvested earnings net of depreciation), government loans, bank and non-bank claims, and official gold holdings -- are misleadingly valued at their book, or nominal, values.    While this accounting practice is convenient, it introduces three principal and substantial sources of error:   First, the resulting underestimate of U.S. direct investments abroad is much larger than the underestimate of foreign direct investment in the U.S. The reason for this is that the direct investments abroad by U.S. corporations (including reinvestment of earnings net of depreciation) are generally of older vintage than the corresponding investments in the U.S. by foreign corporations. Consequently, the respective book valuations of U.S. direct investments abroad reflect the much lower costs and prices prevailing at the time the investments were made, while the more recent direct investments in the U.S. by foreign corporations occurred at costs and prices closer to ones that prevail today.    Therefore, if both U.S. direct investments abroad and foreign direct investments in the U.S. are converted from their book values into 1986 dollars, a closer approximation of their true market value is possible. The result? The value of U.S. holdings abroad is about $260 billion above that of foreign direct investments in the U.S.    Second, the book or nominal value of loans owed to U.S. banks and non-banking institutions by the principal developing countries is a substantial overestimate of their true market value. A closer approximation of the market value of these claims, based on averaging the currently prevailing discounts in the secondary debt market, results in reducing the net value of these loans held by U.S. banks at the end of 1986 by approximately $38 billion.    Finally, the official estimates of the net international position of the U.S. include U.S. gold reserves valued at the &quot;official&quot; gold price of $42 an ounce, rather than the prevailing market price of gold. Marking the gold reserves to a market valuation results in an upward adjustment of about $91 billion in the U.S. asset position.    The combined effect of these three adjustments -- two positive and one negativeis to shift the balance from a large negative figure -- $264 billion -- at the end of 1986, to a small positive figure -- $50 billion.    It is important to note that this conclusion is also corroborated by the fact that, in 1986, the U.S. balance of payments showed net investment income of $21 billion, representing the excess of remitted profits, dividends and interest derived from U.S. holdings abroad over the corresponding earnings from foreign holdings in the U.S.    Although this recalculation is probably closer to being accurate than the commonly accepted Commerce Department estimates, its significance shouldn't be exaggerated. As noted earlier, the underlying data are neither complete nor wholly reliable. Other problems arise, for example, in connection with the appropriate way to treat the assets and liabilities of foreign subsidiaries of U.S. banks and U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks, and how to handle the valuation of &quot;sovereign&quot; debt owed to U.S. government institutions. Indeed, depending on how one handles these matters, as well as the recurring &quot;errors and omissions&quot; in the U.S. balance of payments, a wide range of estimates of the U.S. international position can be generated.    To be sure, even if the U.S. was, in fact, a net creditor at the end of 1986, it will probably have shifted to a debtor position by the end of 1987, because of the expected U.S. trade deficit in 1987 of more than $165 billion. Even this prediction is uncertain. As a result of Black Monday, the 1987 market value of foreign holdings of U.S. securities will be reduced by substantially more than the corresponding reduction of U.S. holdings abroad. Moreover, the market price of gold in 1987 has increased about 30% above that in 1986, thus warranting a corresponding increase in that component of the full international balance sheet of the U.S.    If, nevertheless, the actual debtor status of the U.S. lies sometime in the future rather than in the past, the burden of servicing such potential net foreign asset holdings in the U.S. will be that much lower than has hitherto been assumed. Furthermore, beliefs about the U.S. international financial position sometimes affect behavior. Hence, dispelling erroneous ones can be useful, especially where the erroneous beliefs have been as widely held and as highly publicized as those relating to the so-called debtor status of the U.S.    ---   Mr. Wolf is director of RAND Corp. research on international economic policy and dean of RAND's Graduate School. Ms. Hooker, a RAND consultant, is a graduate student at the University of Michigan. </TEXT></DOC>