<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861216-0164 </DOCNO><HL> Flawed Procedures?Maintenance PracticesOf British Airways AreA Subject of Inquiry---One Cause of a Fatal '85 FireOn Jet Could Have BeenMisdiagnosis by Mechanics---A Certain Factor: Bad Luck---By William M. CarleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/16/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> UTX EUROPAIRLINES (AIR)AEROSPACE (ARO)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><DATELINE> MANCHESTER, England  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Packed with 131 vacationers, the British Airtours jet began its takeoff roll routinely enough.    It was Aug. 22, 1985; and the Boeing 737, part of British Airways' charter operations, was heading for Corfu. But as the jet began roaring down the runway, the engine under the left wing exploded. Part of the engine punctured the fuel tank in the wing, and fuel ignited. Flames and thick black smoke trailed the jet.    &quot;It was like a blowtorch,&quot; Brendan Kelly, an air-traffic controller watching from the tower, said later.    Capt. Peter Terrington ordered the takeoff aborted, and the jet rolled to a stop. But as frantic passengers clawed their way out escape doors, searing fire and smoke swept through the cabin, trapping many inside. When it was over, 55 had died. (Since the fire began in the rear and moved forward, there were no deaths in the cockpit.)    The tragic accident carried implications that reverberated around the world. The explosion occurred in one of the plane's JT8D engines -- the most widely used jet engine in commercial aviation. Made by Pratt andamp; Whitney, a unit of United Technologies Corp., the JT8D powers about 4,400 planes world-wide. Airline executives began worrying whether their JT8Ds were safe or whether the engines, as they aged, were developing fatal flaws.    The British government's inquiry into the crash still isn't completed. But interviews with aviation officials in the U.S. and Britain and evidence presented at a Manchester coroner's inquest arising from the accident indicate some causes.    There is no doubt that the accident was triggered by a series of unlikely events, making it difficult to predict -- and prevent. There also is evidence, however, of questionable maintenance practices by British Airways, which services the planes operated by its British Airtours subsidiary.    A close look at events leading up to the crash suggests how, despite the industry's scrupulous safety efforts, seemingly small flaws and slip-ups can go undetected, eventually snowballing into catastrophe.    When the engine acted up just prior to the accident, British Airways mechanics apparently misdiagnosed the most serious problem, evidence indicates. As a result, they only tinkered with the problem when it actually needed major work.    In the event of an accident, other carriers are usually loath to criticize the airline affected. Not so in this case. Piedmont Airlines, which operates the world's largest fleet of 737-200s -- the plane involved in the accident -- blasted British Airways in a filing with the U.S. Federal Aviation Agency. The British Airtours crash, Piedmont stated, resulted from &quot;totally unacceptable maintenance procedures.&quot;    Similarly, the Air Transport Association, a trade group of U.S. airlines, said in a Jan. 15, 1986, filing with the FAA: &quot;The maintenance and repair procedures which led to {the Manchester} accident are not representative of those used by ATA member airlines.&quot;    British Airways officials won't comment publicly because the crash investigation isn't over. But privately, they vehemently reject any suggestion that the airline was at fault. Problems with the JT8D, such as slow acceleration, were common, they say, and stemmed mainly from minor causes. This made diagnosing major mechanical faults difficult. &quot;Every time you get a stomachache, do you suspect cancer?&quot; one executive at the airline asks.    The sequence of events leading to the accident was so improbable, the airline's officials add, that it was almost impossible to anticipate and prevent. Says one: &quot;We were just damned unlucky.&quot;    In one respect, British Airways was unlucky. The JT8D part that failed had failed before in other carriers' planes but had never caused an accident. Thus, the airlines hadn't focused on its potential for disaster.    The heart of the JT8D consists of nine burner cans arranged around the core of the engine. In each can fuel is injected, combined with compressed air and ignited. This continuous blast from the rear of the engine pushes a jet forward.    Air in a burner can reaches nearly 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit, a temperature that can cause the cans to crack. Small cracks are common; but if left unattended, they can grow, causing the can to split apart or separate. In a separation, some of the can's hot blast reaches the engine's steel outer casing, weakening it.    The tremendous pressures within the engine then burst through the casing, sometimes hurling out engine parts like projectiles at supersonic speeds. &quot;It's like shooting a missile at your own airplane,&quot; says one aircraft expert.    In 1979, a Continental Airlines jet taking off from San Francisco went through this harrowing sequence. Part of the burner can shot through the plane's vertical tail fin. Luckily, the damage was so slight that the pilot was able to land safely.    Pratt andamp; Whitney investigated the Continental incident and then wrote all operators of JT8D engines, including British Airways. The Jan. 31, 1980, letter noted that burner cans had been cracking and that airlines had been welding the cracks but that the cans had been cracking a second time along the weld seam. This, Pratt said, was apparently what happened on the Continental jet.    Pratt advised carriers before welding to first use a process known as solution heat treating to restore strength to the steel and help prevent new cracks. The letter also warned: &quot;Replace {burner-can parts} . . . which have been extensively weld repaired.&quot;    Pratt also noted that an engine that was slow in starting or accelerating could be symptomatic of a cracked burner can. If such abnormalities occur, Pratt said, &quot;it is recommended that engine trouble-shooting be accomplished.&quot;    In January 1985, a cracked burner can ruptured an engine casing on a Western Airlines jet as it was beginning its takeoff. The pilot safely aborted the flight. On Feb. 2 -- just seven months before the British Airtours accident -- Pratt sent a telegram to all operators of JT8Ds, again including British Airways, describing Western's near accident.    The telegram reiterated the earlier advisory about weld repairs and added: &quot;Reports of slow starting or acceleration should be suspected as a potential cause of severely distressed or misaligned&quot; burner cans.    British Airways, meanwhile, had been encountering burner-can problems of its own. In 1983, two cracks appeared in a can 21 inches around. One crack was 1 1/2 inches, the other 5 1/2 inches. Despite Pratt's earlier warnings against extensive welding, the airline's mechanics went ahead and welded the two cracks.    The mechanics decided not to use solution heat treating on the welds, for at British Airways the process had seemed to produce even more cracks. (The treatment's effectiveness is debated among metallurgists.) In any event, in February 1984, the burner can with two welded cracks was installed on a British Airtours 737 code-named Juliet Lima.    In 1984 and 1985, British Airways pilots began complaining about slow acceleration of 737s, including Juliet Lima. In the airline's fleet of 44 737s, the average rose to one complaint per plane every other month. Complaints about Juliet Lima were above average: one complaint every month, though a few other planes were even worse. Most of the jets apparently needed fuel-control adjustments. (The JT8D trouble-shooting chart indicates that if an engine accelerates slowly, mechanics should first check fuel controls, then burner cans.)    In August last year, however, Juliet Lima's troubles worsened. On Aug. 5 and again on Aug. 20, the plane's pilots complained about slow acceleration.    On Aug. 20, another symptom, called throttle stagger, developed. When a 737 pilot pushes forward on the two throttles -- one for each engine -- to take off, the two throttles should be about even to produce the same amount of power. But Juliet Lima's No. 1 engine, on its left side, was producing so little power -- possibly because by this time the welded can had cracked again -- that the throttle for that engine had to be pushed way ahead of the other. &quot;About 1 1/2 to 2 inches throttle stagger,&quot; the pilot reported.    The next day, Aug. 21, Juliet Lima flew from Manchester to Barcelona and back. On arrival in Manchester, the pilot filed the most ominous report of all: Instead of normal three-second acceleration, &quot;No. 1 eng does not accelerate for 5 or 6 secs,&quot; he noted. &quot;Auto throttle drops out due to amount of stagger.&quot; (This meant that throttle stagger had become so great that the automatic throttle control couldn't function and kicked off.) Finally, the pilot reported: &quot;In the air No. 1 eng is slower than No. 2 as well.&quot;    One U.S. jet-engine expert comments: &quot;No. 1 was a very sick engine trying to tell us something.&quot;    At this point, two British Airways mechanics at Manchester began working on Juliet Lima. They concluded that fuel controls were to blame. So they merely cleaned one fuel-control device and adjusted another, increasing fuel flow. Now No. 1 engine seemed -- to them -- to be in working order.    In increasing the fuel flow, however, the mechanics had turned an adjustment screw one full turn. This might seem minor, but the screw is so sensitive that it makes 32 clicks during each full turn. The Boeing 737 manual permits only eight clicks for adjustments, and then only in connection with more thorough testing than was done at Manchester. Some airline-industry engineers suggest that the need for such a big adjustment should have alerted the mechanics to something seriously wrong. British Airways says the mechanics merely restored normal fuel flow in No. 1 engine, making it equal to No. 2.    The mechanics hadn't been told of Pratt's warnings and had never before performed the sort of fuel adjustment they did that day, according to testimony at the Manchester inquest. And they didn't check the burner cans, which would have required a time-consuming partial dismantling of the engine. But they did schedule the jet for a more thorough checkup later.    The night of Aug. 21-22, Juliet Lima flew from Manchester to Athens and back, seemingly operating normally. Shortly after 7 a.m. on Aug. 22, Juliet Lima taxied to the runway bound for Corfu. With co-pilot Brian Love at the controls, the jet began its final takeoff roll.    Within 32 seconds, the jet was speeding down the runway at 123 knots (about 142 miles per hour). At that point, the two pilots heard a bang on the left side. As it was later determined, the burner can on No. 1 engine had split partly along the old welded crack. Part of the can shot upward through the wing, blasting an 8-inch hole in the fuel tank. Fuel gushed onto the hot engine, igniting instantly.    Capt. Terrington ordered co-pilot Love to stop and radioed the control tower: &quot;28 Mike, we're just abandoning takeoff. It's . . . {fire-warning bell goes off in cockpit} . . . erm . . . looks as if we've got fire on No. 1.&quot; The shuddering jet slowed and turned onto a taxiway, but in such a way that the wind blew the fire from the left wing onto the fuselage.    &quot;Oh my God, the plane's on fire,&quot; a woman passenger screamed. In seconds, flames roared across the cabin ceiling and black smoke filled the plane. Some emergency exits were blocked by fire. The corridor, according to passenger Paul Speed, was soon &quot;tangled&quot; with bodies.    Immediately after the accident, British Airways began checking its other jets for cracks. It found cracks more than 2 inches long in 36 engines, all of which it removed from planes. Even after spare engines were installed, 13 jets were grounded.    In a wave of similar inspections around the world, several other carriers found long cracks. Worse yet, an FAA investigation in the U.S. found eight instances over the past six years in which a can had separated and the flame had burned through the engine's outer casing. Piedmont, which criticized British Airways, had one burn-through, as did Frontier Airlines and Continental. Western had two and Eastern Airlines three. Any one of these might have resulted in an accident.    Alarmed by the burn-throughs, the FAA issued new rules requiring airlines to conduct frequent inspections of burner cans. The agency also prohibited the welding of can cracks longer than 3 inches. British Airways initiated an even tougher policy: Cracked cans aren't welded; they are replaced. The airline also pioneered new inspection techniques to detect cracks quickly, without dismantling the engine.    In testimony at the Manchester inquiry, Donald Craig, British Airways' chief engineer for technical and quality services, argued that his airline, in buying 737s, had ordered an extra-durable burner can and thus didn't think Pratt's warnings applied to its engines. That was why the mechanics weren't informed of the warnings, he said.    But Pratt's warnings had covered all JT8D engines. And critics say the airline knew it had cracking problems with its burner cans because it was welding cracks.    Mr. Craig also maintained that Juliet Lima's slow acceleration was a result of fuel-control problems. He suggested that the burner can separated only on the last takeoff roll. Wear on the can, however, indicates that it may have cracked, separated and moved about earlier, causing the slow acceleration. Exactly when the can separated and what really caused the slow acceleration may never be determined.    There is no doubt that the airline, to some extent, was a victim of misfortune. When part of the burner can shot out of the engine, it just happened to hit a small fuel access panel on the 737's wing, which was made of a more brittle metal than the rest of the wing. The shattering of this small panel allowed fuel to escape, starting the fire. As a result of the accident, the FAA is proposing a rule requiring replacement of the access panel with tougher metal. </TEXT></DOC>