<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880406-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis Beats Jackson, Gore In Wisconsin --- Gain in Blue-Collar Support Is Cited for Governor; No Rebound for Simon </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers and Rich Jaroslovsky (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis decisively won the Wisconsin Democratic primary, capturing a long-sought victory in the industrial Midwest and blunting the wave of emotion and an unparalleled white vote for the Rev. Jesse Jackson.    With two-thirds of the vote in, Mr. Dukakis led with 47%, while Mr. Jackson was getting 29% and Tennessee's Sen. Albert Gore trailed with 17%. For Illinois Sen. Paul Simon, who got only 5% of the vote, Wisconsin squelched the faint hopes of salvaging his campaign.    Late-breaking support that began last weekend helped propel Mr. Dukakis over his rivals. According to NBC News estimates, Mr. Dukakis won more than half of the 81 delegates at stake in Wisconsin yesterday. He carried eight of the state's nine congressional districts, while Mr. Jackson won the other one. Mr. Jackson won about one-third of the delegates and Mr. Gore won the remainder.    Mr. Dukakis's triumph follows a narrow win Monday in the Colorado Democratic caucuses. Beginning in Connecticut last week, he has put together a string of victories that re-establish his lead -- however fragile -- in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. He gained an edge going into the New York primary April 19, and he successfully competed for the blue-collar vote that eluded him in his bitter loss to Mr. Jackson last month in Michigan.    &quot;Wisconsin is a very strong affirmation of our candidacy when it was being questioned from many sides,&quot; said Dukakis pollster Thomas Kiley.    Mr. Dukakis was strong across the board in this predominantly white state, according to an NBC News exit poll. He decisively led among both moderate and conservative voters, and tied Mr. Jackson among liberals; he led among white-collar and professional workers as well as blue-collar workers; he led among voters in union and nonunion households.    And despite the suggestion of Republican Gov. Tommy Thompson that GOP voters might cross over and vote for Mr. Jackson to help muddy the Democratic waters, NBC found that Mr. Dukakis won the vote of almost half the Republicans who did cross over. Mr. Jackson won the vote of one in five such voters.    Gov. Dukakis last night declared that his victory spanned &quot;people all over Wisconsin.&quot; At a Manhattan news conference, he said he thought that many voters were looking for &quot;the strongest nominee to lead our party.&quot; As before, he said he would like the endorsement of New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, but indicated he isn't counting on it.    Last night, Mr. Jackson congratulated Mr. Dukakis and praised him for a &quot;positive&quot; campaign in Wisconsin, but insisted that he still has a real chance to win the New York contest, where 255 delegates are at stake.    Mr. Dukakis's victory margin represents a serious setback for Mr. Jackson, but going into New York, the former civil-rights leader remains a major contender. The NBC News exit poll indicated that he captured at least one-quarter of the white vote in the Wisconsin, and in New York he will be able to combine this appeal with a black base of support that has represented about 25% of the Democratic vote in past years.    By these calculations, Rev. Jackson has the potential to win as much as 40% of the vote in what will be a three-man contest in New York. Though most analysts doubt whether he will duplicate his Wisconsin showing among whites, his rival, Gov. Dukakis, must worry that his own vote will be pared by an aggressive challenge from Sen. Gore.    The Tennessean has demonstrated more success in puncturing his rivals than in promoting himself. Wisconsin is his strongest showing since Super Tuesday a month ago, but unless he gets at least 20% of the vote in New York, his campaign is doomed and he will lose federal matching funds.    In high-profile appearances, Mr. Gore has begun to court New York's substantial Jewish vote, and new ads filmed before a Vietnam memorial in the city set the groundwork for what are likely to be attacks on Gov. Dukakis's lack of experience in foreign affairs. &quot;It isn't going to be a cutesy-pie campaign,&quot; said David Garth, the New York consultant who will guide an estimated $1 million media investment. &quot;We're going to go very strong on foreign policy.&quot;    The governor is scheduled to give a foreign-policy address Friday encompassing his views on U.S.-Soviet relations. But together with Mr. Jackson, his economic message has effectively shut Mr. Gore out of the blue-collar vote in the North. The NBC News poll indicates that the two leaders captured almost four-fifths of the white blue-collar vote. Mr. Jackson, with 32% of these voters, far surpassed Sen. Gore.    Gov. Dukakis's showing among blue-collar voters appeared to be his strongest to date outside of New England, and he is relying on his domestic agenda of jobs and economic development to hold this base in New York. The NBC survey found that two-thirds of Wisconsin's Democratic voters think Mr. Dukakis will win the party's presidential nomination, although as many as four in 10 of his own supporters told NBC that they wished someone else was running.    When asked how much each candidate cares about people like them, more Wisconsin voters favored Mr. Jackson than the governor, and these findings underscore Mr. Dukakis's continued vulnerability in the weeks ahead.    &quot;They (Dukakis supporters) have built a good track, but the engine is made of glass,&quot; said Edward Reilly, a Democratic strategist and former pollster to Rep. Richard Gephardt's presidential campaign. &quot;Each week is crucial to them. No one is going to say this is the beginning of the end.&quot;    The NBC exit polls showed that Mr. Dukakis won about half of the voters who made up their minds in the last days of the campaign, while Mr. Jackson won only about one in four of such voters. This suggests that some voters who might have been considering casting their ballots for Mr. Jackson as a symbolic gesture had second thoughts when confronted with the reality that they were voting for a potential nominee.    Though overshadowed by the Democratic contest, the Republican primary offered some insight into GOP views of their almost-certain nominee, Vice President George Bush, who picked up more than 80% of GOP voters in Wisconsin. According to the NBC survey, only about half the people who voted for the vice president support him strongly. Moreover, while about half the Republicans think Mr. Bush would be as strong a leader as Ronald Reagan, the number of those saying he wouldn't be as strong was almost twice as large as those saying he would be stronger.    The Wisconsin voting came as Colorado Democrats were still counting the results of Monday's caucuses, in which Gov. Dukakis won a narrow victory over Mr. Jackson. With most of the precincts reported last night, the two men were capturing more than 80% of the vote and stood to shut out Sen. Gore from gaining any of the 45 delegates at stake.    Estimates indicate that Mr. Jackson could win 17 delegates -- compared with 21 for Gov. Dukakis -- in the state convention next month. However, Mr. Jackson was irritated with the slowness of the count, which was overseen by a state party apparatus led by Dukakis supporter Buie Seawell.    Mr. Seawell, the Colorado Democratic chairman, denied any political mischief. Mr. Jackson told reporters that 30 of the more than 2,700 caucus sites had been changed without the knowledge of his campaign and suggested the slow count was designed to obscure his showing.    &quot;Justice has been obstructed,&quot; said Mr. Jackson in a dispute that, while overshadowed by Wisconsin results, was one of the bitterest to date for his campaign. </TEXT></DOC>