<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871222-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SEARCH TEAMS FAILED to find any of the missing from a Philippine shipwreck.    Authorities in Manila said about 1,500 people were presumed drowned after a passenger ship collided with an oil tanker and burst into flames. Both vessels sank in a busy shipping channel off Mindoro Island. Rescue crews said only 26 people were plucked from the waters late Sunday night immediately after the collision, considered one of the century's worst maritime accidents. The inter-island ship was carrying Christmas travelers bound for Manila from the islands of Samar and Leyte.    The U.S. Embassy said there wasn't an indication that any Americans were on board the passenger ship, which some survivors said was overcrowded.    ---   FIGHTING PERSISTED between Nicaraguan troops and Contra rebels.    As Sandinista and rebel represenatives met in the Dominican Republic for cease-fire talks, battles raged in eastern and central Nicaragua. A Defense Ministry spokesman said 23 soldiers and 24 insurgents were killed, and at least 53 civilians were wounded. The Defense Ministry also said that a ground-to-air missile fired by the Contras hit a civilian cargo plane, wounding four crew members. The Aeronica plane, flying to Managua from Panama, made an emergency landing in Costa Rica.    Congressional negotiators reached a compromise to keep U.S. aid flowing to the Contras, but it was conditioned on a review of regional peace efforts.    ---   Israeli soldiers killed three Palestinians and wounded at least 26 others in the West Bank as Arabs heeded a general-strike call. Riots and confrontation spread to Arab areas of Israel, with violence reported in Nazareth and a Tel Aviv suburb. In Bethlehem, the town's mayor canceled some seasonal events because of the protests.    Shiite Moslem guerrillas stormed positions of an Israeli-backed militia in southern Lebanon in an apparent show of support for Palestinians in Israeli-occupied territories. Lebanese police and hospital sources said at least 12 people were killed and 15 others wounded in the daylong fighting.    ---   Three white teen-agers were convicted by a New York City jury of manslaughter in the racially motivated death of a black man a year ago in the Howard Beach section of the borough of Queens. Two of the three were acquitted of murder charges. A fourth defendant was cleared completely.    Hundreds of demonstrators defied a court order and blocked the Brooklyn Bridge and disrupted New York City subway service in a rush hour protest against racial violence. There were dozens of arrests, police said.    ---   The Senate approved a $30.3 billion housing measure. The bill, the first major housing legislation in seven years, was sent to the House for a vote.    ---   South Korea's government vowed to crack down on critics alleging that Roh's victory in last week's presidential election was due to fraud, as opposition candidates Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam conceded in public that their rivalry helped Roh win. In Kwangju, dissident students firebombed the offices of a U.S. agency.    ---   Iran and Iraq reported fighting on the south-central Persian Gulf war front. Tehran said its Revolutionary Guards retook a strip of Iranian territory and killed or wounded about 1,000 Iraqis. Baghdad, however, said the attack was repulsed and more than 1,200 Iranians were killed. Neither side's claims could be confirmed.    ---   The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz TM-4 capsule into orbit, carrying three cosmonauts to the Mir space station to relieve a two-man team that has been in space for months. The spacecraft is to link with Mir tomorrow, and the five cosmonauts are to work together for about five days.    Morton Thiokol said the failure of ground equipment caused the scrub of a weekend test-firing of the redesigned booster rocket for the space shuttle. The test has been tentatively rescheduled for tomorrow.    ---   A State Department official said the U.S. won't commit itself to ending military aid to Afghanistan until it has the &quot;full details&quot; of a Soviet troop withdrawal from the country. Undersecretary of State Armacost made the comments in an appraisal of the war between Kabul and Moslem rebels as it entered its eighth year.    ---   A helicopter crashed and burned on the deck of an offshore oil rig in the Gulf of Mexico, killing 14 of the 15 people aboard, including the aircraft's two crew members. The helicopter was carrying oil workers to begin a Christmas week work-turn on the Penrod Drilling Co. rig off Louisiana.    ---   A U.S. appeals court in Virginia upheld the espionage and related convictions of former National Security Council worker Ronald Pelton. He was convicted in Baltimore in June 1986 of selling electronic eavesdropping secrets to Moscow. Pelton was sentenced to three life terms plus 10 years.    ---   Sweden has decided to sink foreign submarines violating its territorial waters, rather than attempt to force the vessels to the surface. The policy was announced Sunday by Social Democratic Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson. Stockholm has blamed past incursions on the Soviet Union.    ---   Czechoslovakia's union chief warned of worker discontent and urged a crackdown on corruption. The trade union leader's comments followed the passage of a resoluton by the party's Central Commitee setting a timetable for some economic changes. </TEXT></DOC>