<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880128-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Don't Be Misled by Africa </HL><AUTHOR> Max Singer </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   People look at Africa and get discouraged about the prospects for economic development. This reaction is a triple error -- although it is true that a number of African countries are poorer than they were 20 years ago, and some like Nigeria and Ethiopia are likely to have more than six times as many people as they do now before their population stops growing.    First, Africa constitutes only 11% of the world's population. Looking at Africa doesn't give much insight into the prospects for the &quot;Third World,&quot; most of which is in Asia. India alone has almost 50% more people than all of Africa.    Second, Africa is not all the same. Some black African countries, such as Kenya and Malawi, have been developing quite nicely. The key to understanding African development is to not lump everybody together by looking at averages or totals. Look separately at those who are doing well and those who are doing poorly. Differences shed light. But since talking about differences causes controversy, many writers take the easy way out and use averages.    Third, the really interesting question is why so much attention is focused on the small part of the not-yet-developed world that is most discouraging, rather than on the much larger part that is much more encouraging. The perverse proclivities of those who influence our perception of economic development may do more to shape the world than African resistance to development.    To get perspective, let's say that a society is &quot;wealthy&quot; if it has enough resources to provide decent living standards and a high school education to most of its citizens -- a test that no country could pass in 1900. Today one-quarter of the people of the world live in countries that have crossed that threshold.    When China and India have multiplied their per-capita income by about five times -- to the level where Greece is today -- more than three-quarters of all people will be living in wealthy countries. At that point we can say that the world as a whole will have crossed the threshold to being &quot;wealthy.&quot; If the experience of the last generation is any guide, this is likely to happen less than 100 years from now. But even if it takes an additional century, human life on Earth will still have been transformed in what historically is the blink of an eye.    Economic development is best understood as a community learning process. The reason we in America are rich today, and the people who lived here when Abraham Lincoln was a boy were poor, is not that as individuals we are smarter or work harder. We are rich because we are productive, and we are productive because our society has learned what is needed to make a modern economy work. (Of course, &quot;learning&quot; is a metaphor for many different kinds of change.)    The accumulation of capital and the invention of new technology were also essential to our growth. But most of the technology we struggled to create is now available to the whole world. For that technology to do others any good, people have to learn how to use it, but they don't have to invent it.    When almost all other societies learn how to become productive, can most of Africa fail to learn? There is no way to know. But as the rest of the world becomes wealthy, learning becomes easier and easier. Differences in economic level always provide opportunities for profitable trade and investment with the countries that are far behind. And trade and investment are important vehicles for automatic teaching and learning. As wealth spreads and travel becomes cheaper, the ideas and feel of the modern ways of working become pervasive, and it gets to be hard to avoid picking them up.    People work for lower pay in less developed countries, and entrepreneurs are always inventing new ways to incorporate the labor of people in poor countries into products that can be sold in richer countries. And as the poorer countries advance, more and more of the labor-saving products of the advanced countries become affordable. The poor nation moves first to metal-tipped plows on the way to tractors and computers.    Of course, the cultural and psychological characteristics that stand in the way of economic development in many African countries are deeply rooted and hard to change by direct action. But the changes of policy likely to be sufficient to start these countries on the path to economic transformation are comparatively straightforward and well-tried.    The engine of growth will start if farmers are allowed to farm as they think best and to sell their crops at unregulated prices, and if the government does not interfere with those who want to sell services to farmers. These few simple policies -- with one or two related measures -- can make all the difference. None are followed in those African countries that are the source of most American discouragement about African development.    Why should American commentators -- and even some development &quot;experts&quot; -- focus so much on Africa when they look at the prospects for the Third World? Of course, some African countries now look hopeless -- with incompetent leaders whose modern appetites are combined with primitive practices and attitudes. But why focus on the hardest cases? It isn't as if there's a need to overcome rampant optimism. Excessive attention to the difficulties of African development is part of a pattern of focusing on sick trees and ignoring the healthy forest.    Most people don't realize that the world will be going from one-quarter wealthy to three-quarters wealthy in only a century or so. They are not helped to appreciate this big fact by focusing attention on the parts of Africa likely to take longer.    ---   Mr. Singer's book &quot;Passage to a Human World: The Dynamics of Creating Global Wealth&quot; has just been published by the Hudson Institute. </TEXT></DOC>