<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Fraud Trial of Banker Could Set StageFor Spate of Texas Illegal-Lending Cases---By Leonard M. ApcarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> LAFAYETTE, La.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The trial has droned on for more than three weeks to a mostly empty courtroom here. But the verdict that may come in the next few days is certain to grab immediately the attention of bankers and prosecutors in Texas and Washington.    The chief defendant on trial for bank fraud, robbery and conspiracy is Herman K. Beebe Sr., a small-town banker who has been lending money for a long time in Texas and Louisiana, and has drawn the attention of federal bank regulators and law-enforcement officials. Over the years, Mr. Beebe, his family or his Shreveport-based company have owned some 50 financial institutions, including several that have failed. Convicted once, in Shreveport federal court in 1985 for loan fraud, this is Mr. Beebe's third trip to the defendant's table in criminal court.    The affable, 60-year-old Mr. Beebe is accused by federal prosecutors of conspiring to defraud 16 banks and Sandamp;Ls in four states in transactions involving some $30 million.    Texas is now the focus for the nation's biggest bank-fraud investigation, and Mr. Beebe's trial here is being viewed by federal banking and thrift industry regulators as a dress rehearsal for other criminal cases, about allegedly fraudulent lending practices, which they expect to develop in Texas.    Mr. Beebe has allegedly been a behind-the-scenes financier for some of the controversial real estate developers who jumped into the savings and loan business in Texas. Consequently, Mr. Beebe or his company, AMI Inc., a banking, insurance, lodging and nursing-home concern, has owned stock in some of the most recent Sandamp;L busts in Texas.    Some of the owners of those institutions have been accused of fraud, like Mr. Beebe, and some have been convicted.    The Beebe case &quot;is the kind of case we have seen so many times in the referrals we are making in Texas&quot; to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, says Rosemary Stewart, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board's enforcement director.    Indeed, the Beebe case is a &quot;must-win&quot; for both sides. The government believes that a conviction will prominently display its new-found determination to stamp out what regulators say is a growing epidemic of bank fraud, especially in the Southwest. And of course Mr. Beebe, who is currently on probation from a prior conviction, could go to prison if he is found guilty.    As previously reported, some 400 Texas Sandamp;L owners, managers and borrowers -- including Mr. Beebe and some of his associates -- are under investigation. Federal officials believe that about 20 Texas thrifts have made billions of dollars in high-risk, &quot;back-scratching&quot; loans to each other, mostly to inflate the profits of their Sandamp;Ls and finance the real estate and business ventures of friends of the Sandamp;L operators.    The theme of allegedly self-dealing bankers echoes through the Beebe case, which was moved here from Shreveport to escape pretrial publicity. Prosecutors said in court that the $30 million transactions in the Beebe case were used to help Richard Wolfe, a major horse farmer and an alleged associate of Mr. Beebe's, who desperately needed cash to pay off some loans.    Some of the loans came from banks and Sandamp;Ls in which Mr. Beebe, his company or his family owned stock, and almost half of the funds came from some Texas institutions whose ownership Mr. Beebe had helped finance, prosecutors said in court. At some of the banks, former Beebe employees were in charge.    Prosecutors also said in court that Messrs. Beebe and Wolfe didn't tell the banks and thrifts from which they got the loans that they planned jointly to launch a separate business selling racehorse tax shelters, in which they hoped to reap a $10 million profit.    Mr. Wolfe, who will be tried separately, never even visited some of the banks, prosecutors said in court. But he got the money he needed quickly. Dale Anderson, a close associate of Mr. Beebe who testified against him this week at the trial, said in court that Mr. Wolfe needed money &quot;every minute.&quot; Mr. Anderson was convicted on loan-fraud charges with Mr. Beebe in 1985 and is also on probation.    On one day, for example, Messrs. Beebe and Wolfe hopped on Mr. Beebe's private plane and dropped in at two small Louisiana banks, including one bank where Mr. Anderson was about to be installed as chairman. In hours, Mr. Wolfe got about $1.5 million from the two banks, prosecutors said in court.    Of course, Mr. Wolfe had to return Mr. Beebe's favor, prosecutors said in court. Mr. Wolfe bought from the two banks bad loans, such as a white-elephant office building in Baton Rouge on the books at one of the banks. At this DeRidder, La., bank, Mr. Beebe had met with the bank's board to discuss a capital infusion only a month before, an employee at the bank testified.    Mr. Wolfe has denied the government's bank-fraud charges. Neither he nor his lawyers could be reached for comment yesterday.    Officials at the two banks cited as giving Mr. Wolfe loans couldn't be reached for comment.    Mr. Beebe has pleaded not guilty, and Mr. Beebe's lawyer, Gerry Spence of Jackson Hole, Wyo., doesn't plan to call any witnesses in Mr. Beebe's defense.    But he has repeatedly told the court, through questioning of government witnesses and in a 2 1/2-hour opening statement, that there wasn't anything irregular about the way the loans to Mr. Wolfe were made. And, he says, Mr. Beebe promised that if Mr. Wolfe defaulted, Mr. Beebe would make good on the loans. (He didn't, but not for criminal reasons, Mr. Spence says.)    More important, Mr. Spence denies the government's allegation that Mr. Beebe became a partner with Mr. Wolfe in a tax-shelter scheme.    Finally, Mr. Spence adds, bank &quot;ownership is immaterial.&quot; Neither Mr. Beebe nor an entity he controlled had a majority stake in any of the institutions that made the loans, he says. Mr. Spence adds, &quot;the only conspiring I think you'll find in this case was the conspiracy to destroy Mr. Beebe.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>