<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880606-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: Attitudes Harden Before Arteries When Hiring the Elderly </HL><AUTHOR> Max Bader </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> FIN </IN><TEXT>   Americans are retiring earlier. According to figures reported in this newspaper, in 1986, only 16% of all males continued to work beyond age 65 vs. 22% a decade earlier. One-third of all males aged 55-64 no longer work. Departure from the labor force in large part has been spurred by more generous pension plans. Those pensions, when combined with Social Security and personal retirement funds, make retirement at age 62 or earlier much easier. Thus, only 3% of employees of large firms with pension plans worked beyond age 65 in 1986, and, the proportion working until age 65 fell to 5% from 19% in 1978.    Most people retire early of their own volition rather than due to health or other involuntary reasons. Had they wished, most were physically and intellectually able to continue at their last job or work elsewhere. However, their decision to retire should not be interpreted to mean that older Americans do not wish to work. Indeed, most people like to work, if the atmosphere and surroundings are generally pleasant, something about the job is interesting, and the co-workers are congenial.    In coming decades, the proportion of working Americans available to support retired senior citizens will fall to the lowest ratio ever -- about two for every retiree -- unless more older persons can be persuaded to stay in the labor force. The reasons for this, besides earlier retirement of American workers, include an extended life expectancy, a lower birth rate during the 1970s and 1980s, lower immigration (due to the new immigration laws), and the AIDS epidemic. The AIDS epidemic is taking its toll mainly among people at their prime productive ages and, therefore, may eventually have same effect as a major military conflict such as the Vietnam or Korean wars.    The consensus is rapidly developing that more than automation is needed to fill the gap between the work that must be done and the number of younger employees available to do it. This is already becoming apparent when one visits a fastfood restaurant. Not only are youth and older people working together, but there are advertisements for employees to fill vacancies at wages well above the minimum wage. That is a clear sign that we will need to retain many of the more productive, older people in the labor force to keep the economy functioning properly.    Retention of older employees in the labor force will require some changes in public and employer attitudes, policies and programs. In particular, many employers will have to stop their discrimination against older workers and overcome their fears that they are more expensive to employ and more difficult to deal with than younger ones.    The following points must be recognized if the labor-force problem is to be solved satisfactorily:   --Healthy older workers do not necessarily consume more employer resources than younger employees. Their fringe-benefit requirements are different. Their families are grown, and they have the security of retirement income and Medicare if they can no longer work. They have much less need for disability insurance, life insurance, dental and even medical insurance. Also, those who are over 65, or have more than 30 years of service to their employer, stand to gain less from the employer's retirement plan, thus costing the employer little.    --Use of sick leave is related more to a person's lifetime pattern of sick leave use than to illness or age. Older workers are as reliable as anyone else. Moreover, aging and disability, through the process of natural selection, tend to weed out the less fit and less reliable people from the work force before retirement age; it is the healthier, more fit, more intelligent employees who survive in the greatest proportions until retirement age and beyond. Those persons who would choose to continue working will have half as much need for health-care services as those who drop out. The study of aspirin's effect on heart-attack prevention among physicians showed this dramatically: The New England Journal of Medicine reported that morbidity and mortality rates for both experimental and control groups were much lower than expected.    --The vast majority of older persons retain their mental faculties well beyond traditional retirement age and are perfectly capable of learning new skills when provided with the opportunity. Most like such a challenge. Moreover, the healthier older persons are those who will keep working, and they are very likely to be mentally alert and more youthful in outlook.    --Older persons are not necessarily more rigid in their thinking than younger persons, although their past experiences may cause them to be more cautious and more willing to state objections to a proposed course of action, both of which are often virtues. In general, flexibility is a personality characteristic that develops early in life and tends to carry through.    --Older employees do not like limits placed upon their ability to advance in their careers any more than younger employees. They want the opportunity to advance, if they are qualified and deserving. Employers should appreciate that people who reach age 60 often have the potential for at least 10 to 15 very productive years left, if provided with opportunities to continue their development. That is long enough to use merit as the basis for advancement. It is noteworthy that many older workers may pass up the opportunity for advancement when offered, and allow younger, qualified employees to pass them on the career ladder due to altruistic and/or personal reasons.    The potential for high performance, once thought to be very exceptional and limited to certain specially endowed members of society, may well be the rule for those who remain healthy and are given encouragement plus modest aids to alleviate minor handicaps with vision, hearing, mobility, etc. It is now time for our society to more adequately recognize the enormous talent pool that exists among older Americans and begin to take much larger steps to make better use of it for society's betterment.    ---   Dr. Bader is a Seattle-based medical consultant in preventive medicine. </TEXT></DOC>