<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880216-0079 </DOCNO><HL> A Donkey Without Teeth Again in '88? </HL><AUTHOR> Jay Winik </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   At a time when the Republican Party has demonstrated more than its share of disarray in its conduct of foreign policy, it's by no means clear the Democrats can prove to be more suitable custodians of the nation's security.    Democrats have a real shot at the presidency this time around. But beneath what has been mostly moderate campaign rhetoric on foreign policy lie the neo-isolationism and weakness that have characterized the nominees since 1972. Testimony to this is the very inability of the candidates to come to grips as to when, if ever, they would be prepared to use force.    It was not always this way. In the wake of World War II, it was the Democrats who committed the U.S. to the role of a world superpower, containing Soviet communism. To this day, more conservative Democrats recall that John F. Kennedy, in language that was to be echoed by Ronald Reagan, wrote that &quot;we are the watchmen on the walls of world freedom.&quot;    Those very same Democrats, whose views are now articulated by such an organization as the broadly based Democratic Leadership Council, continue to look for signs that the party will reclaim its heritage of strength and internationalism. After being drubbed four out of the last five elections, they say, the party should field a candidate more in touch with conservative Democrats in the South and the West, who since 1972 have crossed over to elect Republican presidents.    Though Democratic voters on specific issues may support a nuclear freeze or oppose Contra aid, overall they want leaders who will ensure America's prominence in world affairs and face up to the reality of the struggle between liberal democracy and Soviet totalitarianism. Polls continue to demonstrate that more than half the party's electorate fears aggression by Moscow around the world.    It's no accident, then, that Sen. Albert Gore has acknowledged this profound weakness on the part of the Democrats, prompting him to accuse his party of embracing a foreign policy of &quot;retreat, complacency and doubt.&quot; Sen. Gore himself is going to great pains to demonstrate that he is no dove on national security. In turn, barring only Jesse Jackson (who has decidedly staked out the ground of the radical left), the rest of the candidates claim only shades of difference between theirs and Sen. Gore's security policies. In short, all but one of the candidates are at least rhetorically trying to show that they are not soft on defense.    A closer examination, however, demonstrates that this campaign rhetoric of firmness is belied by reality. Consider two examples. All the candidates are depicting themselves as can-do leaders able to negotiate &quot;real arms control&quot; with Mikhail Gorbachev. Yet they all reactively cling to the so-called &quot;narrow interpretation&quot; of the ABM treaty and the unratified limits of the SALT II treaty; not one of the lot envisages any role for SDI, either in strengthening deterrence or in playing a role in U.S.-Soviet negotiations. Once again, they are showing their tendency to give away unilaterally what properly should be bargained with the Soviets, a habit that is further compounded by the Democratic Congress's attempts to legislate arms control through backdoor appropriations. This is precisely the wrong lesson to be derived from President Reagan's success in negotiating the INF treaty, the only nuclear-arms-reduction pact to be completed since the atomic era dawned.    Consider a second example. All the candidates have decried what they refer to as this administration's obsession with the Sandinistas. However, their alternative policies would have the U.S. subordinate its national-security interest to an erroneous interpretation of international law and relinquish its leadership role to the bromide of multilateral diplomacy. Acknowledging the Sandinistas to be Marxists, they continue to treat them as misguided nationalists. They ignore the refusal ever to give up real power. They also cast a blind eye to the overwhelming evidence of the Sandinista commitment to spread Marxism-Leninism throughout the hemisphere. They have retreated to saying, &quot;Give peace a chance&quot; via the Arias plan.    The Democratic contenders are not pledging to protect the surrounding democracies with indigenous or U.S. forces that could attack the Sandinistas, even though this would be fully justified under international law in the unlikely event of outright Nicaraguan aggression or the more likely case of subversion. Their policy amounts at best to a form of containment calling to mind the ill-fated Paris peace accords.    Perhaps Sen. Fritz Hollings characterized his party's views best when on the day of his house's Contra vote he said of fellow Democrats: &quot;They are not committed to fighting for anything. They are only willing to posture and talk.&quot;    In a sense, as Mr. Hollings's unsuccessful 1984 bid for the presidency reminds us, the route to the White House for Democrats has been mine-strewn for a more hawkish contender. To a degree that this year's &quot;Super Tuesday&quot; in the South will only partially attentuate, the primary schedule and limits on campaign donations and spending enhance the sway of left-oriented activists over the nomination.    Another part of the problem is that the Democrats suffer from a sheer lack of experience in the White House. They've had responsibility for executing foreign policy only four of the past 20 years. Theirs has been the admittedly easier task of reacting to White House policy from the less accountable position of the legislative branch. And in Congress, it is no secret that the House Democratic leadership remains wedded to the shibboleths of the left. The &quot;defense Democrats&quot; who have favored such policies as aid to the Contras or support for the MX missile are reminded in subtle and not so subtle ways by the leadership that their views carry the risk of party exile or irrelevancy.    This has led to an effective transformation of the party, with the views of the left slowly but inexorably institutionalized.    Finally, there is the spectre of the Carter presidency. Perhaps more than anything else, it symbolizes the weakness that has come to characterize Democrats on foreign policy. In four short years, the Democrats presided over a slew of foreign-policy disasters, from the fall of Nicaragua and Iran, to the destabilizing Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, to the failed SALT II treaty. To this very day, these events have left us with a geopolitical legacy that threatens U.S. interests in our own hemisphere and international stability in the Gulf and beyond.    The Carter administration vacillated between the conflicting world views of the dominant dovish set led by Secretary of State Cyrus Vance and the tougher-minded clique of National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski. Only when global events showed the folly of Mr. Vance and his crowd did the president take his hawkish advisers more seriously, by which time it was too little, too late. A future Democratic administration stands to lurch similarly between its different wings, and in all likelihood gravitate even further to the left than did Mr. Carter.    It's little wonder, then, that more conservative Democrats, deeply loyal to their party on domestic and cultural issues, harbor such despair about what a Democratic administration might look like. And no one, including Republicans, should rejoice at this seemingly irreversible slide to the left. If this trend continues in the post-Reagan era, the two parties will be as divided as ever about America's role in the world. At a time when the consensus for increased military budgets has reached an end, the effect will be greater paralysis and timidity in the execution of our security policy, and a corresponding diminution of U.S. influence internationally.    At a minimum, the task for the Democratic candidates is clear. First, they at least need to signal to the American people that they will not return to the Carter ways or yield to those of the House leadership. Second, they should provide a leading role for thoughtful moderates such as Charles Robb in the development of the party's platform. Third, they have to be willing to repudiate the radical views of Jesse Jackson. And fourth, they should explain how on issues such as regional conflicts and the future of deterrence they and the Republicans can agree as a sign of their seriousness in rebuilding a bipartisan foreign policy. Taken together, these actions could go a long way toward reassuring disaffected voters and elites alike.    But if the candidates cannot decidedly address these issues, or feel that they need not, the time has finally come for conservative Democrats to do more than go through their quadrennial ritual of regret over a squandered opportunity to regain the White House. They must insist on radical reforms of a primary election system, campaign-finance rules and House Caucus power that place presidential aspirants and emerging leaders at the mercy of the entrenched left rather than at home with a true grass-roots constituency.    ---   Mr. Winik, until recently a House Armed Services Committee aide to Rep. Les Aspin, wrote the Democratic Party's 1986 mid-term plank on foreign policy. He is a visiting fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. </TEXT></DOC>