<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880914-0063 </DOCNO><HL> High-Tech War: Nine Firms That Make Personal Computers Gang Up Against IBM --- They Seek to Set the Standard For the Machine's Design; Big Blue Derides Move --- Probable Chaos for Customers </HL><AUTHOR> Paul B. Carroll and Michael W. Miller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> IBM CPQ ASTA HWP NIPNY TAN WYS INTC MSFT </CO><IN> EDP </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Darts flew, contradictions swirled and volleys of high-tech hyperbole arched across midtown. It was the revolt of the clones.    Nine big personal-computer makers are doing what computer companies have dreamed of doing for decades: ganging up on International Business Machines Corp. They are joining forces in an audacious attempt to wrest away from IBM the power of setting the standard for how personal computers are designed, and they seem to have a chance of succeeding.    Their announcement here yesterday marked one of the most chaotic and most important days in the industry's recent history. In a hotel ballroom in Times Square, the top officials of virtually every big player in the $40 billion-a-year personal-computer industry gathered to cheer the clones on. The most glaring exception -- IBM -- was holding its own press conference across town in its Madison Avenue skyscraper. The IBM meeting, called to unveil a string of new PC products, quickly turned into a forum for Big Blue executives to deride the clones' plan -- and to warn that it might involve infringing on IBM patents.    The two camps agree that the new war could throw customers into confusion and thus damp all the companies' sales. The confusion is likely to become especially acute because the war turns on arcane technical questions that most PC users aren't even aware of.    Within the industry, however, those questions are almost a matter of theology. When IBM introduced its first PC in 1981, the industry giant claimed for itself the power to decide what business PCs should look like. Most of the industry has dutifully followed with IBM clones ever since.    Early last year, IBM set off in a new direction, with its PS/2 family. But yesterday, the IBM-compatible industry not only declined to follow the PS/2, but also stood together and proposed its own direction for the PC design of the future.    The battleground selected by the Gang of Nine -- the electronic conduit that moves data from one part of a PC to another -- is esoteric but charged with both symbolic and technical importance. For 16 months, IBM has been proclaiming that future PCs will rely on a conduit of its own design called the Micro Channel. But the nine companies, at the press conference here yesterday, unveiled a plan to throw their weight behind a rival conduit, the Extended Industry Standard Architecture.    &quot;This is the first time the compatible industry is deciding where it wants to go, not following IBM's lead,&quot; says Aaron Goldberg, a vice president at International Data Corp., a market-research firm. &quot;It's the adolescence of the compatible manufacturers. They bought their first car. Now, they're independent and on the town.&quot;    Tim Bajarin, a consultant at Creative Strategies Research International, says, &quot;If there was ever a chance for people to thwart IBM from keeping its industry dominance, this is what would do it.&quot;    Absent from yesterday's fray was Apple Computer Inc., the one company that might profit from the growing confusion. Apple, with about 10% of the world-wide market, is the only big PC maker that has refused to clone IBM. That strategy once made it hard for Apple's Macintosh computers to gain credibility among business users. But now, the Cupertino, Calif., company can market itself as a stable alternative to the mayhem in the IBM/clone arena. &quot;The Mac is a lot simpler to understand,&quot; brags Randall Battat, Apple's product-marketing vice president.    The stakes are enormous for the nine insurgents that gathered yesterday -- Compaq Computer Corp., AST Research Inc., Epson America Inc., Hewlett-Packard Co., NEC Corp., Ing C. Olivetti andamp; Co., Tandy Corp., Wyse Technology and Zenith Data Systems Corp. The nine have clout in the market; together, they outsell IBM's personal computers by a ratio 1.5 to 1, Gartner Group Inc. estimates.    But their development and marketing efforts will be more expensive than simply following IBM's lead. It will also take more time; the clone makers said yesterday that they won't sell products using the new standard until late 1989. That schedule may not play well in an industry that rarely waits for those who spend time and money heading down technological trails that might turn out to be blind alleys.    The risks are greatest for Compaq, the behind-the-scenes ringleader of yesterday's announcement. Because in recent years it has been fast building a reputation for the best technology in the industry, it has the most to lose. And few companies that are No. 3 in an industry -- Compaq's position, behind IBM and Apple -- have achieved the sort of influence that Compaq is seeking.    In a bit of irony, some of the other members of the Gang of Nine are already worried that the Houston company could wind up as a mini-IBM among the clone makers -- seizing for itself control of future design decisions.    For IBM, the gang's announcement yesterday is at best a duststorm of confusion, and, at worst, a dagger to the heart of its PC strategy. It brought out its PS/2 in April 1987 as a clone-killer, a club to beat back the legions of compatible machines that plundered market share from IBM's first PC. Whereas the first PC was built with off-the-shelf parts, IBM filled the PS/2 with its own technology -- most notably the Micro Channel -- and threatened to sue anyone copying it without paying steep royalties.    Now, that strategy suddenly seems to have worked perhaps too well. Cloning has become an expensive, technically arduous ordeal. Only a few companies have bothered to clone the PS/2, and one of them is keeping its machine off the market because of insufficient demand. IBM may have deterred the clones so forcefully that it could lose its valuable control over the future of the market.    &quot;We believe this has a better-than-even chance of relegating the Micro Channel to a niche: people who buy IBM blindly, just because it's IBM,&quot; says Jonathan Yarmis, a Gartner Group analyst.    IBM itself professed to be serenely unconcerned about whether clones hop into Big Blue's back seat or get behind the wheel of their own car. &quot;Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, but it isn't the measure of success,&quot; said Richard Gough, a top IBM personal-computer marketing manager. &quot;The measure of success is selling a lot of products.&quot;    IBM also turned the clones' announcement into an opportunity to score a marketing point of its own. It argued that the clones' proposal of a new architecture amounts to an admission that the old architecture is running out of steam. That, IBM argued, leaves PC power-users with two choices: buying the Micro Channel or waiting a year for the clones' new design. In fact, IBM officials seemed unable to speak of the clones' proposed design without tacking on the clause &quot;which will be there one year in the future.&quot;    But IBM's statements yesterday also suggested that it itself is faltering a bit in the PC wars. For the first time, it admitted losing share in what it called the fastest-growing part of the U.S. market: the low end, the equipment designed for single users using simple programs. IBM said it thinks its low-end share has been eroding for about a year, with its lost sales going to &quot;people who aren't household names,&quot; such as mail-order firms.    It took a step yesterday to regain low-end sales; it unveiled a new version of the PS/2, called the Model 30-286. But that risked adding fuel to the rebel clones' fire because the new version doesn't use the Micro Channel design that IBM considers the PC innards of the future -- and that the clones yesterday branded a failed design.    IBM explained that apparent mixed signal by saying that even though it champions the Micro Channel, it has always kept room in its product line for cheaper machines for less advanced users.    Finally, in an interview yesterday, an IBM official pointedly brought up the possibility that the clones might be risking legal trouble. Just steering clear of the Micro Channel &quot;doesn't mean that they don't use our intellectual assets,&quot; said Nicholas Donofrio, vice president of development for IBM's personal-computer division.    IBM holds patents to technology in the widely cloned first-generation PC, technology that might well crop up in the clones' new design. IBM's rivals are skeptical that the company could suddenly charge royalties on that old technology after quietly abiding so many clones. Mr. Donofrio says he didn't yet know enough about the new clone design to predict just what patent battles might ensue.    Some people at the Times Square press conference wondered whether the Gang of Nine could face antitrust objections. But people just smiled at the prospect that such a dominant company as IBM would chase much smaller players on antitrust grounds.    Both camps yesterday marshaled statistics to back up their disparate views of IBM's Micro Channel.    The Times Square rebels flashed a slide declaring that the Micro Channel accounted for just one-fifth of business PCs sold by U.S. dealers in this year's second quarter. Non-Micro Channel clones accounted for two-thirds. The message: IBM and the Micro Channel are moving out of the mainstream, into their own niche of brand-loyalists.    IBM retorted with news that by the end of this month, it will have shipped three million PS/2s, half of them Micro Channel machines. It said its PC market share is holding steady or better in the high end, which includes the more advanced Micro Channel computers.    IBM's adversaries accuse it of inflating its sales figures by counting machines &quot;shipped&quot; to dealers and still languishing on their shelves. IBM accuses the clones of distorting its sales data by ignoring international markets, where the PS/2 is faring well, and also sales through middlemen who add features to IBM machines.    The roots of yesterday's announcement go back to the spring of 1985, when more than 60 companies assembled to discuss ways of improving the data pathway. Meetings and work went on for roughly a year, but rumors of new computers from IBM, then their actual introduction in April 1987, froze the rebels until they could see how customers would react.    Several of IBM's rivals, including Compaq and AST, criticized IBM's new machines, saying they broke faith with customers by forcing them into a bothersome transition to the Micro Channel. Several companies talked last year about producing a rival standard, but Compaq wasn't ready to commit itself, and nothing came of it.    The clone makers were unhappy that Micro Channel machines required a whole new design for add-on boards -- increasingly popular accessories that give PCs extra speed and functions. To the clone makers, an ideal design would have the performance that IBM claimed for the Micro Channel, without making users throw out their old boards. Software wasn't an issue because the old clones, the new PS/2 and even the Gang of Nine's proposed new system all can run the same programs.    What revived the talks were market-share numbers in the 1988 first half; they indicated that IBM's Micro Channel wasn't catching on the way some competitors had feared. In addition, IBM had inadvertently helped foment a revolt by turning the screws on competitors, mainly by raising licensing fees for its patents. IBM also irked its dealers with heavy pressure to sell more IBM machines than they could.    A few of the companies involved in the announcement say Intel Corp. and Microsoft Corp. played a role, perhaps also inadvertently, in rallying the rebels. Intel, the dominant chip supplier, and Microsoft, the dominant software company, were the only ones talking regularly with all the players. And some companies that grumbled to Intel and Microsoft say they, in turn, heard encouraging noises about how they weren't the only ones complaining.    &quot;It's hard to get nine competitors together who don't trust each other,&quot; says Andrew Czernek, vice president of product marketing at Zenith Data Systems. &quot;Intel and Microsoft were catalysts.&quot;    A bit more than two months ago, Compaq decided that it was ready, and, with roughly 80% of the engineering work done, quickly assembled a group. The companies rushed to finish the work because of fears that leaks to the press could prove damaging. But the work was also done at long distance; the companies never met all in one room before yesterday's announcement. The closest they came was a last-minute technical meeting Monday, attended by engineers from five of the nine rebels.    &quot;It was a stop-and-go effort,&quot; Mr. Czernek says. &quot;One company was in three times and out twice.&quot; In addition, Rod Canion, Compaq's chief executive, says some of the bigger companies involved were slow to join because their managements couldn't move very fast.    Several companies say they expressed concern that Compaq would turn into another IBM, dictating where the market would go. So they agreed to have a law firm administer the handling of the standard.    &quot;We wanted to make Compaq more of a licensee than a licensor,&quot; says Steve Lapinski, vice president of marketing at Epson America. The rebels note that, unlike IBM, they won't charge a licensing fee, just an administrative fee of $2,500 that goes to the law firm.    The companies also worried that Intel would be the only company that could make the necessary chips -- a bone of contention between Intel and others in the past. So the group agreed to open the chip specifications to all comers.    Moreover, the companies set up an informal arbitration process that they say ensures that nothing will go ahead until all nine reach a consensus. Mr. Canion acknowledges the possibility that a company could, like the Soviet Union in the UN Security Council, hold up something simply by saying, &quot;Nyet.&quot; But he says no one has invoked that privilege thus far.    After the nine got their act together, they took it on the road by calling as many other companies as they could to line up support. The companies involved reached 60 by the time the slides were printed for the announcement, but the actual total exceeds 80. &quot;We couldn't change the slides fast enough,&quot; says Ed Juge, Tandy's director of marketing.    Last Friday, Mr. Canion even called William C. Lowe, the president of IBM's PC division, to see whether IBM wanted to join the effort. &quot;Bill was cordial,&quot; Mr. Canion says with a smile, &quot;but he declined to join.&quot;    Although the risks Mr. Canion faces are big, so are the potential benefits. &quot;Compaq would be the big winner&quot; if the effort succeeds, says Charles Wolf, an analyst at First Boston Corp. Notably bearish on Compaq after IBM introduced the PS/2 line, he now views the company's outlook as bright: &quot;With their distribution and marketing, they would be the high-end leader in the marketplace. They would really become the company setting the standard.&quot;    That would be a departure for Compaq, which has etched a remarkable record as one of the fastest-growing companies in business history by playing the computer game exceptionally well -- but always on IBM's turf.    Unlike cheap clones that undercut IBM's prices, Compaq successfully sold computers that outperformed IBM's machines for about the same price. Started in February 1982 by three former employees of Texas Instruments Inc., Compaq sold $1.22 billion of computers in 1987. It will probably approach $2 billion this year, as the de facto leader of the multibillion-dollar IBM-compatible market. If Tandy had announced the new standard, Larry Bowman, an analyst at Fidelity Management andamp; Research Co., comments, &quot;nobody would run down to Radio Shack to buy it. Compaq is the only company people will follow.&quot;    If the industry runs true to form, the PC-market impact of yesterday's events won't become clear for more than a year. (On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, IBM closed up $1.375 to $115, and Compaq ended down 50 cents at $54.)    &quot;I could see IBM being in left field&quot; if the rival group delivers everything it promised, says George Williams, associate director of information systems at General Foods Corp.'s General Foods Worldwide unit, which buys IBM PCs for about half its PC needs. But &quot;for the next year we continue on our way, perhaps with a tendency to view the Micro Channel with suspicion.&quot;    Matt Fitzsimmons, owner of a ComputerLand store in North White Plains, N.Y., says that, at least for the moment, &quot;I don't think anybody will change their plans because of this.&quot;    And even at the computer companies themselves, little is likely to change right away. It will be business as usual. As Mr. Czernek of Zenith says, &quot;We're all being real buddy-buddy right now, but we'll be ready to cut each other's throats for a nickel on the 14th of September.&quot;    ---   Paul Duke Jr. contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>