<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870528-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Physicists Studying SDI Aren't Dilettantes</HL><DD> 05/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Re the May 1 editorial, &quot;The Naysayers' Report,&quot; and William Kucewicz's related editorial-page article, &quot;Affordable, Effective SDI Is Possible by 1994&quot;:    In your editorial, you expressed reservations about the purpose of the report on directed-energy weapons by the American Physical Society, the professional organization of physicists. The editorial also discounted the report's conclusions, on the basis that the many people working on the problem full time in the Pentagon represented a greater pool of expertise than a committee of physicists working on their own time over an 18-month period. Clearly, a restatement of the report's intent and formulation is in order.    In matters of public policy involving a large technical component originating from research in physics, the members of the physics community feel they have a special obligation to their fellow citizens to explain the technical issues. Accordingly the APS has sponsored a number of studies over the years, which have had a significant impact on setting public policy. It was in this spirit that the elected governing body of the APS voted two years ago to conduct a study of directed-energy weapons. Funding was obtained from the Carnegie Corp. and the MacArthur Foundation, and an appointed committee comprising experts distinguished by their contributions to the specialized fields.    The co-chairmen illustrate this level of expertise: Dr. Kumar Patel, director of material sciences at the ATT Bell Laboratories, is the inventor of the carbon-dioxide laser, a possible directed-energy weapon; and Prof. Nicolaas Bloembergen of Harvard University is a Nobel Prize winner for his work on nonlinear optics and laser interactions. The other members of the panel also have the highest credentials and considerable care was taken to ensure balance. There were members from government and industrial laboratories who were working on the relevant technologies, and members from the university community doing research in associated areas. It was a group with unimpeachable technical qualifications -- not, as implied in the editorial, a bunch of physicist-dilettantes making unjustified assertions.    It is certainly true that Gen. Abrahamson, one of our most highly respected and effective military officers, has assembled a talented team to try to carry out the directive from President Reagan to &quot;give us the means of rendering these nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete,&quot; and it can be fairly asked whether an independent group can contribute anything new. That it can was the judgment of Gen. Abrahamson himself. The APS committee has enjoyed the full cooperation of the SDI office. The essential point is that the Pentagon is, by and large, a consumer of technology; the APS committee represents the originators of technology. Therefore, the committee is in a position to render totally independent judgments.    The APS panel has produced a highly technical report of more than 400 pages. While the committee represented diverse interests, there was unanimity in the conclusions. The report emphasizes the large amount of research that still has to be done before a judgment on directed-energy weapons can be made. And it indirectly points the directions in which the money for research should be spent in order to be most effective.    Val L. Fitch   President   The American Physical Society   New York   ---   The advocates of strategic defenses generally either overestimate the cost of Soviet countermeasures or underestimate the cost of their proposed systems. The advocates of kinetic-kill weapons systems quoted by Mr. Kucewicz do both.    The Marshall group's estimate of $900 billion for Soviet offensive countermeasures to its proposed system is ludicrous. Consider what the Soviets could purchase from the U.S. arsenal for $60 billion, half the cost of the Marshall defense: 1,200 MX missiles, equipped with 10 warheads each; 30 Trident submarines, each equipped with 24 eight-warhead missiles; or 3,000 B-1 bombers carrying perhaps five warheads apiece. The MXs would double the size of the Soviet land-based nuclear arsenal, easily overwhelming the Marshall defense. The Trident missiles are virtually invulnerable to strategic defenses due to their very short flight times. A flight of 3,000 bombers would swamp American air-defense capabilities and would be invisible to a strategic defense's sensors.    Kinetic-kill weapons are far from being ready to deploy and their cost is likely to be far higher than the Marshall group estimates. The destruction of one weapon on a known trajectory in peacetime is a long way from demonstrating the ability to construct a defense against &quot;1,200 ICBMs with 11,200 warheads and 90,000 decoys&quot; rising from locations scattered across the 11,000-mile breadth of the Soviet Union. As a feat of targeting, NASA's threading of space probes through the solar system is more impressive than the Air Force test. And the Marshall group itself admits that its system's $124 billion price tag does not include research and development.    In an accompanying editorial, the Journal belittles the APS report that conclusively shows we are at least 10 years of hard research away from being able to determine whether directed-energy weapons are even feasible for strategic defense. The Journal suggests that this is not news to the Pentagon's SDI office and that this, coupled with Mr. Kucewicz's &quot;facts,&quot; has resulted in a shift of SDI's emphasis to kinetic weapons. Then why does the SDI office's fiscal 1987 budget proposal contain $700 billion for each of kinetic and directed-energy weapons, with increases to $1 billion each in 1988 and $1.2 billion each in 1989?    Stephen R. Walton   Astronomer and APS Member   Alhambra, Calif.   ---   President Reagan notwithstanding, knowledgeable proponents of the SDI concede that its chief purpose is not to protect the American people from incoming nuclear missiles but rather to maintain a credible deterrence. In his analysis, Mr. Kucewicz concurs, writing that &quot;to deter a Soviet first strike . . . is, after all, the fundamental objective of SDI.&quot;    If this is the case, the debate should focus not just on SDI's feasibility or affordability, but on its cost-effectiveness as well. Will we be getting the most deterrence for our dollar? Midgetman mobile ICBMs and submarine-based SLBMs are just two systems that can provide deterrence at a much lower cost-and with today's technology. Recognizing that SDI is really about deterrence, one must question the pursuit of a distant, uncertain defense system when cost-effective alternatives are available today.    Charles Ringo   Lake Oswego, Ore.   ---   Mr. Kucewicz implies that SDI will be the deterrent that will, once and for all, bring an end to all war. TNT, the machine gun, the airplane and the atomic bomb were all considered the ultimate deterrent at one point, yet each has been employed as an offensive weapon. If SDI becomes a reality, let us hope history does not repeat itself.    SDI perpetuates the illusion that more weapons equals more security. Our dependence upon violence to resolve conflict is a short-run solution to a long-term problem. In order to ensure our survival, we must change the way we think about conflict. By spending billions of dollars on developing nonviolent means of resolving conflict, we can build a world beyond war and a sustainable, secure future for all people.    Donald L. Ashbaugh   Cedar Falls, Iowa</TEXT></DOC>