<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0126 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Leaving Liability Alone---By Walter Olson</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The American tort-liability system has been called many things -- warm, generous, flexible -- but even its admirers might blush to call it thrifty or economically efficient. Proving it so is the aim of William Landes and Judge Richard Posner in &quot;The Economic Structure of Tort Law&quot; (Harvard University Press, 329 pages, $25). The authors make interesting defenders of today's broad liability system, because they are the sort of market-minded &quot;law-and-economics&quot; scholars -- a University of Chicago economist and a leading Reagan appointee to the federal bench -- you might expect to oppose it. Though their heroic efforts fail to convince, they provide plenty of challenge along the way for the advocates of tort reform.    The economic merit of tort law, the authors say, is often misunderstood. It is not good at compensating injury victims and spreading accident losses. It is good at giving everyone the proper incentives to prevent accidents, or, more exactly, to keep accidents down to the level where preventing them would cost more than letting them happen. (The modern definition of negligence uses a cost-benefit standard.) If not for the prospect of being sued, we would all behave less carefully, and needless injuries would abound.    So far, so good. But the authors take two crucial steps further. They claim that in practice economic efficiency is the law's ruling objective: Despite all appearances, courts are not really trying to shift wealth from one group to another, or bend the rules to help hard-luck litigants. Even judges who profess to disdain economics use moral reasoning based on utilitarian notions that can be translated into economic propositions. Second, and fatefully, they believe that judges tend to get the economics right. In other words, if a rule exists it is probably efficient.    Armed with this confidence, Messrs. Landes and Posner proceed to offer possible economic rationalizations -- immensely clever and imaginative, and sometimes persuasive -- for one controversial tort rule after another. Their erudition is vast (too vast for the general reader, who is apt to bog down amid algebraic equations) and their ideas so varied and provocative that every page could spark useful debate.    The rationalizations usually hinge on assumed transaction costs: the costs of keeping informed about risks, the costs of negotiating with someone to get him to behave more safely, the costs of resolving the issue in court. In most cases the authors give only intuitive evidence for why transaction costs should be high or low, and their intuitions about the costs of uncertainty in litigation are rather blithe: They think, for example, that punitive damage awards have little incentive effect because so many are reversed on appeal.    The basic problem is that any rule looks good if you make the right assumptions about transaction costs. These assumed transaction costs expand and shrink wondrously as the story goes along, like Alice, first so big they pop out of the chimney and then so small they creep under the door. The information cost of comparing the safety of different product designs is so high that consumers cannot do it well over a lifetime of use, but so low that jurors can do it well over three days in a trial.    One question keeps coming up: Why is it efficient for North Dakota to follow one rule but South Dakota exactly the opposite? Presumably the answer is that economic conditions differ from state to state. But the data can always be read both ways. Trespasses by wandering cattle are treated more leniently in ranching states than in farming states, and stray sparks from trains more leniently in U.S. than in English courts. Is this because the underlying economics vary, or just because livestock and railroad owners have more lobbying power in some places? (And if they do, is it because their industries are more valuable there?) Likewise, urban states were faster than rural states to embrace the new product-liability rules. Is this because, as the authors believe, city dwellers use more complex products and need more legal protection, or just because they tend to pioneer political trends and have access to more aggressive lawyers?    The authors favor the rule of contributory negligence, which prevents a victim from suing on an injury he helped cause, but that doctrine has survived in only eight states, every one of them below the Mason-Dixon line. Maybe Northerners differ systematically from Southerners in propensity to drive fast, mix pills with liquor, and do other contributorily negligent things. More likely the difference is cultural and historical.    With all their talents, the authors admit they can't find an efficiency rationale for several other key new-tort doctrines, such as the rejection of industry custom as a defense. In fact, contrary to their general method, they chalk up some of these anomalies to collectivist ideology (bad rules correlate, they find, with the size of a state's public sector). Why not apply the same test to other tort doctrines too?    It's true that even the most wrongheaded court is constrained by the scarcity of available resources, just as Laurel and Hardy were constrained by the number of custard pies on hand. The economic basis of the liability revolution may simply be that over-broad liability is now less of a relative burden: Once it would have been unbearably costly, but now it is bearably costly. That does not make it a good idea.    ---   Mr. Olson is a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research and directs its Project on Civil Justice Reform. </TEXT></DOC>