<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870129-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. INVALIDATED passports for travel to or to remain in Lebanon.    Referring to a recent spate of kidnappings in Beirut, the State Department said the move was effective immediately. U.S. citizens already in Lebanon were given a 30-day exemption to allow them time to depart. Meanwhile, senior Reagan aides said the U.S. was considering military action against terrorist targets in Lebanon if any American hostage is killed. In London, the Church of England said it was reassured that hostage-negotiator Terry Waite is safe. His whereabouts weren't known.    West German police said they found a cache of liquid explosives believed hidden by Arabs tied to the revenge kidnapping of two West Germans in Beirut.    ---   GORBACHEV FAILED to carry out widely expected personnel changes.    While the Communist Party, during the second day of a Central Committee meeting, removed a Brezhnev-era member of the ruling Politburo, the ouster didn't match indications that the Kremlin leader would make wide-ranging changes that would further help consolidate his power. In his opening address to the plenum Tuesday, Gorbachev had called for a &quot;mechanism&quot; by which Kremlin officials could be retired in an orderly way.    The official news agency Tass, in a report on the plenum, said a member of the Communist Party's Secretariat had retired for &quot;health reasons.&quot;    ---   SHULTZ EXPRESSED concern over the ANC's use of anti-apartheid violence.    In a meeting at the State Department with Oliver Tambo, head of the outlawed African National Congress, the secretary of state also voiced concern about Soviet influence on the black South African group. Following the session, Tambo said the sanctions imposed last year by Congress against South Africa had made a &quot;valuable contribution&quot; toward ending apartheid. The meeting was the highest-level contact between the U.S. and the ANC.    Conservative demonstrators protested the meeting because the ANC has refused to renounce violence in its campaign to eliminate apartheid.    ---   Rebel soldiers in Manila ended their occupation of a television station that was seized Monday in a failed coup attempt. The move by more than 200 pro-Marcos troops followed negotiations with Philippine defense officials. The Philippine armed forces chief said he was unsure whether any action would be taken against the mutineers.    ---   Iran's Rafsanjani indicated that Tehran remains interested in better ties with the U.S., and insisted that Washington does too. The speaker of Iran's parliament, however, warned that the U.S. must release arms purchased in 1979 by the shah's regime if it wants more help in freeing American hostages in Lebanon.    A federal judge empaneled a 23-member grand jury to investigate the Iran-Contra affair. The panel, viewed as the primary investigative tool of independent counsel Lawrence Walsh, is empowered to indict individuals if it determines that criminal violations occurred as a result of the arms sales.    ---   Iraq rejected an offer from Iran to end an exchange of air attacks on cities. Iraqi jets bombarded two ships near Iran's Larak Island oil terminal, and Tehran resumed the bombing of Iraqi cities. In Kuwait, delegates to the Islamic summit discussed sending a delegation to Tehran and Baghdad in an effort to end the Persian Gulf war.    ---   Nicaragua released Sam Nesley Hall, an American arrested last month at a restricted air base near Managua and accused of spying. Nicaraguan officials said he was mentally ill. Hall, who arrived in Miami via Costa Rica, apologized to the Nicaraguan people for &quot;any inconvenience I caused.&quot;    ---   Reagan proposed financing this year's pay increase for federal workers with money that Congress has earmarked for other programs ranging from mass transit to food for the poor. The funds transfer is aimed at complying with the Gramm-Rudman law.    ---   The Energy Department said it plans to defer for five additional years, until 2003, the opening of its first permanent high-level nuclear-waste repository. The agency said the delay is needed to complete a study of three potential sites.    ---   NASA observed a 73-second period of silence at the Kennedy Space Center to mark the anniversary of the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger. Reagan, in a televised message to space agency installations, said Americans should learn the &quot;lesson of courage&quot; taught by the Challenger crew.    China signed its first contract to launch a private U.S. satellite that originally was intended to be placed in orbit by a space shuttle. The move is considered a significant sign of increasing foreign competition to provide access to space.    ---   A senior U.S. official arrived in Poland for talks with government, church and opposition leaders. Deputy Secretary of State Whitehead, the highest-ranking U.S. official to visit Poland since economic sanctions were imposed in 1981, said he would investigate whether the curbs could be lifted.    ---   The Soviet Union faulted Reagan's State of the Union call for more constructive superpower ties. Radio Moscow, citing Reagan's refusal to make concessions on his space-based antimissile program, asserted that it was Washington that was hindering progress toward an arms-control pact.    ---   The White House said Reagan's new national security adviser would leave today for a brief inspection tour of Central America. Frank Carlucci will visit El Salvador, Costa Rica, Guatemala and Honduras. The trip comes as Reagan is seeking continued aid to Nicaragua's anti-government rebels. </TEXT></DOC>