<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880627-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Italy's Industrial Policy Challenged by 1992 </HL><AUTHOR> Adolfo Battaglia </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Italian industrialists are making news abroad as they demonstrate the kind of dynamism Europe expects will become standard after 1992. But the plans for completion of a single European market of 320 million also provide Italy with a challenge at home.    After more than five years of uninterrupted economic growth, Italy is at a crossroads. The year 1992 will mean increased competition not only among European companies, but also against American, Japanese and other extra-European companies that will move to Europe to conquer a share of this new, open market. To compete it is necessary for Italian industries to achieve a world-wide dimension, to restructure financially, to renovate their technology and to reach a higher level of efficiency.    This process has already started. Recently several large Italian companies have successfully undertaken major changes. Banks, insurance concerns, industry and finance companies have started to expand abroad in Europe and even in the U.S., a market that until only a few years ago seemed unreachable. New alliances have been established with European counterparts. In the domestic market, new links between Italy's private sector and its large public one are also forming. The recent agreement between Montedison and ENI, the state holding company for energy, is but one example. Much is yet to be done to enable Italian industry to arrive in strong shape at its appointment with Europe. The Italian government is aware of the need for change and is working to achieve it.    It's important to realize that the philosophy underlying Italian industrial policy is changing. After decades of extensive state intervention and assistance with the rescue of failing firms, which have had a substantial adverse impact on public finance, the time has come to return to the market, to enhance competitiveness and promote efficiency. Italian businesses can no longer count on the government to bail them out. The government is working to remove many bureaucratic headaches and obstacles that still confront companies operating in Italy, introduce competitiveness in public services, promote a new flow of foreign and domestic investments and stimulate small- and medium-sized industry.    A first step of this new policy is the imminent adoption of a new competition law. This law is not an attempt to introduce additional red tape. The goal is to promote the deregulation of many protected sectors. It should increase competition, remove obstacles to the entry in the market and protect consumers. Italy alone among the members of the European Community currently has no antitrust law. This seems to be an unbearable situation in a highly industrialized country where the opportunities for abuse abound. The new rules will create an independent authority to overview and administer the competition policy. These rules will be directed toward the prevention of restrictive practices and the state interventions that can distort competition. They should not be hostile to the mergers and concentrations that are essential for competition in a market of global competition; they should prevent anti-competitive effects, if there are any.    Antitrust is a particularly delicate issue for us. Italian industry is composed only of a few conglomerates and many small- to medium-sized companies, as is shown by the fact that only nine Italian companies appear in the Fortune 500 of non-American companies. This compares with 72 English, 53 German and 41 French companies. Thus, while we think that the abuse of a dominant market position should be opposed, we must not limit our sights only to the domestic market: In 1992, our &quot;internal&quot; market will be Europe.    The new competition law will be based on the distinction between national and EC jurisdiction. We strongly feel that in order to achieve a real single market it will be necessary to have only one set of rules applicable to all companies -- European or not -- that do business in the EC in lieu of the current system of national regulations. Businessmen need certainty when they make decisions regarding acquisitions or mergers. They should not be faced with different levels of jurisdiction (national and European) often pursuing conflicting objectives. The Italian government has insisted during the preparatory talks in Brussels that the proposed directive on merger control set a single barrier at the EC level. The national legislation should then concern only the concentration that falls outside EC jurisdiction.    A second change that will take place in Italy in the next few years is a reduction of the large role that the public sector plays in the economy. Although public companies contributed substantially to Italy's successful industrialization in the 1950s and 1960s -- and performed a fundamental mission in certain strategic sectors such as energy -- in the 1970s they lost momentum and expanded too much. This does not mean that there should be an extensive program of privatizations. The focus should be on efficiency in the public sector. Privatization is only one of many roads that can be followed. In certain cases it may be more convenient to contract out services; in other cases a joint venture may be desirable between companies belonging to the private and the public sectors; or it may even be better, for strategic reasons, to keep a business in state hands. Whatever the road chosen, state-owned companies must operate in an efficient way, in a competitive market and with an independent management.    A third fundamental element of our new industrial policy is the promotion of the development of small- and medium-sized industry, the backbone of the Italian economy. Currently these industries are suffering from increased competition from large conglomerates. They often lack the necessary information as to the new technologies available in the market and need more appropriate assistance to restructure their business or enhance their competitiveness. Last, but not least, they have limited financial resources and have difficulties in obtaining the financing necessary to purchase new equipment or develop new products.    To prevent a market failure that might hurt the whole country, a new policy is to be implemented. In the first place financial aid will be provided to the small firms that will seek advice from consultants. Technological innovation will be promoted and public funds for this purpose will be available. We will facilitate access of these smaller, but no less crucial, businesses to the financial markets, create fiscal incentives and stimulate investment in research and development. The industry ministry is introducing special legislation that will promote small- and medium-sized industry according to these guidelines and regulate more efficiently the liquidation of failing firms.    This is only a brief outline of the major guidelines of Italy's new industrial policy and does not pretend to be exhaustive. The eventual goal is the abolition of all the technical barriers and the standardization of legislation in accordance with directives set forth by the EC Council. Italy has entered a new stage of its industrial policy, from which there is no return to the old state-dominated system.    ---   Mr. Battaglia is Italy's minister of industry. </TEXT></DOC>