<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Goods Shrink and Trade Grows </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Greenspan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   As a participant over the past year in the G-7 deliberations of finance ministers and central bank governors, I have been struck by the growing desire among leading industrial nations to coordinate policies. Since coordination requires the modification of domestic political trade-offs previously struck, altering such positions is extremely difficult.    The seemingly inexorable expansion of international trade is the dominant reason for coordinating policies. World real exports rose to more than 14% of world real gross national product last year from 8 1/2% in 1960. During the past decade the ratio rose by almost two percentage points.    While many factors are spurring the expansion of world trade, one little noticed element has had a significant impact on trade across borders in recent decades. It is the marked downsizing of economic output. The creation of economic value in recent decades has shifted toward conceptual values -- that is, those created by new scientific insights and knowledge -- with far less reliance on physical volumes. This, understandably, is downsizing economic output.    A half-century ago, for example, radios, activated by large vacuum tubes, were bulky. Today, they can fit in a pocket. One hair-thin fiber-optic cable replaces thick bundles of heavy copper telephone wire. Advances in architecture and engineering, and the development and use of lighter but stronger materials, give us the same working space with a lot less concrete and steel tonnage than required in the past. Improvements in heating technology mean people can wear lighter fabrics, many of which were the products of major advances in chemical technology.    Even the physical quantity of goods consumed in creating economic services has been affected. Financial transactions buttressed with reams of paper are being reduced to electronic impulses -- though, perversely, the rapid growth of financial markets probably has expanded the number of trees cut down. The transportation industry now moves more goods with greater convenience while consuming substantially less fuel per ton. The number of air travelers has expanded greatly relative to the materials required to build and fuel large, modern aircraft.    The considerable increase in the economic well-being of most nations in recent decades apparently has come about without much change in the bulk or weight of the GNP. In fact, if all the tons of grain, cotton, ore, coal, steel, cement and the like that Americans produce were combined, their aggregate volume probably would not be much greater on a per-capita basis today than it was, say, 50 or 75 years ago. This would mean that increases in the conceptual components of GNP would account for the major part of the rise in real GNP in the U.S. The same holds true for the industrial world as a whole.    The conceptual contribution to economic activity reflects the explosive growth in information gathering and processing techniques, which have greatly extended our ability to substitute ideas for physical volume. These trends almost surely will continue into the next century and beyond. Telecommunications and advanced computing are destined to take on an even greater role.    At the turn of this century, we created economic value by moving ore by rail from the Mesabi Range down to Pittsburgh, where it was joined with coal to produce steel. Today, economic value is created by moving data, analyses and insights from one location to another through ever more sophisticated electronic means. Economic production continues to serve human needs and values. But the products serving those needs are becoming progressively impalpable.    Obviously, the less the bulk and the lower the weight, the easier it is to move goods -- including across national boundaries. High-value, easily transportable computer components are more attractive cross-border products than heavy construction gravel or bulky fiberglass insulation. It is not surprising, therefore, to find that pounds shipped by vessel and air per real dollar of U.S. exports have fallen an average of more than 2 1/2% per year during the past two decades. Pounds shipped per real dollar of U.S. imports have declined an average of more than 4% per year.    On a global basis, the real value of trade has grown at an annual rate of more than 5% over the past two decades, significantly outstripping the growth in world GNP. In tonnage terms, of course, the increase has been far less.    Also implicit in the downsizing of products is the increased integration of the world's production facilities. Bottlenecks tend to emerge when domestic plants are pressed to capacity by burgeoning domestic demand. But if additional supplies from other world producers are quickly available, such pressures can be significantly reduced. The cost of moving gravel across continents makes it hard to see foreign quarries as much of a backup for excess domestic demand. But the ease with which small electronic components can be moved by air integrates a significant part of the world's capacity. Thus, as we progress toward general downsizing of economic output, world-wide production and inventory controls become far more feasible and dislocations less likely.    But the increasing ease with which economic goods and services can spill over national borders creates a major problem for the domestic politics of countries inclined to inhibit such movement. Leaders must become increasingly protectionist, or otherwise open their economies to a more market-oriented system.    The international economic pressures of recent decades have exposed the economic inadequacies of the centrally directed economies of the Soviet bloc and, to a somewhat lesser extent, some of the partially centrally planned economies of the West. The choice of the European Community to move toward further integration by 1992 reflects such economic pressures.    The elimination of intra-Common Market capital controls will accelerate the movement of capital across borders. This in turn will require greater coordination of monetary policies, or risk major destabilizing capital flows, should central banks' policies diverge. But coordination presupposes the forgoing of full sovereignty over a nation's affairs. Implicit in the movement toward economic integration is a greater adherence of domestic economic policies to international economic pressures.    Countries, can, of course, eschew international economic cooperation and become more protectionist. But the extraordinary downsizing of goods makes protectionism harder to sustain, in the same sense that repressive governments have trouble blocking the satellite-transmitted flow of information to their people.    Certainly, a major world economic disruption could induce a hasty resurrection of the protectionist walls of an earlier era. But gains in technology are irreversible, and the downsizing of goods will continue, making it far less easy to suppress world-wide trade. Indeed, the benefits of increasing trade should be a major force galvanizing productivity and economic growth as the world moves toward the new century. Coordination of international economic policies is bound to expand and become ever more pervasive as the cross-border trade in goods and services grows as a proportion of world output.    This somewhat beneficent focus on longer-run developments should not be interpreted as a denial of the importance of current economic problems. International adjustment, the burdens of budget deficits and excessive external debt, low savings rates and inflation are all potentially troublesome to the world economic structure. But it is clear that the economics of technology and of international trade are interacting in a way that is smoothing some of these difficulties.    ---   Mr. Greenspan is chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. </TEXT></DOC>