<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880803-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Bulldog: Fighting On in Court, Marvin Warner Strives To Salvage His Fortune --- Former Thrift Official Snarled In E.S.M. Disaster Battles Criminal, Civil Allegations --- Using Up an Army of Lawyers </HL><AUTHOR> Martha Brannigan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR BNK BCY BIO </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's down to the wire for Marvin L. Warner.    A federal jury is ready to announce its finding in a civil suit brought against him by E.S.M. Government Securities Inc.'s trustee, who contends that Mr. Warner's &quot;insider&quot; status unfairly helped him pull $23 million out of the fraud-ridden securities firm before its March 1985 collapse. The trustee wants the money back.    In the corridor outside the courtroom, attorneys are working out a last-minute settlement: Mr. Warner will pay $6 million and everyone will go home happy. The silvery-haired financier seems ready to deal. Suddenly, the Marvin L. Warner erupts in Marvin L. Warner: He balks. No deal.    Back in court, the jury returns its verdict. Against Mr. Warner. For the full $23 million.    &quot;I feel terrible. I'm stunned,&quot; he says later. &quot;Of course, we will appeal.&quot;    Of course, almost anyone would. But especially Marvin L. Warner. He has reportedly requested a new trial based on, among other things, alleged juror misconduct; a hearing is said to be set Aug. 18.    Three years after the demise of E.S.M. in one of the most thunderous financial frauds of the decade, the 69-year-old Mr. Warner says he is working &quot;more than full time&quot; trying to salvage his fortune -- and even his freedom. A self-made millionaire and former U.S. ambassador to Switzerland, he got snarled in the E.S.M. imbroglio when it came to light that he had closed his personal E.S.M. account shortly before the firm failed -- a fact that leads some to suggest that he had insider knowledge. His Cincinnati-based Home State Savings Bank, which had been E.S.M.'s biggest customer and had engaged in highly unusual transactions with it, collapsed on the heels of E.S.M.'s failure. That forced 70 other Ohio thrift institutions to close temporarily, in the first bank holiday since the Depression. Three years later, Mr. Warner is still struggling to get unsnarled.    Most of the other E.S.M. figures have faded from the limelight. Six of the firm's officers and the outside auditor pleaded guilty to fraud charges, and four others were convicted in trials. All are now in prison. One was acquitted. Two people committed suicide, including Mr. Warner's son-in-law, an outside lawyer for E.S.M.    But Mr. Warner continues to press on. He has the wealth to resist and, equally important, the determination. Whatever the merits of his case, the fight he is putting up is extraordinary.    &quot;He is as strong as an ox and incredibly resilient,&quot; says Robert &quot;Buzz&quot; Trafford, an attorney representing Home State's liquidator in an $875 million damage suit against Mr. Warner in the Court of Claims of Ohio. &quot;Many people would have collapsed under the pressure after three years.&quot;    &quot;I'm fighting for my life and my livelihood,&quot; says the tanned and trim Mr. Warner, who seems the quintessential Southern gentleman. &quot;When I've spent my last penny and I'm dead and underground, that's when I'll quit fighting.&quot;    He says he has paid $10 million in legal fees so far. A lawyer himself, he insists on running the show, and he has hired -- and fired or otherwise parted ways with -- dozens of lawyers, including such big names as William Saxbe and James Neal. He has a stable of accountants, investigators and jury experts working on his case. He commissioned at least three jury studies, including one that found that he fares best with women jurors aged 27 to 55. He briefly hired a prominent Washington, D.C., public-relations firm to try to dig out of the avalanche of bad publicity.    Aside from last month's $23 million civil case, he has been through two criminal trials -- a seven-week federal one, in which an Ann Arbor, Mich., jury acquitted him on all counts, and a 10-week trial in an Ohio state court, where he was convicted on nine of 85 counts -- six counts of unauthorized acts and three of securities fraud. For that, he was sentenced to 42 months in prison and a $22 million restitution judgment, although many lawyers give Mr. Warner, who is free on bail, a good shot at winning his appeal for a new trial.    He still faces another criminal trial in an Ohio court on three charges of misapplication of bank funds in connection with loans from Home State; those charges carry a penalty of up to 54 months in prison. According to his bankruptcy filing, there are 32 civil suits against him, seeking more than $4.27 billion in damages; the Fort Lauderdale case, decided earlier this month, was the first to go to trial.    So far, Mr. Warner has refused to settle anything.    When attorneys suggested that he acquiesce -- simply for expedience in view of the flood of litigation -- to a permanent injunction sought by the Securities and Exchange Commission, he refused. &quot;Why should I sign a consent?&quot; he says. &quot;I didn't do what they say I did.&quot;    What's more, he is doing some suing of his own in connection with the E.S.M. affair. He is seeking more than $364 million in eight suits, whose targets include two accounting firms, the state of Ohio and C. Thomas Tew, E.S.M.'s trustee.    He has moved aggressively in other ways, too. Last November, he filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, which he hoped would let him consolidate the dozens of claims against him into one proceeding. Instead, the bankruptcy judge ruled that four of the most important cases could proceed. Mr. Warner then tried to back out of bankruptcy court, which he said was only increasing his paper work and disclosure requirements. The judge said no.    Beginning just after E.S.M.'s collapse, Mr. Warner did some major rearranging of his financial affairs. He transferred some $32 million of assets to his wife, Jody, to his son, Marvin Jr., and to trust funds. The transfers include millions in cash, art, jewelry and real estate, plus the family jet, which went to his wife. Some $6.5 million found its way into a new trust fund from which he and his wife derive income. Thoroughbred racehorses valued at millions of dollars went to his son.    His attorneys call his moves &quot;sound estate planning.&quot; But his creditors describe them in a memorandum filed in federal bankruptcy court in Jacksonville, Fla., as &quot;a massive, comprehensive scheme to loot the debtor's estate.&quot;    Mr. Warner, who had a net worth of about $79 million (by one estimate $101 million) just before E.S.M.'s collapse, reports assets of about $20 million in his bankruptcy filings, $17.7 million of which he says is exempt from creditors' reach. The creditors have hired Price Waterhouse, the big accounting firm, to retrace his financial history over several years, and say they will go after the stash he contends is beyond their reach. That, too, must be resolved in court.    &quot;He's a professional litigant,&quot; says Mr. Tew, the E.S.M. trustee.    When not in court, Mr. Warner is usually on his Ocala, Fla., horse farm, which has an indoor swimming pool for him and an exercise pool for his horses. He swims and jogs or walks &quot;to maintain my mental and physical strength and equilibrium.&quot; He keeps close to his family, especially his wife, but doesn't seek out friends &quot;because I know my name has been tainted, and I don't want to impose on them.&quot;    This isn't what he expected of life.    A proud, self-made man, Mr. Warner parlayed profits from building low-income housing developments into a fortune in banking and real estate.    The native Alabaman was always a wheeler-dealer who played tough -- and usually won. In 1983, for example, he pushed through the sale of his stake in ComBanks Corp. to Tampa-based Freedom Savings andamp; Loan Association by buying Freedom shares at the last minute and voting them in favor of the deal. The sale had failed three times earlier, partly because some Freedom holders considered the price too high. He was a powerful Democrat, whose appointment in 1977 by President Carter as ambassador to Switzerland raised a controversy among career diplomats. For amusement, he bought a stake in the New York Yankees and acquired his own football team, the ill-fated Birmingham Stallions. And he became a prominent horse breeder.    &quot;I was a respected man once,&quot; says Mr. Warner, his voice sounding weary. &quot;People may not have always liked me, but they never said I was dishonest.&quot;    Most allegations against Mr. Warner turn on what and when he knew about E.S.M.'s problems and on the special ties he and Home State allegedly had as E.S.M.'s biggest customer. His accusers, including Mr. Tew, say the firms propped each other up. His savings bank, they contend, put up excessive collateral -- government securities -- for its loans, which gave E.S.M. the extra securities it needed. In turn, they allege, Home State profited from phony securities transactions to keep it afloat. Mr. Warner's personal account at E.S.M., which allegedly reaped illicit profits, was closed shortly before its collapse.    No one alleges that Mr. Warner knew that E.S.M. bribed its auditor to hide its losses and pledged the same securities as collateral to multiple customers. But his critics, again including Mr. Tew, contend that he knew plenty about its financial troubles from, among other things, talks with E.S.M.'s flamboyant chairman and principal looter, Ronnie R. Ewton, as early as August 1983. &quot;I told him we were bleeding out of both ears,&quot; says Mr. Ewton, a former close associate and now the star witness against him. (Mr. Warner responds that Mr. Ewton, who now teaches Bible studies and works in the chaplain's office at a maximum-security state prison, is a &quot;professional liar.&quot;)    After Home State's collapse, Mr. Warner moved from Cincinnati to his 400-acre Ocala farm, which he bought for $3.5 million cash. His wish to get out of Cincinnati was understandable: Public sentiment against him was rabid, and many Ohioans still blame him for the statewide crisis among thrift institutions. But the move also made financial sense. Florida has an extremely liberal homestead law; if the courts uphold his declaration that the farm is his legal &quot;homestead,&quot; it will be virtually untouchable under bankruptcy law.    Mr. Warner kept 160 acres for himself and his wife -- the maximum permitted for a homestead -- and transferred 80 acres to his wife and 160 to his son. He also shifted assets from his own name to &quot;tenants by the entirety&quot; with his wife, which generally makes it tougher for creditors to seize.    The wrangling over his personal finances is only part of the litigation against him. The civil lineup against him includes the Ohio Deposit Guarantee Fund, which went belly up when Home State failed; it is suing for $756 million. Four municipalities that lost their investments with E.S.M., including Harrisburg, Pa., and Beaumont, Texas, want a total of more than $460 million. Even Grant Thornton, the accounting firm whose bribed auditor approved E.S.M.'s falsified financial statements, is suing for $942 million.    Throughout his legal tangles, Mr. Warner has dominated the strategy -- and run off enough lawyers to staff a fair-sized firm. &quot;Good lawyers are just reluctant to turn their judgment over to the client,&quot; says Hugo Black Jr., a Miami attorney who represented him early in the game.    Mr. Black says he once told the SEC that Mr. Warner couldn't attend a deposition in Miami because he would be out of town, only to get a call from an irate SEC official who fumed that Mr. Warner had scheduled a news conference in the city that day. &quot;He would just go off on his own,&quot; recalls Mr. Black, who says he chose to withdraw from the case.    &quot;Marvin wants to win, and he wants to win desperately,&quot; says James A. Fischette, who briefly represented Mr. Warner in his bankruptcy case. &quot;When he doesn't win, he goes out and gets an attorney who he thinks can win.&quot; Though conceding some disagreements with Mr. Warner, the attorney says he withdrew because of poor health.    Mr. Warner's own view: &quot;It is practically impossible to find a competent and dedicated attorney who will really look out for you.&quot; His wife, who is also a lawyer, agrees. &quot;When lawyers see someone like Marvin and see he's down, they take advantage,&quot; she says. If questioned about their rapidly multiplying bills, she says, &quot;they get so indignant -- like, 'How dare you challenge it?'&quot;    A key to Mr. Warner's defense is his credibility. He is a confident, unflappable witness who looks at the jurors as he speaks and insists on explaining his answers. He reminds them of his common roots. &quot;I worked myself up from selling newspapers on the street corner, where pennies counted,&quot; he testified, prompting rolled eyes and groans from plaintiffs' lawyers, who have wearied of the tale.    Mr. Warner calls the past three years &quot;an absolute nightmare&quot; and figures he will need at least several years to resolve all the litigation. &quot;I've got to be strong,&quot; he says. &quot;I have no choice. I didn't live 69 years to have everything taken away from me.&quot; He adds: &quot;I've got a family and children and grandchildren. I've got to clear my name for them.&quot;    However, he has become philosophic and sees a certain irony in his problems. In his view, the brains and toughness that enabled him to amass a $100 million fortune have come back to haunt him as he tries to persuade juries that he, too, was a victim of the fraud at E.S.M. &quot;Nobody believes someone that smart and that tough could be taken,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>