<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871001-0052 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   KIM YOUNG SAM DECLARED he is a candidate for South Korea's presidency.    Kim Dae Jung, his main opposition rival, angrily refused to immediately step aside. The announcements, signaling failure of opposition leaders in their attempt to mount a unified campaign for the Dec. 20 election, caused consternation in opposition ranks and glee in the ruling party. Kim Young Sam said he made his decision after talks broke down with Kim Dae Jung over who should run.    The two split in the 1971 presidential race, won by Park Chung Hee, when Kim Dae Jung overturned opposition consensus for Kim Young Sam.    ---   A SENATE PANEL CONCLUDED 12 days of hearings on the Bork nomination.    Reagan launched a new campaign on behalf of his Supreme Court nominee, charging a &quot;deliberate campaign of disinformation and distortion&quot; by opponents. Former President Carter, in a letter to the Senate Judiciary panel, called Bork's views on civil rights cases &quot;particularly obnoxious.&quot; At the hearings, legal specialists differed on the impact of Bork's free-market approach to antitrust law.    The panel is set to vote Tuesday on whether to send the nomination to the full Senate with no recommendation or a positive or negative report.    ---   Gov. Dukakis acknowledged that his campaign manager provided news organizations with videotapes that helped to force Sen. Biden out of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. The manager and another top campaign aide of the Massachusetts Democrat resigned following the disclosure.    ---   White House officials plan to meet next week to consider imposing an embargo on either oil, or all, imports from Iran, a State Department aide said. Separately, U.S. officials said Beijing and Moscow have expressed some support for a global arms embargo against Iran if efforts to negotiate a Iran-Iraq truce fail.    ---   The draft Iran-Contra report criticizes Reagan for selling arms to Tehran and poorly supervising his National Security Council aides, two Republican congressmen disclosed. They said the report also questions Adm. Poindexter's assertion that Reagan didn't know of the diversion of arms-sale proceeds to the Contras.    ---   The U.S. will seek an agreement with its allies on guidelines for the sale of sensitive technology to Communist-controlled firms operating in allies' territories, a senior Commerce Department official said. The initiative was triggered by a recent U.S. interagency dispute over shipment of a computer to a Soviet firm in West Germany.    ---   U.S. scientists said ozone depletion over Antarctica reached record levels in recent months, but added it is premature to conclude that recent controls on ozone-eroding chemicals need to be tightened. An air-sampling program provided new support for the theory that man-made chemicals contribute to the seasonal high-altitude ozone drop.    ---   The Chernobyl accident was less harmful to the average Soviet citizen than previously estimated. New Soviet radiation studies indicated that the fallout from the nuclear reactor accident gave the Soviet population a radiation dose of less than half of Moscow's earlier estimates.    ---   Salvadoran rebels accused President Duarte of trying to sabotage peace talks set for Sunday, and said they would not attend a preparatory meeting until his intentions were clear. Duarte had said the only proposal he would discuss at the talks, set up under a five-nation Central American peace plan, would be a rebel arms surrender.    ---   Reagan is expected to tell Congress that he will seek no new sanctions against South Africa. The president's report, required by legislation passed over his veto last year, is due tomorrow. In Pretoria, Botha declared South Africa's Natal province a disaster area, where as many as 100 people are feared dead after heavy rains.    ---   Gov. Deukmejian signed a bill making California the first state to bypass FDA regulations on AIDS-drug testing. Under the bill, California will begin its own program of testing human volunteers with experimental drugs manufactured in the state. If the tests prove successful, it will also license the drugs for sale within the state.    ---   Philippine troops withdrew after encircling Manila in response to reports that renegade military forces would try to enter the capital. Vice President Laurel said Col. Honasan, leader of the Aug. 28 coup attempt, would accept an amnesty if President Aquino purged her government of leftists.    ---   Bavadra was released from prison by Fiji's coup leaders. The former prime minister, leader of the Pacific island nation's Indian-dominated party, was deposed May 14 and arrested in a second coup last week.    ---   Pakistan accused India of provoking attacks in a disputed Himalayan pass. India, in turn, accused Pakistan of launching the attacks and said it inflicted heavy casualties on Pakistani troops. Islamabad withheld comment on an Indian news agency report that 150 Pakistani soldiers died in three nights of fighting last week.    ---   Postal service was disrupted in two Canadian cities yesterday as the 23,000-member Canadian Union of Postal Workers began rotating strikes to support contract demands. Victoria, British Columbia, and Montreal were affected by the strikes. </TEXT></DOC>