<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881116-0015 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Time Is Running Out for Tibet </HL><AUTHOR> Kerry Moran </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> KATMANDU, Nepal  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Sept. 27 a small group of Buddhist monks shouting Tibetan-independence slogans marched around Lhasa's Jokhang Temple. This protest marked the anniversary of the first in a series of anti-Chinese demonstrations held in the Tibetan capital this past year. A larger demonstration was expected on Oct. 1, Chinese National Day, but the night before nine truckloads of armed Chinese soldiers were driven around Lhasa's central road in a show of force that effectively squelched any opposition.    Although National Day passed without an outbreak of violence, recent visitors report that resentment of Chinese rule has not abated. Hundreds of suspected demonstrators have been rounded up in night arrests, plain-clothes police guard monasteries, and armed troops parade on the streets of Lhasa, while foreign journalists, politicians and human-rights observers are denied permission to enter the region. At the same time, however, China is taking a more conciliatory tack with Tibet's exiled leader, the Dalai Lama, whom it is trying to persuade to dismantle his government-in-exile in Dharmsala, India, and return to China. In April it dropped its insistence that he stay in Beijing, announcing he would be free to live anywhere in China.    In a June speech before the European Parliament in Strasbourg, the Dalai Lama gave the first indication his government-in-exile might settle for something less than complete independence. He proposed Tibet become a self-governing political entity ruled &quot;in association with the People's Republic of China.&quot; Under this plan, China would control Tibet's foreign policy and retain a limited number of military bases in the region; internal affairs would be allocated to a democratically elected Tibetan government. Although Beijing officially rejected the Strasbourg proposal as a &quot;disguised form of independence,&quot; it has offered to meet the Dalai Lama virtually anywhere to discuss any issue except Tibetan independence. The Dalai Lama has suggested a meeting in Geneva in January, which the Chinese are now considering.    China's new willingness to talk with the man it generally claims is &quot;splitting the motherland and sabotaging the national unity&quot; stems from its sensitivity to international pressure, the single weapon Tibetans have. At least six anti-Chinese demonstrations have occurred in Lhasa since the well-publicized uprising in October 1987 splashed Tibet on front pages around the world, and reports of incidents in Eastern Tibet this spring make it appear that Tibetan frustration is spreading. A compromise offers the possibility of silencing the Dalai Lama, one of China's most influential critics, by absorbing him into the mainstream.    Tibetans are for their part driven by the knowledge that time is running out. A generation has grown up in exile or under Chinese rule since the 1959 popular uprising in Lhasa that sent the Dalai Lama and 100,000 followers fleeing to India. Quietly but steadily, Tibetan identity is being eroded by a Chinese civilian invasion. Since 1983 the government has lured Chinese settlers from interior provinces with offers of higher wages, bonuses and benefits. The extent of the resettlement drive is complicated by the definition of &quot;Tibet&quot;: More than half of the original territory has been quietly partitioned off into neighboring provinces since the Chinese takeover. Although China's right to rule Tibet is questionable on historical grounds, it is internationally accepted as a &quot;fait accompli.&quot;    Given Tibet's lack of bargaining power, many observers -- particularly non-Tibetans -- suggest it had best settle for whatever compromise can be reached. But the Strasbourg proposal met with fierce objections from Tibetan exiles. According to the Press Trust of India, the Dalai Lama said in New Delhi Tuesday that the demand for independence had not been dropped. &quot;Our struggle for independence shall continue come what may,&quot; he said. &quot;The Tibetan people need have no fear nor lose heart that their interests will be sold out behind their back by the negotiating team.&quot;    Many Tibetans worry that if they return with less than independence, the Chinese can simply close the country and nobody will know what is happening. Tibetans have every right to their suspicions of compromise with China. Thousands of Tibetans were arrested following the March demonstrations; in a follow-up report issued in July, Asia Watch listed the names of 256 detainees still held. March 5 was Lhasa's bloodiest day since the uprising of 1959: Between eight and 16 monks were killed, along with two Tibetan laymen and a Chinese policeman. Confusion over the number of casualties remains because the official government report admits only five -- and for weeks insisted the only death was the policeman's.    Foreigners visiting Lhasa are frequently asked, &quot;Tell America to please help Tibet,&quot; reflecting a widespread Tibetan hope that the U.S. will intervene. The concept has no place in the world of &quot;Realpolitik&quot; where the U.S. does not question China's right to rule Tibet. But in Lhasa, where Tibetan crowds armed with stones and slingshots are pitted against Chinese troops with rifles and tear gas, reality is blurred by hopes.    Religion, still the focal point of Tibetan life, remains the focus of aspirations for independence. The desire for nationalism is embodied in the person of the 54-year-old Dalai Lama. Although requesting a &quot;Dalai Lama photo&quot; has become a game for children in tourist areas, in remoter parts adults' eyes fill with tears at a picture of their exiled leader. The precise conditions under which he should return is a question few have considered: Until recently most Tibetans considered his return synonymous with the departure of the Chinese.    The current repression in Lhasa emphasizes how cautiously the Dalai Lama must deal with China; at the same time it underlines the necessity of doing so. Speaking in England in April, the Dalai Lama admitted the obvious: &quot;China as a government will never give up Tibet.&quot; The region's strategic position as a Himalayan buffer zone, its tremendous natural resources, and the nuclear-missile bases it shelters make Tibet too valuable to relinquish. In quantitative terms alone, Tibetan territory constitutes a quarter of the land mass of China. And here is the matter of precedent: Were China to withdraw from Tibet, or even to make concessions, the unruly Moslem minority in neighboring Xinjiang province would agitate for its own independence. Tibet is the most troublesome example of China's need to control its 55 minorities -- who together constitute 6% of the nation's population but live on 60% of its land.    The Dalai Lama and the Tibetan government-in-exile must weave skillfully among the Chinese world, their own and that of the nearly six million Tibetans in China. Having survived 30 years of shifting Chinese policies, from the destruction of the Cultural Revolution to the tourism-inspired liberalizations of the early 1980s and back to the current repressive crackdown, Tibetans have little trust. &quot;Once you are bitten by a snake, you feel fear even when you see a piece of rope,&quot; the Dalai Lama once commented on dealing with China. He himself may need the power of a snake charmer to gain something for Tibet at the negotiating table.    ---   Ms. Moran is author of the forthcoming book, &quot;Kailas: On Pilgrimage to the Sacred Mountain of Tibet&quot; (Thames andamp; Hudson, London). </TEXT></DOC>