<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861224-0174 </DOCNO><HL> Will the Quincy Shipyard Go to the Workers?---By Philip Dine</HL><DD> 12/24/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GD LABORTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN><DATELINE> QUINCY, Mass.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The largest worker-run company in the country may soon be established in this birthplace of two U.S. presidents: John Adams and son John Quincy Adams.    Workers at the Quincy shipyard, some of whom spent decades rigging booms, painting hulls or installing engines, could shortly be electing the yard's board and sharing in profits -- if current owner General Dynamics decides to sell them the yard.    The giant defense contractor closed the 182-acre property this summer because of a lack of work, and is trying to unload it. The workers are among 17 bidders seeking the yard.    Selling it to the workers would preserve a century-old tradition of shipbuilding in this blue-collar city of 85,000 just south of Boston. Of wider import, it would provide an arena for gauging whether the incentive of worker ownership can lead to success where corporate know-how has failed.    The shipyard workers believe, and a state study supports their contention, that a streamlined yard under employee control could succeed. Cognizant of the industrial-relations lessons that might be drawn, regional and national labor leaders plus the state's congressional delegation and Gov. Michael Dukakis have been urging General Dynamics to give the workers a shot. But the company's chief executive, Stanley Pace, must determine whether the nation's second-largest weapons builder, after McDonnell Douglas, wants to be replaced as plant owner by workers it laid off.    The Quincy shipyard would be a so-called ESOP (Employee Stock Ownership Plan), a structure that has gained currency in recent years. In most of those cases, however, workers have been given company shares but do not participate in running the plant. The only other employee-owned U.S. shipyard, Avondale in New Orleans, fits into that category. Workers at much-noted Weirton Steel will not actually enjoy full ownership rights for at least a decade. The handful of cases where workers have control -- known as democratic ESOPs -- such as Seymour Specialty Wire Co. in Connecticut, are much smaller than the Quincy shipyard.    The buyout attempt was hatched 17 months ago when General Dynamics announced its intention to close the yard, which rose to national prominence during World War II, when 55,000 workers built 121 ships. Nuclear surface vessels and liquefied-natural-gas tankers were later pioneered here. When the closing was announced, the yard employed 4,200.    Besides an industry slump, the yard was doomed by General Dynamics' failure to bid competitively for government contracts and, arguably, by the negative publicity generated by its misuse of public funds. Controversy distracted management and seemed to leave it less engaged in operations such as Quincy.    General Dynamics, which bought the yard from Bethlehem Steel in 1963, launched its last ship in May. Employees, union officials and industry consultants who decided they wanted to try to save shipbuilding in the Boston area formed the nonprofit Massachusetts Shipbuilders Inc. In mid-September, a $100,000 state-commissioned study on the feasibility of an employee buyout found it could work if the workers agreed to cut their $11.53-an-hour top wages temporarily by 17%, soften union work restrictions and trim the yard's size. A predicted industry rebound by 1988, primarily as a result of the aging of existing vessels, would allow the workers, as owners, to recoup their sacrifices. The Quincy wages, though much higher than those of some Asian producers, could still attract business because of federal laws requiring cargo passing between U.S. ports to be carried on domestically built vessels.    Two weeks after release of the state report, the workers submitted their bid, with more than 2,200 saying they would return to an employee-owned yard. (Projections call for only 450 to be called back at the outset, with the work force rising to 3,000 in a couple of years, depending on how many contracts are landed for shipbuilding and not just ship repair.)    It's not been disclosed whether any of the other bids would maintain the shipyard. Several are believed to call for condominiums or commercial development of the booming waterfront.    The employee buyout ran into some public concern over possible pollution when it was reported that the bid included plans for two coal-fired power plants in a corner of the yard. (The workers need private partners to help finance the purchase.) But support from local officials has once again solidified.    A decision to sell to the workers would make sense from several standpoints. With five dry docks and the largest crane of its kind in the Western Hemisphere, Quincy and its experienced work force provide a facility of special merit. It would also provide a labor-relations laboratory for measuring the effect of ownership and control on U.S. worker motivation. And it would not be an entirely selfless act for General Dynamics; the troubled, St. Louis-based corporation could gain good will in Washington, especially with the ascension of Sen. Edward Kennedy, a strong backer of the workers' bid, to chairman of the Armed Services Committee's Seapower and Force Projection Subcommittee.    Luxury housing, offices or stores can be built anywhere. General Dynamics, recipient of so much adverse publicity, instead might help write a page in the nation's labor history.    ---   Mr. Dine is city hall reporter for the Patriot Ledger in Quincy. </TEXT></DOC>