<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871211-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Boom Times Have Ended for Financial Services Firms---Employment Prospects Are Bleak inWake of Stock Market's Collapse---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 12/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EFH SHE AXP SB GE R CCI MHC V BT BK CIL CIH TIC ITT FBCBSC MOKG MSFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)INSURANCE (INS)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND) </IN><TEXT>   For the financial services industry, which for five years has celebrated boom times of expanding profits and employment, the party is over.    Companies throughout the industry, despite pockets of optimism, are standing pat or pulling back: Some have trimmed staff, others are freezing hiring, and many are searching for ways to pare costs.    And the consequence for those who already have lost their jobs on Wall Street -- or soon may -- appears grim in the wake of the stock market's collapse. Even banks and insurers, which have in the past served as havens for those left jobless by market downturns, seem less likely to offer safe harbor this time around.    There will be keen competition for what jobs there are. The big brokerages have cut close to 4,000 jobs since October. A further 5,000 to 6,000 cuts are looming as a result of the planned merger of Shearson Lehman Holdings Inc. and E.F. Hutton Group Inc.; most of those cuts are expected to come at Hutton. Thus, the total currently seems to be as many as 10,000 lost jobs. The big announced layoffs include about 800 at Salomon Brothers Inc., 1,000 at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., as many as 400 at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co, and 875 at L.F. Rothschild Inc.    Adding to that pool, too, will be next year's crop of business-school graduates. The schools say it's too early to tell how sharply recruiters may retrench, though, and students are aware of one advantage they have: &quot;Entering people are the cheapest labor,&quot; says Karen Shore, a student at Harvard Business School.    The reality for those seeking jobs in the financial services sector could prove as stark as a blank wall even should the market move upward: Many companies retrenched before the October crash, some did so after, and few are talking of expansion.    Many companies discount the effect of the crash on their businesses and say they wisely chose to grow leaner during a time when Wall Street's big securities firms were growing fat. Some even say they see any possible downturn as an opportunity. But in interviews with officials of dozens of companies across the country, the overall picture that emerged was of constraint.    Banks once provided a refuge for Wall Street's unemployed. In the mid-1970s, several picked up some of the analysts laid off then, but banks, which must cope with the problem of Latin loans, are unlikely to do any wholesale hiring now.    At the New York money-center banks, staff reductions have been under way for some years, and the crash could trigger a new round of cutbacks, particularly in capital-market and investment banking, two sectors that had been growing at many major banks. Citicorp, for one, has chopped 5,000 jobs from its traditional corporate lending staff over the past two years. Those reductions were largely offset by staff increases on the retail and investment banking side, but now cost-cutters are shifting their attention there. About 1,000 jobs will be dropped from the New York branch system over the next year, and Chairman John S. Reed says expenses at Citicorp's investment banking unit are too high and must be cut.    At Manufacturers Hanover Corp., cutbacks have been gradual. Since January 1986, the company's payroll is down by about 2,800 people, or about 6.6%. At Irving Bank Corp., a hostile takeover bid by Bank of New York Co. has added to the jitters caused by the crash. Bank of New York has indicated its intent to sell or close Irving's upstate New York branches if it gains control. At Bankers Trust New York Corp., though, officials say that there are no plans for job cutbacks and that about 200 new employees will be recruited from college campuses next year, about the same number as this year.    Elsewhere, the outlook is dim. In Chicago, Continental Illinois Corp.'s options clearing unit laid off 130 of its 1,000 workers following the crash. Continental said the reduction was made to bring staff at First Options of Chicago Inc., which had a loss of $90 million during the plunge, in line with lower trading volume. As part of a restructuring unrelated to the market's collapse, Continental plans to shed the consumer banking business and some marginal commercial banking operations of Continental Illinois National Bank andamp; Trust Co. The bank holding company, which has cut staff by more than 3,000 since 1982 to about 9,850, says it has no plans for additional large-scale cutbacks.    Like banks, insurance companies might have provided a source of jobs, but a number of them were moving to control personnel expenses even before the market crash, and those efforts are continuing unchanged.    One reason: Softening property-casualty insurance rates foretell a cyclical flattening and then a downturn in profits over the next few years. New York-based Continental Corp., for instance, imposed a hiring freeze last summer when it saw increases in rates moderating. Total employment there is around 16,500, down around 500 people from year-end 1986.    Other insurers, including Travelers Corp., Hartford, Conn., and the Hartford Insurance Group of ITT Corp., say they've been eyeing personnel costs. Travelers is already several months into &quot;an across-the-board look at alternatives to enable us to be more cost-effective,&quot; a spokesman says. Travelers has a hiring freeze in its data-processing department and has used attrition and a severance program to cut 90 of 1,000 people from its individual life and health insurance department. Travelers has about 34,300 employees.    Before the crash, ITT's insurance group, based in Hartford, imposed hiring freezes in its property-casualty and group insurance divisions. Earlier this month, it offered an early retirement program to 362 long-term employees in its property-casualty area. The Hartford Group's total employees number about 20,000.    Insurance companies appear less concerned than some other businesses about the possibility of a recession. Even in a weakened economy, &quot;you still have to have insurance,&quot; said a spokesman for the Home Group, New York.    In New York, some see a hint of opportunity amid the gloom. Bear, Stearns andamp; Co.'s president, James E. Cayne, says he has his eye out for new employees. &quot;There are good people around to be hired,&quot; he says, adding that since the crash Oct. 19, the firm has taken on 50 people in corporate finance, public finance, fixed income, retail sales and capital markets. Bear Stearns says it isn't planning to cut back its work force of 6,000 or to discontinue any businesses, although a spokeswoman says, &quot;We're always looking for ways to pare costs, and we'll be looking for more.&quot;    At First Boston Corp., a spokesman says, &quot;We don't plan any major wholesale cutback, but we have imposed a cap, which means we are still hiring.&quot; He says, though, that the securities firm, which employs 5,400 people, will shrink through attrition. &quot;We have a normal turnover of 10% to 14% annually,&quot; he notes. First Boston will be adding people in the international area, particularly in the Far East, and in equity products. &quot;We've had substantially higher market share since the crash,&quot; he says. &quot;We were there answering phones.&quot;    In Los Angeles, the regional securities firm of Morgan, Olmstead, Kennedy andamp; Gardner has instituted a hiring freeze on operational, or back-office, personnel and is using a policy of attrition. Senior managers, who make generally in excess of $100,000 a year, are taking a 10% to 20% pay cut this year, the firm says.    In Philadelphia, the securities firm of W.H. Newbold's Son andamp; Co. has imposed &quot;an informal hiring freeze&quot; for most job categories, a manager says. But selective hiring continues, and no layoffs are planned. &quot;We never really got fat,&quot; says Maris Ogg, research director.    And perks, too, are going. Butcher andamp; Singer Inc., a regional securities brokerage also based in Philadelphia, has canceled an all-expense-paid trip to Hawaii that had been scheduled for February for members of its two top sales clubs. &quot;That was just too rich a trip to be taking in this time,&quot; says Henry P. Glendinning Jr., president and chief executive officer. Mr. Glendinning says Butcher doesn't have &quot;even minor cutbacks of the work force in mind,&quot; but because of economic uncertainties, the firm is going through its budget rigorously, &quot;cutting everything that isn't necessary.&quot;    Other regional brokerages say they are looking closely at expenses across the board, but aren't planning any specific layoffs. Some say few regional firms had expanded as rapidly as the national firms during the five-year bull market. &quot;A lot of (national) companies tended to staff up,&quot; says a spokesman for Stephens Inc. in Little Rock, Ark. &quot;We tended to stay lean.&quot;    Another, Rauscher Pierce Refsnes Inc. in Dallas, imposed a hiring-and-wage freeze for clerical and support staff back in July. &quot;Our retail commission volume was not good; spreads were not good in our municipal business,&quot; says Rauscher's president and chief executive officer, David Smith. Nevertheless, the firm plans no &quot;massive layoffs&quot; among its about 1,000 employees in 30 offices in the Southwest.    Bob Malone, president and owner of Malone andamp; Associates Inc., a Denver brokerage involved in the penny-stock market, says his firm has tightened its belt in recent weeks but hasn't made any layoffs. The firm has imposed a hiring freeze partly because the staff has expanded to 50 from about 40 at the beginning of the year.    Though Boston's mutual-fund industry has boomed over the past few years, none say they are planning major retrenchments. Putnam Cos. recently laid off six portfolio managers and analysts in its equity funds but plans to hire a few more people in its bond funds. &quot;We're rebalancing to get experience and resources where we need them,&quot; a spokeswoman says. Employment will remain at the current level of 2,200 next year, up from 1,200 a year ago, Putnam says.    Fidelity Investments, the biggest mutual-fund company, is taking an &quot;extremely cautious&quot; approach, but says it isn't planning any cutbacks. The 1988 budget isn't final, but &quot;the plans we come out with will without doubt be more conservative than we would have created&quot; had Oct. 19 not happened, a spokesman says.    Some are optimistic. Vanguard Group of Investment Cos., a Valley Forge, Pa.-based manager of mutual funds with about 1,500 employes, says it has more than 140 openings to fill in the next few months. Robert Nowaczyk, vice president of human resources, says that Vanguard is preparing to introduce four or five new mutual funds soon and that demand for its institutional services is strong. Vanguard's fastest growing product line is 401-K plans, which are rising in popularity with many employers now that tax revision has made individual retirement accounts less fashionable.    Still, many companies, after boom times, are unaccustomed to talking about cutbacks.    At Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards Inc., a Los Angeles regional brokerage, no layoffs are planned, says Thomas Adkins, executive vice president, adding, &quot;Morale is a dicey thing right now, so I don't like to talk about these things.&quot;    ---      ... And the Latest Round of Cutbacks Has Begun   Layoffs at securities firms that were announced since theend of September. Shearson Lehman/E.F. Hutton .............. 5,000-6,000* Kidder Peabody ................................. 1,000 L.F. Rothschild .................................. 875 Salomon Brothers ................................. 800 Goldman Sachs .................................... 400** Drexel Burnham ................................... 100 Morgan Stanley .................................... 35 Oppenheimer ....................................... 20   *Reflects anticipated job losses associated withShearson's recently announced acquisition of Hutton   **As many as   (Revised WSJ Dec. 14, 1987)</TEXT></DOC>