<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871231-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Coffee Prices Drop Sharply When CutIn World-Export Quota Doesn't Develop---By William PowerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Coffee-futures prices dropped sharply after an anticipated reduction in world exports didn't develop.    Under a price-supporting mechanism set by the International Coffee Organization, which is made up of producing countries, export quotas are cut when prices fall to certain levels.    Early in the week, prices were nudging the next price level to trigger a cut, which would have shaved another 1.5 million bags from world-wide supplies. The global quota is 56.5 million bags yearly. A bag is 132 pounds.    However, the ICO price indicator instead ticked upward the past two days, dashing hopes of a quota cut.    On the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange, the March-delivery coffee contract fell 3.2 cents a pound, to $1.27 a pound.    Though prices fell the past two days on diminishing hopes for the quota cut, the reason for the steepness of the decline was &quot;mostly technical,&quot; said Debra Tropp, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. She said price falls Tuesday and yesterday were exaggerated by selling triggered by the hitting of certain price points.    &quot;There will be no additional cut in the quota this quarter. There will be a million-bag cut (from previous price falls), but that's been discounted (in the market) already,&quot; one analyst said.    In any case, a quota cut seems inevitable, at least next month. If the ICO price indicator remains where it is or goes slightly higher, another one-million-bag cut will be made in the 1988 first quarter. That cut may be triggered as soon as Monday, analysts said. Still, while that quota cut might support the market, the agreement allows only a certain amount of export cutbacks a quarter, and some traders had hoped a cut could have been made this week rather than having to use up one of next quarter's cuts.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices fell on forecasts that Florida, the main source of juice, probably won't be hit with a damaging freeze next month. The state has had such price-supporting freezes six of the past eight seasons. On the New York Cotton Exchange, orange juice for March delivery closed at $1.6515 a pound, down 3.65 cents and down 5.5 cents since prices rose after a cold snap in California on Christmas Day. James Roemer, a Des Moines, Iowa, meteorologist who runs Weather Trades Inc., said that with current weather patterns, there is only a 25% chance of a freeze through January in Florida citrus groves. There may be a cold wave Jan. 5-15, Mr. Roemer said, but &quot;a little bit of cold . . . actually helps trees firm up and fight the weather better.&quot;    PRECIOUS METALS: Prices were down for mostly technical reasons, with January-delivery platinum plunging $17, to $493.40 an ounce, a sharp fall even considering the metal's volatility. Heavy selling by one influential broker on the New York Mercantile Exchange fueled some of the fall, traders said, as well as the fizzling of an oil-futures rally next door to the platinum pit on the New York Merc floor. Many traders play both markets. &quot;What might have weighed on the market psychology is that platinum has traded on crude oil's moves, and there was great excitement that crude would follow through (from the previous day's rally). When crude did an about-face and headed down, nervous liquidation spilled over to platinum,&quot; said Bernard Savaiko, senior precious-metals analyst at PaineWebber Inc. Year-end unwinding of some positions and heavy European platinum selling also contributed to the fall, analysts said. February-delivery gold was down $3.90, to $485.50 an ounce, and silver also fell, continuing a slide triggered by some central-bank moves to support the dollar.    ENERGY: After a rally carried over from the previous day and from a strong European market, U.S. oil prices on futures and spot markets closed mostly unchanged. The February-delivery crude-oil contract settled at $16.89 a barrel, down four cents. Heating oil and gasoline prices almost gave back some of their gains from Tuesday. &quot;The rally fizzled at midday when buyers dried up,&quot; shying away after crude traded as high as $17.34 a barrel, said Richard D. Donovan, head of E.F. Hutton andamp; Co.'s international energy department. On the spot, or non-contract, market, the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude traded five cents lower from the previous day, at $16.90.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean-oil prices finished higher on speculation that India might be in the market for U.S. bean oil, analysts said. Rumors about Soviet oil purchases also boosted the market. The soybean-oil contract for January settlement closed up 0.45 cent at 20.80 cents a pound. Strength in the oil market spilled over to the soybean market, which also closed higher. Wheat prices finished lower as any gains were offset by the Agriculture Department's weekly auction of surplus wheat, said Richard Loewy, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Expectations that farmers will increase selling in the new year hurt corn prices, which also finished lower.    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Futures prices ended the day mixed in a thin trading session. Although there has been speculation over the past couple of days that the Federal Reserve Board and central banks of West Germany and Switzerland have tried to shore up the weak U.S. dollar, the market is unimpressed, analysts said. &quot;Given the amount of intervention over the last three days, the dollar's steadiness has been unimpressive. If all (the intervention) can do is barely steady the dollar, this doesn't portend too well for the first part of 1988,&quot; said William O'Neill, director of research for Elders Futures Inc., New York. Indeed, early next year, cash prices for the Japanese yen may reach 120 yen to the dollar, and the Deutsch mark may have a high of 1.55 marks to the dollar, said Marc Chandler, an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>