<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870218-0010 </DOCNO><HL> Search for 'Monopole,'Missing Physics Link,Stalls After 'Sighting'---Stanford Finding of '82 NowLooks Like False Alarm,But Scientists Press On---Albert Einstein's Rare Failure---By Frank E. JamesStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> PALO ALTO, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Feb. 14, 1982, nature, it seemed, handed physicist Blas Cabrera a Valentine. It took the form of what appeared to be one of the biggest scientific finds of the century.    On that Sunday, a sophisticated detector Mr. Cabrera had built registered the passage of a &quot;monopole,&quot; an elusive subatomic particle sought by scientists for over 50 years. The particle, a strange magnet with only one pole, was supposedly formed at the birth of the universe but had never before been spotted.    The monopole had long been the missing link of physics. Proving its existence would provide the evidence supporting certain pivotal theories of physics. If monopoles existed, they would be the oldest relic of the &quot;big bang,&quot; the gigantic explosion that supposedly formed the universe.    Thus, when Mr. Cabrera's machine indicated that at precisely 1:53 p.m., a monopole had plunged from outer space to Earth and through the basement of his Stanford University laboratory, he became a celebrity. There was talk of a Nobel Prize if his find was verified. Dozens of scientists rushed to build detectors and join the search for another monopole.    But five years later, Mr. Cabrera's Valentine looks more like an April Fool's joke. Despite scientists' eager search, no one has found another monopole. And in the world of science, where a discovery that can't be replicated isn't official, a consensus is arising that Mr. Cabrera's find was a fluke. On the wall of his office hangs a prodding reminder, a 1983 telegram from Nobel laureate and Harvard University physicist Sheldon Glashow:    Roses are red, violets are blue,    Now's the time for monopole two.   So goes one of the wildest goose chases in the history of science. Since the 1930s, scientists have searched high and low for monopoles, hoping to find them lodged in rocks, on mountain peaks, on sea bottoms and even on the moon. An undisputed discovery of a monopole would rank as one of the century's biggest scientific coups, making its finder a shoo-in for Nobel laurels. The snag is that no one knows for certain whether monopoles exist. Even if they do exist, monopoles probably have no practical use.    Nevertheless, hopes of scoring a major advance for basic science keep scientists pushing ahead with the search. At last count there were 35 monopole-hunting packs world-wide, including one operating a four-story-tall detector in the Soviet Union and several that are cooperating on a $10 million model under construction in an Italian mountain tunnel.    &quot;This is big business, looking for monopoles,&quot; says Stuart Bermon, a physicist on a monopole team at International Business Machines Corp., which has joined such heavy hitters as Stanford and the University of Chicago in the monopole quest.    The particle -- different from all known magnets, which have two poles -- holds the solution to some fundamental riddles of physics. Scientists generally believe that at the moment of the universe's superhot start, just one universal force existed. But as the universe cooled, the force fractured into the four known today -- gravity, electromagnetism, the &quot;strong&quot; force binding together atomic nuclei, and the &quot;weak&quot; force responsible for radioactivity.    Modern physics has largely been the story of attempts to arrive at satisfactory explanations that reunify these forces. Albert Einstein spent his last decades working on a theoretical basis for the reunification of just two forces, electromagnetism and gravity.    In this, Mr. Einstein died a failure. The result of his and other efforts, however, is a body of hypotheses called the Grand Unified Theories, which lay the theoretical groundwork for reunification of the forces and predict the existence of monopoles. The detection of a monopole would be important evidence in support of these theories.    Also, within electromagnetism itself abides a mystery scientists badly want to solve. Electric fields and magnetic fields are symmetrical and interrelated. But while electricity has basic units called electrons, no corresponding units have been observed for magnetism. In 1931, British physicist P.A.M. Dirac showed mathematically that since electrons exist, monopoles must also.    But what is a monopole good for? &quot;Aside from the fact that you can't trap it once you get it, the practical benefit of finding a monopole is nonexistent,&quot; says Jim Rozen, an IBM engineer. Henry Frisch, a University of Chicago physicist, adds, &quot;It's far-fetched to talk about what we could do with them when we don't even know if they exist.&quot;    IBM justifies its work in the field as a contribution to basic science, and, of course, the company wouldn't be hurt by receiving another Nobel like the one last year for its work on a new type of microscope.    Ivory-tower types continue brainstorming for potential uses. Because monopoles are believed to have the potential to cause matter to disintegrate, Curtis G. Callan Jr., a Princeton University physicist, suggests harnessing them as &quot;a free-energy source.&quot; He adds, &quot;You could essentially convert matter into energy with almost 100% efficiency by throwing your garbage in with them.&quot;    Monopoles' unique theoretical qualities invite such speculation. The slowest and heaviest of the subatomic particles, monopoles might be described as the Sumo wrestlers of the group, in comparison with the ballerina-like electrons and neutrons. Monopoles move at about 190 miles a second -- a crawl compared with some other particles that fly at roughly the speed of light. And the monopole is thought to weigh about as much as a bacterium -- although a bacterium is trillions of times larger.    Even in this age of the accelerator, when physicists use giant atom smashers to make previously unseen particles such as antiprotons, monopoles can't be created by man -- they are too heavy. While smaller, lighter particles can be made in an accelerator, creating a particle as dense as a monopole would take an enormous machine.    &quot;It's calculated it would take a linear accelerator from here to {the star} Alpha Centauri to make monopoles,&quot; says IBM's Mr. Bermon. &quot;That's four light-years away.&quot;    Scientists also believe that a flying monopole would sink through ordinary earth-stuff like a billiard ball plunked into the ocean. The particle thus will have to be discovered in nature if at all, and it will have to be found on the fly.    That task is rendered still more difficult by the likelihood that monopoles are extremely scarce. Eugene Parker, a University of Chicago physicist, figures that too many monopoles would have &quot;shorted out&quot; and destroyed the galactic magnetic field by the force of their combined magnetism. He says there can't be much more than a monopole a year whizzing through any earthly space the size of a football field.    &quot;It could be just one monopole passes through the city of Chicago per year,&quot; says Michael Turner, another University of Chicago physicist. &quot;Clearly, that would be a devastatingly small number for an experimenter to seek,&quot; he says, adding, &quot;But a detector the size of Chicago would make a nice public-works project.&quot;    One complex scenario suggests that there is just one monopole in the universe. &quot;We joke here that there may be only one and it went through Stanford,&quot; says Chicago's Mr. Frisch.    The silence of Mr. Cabrera's new and bigger detector at Stanford understandably is no surprise. &quot;Cabrera's new machine hasn't belched, hiccuped or anything&quot; since the apparent monopole sighting five years ago, says Joel Shurkin, a former Philadelphia Inquirer science writer now at Stanford.    Building a detector with any real prospect of spotting a monopole is a herculean task. Ideally, a detector should be spread over an area at least the size of a football field. But the biggest one so far is a machine in the Caucasus Mountains of the Soviet Union, which, though four stories tall, would only cover a football field's end zone. A U.S.-Italian team is installing a bigger detector -- about two-thirds the size of a football field -- under Italy's Gran Sasso mountain, which acts as a sort of giant screen to block out most particles that aren't monopoles.    The Italy detector works on the &quot;scintillation&quot; principle, using containers of treated mineral oil. Theoretically, if a monopole passed through the detector, it would cause a reaction in the solution, resulting in a faint light emission picked up by instruments.    But these devices have drawbacks. They also respond to the few other, but more plentiful, subatomic particles such as neutrinos, which, like monopoles, could pierce a mountain and enter the detector. It takes good computers and careful scientists to tell the difference.    Most researchers, including Mr. Cabrera, prefer detectors based on induction. A magnet passing through a wire coil induces an electrical surge in the coil. Only a visiting monopole would leave a unique &quot;signature&quot; -- a predictable, minuscule surge.    The coil is chilled to extremely low temperatures in an oversized thermos of liquid helium, to prevent the charge from dissipating fast. In practice, such detectors are shaped a bit like a small submarine.    But no one has yet figured out how to expand the device to football-field size. Mr. Cabrera's first detector, for instance, had a bull's-eye of merely four square inches. If the machine actually detected a monopole, it was an example of extraordinary luck -- comparable to using a coffee mug to catch a BB pellet dropped from a plane at 35,000 feet.    The monopole quest isn't for everyone. &quot;The kind of personality who does this is the same as the guy who becomes a gold miner,&quot; says Barry Barish, a California Institute of Technology physicist who is working on the Italian detector. &quot;He's a gambler.&quot;    Scientists at Bell Laboratories, the American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. research subsidiary that has won several Nobel Prizes, found the whole endeavor tiring. &quot;A few years ago we set up a carbon copy of Cabrera's experiment, sat there, counted and got bored,&quot; says Robert C. Dynes, the director of chemical-physics research for Bell Labs.    Perhaps most dreaded is the false alarm. In 1975, physicist P. Buford Price at a press conference announced that a detector he had sent aloft in a balloon had captured evidence of something looking very much like a monopole. But his claims deflated when colleagues found flaws in his data.    Mr. Cabrera, aware of that danger, gave no press conference. But word of the St. Valentine's Day event spread rapidly throughout the physics community. Then the New York Times ran a front-page story, and requests poured in for interviews, including an offer of a television documentary. He refused, chagrined by the attention. &quot;It would've turned the lab into a zoo,&quot; he says.    Now, as Mr. Cabrera prepares to operate his third and largest new machine, with a bull's-eye 16 feet long and 20 inches high, his doubts grow. &quot;It's important to run the larger detector, but I feel there's less and less a chance of seeing something.&quot;    The monopole search inspires pranksterism by other scientists. At IBM, physicist Chang C. Tsuei says the monopole lab is the only one of his facilities that is kept locked. On the Valentine's Day anniversary of the Cabrera event, the lock foiled a practical-joking colleague who sought to tamper with the IBM experiment.    But the thwarted prankster left a limerick under the door:    I passed through your lab on my flight    At a speed a lot slower than light   But I had reluctance   From lack of inductance   To give you a {signal} last night. </TEXT></DOC>