<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870714-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH SAID there were lapses in the supervision of Iran-Contra funds.    The former White House aide, saying that standard accounting practices weren't applied to the operation, also told the congressional panels investigating the affair that he had engaged a British firm for sabotage missions into Nicaragua. North was ordered back for further questioning today, to be followed by a rebuttal appearance by former National Security Adviser McFarlane.    A presidential spokesman said Reagan never was told of aides' plans to use Iranian arms-sales profits for covert operations. The denial was in response to a statement Sunday by Sen. Inouye (D., Hawaii), who cited a 1986 Poindexter memo. Poindexter, who is to testify soon, is expected to provide information that could be damaging to Reagan.    A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows that the public overwhelmingly believes North testified truthfully and shouldn't be prosecuted.    ---   Deaver's trial opened in Washington with the selection of a jury to consider charges that the former White House aide lied to Congress and a grand jury about his lobbying activities. The trial, in which current and former Reagan officials are expected to testify, could last as long as five weeks.    ---   Two Iranian gunboats attacked a French freighter, firing rockets and machine guns at the vessel in the Persian Gulf near Saudi Arabia. Casualties weren't reported. Iraq later said its warplanes raided a nearby Iranian island where Tehran reportedly bases its military ships.    Weinberger said the start of U.S. escort operations for Kuwaiti tankers in the gulf is &quot;imminent.&quot; The defense secretary also said the U.S. is prepared to attack Iran's anti-ship missiles if it believes the weapons are about to be used by Tehran.    ---   South Korea's Chun purged from his cabinet six ministers with close connections to the ruling Democratic Justice Party, including Prime Minister Lee Han Key. He also had the minister of trade and industry resign his DJP seat in the National Assembly. Chun named a retired air force chief as the new premier.    ---   The Canadian coast guard seized a Chilean-registered freighter on suspicion of landing 174 refugees Sunday in a Nova Scotia fishing village. All the refugees, taken to Halifax for preliminary immigration examination, appeared to be Indian nationals.    ---   A Soviet diplomatic delegation arrived in Israel unannounced Sunday for the first official visit to the Jewish state since the Kremlin severed ties in 1967. The eight-member group, traveling on 90-day visas, are to hold talks today with Israeli officials and later survey Russian Orthodox Church property.    ---   Italy's President Cossiga named Christian Democrat Giovanni Goria prime minister-designate. Goria, treasury minister in four consecutive governments, will attempt to form Italy's 47th post-war government and end a four-month political dispute that resulted in early elections in June.    ---   NASA said four workers were injured and a rocket segment damaged in a launch pad accident at Cape Canaveral, Fla., involving an Atlas-Centaur rocket. The space agency said a work platform ruptured a hydrogen fuel tank on the rocket's upper stage as the workers prepared to repair a leak.    ---   The State Department said it held talks last month with a representative of guerrillas in Mozambique in an effort to obtain data that the U.S. hoped would lead to the release of seven foreigners, including an American, abducted two months ago. A spokesman said the talks didn't reflect a change in policy of spurning the rebels.    ---   Union officials in South Africa said as many as 80,000 black metal workers planned a strike today over a pay dispute, and the country's mining industry faced a similar action by more than 200,000 black employees. The walkout by the metal workers reportedly would be the first industrywide national strike in South Africa.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon have demanded a ransom approaching $17 million to free two West Germans held captive since January, the Beirut newspaper An-Nahar reported. It was the first time the Lebanese media reported that a ransom had been demanded for the pair, who are among at least 25 foreigners missing in Lebanon.    ---   A Haitian opposition coalition called for a nationwide strike tomorrow to demand the resignation of the governing military council. The alliance led a weeklong general strike last month, in which at least 20 people were killed and more than 100 injured.    ---   Military officials in Manila foiled plans for another coup attempt against President Aquino and arrested an army major allegedly involved in the plot, a Philippine security official said. The plot appeared to be a last-ditch attempt to topple Aquino before a new congress convenes in two weeks.    ---   Salvadoran rebels attacked several vehicles to enforce a transport ban called by the leftist guerrillas to protest police shootings last week of striking hospital employees. The military deployed tanks, helicopters and extra patrols to keep certain roads open.    ---   Died: Nathan Perlmutter, 64, director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, Sunday, in New York City, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>