<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880112-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: RKO Just Can't Say Goodbye to the Airwaves </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GY </CO><IN> TNM TEL </IN><G> FCC </G><TEXT>   In 1980, the Federal Communications Commission inflicted on RKO General Corp. one of the largest penalties ever suffered by an American company, the loss of its license to operate WNAC-TV in Boston. With a license, WNAC was worth upward of $150 million. Without one, its value dropped to $22 million, which is all RKO received from the new licensees in 1982 after it had exhausted all its court appeals. The winner of the license bonanza was a group that included former Kennedy science adviser Jerome Weisner, The New Republic publisher Martin Peretz, black youth worker Bert Lee and supermarket heir David Mugar.    Bostonians are free to debate -- if so moved -- whether the new group is better serving the &quot;public interest&quot; that federal law requires the FCC to protect. A November 1986 New England Monthly article had even the acquiring syndicate divided on that issue between minority members and the business-minded Mr. Mugar.    More interestingly, the 1980 punishment did not end RKO General's troubles with the FCC, which by now have dragged on for 23 years. Last August, Administrative Law Judge Edward J. Kuhlman accused RKO of &quot;dishonesty&quot; and recommended that the FCC relieve it of its 14 remaining broadcast licenses. The full commission hasn't ruled on his draconian proposal.    A. William Reynolds, chairman and chief executive officer of GenCorp, RKO's parent, estimates that loss of the remaining licenses would cost the company some $250 million, or roughly $8 a share. He says stock analysts have told him the market already has discounted GenCorp's stock on the assumption that it will take a further FCC hit.    Needless to say, Mr. Reynolds is not happy. &quot;I'm a business administrator, not a legislator or a public citizen and I try not to get emotional about this,&quot; he says. &quot;But I really think that if the administrative law judge's decision stands, a serious injustice is being done.&quot;    Congress, of course, has decreed that broadcasting channels are owned by the public, not broadcasters, and what the public gives it also can take away. As a practical matter, broadcasters nearly always can defend these valuable franchises when they come up for review. But international publishing tycoon Rupert Murdoch learned last month that politics are never far below the surface. Teddy Kennedy, no fan of Mr. Murdoch's Boston Herald and New York Post, had moved, through a rider to the budget bill, to block any effort by the FCC to let Mr. Murdoch operate those two newspapers and broadcasting stations in the same cities.    The irony about GenCorp, however, is that it wants out of the broadcasting business. It made that decision not long after Mr. Reynolds took charge of the company three years ago. A special law sponsored by Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey eased the way for RKO to sell WOR-TV of New York so it could be moved to the senator's state. RKO sold the station to MCA in 1985 for $387 million. It has a deal to sell its biggest remaining property, KHJ-TV in Los Angeles, to Walt Disney Co. for $217 million, but its return will be far smaller if the FCC adopts Judge Kaufman's recommendation and revokes its license. It has one other TV property, WHBQ-TV of Memphis, and 12 radio stations.    GenCorp is learning, as in the song RKO disc jockeys were spinning some years back, that &quot;breaking up is hard to do.&quot; The FCC is taking its time. Westinghouse gave up an option to buy KHJ after one year. A three-year option agreement with Disney is nearing the end of its second year.    RKO also has struck deals for selling five radio stations, in each case attempting as in the Los Angeles deal to recover about 70% of the market value of licenses and property. But since RKO now is regarded as something of a honey pot for entrepreneurial lawyers and other license-application speculators, its other licenses have so many bidders that it has not been able to strike a clean deal with anyone. Sometimes applicant groups combine, as did the Boston groups. But if they don't and there is one holdout, the FCC gets tied up in knots trying to judge which applicant is best &quot;qualified&quot; to do what broadcasting stations mainly do, beam pop music, steamy movies, sitcoms, game shows, crime dramas and the like.    Even if the FCC allows RKO to sell its licenses, the license applicants would get 30% of total value. That's not bad. The windfalls become really big if the FCC requires RKO to surrender the licenses. That golden glow of free money along with the FCC's mission of trying to give under-represented population groups a greater foothold in broadcasting greatly complicate Mr. Reynolds's efforts to get out of the business.    &quot;It's been an enlightening social education for me to deal with these applicant groups,&quot; he says. &quot;Typically there's a women's group and a minority group. Two groups that applied for all our licenses are essentially just speculators. On one occasion, I got all the applicants in New York together in a room. They hate each other. The FCC has been holding hearings to try and determine who is the best of the applicants. In that process, all have their lawyers who try to dig up all the dirt they can about the others. In most cases they've been able to accept a 70-30 split with us as a general principle but they have not been able to agree on how to divide the booty up among themselves.&quot;    As to what FCC commissioners think about all this, Mr. Reynolds has no idea. He is precluded from any discussion with commissioners outside the public hearings. But he is well aware that he is dealing with a political process.    Indeed, a case can be made that RKO's troubles have had an important political component from the outset. GenCorp is the former General Tire andamp; Rubber Co., once dominated by the O'Neil family of Akron, Ohio. The O'Neils were strong supporters of the Republican Party and when Mr. Mugar set about to try to win their Boston license in the late 1960s, he hired Terry Lenzner and Scott Armstrong, two former Watergate investigators, to look for skeletons in the O'Neil closets. They found some in the form of questionable political-funding operations and various forms of anticompetitive hanky-panky with the local politicians in such places as Morocco. These revelations swung the FCC in 1980, when it was chaired by a former aide to Boston Rep. Tip O'Neill, to rescind the Boston license.    As to the latest go-around with Judge Kuhlman, the core problem was some overbilling by the RKO radio network. GenCorp had disciplined those responsible and finally had sold the network, which is not under FCC regulation. But Judge Kuhlman was not convinced that RKO is fit to own broadcasting stations.    Mr. Reynolds wants to cut off all the management time, legal fees and bad publicity RKO's problems cost GenCorp. The O'Neil days are long gone. GenCorp is mainly owned by institutional investors. Its Aerojet-General subsidiary is an important high-tech defense contractor. It sold its tire business last year and expects good growth in other latex and polymer products, such as automobile parts and vinyl wall coverings. But GenCorp will continue its fight to avoid loss of $250 million on its FCC licenses. So don't look for an early end to the long-running saga of RKO General. </TEXT></DOC>