<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Labor Letter:A Special News Report on PeopleAnd Their Jobs in Offices,Fields and Factories---By Jeanne Saddler</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR GOVMTFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   BONUS PAY gains favor as more companies tie salaries to performance.    Cleveland's Parker Hannifin Corp. gives quarterly bonuses to its best-performing divisions. &quot;You can't say, 'The company's doing well, so I'll coast,'&quot; says a spokesman. American Greetings Corp. says that even its cost-of-living increases are now tied to merit, and bonuses are based on each unit's results. Pacific Gas andamp; Electric Co. has a similar team award program for 8,000 management-level workers.    About 2,500 executives at Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co. vie for bonuses under a new &quot;Superior Pay for Superior Performance&quot; program. Bank of America increased by 29% the number of managers whose salary depends in part on performance. Hewlett-Packard Co. and Bechtel Group Inc. base all salary increases on merit.    Bonuses were granted in lieu of salary increases last year by one of every 15 companies among 300 surveyed by Hay Group, a management consultant.    PENSION-LAW PROPOSALS spark controversy about who owns excess assets.    The Reagan administration suggests changing the Employee Retirement Income Security Act to let companies use more easily so-called excess pension plan assets -- amounts funds earn above the retirement payments they owe. Current law says employers own such assets, but labor unions and some congressmen contend that workers have an interest in the surplus.    The administration's proposal would force employers to retain 125% of the promised benefits in a plan before using any of the money. But senior-citizen groups fear that isn't enough and want some of the surplus assets given to workers in the plan. Some business groups favor a proposed change that would let them use excess sums to pay retiree health benefits.    STATE EMPLOYEES will feel effects of cost-cutting measures in fiscal 1988.    Layoffs are likely so far in only five states, according to the National Association of State Budget Officers; 11 others will start or continue hiring freezes. And there's much more interest in saving state funds by offering early retirement incentives, the approach taken in Iowa and Louisiana, or delaying salary increases, the path chosen by California and South Carolina.    States that depend on oil revenue still are suffering. Texas workers won't get a pay raise, and one month's salary from this fiscal year was delayed until fiscal 1988. Alaska's governor is seeking a 15% cut in employees' salaries and benefits. Rhode Island is in the process of cutting its work force by 10%, to 17,000, by June 1988.    But Mississippi mulls a 4.5% state pay increase, citing an improved economy and higher sales-tax revenues.    SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS in Rochester, N.Y., sue the city school district and teachers union. The administrators' association claims that, under a local mentor-teacher program, 22 teachers are doing supervisory work without proper credentials. The suit adds fuel to a debate over the role of teachers as mentors.    TESTING TRUCE: The Veterans Administration and the American Federation of Government Employees agree that the union won't pursue its legal efforts to bar random drug testing while the VA develops procedures governing the tests. The VA also agrees to give 30 days' notice of any new testing plans.    AT SEA? The American Civil Liberties Union sues the Navy on sex discrimination charges in the case of Pamela Celli, a civilian technician who seeks to check her work on board submarines during sea trials. The Navy says the decision on such duty is a military, not a personnel, one.    GOING UNCOVERED: More than half of all workers without health insurance are employed in the retail trade and services industries, according to a report by the Washington-based Employee Benefit Research Institute. Seventy percent of uninsured workers who work full time and year-round earn less than $10,000 annually.    THE GOLDEN RULE guides employee policies at Consumers United Group.    There are no layoffs at the Washington, D.C., insurance company; all workers take a salary cut during slow periods. President James Gibbons says he's in business to provide a model of fairness for other concerns. The 23-year-old company has a minimum annual salary of $18,000, designed to offer a four-member family a decent living. The top officer makes no more than three times the lowest pay.    &quot;How we do business describes the kind of society we are,&quot; says Mr. Gibbons, who in the 1960s combined his anti-poverty efforts with running a company. Workers -- most of them women and minorities -- now own the company and share profits equally. The business includes venture capital and computer services companies as well as the insurance company.    Consumers United also favors unisex insurance rates, breaking with most in the industry, and invests reserves in low-income housing.    THE CHECKOFF: Tennessee Valley Authority agrees to pay $5 million to clerical workers to settle -- without admitting the charge -- a 1984 sex discrimination suit brought by the Office andamp; Professional Employees International Union. . . . More than half of the corporate women officers responding to a survey by consultant Heidrick andamp; Struggles say they don't believe networking in professional women's groups helps advance women's careers. </TEXT></DOC>