<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880113-0024 </DOCNO><HL> ...and Iran's Sense of Religious Mission </HL><AUTHOR> George Nader </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST FREST </CO><TEXT>   The wintery city of Tehran I visited last month was not the Middle East as most Americans imagine it. Indeed, what I saw, in three trips to Iran in the past year, was not the Iran most Americans perceive.    Lean, shivering and determined, Iran is a country now facing two important junctures. One is new elections, for the Parliament in March and the presidency later in the year, which at least guarantee the rotation of the current leadership and may bring new faces to power. Second, on the battlefront with Iraq in the eighth year of war, the season is at hand for a new offensive. Since the Iranians first pushed back Iraqi invaders in 1982, most of their gains have come between January and April.    Internationally, Iran feels encircled. The Arab states, perhaps mostly symbolically at the moment, strongly backed Iraq at the recent summit in Amman, Jordan. There, Iran's only serious Arab ally, Syria, was forced by consensus and Saudi financial pressure to join in the censure.    The feeling of encirclement may have begun with the arrival of the American and then other Western fleets in the gulf, along with the Soviets, to protect Kuwaiti shipping. The seeming cooperation between both &quot;Great Satans&quot; to impose a cease-fire on Iran through the United Nations compounds the sense of isolation.    Fearful of foreign powers after centuries of imperial influence and domination, revolutionary Iran is being squeezed into cohesion by pressure from abroad. The compression will very likely explode outward in the near future, with unpredictable force.    External pressure, plus the long tradition of martyrdom in Shiite Islam that the country's leaders have skillfully accessed, has strengthened the government's call for a five-million member army this year. The surge in enthusiasm for winning the long war against Saddam Hussein was perhaps the most striking aspect of conversations with the Iranians I met in December.    But Iran reaches out in more ways than military thrusts and the threat of explosions (literal and figurative) beyond its borders. It has experienced two stages of relations to the outside since the Islamic Revolution in 1979.    At first, Iranians felt nearly as encircled as they feel today. They feared potential U.S. attempts to reinstall the shah; the memory of the Central Intelligence Agency's role in 1953 is still fresh in Tehran. Russia also has a history of imposing its will on the country, and it had just invaded their ardently Moslem neighbor, Afghanistan, to stop the resurgence of Islam in Soviet Central Asia.    During that time, Iran withdrew into itself, reviling both superpowers. But in the mid-1980s, Iran began a period of modest opening to both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. The collapse of the secret U.S.-Iran initiative left only the Soviets talking to Tehran. Yet the Iranians view their relations with Moscow, which has a territorial lust for Iran dating back to the czars, as a necessary evil. In the end, many Iranians indicate that they would rather deal with the distant, ideologically more attractive and technically more advanced U.S.    But they will not deal with Washington without some interesting concessions. First, it is essential to them that the Islamic Republic be accepted and not threatened. Second, the U.S. must return to its neutrality on the Iran-Iraq War. Further, the Iranian officials I spoke to insist that the U.S. recognize that Iran's self-image today is as a light unto the Islamic world, a beacon for Moslems who wish to re-create the vast ummah (supranational community of believers) that existed culturally and intellectually until the defeat of Ottoman Turkey in World War I.    The essence of the Islamic Republic's self-image is that it speaks not only for itself, but reflects the aspirations of all the Moslems in the world, who are inspired by Iran's determination to follow Islamic principles and hold its own against any kind of foreign domination. Even in the war against Iraq, Iranians say they are fighting for the true Moslem spirit of the Iraqi people, against a secular regime beholden to the superpowers. The clerical regime in Iran today compares its role with that of those Iranian mullahs who joined the struggle against the British mandate in Iraq, when former Ottoman lands were parceled among the European victors as spoils of the Great War.    Although those in power and influence agree the time is near when certain international principles of economic and diplomatic relations must be applied to dispel their country's isolation, this won't lead to a retraction of the rediscovered Islamic identity. Tehran at this time sees no indication Washington accepts this resolve.    Meanwhile, the pragmatic opening with the U.S.S.R. keeps widening. The Soviets offer the carrot of oil and natural gas pipelines through Soviet territory, plus the stick of continued aid to Iraq and cooperation with the Americans to end the war. The U.S. talks to Iran mainly through Switzerland and Algeria, or in other ways through additional third parties.    So Iranians enter the new year with a sense of tragic buoyancy. Never, one senses, have they more identified with the Iman Hussein, whose death 1,300 years ago is the prototype of martyrdom for Shiite Moslems. Iman Hussein's quest to gain the leadership of the infant Islamic nation ended with his slaughter at what is now Karbala, Iraq; Iran has named its offensives after that site (the last great one, in January-February 1987, was &quot;Karbala V&quot;). But intense mobilization, not despair, is the Iranians' response to their sympathetic linkage with their patron saint. For they believe that destiny is theirs.    Nowhere does this spirit take flesh more visibly than in Qom. Long considered the religious capital of the country, Qom is where the Ayatollah Khomeini first took up residence upon his triumphant return from 14 years of exile in 1979. Though the ayatollah has long since moved to north Tehran, the intellectual, spiritual and therefore political heart of Iran has remained in Qom. There, in what is also the geographical center of the country, the pulse of Iran can most reliably be felt.    It was in Qom, after a two-hour ride by car from Tehran, that I met Hussein Ali Montazeri, Ayatollah Khomeini's designated successor. Ayatollah Montazeri, 64, is reputed to be more sympathetic to individual rights and free enterprise than many in Iran's top leadership. While he expressed the government's anti-American line during our meeting in his office, the word from the Bazaar (Tehran's mercantile maze, where talk consistently presages the course of Iranian politics) is that, if conditions were met, he would rather deal with the U.S. than with the Soviets.    No one can say how long will be the wait to replace Ayatollah Khomeini. The founder of the revolution appeared to be as popular and as in control as ever, and when I saw him in December for the second time in 1987 (as in February, at his home), he seemed just as magnetic, though less talkative than before.    Ayatollah Montazeri was as incensed as Ayatollah Khomeini at the bloody events during the annual pilgrimage to Mecca last July, in which several hundred died. He termed the Saudi actions in suppressing an anti-imperialism demonstration in Mecca, which led to the deaths, as a &quot;big crime which Muslims the world over would never forget.&quot;    He also castigated Kuwait and Saudi Arabia for encouraging the U.S. to strengthen its foothold in the gulf. Without these &quot;treacherous&quot; Arab leaders, Ayatollah Montazeri said, the Americans &quot;could not possibly do anything in the region.&quot;    Ayatollah Montazeri also scolded Moslem intellectuals for their silence under &quot;sold-out, corrupt leaders.&quot; And he berated &quot;the Arab summit leaders' bid to recognize the Camp David accords and safeguard the U.S. and Zionist regime's interests in the region.&quot; He also expressed hopes &quot;for the liberation of Holy Qods {Jerusalem} from the Zionist grip, and the holy shrines in Mecca and Medina from Saudi rule.&quot;    To cool the fires of anti-Americanism now raging in Iran, Tehran calls for what it terms a U.S. policy that would separate gulf security from the war -- that is, protection for all shipping, or for none. Anything else is viewed as deliberate interference in legitimate Iranian defense.    If Americans wish to avoid a dangerous and probably unnecessary confrontation with Iran, we must at least understand it and appreciate currents in the Moslem world. Ideologies and systems ranging from monarchy to communism have been tried without a sense of purpose and direction found in any of them. Now there's a return to Islam. Despite protestations of some Arab leaders, many people in the area compare Iran before and after its revolution, and see how powerfully it has been transformed. They see Iran as being not only independent but also capable of challenging both superpowers. &quot;No east and no west&quot; is a term from the Kuran, not an Iranian invention, and it has growing appeal in the Moslem world.    It is this fact, the rise of Islam, that the U.S. must plan for, not the popular concept of a power-hungry Iran threatening regional security. An &quot;Iranian political hegemony&quot; is doomed to failure in the eyes of the Iranians themselves, since they believe such a thing ultimately would be incompatible with the spirit of Islam taking hold independently in other countries as it did in their own.    A remarkable 60% of the Iranian population is age 16 or younger; the country's population growth -- estimated at 60% since 1978, despite one million killed in the war and two million who have left the country -- is predominantly among the poorer and highly urbanized sectors of the population. In even greater proportions than their elders, these young people are devoted to Ayatollah Khomeini and they have grown up conscious of the need to preserve the Islamic Republic at all costs.    This power base should guarantee the perpetuation of some form of Islamic rule in Iran for the indefinite future. Moreover, there is no opposition of any significance that can mount a meaningful challenge.    For Americans to fail to grasp the significance of these developments is to invite greater and more unpleasant surprises than we've had so far.    ---   Mr. Nader is the editor of the Washington-based magazine Middle East Insight.    (See related story: &quot;In Gulf, U.S. Underestimates Own Strengths&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 13, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>