<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0061 </DOCNO><HL> AIDS Drug Comes to a Market Worried About Its Cost---Limited Supply of AZT, Access toTreatment Pose Problems in U.S.---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Now that the Food and Drug Administration has approved the first prescription drug for AIDS, concern is mounting over just how many patients can afford the treatment, and who will pay for it.    The federal agency gave clearance Friday to Burroughs-Wellcome Co., the U.S. unit of London-based Wellcome PLC, to market azidothymidine, or AZT, in the U.S. The drug is for treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and its related pneumonia, as well as for severe AIDS-related complex, known as ARC. More than 32,000 Americans have been diagnosed with the disease, and 10 times that number are believed to suffer from ARC, a set of symptoms similar to AIDS. The company estimates 15,000 patients in each category will qualify for the drug, which will be marketed under the name Retrovir.    Developed with an urgency that matched the swift and fatal course of the epidemic, AZT prolonged survival for patients in a six-month controlled trial last year. Its major side effects include severe anemia and bone marrow suppression, necessitating blood transfusions or a halt in treatment for one-third to one-half of the AIDS patients on the drug.    Still, &quot;AZT is a first step that shows how rapidly progress can be made when the government and private sector work together,&quot; says Samuel Broder of the National Cancer Institute, who administered the first test dose to AIDS patient Joseph Rafuse just 20 months ago. This makes AZT the fastest drug development story since anti-malarial agents were sped to GIs in World War II, he says.    The drug's price -- $8,300 a year wholesale and $10,000 retail -- indicates a hefty $250 million in annual revenue for the company, based on treatment of 30,000 patients. Michael Sorell, an analyst with Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., says he expects the drug will be &quot;a big profit maker for Wellcome,&quot; and the market reacted favorably. In London trading Friday, Wellcome shares closed at the equivalent of $7.97, up 62 cents. But the price and revenue figures alarm physicians and consumer advocates around the country.    &quot;It's expensive. For patients, it's a potential hardship,&quot; says Lawrence Kaplan, medical director of the AIDS clinic at San Francisco General Hospital. Unanswered questions about insurance and Medicaid coverage further cloud the picture, because &quot;many patients aren't working, and survive on government subsidy,&quot; explains a spokeswoman for the San Francisco AIDS Foundation.    &quot;Only the privileged and rich will be able to handle the cost,&quot; adds Lionel Resnick, of the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Miami. &quot;It doesn't take much to realize that we have a very big problem.&quot;    &quot;I think the extraordinarily high price of the drug needs to be justified by the company in very clear terms, because it will clearly limit access to patients who could benefit,&quot; says Jerome Groopman of New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.    But David Barry, vice president for research at Burroughs-Wellcome, says: &quot;I think it's a fair price. It's a price we had to charge to stay in business.&quot; The company, based in Research Triangle Park, N.C., has committed a total of $80 million in research and development of the drug, including about $10 million in free drug given to nearly 5,000 patients who participated in the clinical trial.    He reiterates that AZT is expensive to make, requiring seven months of work to produce six chemical reactions that result in the drug. The material, thymidine, was once obtained from herring sperm but is now purchased in synthesized form from New York-based Pfizer Corp.    Dr. Barry also argues that because AZT prolongs life and reduces episodes of infection, AIDS patients will require less hospitalization and will be able to return to work. Thus, Burroughs-Wellcome officials figure a potential 25% reduction in the cost of care for patients on AZT, he says.    &quot;I have no compunction about charging this price,&quot; Dr. Barry says. &quot;No one flinches at hundreds of dollars a day in hospital costs, but everyone expects a drug that prevents hospitalization to be much less.&quot;    But AZT's price places it clearly beyond the reach of the many patients who are indigent or uninsured. About 40% of AIDS patients are on Medicaid or will be, according to the federal Health Care Financing Administration. But not all states pay for prescription drugs under Medicaid; it is their option to offer the benefit. Two states, Alaska and Wyoming, offer no coverage for prescription drugs under Medicaid, and Florida, which has the fourth-highest incidence of AIDS, limits prescription drug benefits to $22 a month, according to a staffer of a congressional health committee.    &quot;It makes for a very ugly situation,&quot; says Dr. Resnick in Miami. &quot;I'm very frustrated. The government has to take a lead role. We have a lot of poor patients, and I would like to see them on the drug.&quot;    Moreover, ARC patients have a tougher time qualifying than those with a formal AIDS diagnosis. In California, for example, patients with an AIDS diagnosis receive Medicaid. But San Francisco General's Dr. Kaplan worries: &quot;It's more difficult for patients with ARC. Some aren't eligible for MediCal (California's Medicaid) at this stage.&quot; He adds that &quot;the issue of whether third-party payers or MediCal will be covering (treatment) remains to be resolved. We expect that they will.&quot;    One physician, who asked not to be named, warns: &quot;Either it'll be on the taxpayer's back, or patients will be robbing pharmacies . . . . These are desperate, dying patients.&quot; Some physicians fear illegal trade in the drug will arise.    But federal health officials are anxiously studying the drug's impact on federal health programs. William L. Roper, the financing agency's administrator, estimates Medicaid may spend $50 million on AZT in 1987, and $150 million in 1988.    Burroughs-Wellcome executives recently faced questions on Capitol Hill that ranged from sharp to hostile, when the House Subcommittee on Health and the Environment held hearings on the cost of AZT. Rep. Ron Wyden (D., Ore.) asked: &quot;How did you arrive at a price of $10,000? Why didn't you set it at $100,000?&quot; T.E. Haigler Jr., Burroughs-Wellcome president, testified that the company's involvement in AZT research &quot;involved a significant amount of risk.&quot; He added, &quot;Because the full usefulness of AZT and the efficacy and speed of introduction of competitive products are unknown, our financial returns are uncertain.&quot;    Indeed, some physicians and patient advocates hope competition will come soon to force a moderation of AZT's steep price. Other drugs currently are being tested, including interferon, ribavirin, AL-721, isoprinosine, Imreg-1 and GM-CSF.    Some think competition may come from Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., recently designated the government's licensee for the development, testing and possible marketing of DDC, or dideoxycytidine. Hoffmann is the U.S. unit of F. Hoffmann-La Roche andamp; Co., Switzerland. The drug is a sister drug of AZT that scientists at the National Institutes of Health have found more potent in the test tube at lower doses, thus prompting hopes that the drug might work with fewer side effects. But only a handful of patients have received DDC, and despite a preliminary observation that it raised the count of their T-cells -- immune system cells normally ravaged by the virus -- clinical efficacy remains to be proven in larger trials.    The National Cancer Institute also is working on a third related compound, dideoxyadenosine, but hasn't named a commercial licensee. &quot;In the foreseeable future, it's likely we'll have a number of possible strategies for the treatment of AIDS,&quot; says NCI's Dr. Broder. &quot;So at some point, competition may be a real factor in reducing overall costs of anti-viral therapy.&quot;    But for now, AZT's availability is going to be the chief concern for many patients. Burroughs-Wellcome's Dr. Barry says the company has only enough to provide for 15,000 initially, but expects to supply doses for 30,000 by year's end.    Further, distribution will be tightly allocated under a company program that requires doctors to obtain a form from Burroughs-Wellcome -- by calling 1-800-843-9388 -- and fill out a description of an eligible patient's symptoms. The company then will assign a confidential patient number, and allocate a month's dose to the patient's local pharmacy.    Dr. Groopman in Boston says he is skeptical that pharmaceutical representatives can effectively control retail distribution. Dr. Barry counters that the program &quot;is actually very streamlined and straightforward.&quot; But he acknowledges, &quot;There's always the possibility of fraud.&quot;    AZT -- by now a textbook case on the serendipity and complexity of drug development -- was created in 1964 by Jerome Horwitz of the Michigan Cancer Foundation as a possible chemotherapy drug. But it didn't work and was shelved for a decade until acquired by Burroughs-Wellcome as a possible anti-microbial agent. When NCI began mass-screening drugs against the AIDS virus in the test tube, Burroughs-Wellcome became one of about 50 companies and private labs to send in candidate products. A sample of AZT was sent to NCI under the code name &quot;compound S,&quot; and in February 1985, scientists identified it as a potent virus killer in the test tube.    Even before the controversy over AZT's cost, its development and testing as an AIDS drug was marked by urgency, intermittent raw-materials shortages and bitter public debate over the second phase of the clinical trial, in which some patients were merely given a sugar-pill placebo. Patient advocates decried the practice, while researchers maintained it was necessary to establish objective proof of the drug's effectiveness.    By midsummer 1986, word leaked that patients on AZT were enjoying longer survival than patients in the control group. An independent monitoring board in September publicly confirmed the striking six-month results: Only one of 145 patients receiving the drug had died, while 19 of 137 patients receiving the placebo had died. The research group then decided to end the controlled experiment, and provided the drug to the placebo group. Since then, 10 other patients in the original AZT group and 16 in the placebo group have died.    The side effects, however, require that doctors &quot;treat this drug with respect,&quot; Dr. Broder cautions. Despite the brevity of the clinical trial and concern about side effects, an advisory panel to the FDA met last January and, spurred by the rapid and fatal course of the AIDS epidemic, voted 10-1 to recommend AZT receive full agency approval. Since then, both Britain and France have granted market clearance to the drug.    Notwithstanding its approval, AZT must now submit to continuing tests in groups not covered by the FDA approval: children under 12 with AIDS; patients with Kaposi's Sarcoma, which is an AIDS-linked malignancy; those with AIDS-related neurological disease, and carriers of the virus who show no symptoms. Also planned are studies of its effects in combination with other drugs such as the herpes drug acyclovir, or the immune-system booster interferon. Finally, Burroughs-Wellcome says it plans to fund a clinical trial in Africa, which is where AIDS is believed to have originated. </TEXT></DOC>