<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0138 </DOCNO><HL> SEC Bid for Full Merger DisclosureBegs Question: What Is Disclosure?---By Bryan BurroughStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The Securities and Exchange Commission's campaign for fuller disclosure of merger talks is beginning to resemble a failed takeover attempt: lots of saber-rattling followed by little change.    In recent months, the agency has garnered big headlines and shocked Wall Street's legal community by filing charges against Allied Stores Corp. and other companies for allegedly violating disclosure rules. But the flurry of activity isn't helping the SEC create the &quot;level playing field&quot; it seeks for all investors. A slew of recent merger and restructuring announcements have been preceded by stock run-ups, indicating that market professionals continue to know far more about coming news than individual investors.    A major problem, many companies say, lies with the laws themselves. Executives, lawyers and takeover specialists say there isn't any clear definition of when a company must publicize merger talks, leaving them confused about their obligations to investors. And they are sharply divided over the merits of early disclosure, with some companies even resisting it.    &quot;It's stupid to think that you can run a negotiation that's good for shareholders if you're going to do it in a fishbowl,&quot; says Joseph Flom, a top takeover lawyer in New York who says he has seen several deals killed by premature publicity.    Counters Wayne Cross, a New York securities lawyer, &quot;Early disclosure tends to equalize the inequity between market insiders and the moms and pops.&quot;    SEC officials concede that their rules, which require companies to publicize &quot;material developments,&quot; are vague. But the agency is pushing companies to err on the side of disclosure. &quot;This is something we're very serious about,&quot; says Gary Lynch, the SEC's enforcement chief. &quot;It's in everyone's interest to make disclosure as soon as possible.&quot;    But when is that? Consider:   On July 17, a Friday, Standard Brands Paints Co. received -- but didn't disclose -- a takeover bid from a New Zealand company. The bid, however, was announced by the suitor in New Zealand over the weekend. Standard executives didn't disclose the offer until the following Tuesday.    Dan Bane, Standard Brands' chief financial officer, says the Torrance, Calif.-based company didn't immediately understand its disclosure obligations. &quot;We really didn't know what to release, so we waited for more information on the offer,&quot; he says. In the meantime, however, the company's stock rose $2 a share Monday to $28.625 and an additional $2.375 Tuesday, prior to the Standard Brands announcement of the bid.    This sort of pre-announcement trading is widespread, and the run-up in stock prices is often substantial. According to an SEC study released in February, average trading volume in a stock begins to increase about 10 days before a takeover announcement. By three days before the announcement, it has tripled; two days before, it is five times normal. Volume surges to almost 20 times normal on the day of the announcement. On average, a company's stock price rises 38.8% before a takeover offer is announced.    Such a run-up doesn't necessarily mean an illegal leak of inside information -- although that certainly prompts much activity, takeover professionals agree. The SEC study argues that most pre-announcement stock activity is fueled by Wall Street professionals using computers to track trading, educated guesses and a variety of legal tips to make their assumptions. SEC officials, while acknowledging the continued presence of pre-announcement run-ups, believe their campaign has, if nothing else, increased awareness of disclosure issues among companies.    In June, in its most highly publicized case, the SEC filed charges against Allied Stores and lawyer George Kern of the New York law firm of Sullivan andamp; Cromwell for allegedly failing to promptly disclose merger talks and a prospective sale of six shopping centers to Edward J. DeBartolo Corp., a Youngstown, Ohio, developer of shopping malls.    While Allied Stores and Mr. Kern argued that the shopping center transaction was in the very early stages and that the proposed merger with DeBartolo was subject to financing, the SEC said that both moves were &quot;material developments&quot; and should have been disclosed. (Two weeks ago, Allied Stores settled the SEC charges without admitting or denying guilt. Sullivan andamp; Cromwell has said that Mr. Kern will fight the charges.)    The basis of the Allied Stores case was regulations for public filings that require companies subject to a tender offer to disclose merger talks or other &quot;extraordinary&quot; transactions. The SEC has made similar arguments in cases not involving tender offers; in one such brief, it pointed to the large sums paid by fallen arbitrager Ivan Boesky for inside information on preliminary merger talks to show the value market professionals place on it.    Opponents of early disclosure respond that the SEC overlooks the harm that can result from such publicity. In addition to simply killing transactions outright, disclosure may actually hurt less sophisticated investors, the opponents argue. Stock prices may be driven up -- but may crash if the transaction falls through.    That argument, however, hasn't held water with some courts. &quot;To attribute to investors a child-like simplicity, an inability to grasp the probabilistic significance of negotiations, implies that they should not be told about new plants, new products (or) new managers,&quot; the Seventh U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals recently said.    The SEC's opponents have at least one major court ruling in their favor. In a 1984 case that conflicts with current SEC policy, a federal appeals court ruled that Heublein Inc. didn't have to disclose merger talks with RJR Nabisco because the companies hadn't agreed on the transaction's price and structure.    This and other major disclosure issues could be cleared up by a 1979 case involving Basic Inc. that will be reviewed by the Supreme Court this fall. Beset by takeover speculation, Basic on three occasions said it knew of no reasons for unusual stock activity and denied that it was engaged in merger negotiations. Plaintiffs in the case alleged that Basic was, in fact, in talks with Combustion Engineering Inc., which ultimately bought the company.    The Basic case also raises questions about how truthful target firms must be. The SEC, in a 1985 case involving Carnation Co., said companies can't lie when asked about the existence of merger negotiations; in that case, Carnation, in the midst of merger talks with Nestle S.A., had said that no corporate developments accounted for its heavy stock activity. The SEC has said further that whatever companies do say about merger talks must be corrected if circumstances later change.    To be on the safe side, many companies now believe that &quot;no comment&quot; is better than any comment at all. &quot;To do anything else is too risky and cuts their flexibility later,&quot; says David Gunning, a lawyer with the Cleveland firm of Jones, Day Reavis andamp; Pogue whose clients include such rumored takeover targets as Gillette Co.    But the SEC has indicated in Allied Stores and other cases that when negotiations are judged &quot;material,&quot; a &quot;no comment&quot; won't suffice.    An example of the quandary some companies find themselves in is Southland Corp. When the New York Stock Exchange in June inquired about trading that boosted Southland's stock $9.50 in a single week, the company said it didn't know what was behind the activity -- even though, SEC documents revealed later, the company had been approached by the Belzberg brothers of Canada.    Southland repeated the assertion on June 16 when rumors of the Belzberg's interest grew so strong that Southland stock didn't open because of a trade imbalance. By then the company had created a committee of outside directors to evaluate a leveraged buyout or recapitalization plan. Southland, which eventually agreed to be acquired by its major shareholder, has defended its actions, saying that the Belzberg and other talks were preliminary and &quot;inappropriate&quot; to disclose. </TEXT></DOC>