<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880627-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Drexel Defends in Detail Past Practice Of Letting Staff Trade New Junk Bonds </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen J. Adler (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR BON </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. offered its first detailed defense of its former practice of allowing employee partnerships to trade in new junk-bond issues.    The defense was part of an extensive filing Drexel made last Thursday to a congressional subcommittee looking into the firm's junk-bond operations. The filing was accompanied by a letter to subcommittee Chairman John Dingell (D-Mich.) requesting that the boxful of materials not be made public.    Drexel said in its filing that the Securities and Exchange Commission's anti-manipulation rules did not apply to the employee trades because the trades were not open-market purchases. Since there was no public record of the trades, there was no way to manipulate the market price, Drexel said. The substance of Drexel's argument was made available by a subcommittee aide who reviewed the material.    In addition, Drexel's lawyers argued that the anti-manipulation rules were inapplicable because employees paid the same amount for the new bond issues as did other customers.    The subcommittee aide who reviewed the filing said it failed to address what he called &quot;the nub&quot; of the issue. He said Drexel didn't answer the question of whether the trading by employees manipulated prices by limiting the supply of the new issue that was available to the general public.    &quot;The comment is wrong, and a fair reading would indicate that we did in fact respond,&quot; said Steven Anreder, a spokesman for Drexel.    Last month Drexel suspended the employee trading after it was challenged by the oversight and investigations subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Drexel's chief executive officer, Frederick Joseph, cited &quot;public perception&quot; as the reason for stopping the trades and admitted no wrongdoing.    The employee investment partnerships had buying power in the hundreds of millions of dollars and traded in new issues of the high-yield, high-risk bonds, which often are used to finance corporate takeovers.    The accounts, which included a total of at least 200 Drexel employees, purchased from Drexel so much of some of the new issues that other customers sometimes faced shortages and had to purchase at a price higher than the offering price, according to subcommittee investigators.    In addition, in some cases Drexel bought back bonds from employee partnerships at prices higher than it was paying other customers, according to the investigators. Drexel has maintained that market volatility could have been responsible for any such price discrepancies.    Mr. Joseph was asked at the subcommittee hearing last month whether the trades violated SEC Rule 10B6, which bars market manipulation of newly issued securities. In essence, the rule prohibits an underwriter or its &quot;affiliates&quot; from purchasing one of its new issues until outside investors had had an opportunity to buy.    After a discussion that left subcommittee members confused, Drexel's lawyer, Irwin Schneiderman, offered to provide the committee a written explanation of the company's position on the SEC rule.    Drexel took more than six weeks to prepare its reply and to answer other questions raised by the subcommittee. The letter accompanying the filing stated that it contained confidential information and was particularly sensitive in light of ongoing investigations of Drexel's junk-bond operations by the SEC and the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office.    Mr. Schneiderman confirmed that the filing addressed the question of whether Drexel violated SEC rules. But neither he nor Mr. Anreder would comment on the contents of the filing.    According to a committee aide who has reviewed the filing, Drexel said its employee trades didn't run afoul of SEC rules, or those of the National Association of Securities Dealers governing &quot;hot issues&quot; in demand by investors. Besides its other arguments, Drexel maintained in its filing that the anti-manipulation rules were not meant to apply to bonds.    Currently, SEC Rule 10B6 exempts new issues of investment-grade debt, because it is not considered sufficiently volatile to be manipulated if purchased by the underwriter. Drexel argued that the rule was not intended to cover the lower-rated junk bonds either, because such securities are not subject to such wide price fluctuations as stocks.    SEC general counsel Daniel Goelzer told the subcommittee last month that junk bonds were not exempt from the SEC rule. He said that &quot;depending on the facts, there would be a great likelihood of violating that rule, if affiliates of the underwriter were buying the securities, then turning around and selling them themselves to the public, while the underwriter began market-making in the security.&quot; Employee partnerships would be considered &quot;affiliates&quot; of the underwriter if any top executives controlled trading in the accounts.    The SEC's enforcement director, Gary Lynch, has declined to comment on whether the SEC was looking into a possible Rule 10B6 violation. Separately, as disclosed earlier in the month, the SEC has authorized but delayed the filing of civil charges against Drexel and four Drexel employees concerning a wide range of alleged securities-law violations related to the government's insider-trading inquiry. Drexel has denied any wrongdoing.    Subcommittee staffers were surprised last week that Drexel sought to keep the entire congressional filing out of the public record, according to a subcommittee aide.    While lists of Drexel clients might be sealed to protect the company from raids by competitors, the subcommittee aide said he believes the bulk of the filing should be public. &quot;This was stuff that was produced for the hearing record and can't be kept confidential,&quot; he said.    Mr. Anreder said the firm would not comment on why it wanted to keep the filing confidential. The subcommittee is expected to consider on Wednesday whether the filing should be made part of the public record. </TEXT></DOC>