<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/03/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE WHITE HOUSE AGREED to seek a special counsel over U.S.-Iran dealings.    Reagan, in a nationally broadcast speech, called for the appointment of an independent prosecutor to investigate possible criminal violations stemming from covert U.S. arms sales to Tehran and diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels. The president also urged members of Congress to consolidate under one committee their own inquiries of the affair, and he named government veteran Frank Carlucci to succeed Poindexter, who resigned last week as national security adviser. Attorney General Meese's request for a special counsel was expected within days.    The U.S. tried to win the freedom of an Israeli soldier and American hostages in Lebanon last May by offering a swap of some 300 Lebanese Shiite prisoners, a $2 million ransom and a sale of military gear to Iran, sources said.    ---   Weinberger met with French Premier Chirac and praised Paris for approving a five-year defense budget that includes a significant increase in France's nuclear arsenal. The defense secretary, who is in Paris for two days of talks with French leaders, said the spending plan was &quot;clearly necessary because of the world situation.&quot;    ---   Mobs of Hindus rampaged through New Delhi and battled Sikhs over a bus hijacking Sunday in which Sikh extremists killed 24 Hindus. Police reported 1,500 arrests as they attempted to control the 16,000 Hindu rioters in the Indian capital. The rioting erupted during a general strike called to protest a recent wave of killings.    ---   Manila's armed forces chief removed 10 tanks from a military unit linked to last month's reported coup attempt. Meanwhile, Aquino accepted the resignations of two more Philippine cabinet ministers and was briefed on plans for a truce with communist rebels. The insurgents said they wouldn't immediately demand a share of power.    ---   The Justice Department disclosed that Teamsters President Jackie Presser was an informant for the FBI. A lawyer for Presser also said in a filing in Cleveland federal court that documents he is seeking will establish that the FBI has had &quot;continuous contact&quot; with Presser, who is charged with racketeering.    ---   Soviet officials accused the U.S. of stalling in talks on limiting nuclear-arms testing and indicated that Moscow might resume its own tests, which were suspended almost 18 months ago. The Kremlin's comments came as U.S. and Soviet negotiators opened informal arms-control talks in Geneva.    ---   Arianespace announced new delays in its plans to resume launches next year. The chairman of the commercial satellite-launching arm of the European Space Agency said the launches, suspended after a rocket failure in May, wouldn't be resumed as planned in February, but would be postponed until at least March or April.    ---   The IADB approved a $319.3 million loan to Chile despite U.S. objections over Santiago's human-rights record. The action marked the second time in two weeks that the U.S. has protested a loan to Chile because of alleged human-rights violations by the regime led by Gen. Augusto Pinochet.    ---   An Argentine court sentenced retired Gen. Ramon Camps to 25 years in prison for human rights violations. Camps was found guilty on 73 counts of torture and an unspecified number of kidnapping charges. It was the first conviction of a lower-ranking officer of the former military government.    ---   HHS officials are considering a plan to deduct unpaid Medicare hospital bills from Social Security checks. The department's inspector general, in his semiannual report to Congress, suggested garnishment of Social Security checks for beneficiaries who don't pay their share of Medicare hospital costs.    ---   Spain's conservative party leader quit as the Popular Alliance president and said he wouldn't seek reelection to Parliament. Manuel Fraga's resignation followed the opposition party's losses in Sunday's elections for a Basque regional parliament and a defeat to the Socialists in Spanish general elections last June.    ---   Cuba marked the 30th anniversary of the start of Castro's revolution with a parade through central Havana in which the country's Soviet-supplied arsenal of planes, tanks and missiles was displayed.    ---   Suriname's military government ordered a state of emergency in the eastern and southern parts of the South American country to give the army greater flexibility in battling an insurrection. Paramaribo also said there were &quot;indications that dozens&quot; of rebels were killed during an army offensive that began last week.    ---   Shiite Moslem militiamen launched repeated assaults on Palestinian guerrillas at two refugee camps in Beirut and at another in the southern Lebanese port city of Sidon. More than 1,000 people have been killed or wounded in the fighting that began early last week, Lebanese police reported.    ---   Denmark announced that it would allow women to join naval battle units, making it the first NATO country to permit women in combat forces. Copenhagen's defense minister said the decision, which is effective immediately, was a &quot;direct consequence of the general movement toward equality.&quot;    ---   Peru placed its police on alert and canceled leaves by civil guards to prevent possible assaults on the capital by leftist Sendero Luminoso guerrillas. The Defense Ministry said the rebels could strike Lima today to mark the anniversary of the founding of the Maoist guerrilla army.    ---   Died: Desi Arnaz, 69, entertainer, in Del Mar, Calif., of lung cancer. . . . Horace Heidt, 85, band leader, Monday, in Los Angeles, of pneumonia. </TEXT></DOC>