<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Let Europe Negotiate With Gorbachev---By Melvyn Krauss</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   By offering to split the negotiations on medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe from other items on the arms-control agenda (including SDI), Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has demonstrated consummate skill in exploiting current American political weakness to Soviet advantage.    Mr. Gorbachev knows that an arms-control agreement -- particularly the so-called zero option, which would eliminate all U.S. and Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles from Europe -- would be tempting to President Reagan, who is besieged by a major scandal at home and increasingly concerned about his place in history. Mr. Gorbachev also knows that the zero-based option is extremely favorable to Soviet strategic interests, because of the substantial Soviet advantage in Europe in conventional weapons, chemical weapons and short-range nuclear missiles.    Indeed, if consummated without auxiliary accords, the zero-based option would increase the ability of the Soviets to intimidate our West European allies, lead to their further &quot;Finlandization,&quot; split Europe from America and, ultimately, weaken U.S. resolve toward the Soviets as we moved to restore transatlantic unity with a weakened Europe. Even those who, like myself, favor U.S. withdrawal from Europe's defense do not want to see it done this way.    There is, however, a prevailing sense of gloom that since it was the West that originally proposed the zero-based option (even if as a propaganda ploy to ease European acceptance of the Pershing and cruise missiles in the early 1980s), we are duty bound to go through with it. This, of course, is nonsense. Just because one mistake is made doesn't mean you have to compound it by making another.    As pointed out by Gregory Fossedal of the Hoover Institution, for example, the president could respond to Mr. Gorbachev's offer to negotiate the zero-based option by announcing his intention to give control of all U.S. medium-range nuclear weapons located on European soil to the Europeans. This would compel the Soviets to negotiate with the Europeans about dismantling the Pershing and cruise missiles.    The West could reap at least four major advantages from releasing the nuclear missiles to Europe.    First, Europe is much less likely than the U.S. to bargain away the Pershings. The Europeans know that once the Pershings go, to be secure they would have to make substantial investments in conventional arms. They, not the U.S., would have to bear the costs of a conventionalarms buildup. To keep the missiles in Europe, in other words, the price the U.S. must pay is to cede control over them to the Europeans.    Second, the Europeans could get a better deal for the missiles from the Soviets than the U.S. could. According to Harvard historian Adam Ulam, &quot;the Soviet nightmare is that Western Europe will unite politically and rearm itself vigorously, thereby leaving the Soviet Union facing two superpowers instead of one.&quot; The Soviets would be even more anxious -- and willing to pay more in terms of concessions -- to get rid of the Pershings and the cruise missiles if the Europeans rather than the U.S. were at their controls.    Third, releasing the nuclear missiles to Europe would make our European allies stronger by undermining European neutralism and pacifism. Because the U.S. controls the nuclear missiles located on European soil -- which profoundly affects Europe's fate -- Europeans have been made to feel less like players and more like spectators to the East-West struggle. Neutralism feeds off such feelings of disengagement. Peter Bender, a West German political commentator and neutralist, traces the growth of German neutralism to &quot;the feeling that our country has become the training ground for a battle with which the Germans themselves have less and less to do.&quot;    Moreover, Europe's inability to control the nuclear weapons on its soil has led to an unnecessary hostility toward nuclear weapons in general and the U.S. in particular. This has proved a rallying point for Europe's peace movement. The message is clear: If we want the Europeans to behave as responsible allies, they must be given responsibility -- particularly over the trade-off between nuclear and conventional weapons in their own countries.    Finally, releasing the medium-range missiles to Europe would relieve tensions in the Western alliance. As far as Europe is concerned, the U.S. position is one in which we are damned if we do and damned if we don't. If we cut a zero-option deal with the Soviets, for example, Europe undoubtedly will cry &quot;abandonment&quot;; if we don't do the deal, European public opinion will label us as &quot;warmongers.&quot; Mr. Gorbachev knows and exploits this.    On the other hand, the U.S. could not be accused of abandoning Europe if Europe itself negotiated a missile withdrawal. Nor could we be accused of being &quot;warmongers&quot; if Europe chose to keep the missiles.    While the proposal to release the Pershing and cruise missiles to the Europeans is a new idea, the need to give the Europeans a greater say in the disposition of U.S. nuclear weapons already located on European soil has been noted by formidable foreign-policy experts. For example, writing in Time magazine in April 1984, Henry Kissinger argued that &quot;Europe should take over those arms-control negotiations that deal with weapons stationed on European soil.&quot; (The INF negotiations currently are conducted by Americans.) Mr. Kissinger's plan is that the negotiating team be headed by a European chairman, with an American deputy and a mixed, though predominantly European, delegation.    The strength of the Kissinger plan is that, with Europeans bargaining with the Soviets, it is less likely that the Pershings would be traded away. And, clearly, tensions within the alliance would be diminished. Its major weakness, however, is that it would leave the U.S. in control of the missiles that remained in Europe. Thus, the serious problems of European disengagement, neutralism and pacifism, which are associated with the location of foreign nuclear weapons on European soil, still would remain though perhaps in somewhat diminished form.    Skeptics may wonder, though: Can the U.S. really give nuclear weapons to West Germany? This is an extremely important question since a substantial number of the Pershings in Europe are located in West Germany.    Forty years after the end of World War II, West Germany's period of rehabilitation has come to a close. The U.S. cannot force this view on the Europeans, of course, but we can signal to them that we are now ready to treat Germany as an equal member of the alliance by offering it the missiles. Even former French President Giscard d'Estaing recognizes that Germany is, in his own words, a &quot;target without a shield.&quot; He writes: &quot;We cannot let Germany remain in this posture for long or {its} support for the Western alliance will be destroyed.&quot;    The Europeans may or may not accept the American lead in this matter; that is for them, not the U.S. to decide. For our part, we should offer the missiles to the nation-states in which the missiles currently are located. If the Europeans want an alternative arrangement, we should stand ready to accommodate them.    For example, the Europeans may opt for a multilateralist approach and choose to revive the moribund Western European Union (WEU) as an alternative to control by nation-states. The WEU consists of Britain, Germany, France, Italy and the Benelux countries. Unlike the European Economic Community, the WEU excludes those who need excluding (Denmark and Greece) and is totally separate from NATO. Alternatively, Germany could make a separate arrangement with France or a joint one with France and Britain.    Whatever choice is made, one point is clear. The Soviet pressure to rid Western Europe of medium-range missiles is bound to result in the U.S. assuming less responsibility for Western Europe's defense. If we want to keep the missiles in Europe, however, it is best that we release them to the Europeans rather than agree to the zero-option trap laid for us by Mr. Gorbachev.    ---   Mr. Krauss, professor of economics at New York University and senior fellow at the Hoover Institution, is the author of &quot;How NATO Weakens the West&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 1986). </TEXT></DOC>