<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Companies Team Up to Develop Better Tools---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   James L. Koontz, the 52-year-old president and chief executive officer of Kingsbury Machine Tool Corp. of Keene, N.H., has managed to buck the intense international competition in his business by moving several steps up the technology ladder from machine tools into the design of entire manufacturing systems. But in so doing he has become conscious of the shortfalls in U.S. manufacturing technology. He wants to do something about them.    He and other like-minded executives, with a strong boost from the U.S. Department of Defense, have formed the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences, with headquarters in Ann Arbor, Mich., to sponsor research projects addressing basic problems of manufacturing. Members, now nearly 100 firms both large and small from a broad range of industries, will share the results.    The Department of Defense will supply $5 million a year in funding. Mr. Koontz is chairman of the not-for-profit consortium and Edward A. Miller, the 44-year-old former president of a company called Manufacturing Automation Inc., is executive director.    The fundamental problems of manufacturing today are not much different from those of 200 years ago. They deal with cutting out and shaping parts and fitting them together. But quite obviously the products now being made and the ways of making them have changed dramatically. Microscopic precision is needed in electronics equipment, exotic new materials are employed in aircraft, and so forth. Moreover, a rising level of international competition applies great pressure on U.S. companies to perform tasks rapidly, at low cost and with precision.    The Japanese, in particular, have advanced rapidly in developing equipment for manufacturing, supplying most of the heat American companies are feeling. For example, a highly disciplined and innovative Japanese company called Fanuc Ltd. dominates the world market for computers that control machine tools, a key element of high-tech manufacturing. Trying to leapfrog the Fanuc technology will be one of the highest-priority goals of NCMS.    But NCMS is not an organization modeled along the lines of Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry, better known as MITI, which attempts to guide Japanese firms into advanced technology industries.    &quot;We're only talking about generic research,&quot; says Mr. Koontz. &quot;Unlike Japan Inc., or whoever else it might be, we still have that American way of individual freedom here. We are only talking about cooperative efforts in sharing technology and sharing funds to get it. We still can go home and act as independent companies in how we use that technology to develop an individual product.&quot;    Operating as a consortium has benefits for both large and small companies, says Mr. Koontz. Most small companies can't afford to do manufacturing Randamp;D. &quot;A company like mine for a few thousand dollars will have access to millions of dollars of research which no one in this country today has access to. There's no vehicle to actually disseminate this kind of information. Some 80% of manufacturing in the U.S. is done by small shops of less than a few hundred people. They are really undercapitalized and not in any position to do any meaningful research.&quot;    Even big companies have problems finding enough money to do Randamp;D on specialized manufacturing problems. In many cases they leave that up to machinery suppliers. But the most advanced machinery may turn out to be foreign made, which is something NCMS wants to remedy. Mr. Koontz says that if the Japanese, for example, have the best machinery, it often means they have superior products as well.    One problem companies have as they move toward more heavily automated and computerized manufacturing is greater difficulty in matching up the various systems they would like to employ on the shop floor. The software and sometimes even the hardware are not available. General Motors Corp. and Boeing Co. spent heavily to develop, respectively, a &quot;Manufacturing Automation Protocol&quot; (MAP) and &quot;Technical Office Protocol&quot; (TOP) to try to achieve greater standardization in computerized production systems. But there still is a long way to go and NCMS would like to foster greater standardization.    Machine controllers are central to this problem. Office computerization has moved rapidly but shop-floor computerization presents some special problems, partly due to the difficulty of protecting computers from the vibration, dirt and atmospheric changes of a factory environment. Mr. Koontz said that when representatives of companies interested in joining NCMS met, there was remarkable agreement on a need for improved controllers even though the types of manufacturing represented were highly diversified.    &quot;It turns out the guys in the automotive industry, the defense industry, the computer industry, the consumer products industry, the electronics industry, the food and beverage industry, have generic problem sets that cross a horizontal manufacturing perspective,&quot; says Mr. Miller. &quot;We sat people down in a room and started asking them about it and they found that Company A and Company B had the same problem. We were able to come up with a research agenda needed by the vast majority of manufacturing industries in the U.S. That was something I don't think we expected. We expected more vertical segregation. That's going to permit us more leverage on the dollars we're going to spend.    &quot;One of the larger programs where there has been almost 100% consensus is the need for a new set of machine tool controllers -- a new family of controllers. Basically the technology that is available now is from the late 1960s. In the office, the computer technology has changed radically. It hasn't on the factory floor. It doesn't make sense to put on newer high-speed spindles or faster lightweight tables or better manipulators or much more exotic sensors if you don't solve the entire system problem. Everybody agreed. It will take $60 million to $100 million to resolve.&quot;    Messrs. Koontz and Miller talk about such things as building machine tools with &quot;linear&quot; motors, which employ the magnetic field that spins a rotor in an electric motor to instead move something along a straight or curved line. That something might be a tool or a workpiece. Such a motor would eliminate the need for a mechanism to translate spinning motion into linear motion and thus would make the machine simpler and much faster.    &quot;We're limited by ball screws and AC drives at the present time, which affect speed,&quot; says Mr. Koontz. &quot;We're limited by bearings. You see more ceramic bearings and spindles now in order to get more horsepower and speed. We're limited by the control. The control will only accept information so fast, so you can't move technology. Speed is so important.&quot;    In short, NCMS is dealing with that old iron rule of manufacturing, &quot;Time is Money.&quot; Messrs. Koontz and Miller think they will be able to deal with it effectively by mobilizing the Randamp;D resources of U.S. engineering laboratories. It does seem surprising that no one had thought of it before. </TEXT></DOC>