<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Capitol Hill Panels Faulted for Failing to OfferA Full Portrait of Israel's Role in Iran Scandal---By Andy Pasztor and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For months, the congressional investigating committees have relentlessly pursued practically every lead to uncover the roots of the Iran-Contra scandal. But some critics say there has been one notable exception: exposing Israel's full role.    From the beginning of the hearings in May, efforts to spell out Israel's role have created difficult political, legal and practical problems for members of the House and Senate panels. The issue is especially sensitive because some of the lawmakers pushing hardest to uncover details of the covert operations also are strong supporters of Israel and recipients of campaign money from pro-Israel groups.    Israel's crucial participation in U.S.-related arms sales to Iran often has been addressed at the public hearings, but the close U.S. ally hasn't been heard from, by choice. Under an agreement with the panels, Israel hasn't been required to provide any witnesses and has rigidly controlled the supply of information about its role. Last week, Israel turned over a 70-page historical chronology of its involvement but, like an earlier report, it is classified and unavailable for public inspection.    &quot;The role played by Israel in initiating and then sustaining the initiative with Iran has been virtually ignored,&quot; contends Rep. Henry Hyde, (R., Ill.), a member of the House committee. As the hearings draw to a close this week, some legislators and critics doubt that Congress ever will present a complete picture of Israel's participation in the Reagan administration's worst foreign-policy debacle.    Rep. Hyde and Sen. James McClure (R., Idaho) argue that a close examination of Israel's motivations and actions is essential to understanding how the U.S. became involved. Sen. McClure contends that the official U.S. policy of neutrality in the Iran-Iraq war was markedly different from Israel's goal of weakening Iraq by prolonging the war. For Israel, the damage from exposure of the secret policy was much less severe than for the U.S., Sen. McClure says. But some members &quot;don't want to step on the Israelis' toes,&quot; he maintains, because of the &quot;very great&quot; political influence of Jewish groups on Capitol Hill.    Other members insist that the committees haven't pulled their punches, and contend that any finger-pointing at Israel may be an effort to deflect attention from the Reagan administration's embarrassing mistakes. They say the White House, in its own way, used Israel, at times overstating Israeli involvement in carrying out the overall Iran initiative.    In an interview, Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii), chairman of the Senate panel and a longtime supporter of Israel, says the Israelis have made extraordinary efforts to provide accurate and detailed information, allowing lawmakers to elicit additional facts from witnesses. And he says the panels haven't &quot;shied away from scrutinizing&quot; Israel's role, adding, &quot;The record will indicate that we have not been soft on Israel.&quot;    Sen. Inouye received $48,500 in campaign contributions from pro-Israel political-action committees during 1985 and 1986, and is the leading recipient among members of the two committees of such contributions. Overall, 16 of the 26 legislators on the panels received a total of $121,275 in pro-Israel PAC money during the past two years, according to Federal Election Commission records.    Separately, U.S. Customs Service documents disclose American suspicions of more extensive Israeli efforts to ship weapons to Iran -- both before and after the Iran-Contra scandal erupted last November -- than either country has acknowledged.    In September 1985, after reports that a U.S.-registered DC-8 jet took off from Iran and made an &quot;emergency landing&quot; in Tel Aviv under mysterious circumstances, the head of the Customs Service's office of intelligence wrote a memo asserting that &quot;Israelis have been caught 'red-handed' supplying Iran with war material.&quot; Despite Israel's denials that the plane was connected to any arms shipments, a follow-up memo to Customs Commissioner William Van Raab from another senior aide a month later repeated that Israeli involvement in supplying arms to Iran was &quot;strongly suspected.&quot;    And, as recently as last February, U.S. Customs and embassy officials in Rome, Vienna and The Hague were actively investigating the role of current and former Israeli military officials in a suspected fraudulent scheme to supply 10,000 U.S.-manufactured missiles to Iran, according to another Customs Service memo.    When Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger resumes his testimony before the committees today, he is expected to be questioned about the Pentagon's knowledge of Israeli shipments of arms and military spare parts to Iran since the late shah was deposed in 1979.    Notes made by Donald Regan, the former White House chief of staff, indicate that Secretary of State George Shultz was convinced that Israel manipulated the U.S. in the latest sales. Recounting a Nov. 10, 1986, White House meeting, after the U.S. arms sales to Iran became known, Mr. Regan wrote that Mr. Shultz believed that Israel &quot;suckered us into this so we can't complain of their sales,&quot; apparently referring to other Israeli weapons sales to Iran.    Other matters that critics say need further development include the amount of profits made by Israeli arms dealers from the early, U.S.-related sales; whether U.S. officials relied on questionable Israeli intelligence about Iran that contradicted the analyses of U.S. intelligence agencies; and Israel's role in early 1986 in reviving the Iran initiative over the objections of some of President Reagan's senior advisers.    Those who could provide some of the answers -- Amiram Nir and David Kimche, two former Israeli officials, and Al Schwimmer and Jaacov Nimrodi, the Israeli arms dealers -- weren't questioned by congressional investigators. Instead, the Israeli government gathered information from the four men and other Israelis involved in the Iran sales and passed it on to the committees in the form of chronologies.    The committees' decision not to take public testimony from another witness, Michael Ledeen, a former consultant for the National Security Council who played a key role in the development of the plan to sell U.S. weapons to Iran, has disappointed a few members.    Mr. Ledeen, who has been questioned privately by congressional investigators, is eager to testify publicly. &quot;I am the only person (from the U.S. side) who can provide first-hand testimony about the origins of this initiative&quot; by the U.S. to improve relations with Iran, Mr. Ledeen says.    Mr. Ledeen, who has had close ties with senior Israeli officials, says that the former Israeli official, Mr. Kimche, also &quot;badly wants to testify, but the Israeli government won't let him.&quot; Investigators say Mr. Ledeen's knowledge about Israel's role is contained in his private deposition, which will be made public.    The Reagan administration got involved in selling anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles to Iran with Israel's active encouragement. Starting in the summer of 1985, Israel received favorable signals from the Reagan administration to sell U.S.-made weapons to Iran in an effort to free American hostages held in Lebanon. Later, the U.S. directly sold weapons to Iran through a private network supervised by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, the former White House aide and central figure in the Iran-Contra scandal.    Col. North told the committees that Israel first proposed diverting proceeds from the Iran arms sales to other U.S.-Israeli covert operations in late 1985. He testified that, in early 1986, Manucher Ghorbanifar, an Iranian arms dealer identified by U.S. intelligence officials as an Israeli agent, proposed sending some proceeds to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as Contras, and that the idea had the &quot;full knowledge and acquiescence and support&quot; of Israel.    But in an interview, Oded Eran, a senior Israeli Embassy official here, maintains that Israel wasn't &quot;involved in suggesting the diversion&quot; to the Contras. He argues, furthermore, that in its effort to help Congress, Israel has gone out of its way to cooperate. In view of Israel's status as a sovereign nation, Mr. Eran says, Israel has every right to refuse to cooperate -- the same point made by some lawmakers on the committees.    But Mr. Eran adds, &quot;Since we have this special relationship, which we obviously cherish and want to continue, we say we will cooperate.&quot;    In the interview, Sen. Inouye described the information provided by Israel as &quot;far beyond our expectation,&quot; and said that other countries from which help has been requested haven't &quot;provided our committees with any assistance of any significance.&quot; Still, he says, lawmakers are urging Israeli officials to allow disclosure of some classified information that would help paint a fuller picture of Israel's role. </TEXT></DOC>