<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0138 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Ideological Readings of Haiti's Problems Miss the Point---By Michel S. Laguerre</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   Clearly the world is correct in defining the carnage that took place in Haiti last Sunday morning as a harvest of shame for the ruling junta and the regular army. Murderous thugs associated with the former regime, and working with a segment of the army, started killing voters who, for the first time in 30 years, were going to exercise their rights to select their political leaders.    However, outside reporters, analysts and politicians have taken the simplistic road of categorizing these events as &quot;right-wing,&quot; &quot;left-wing,&quot; &quot;interventionist,&quot; &quot;noninterventionist,&quot; etc. depending on their own ideological predilections. In fact, confusion about the functioning of Haiti's army-led government stems from the inability of some analysts to understand two important aspects in the makeup of the army: its historical relationship to the Tonton Macoute Force and the participation of some members in voodoo, secret-society organizations.    When Francois &quot;Papa Doc&quot; Duvalier created the Tonton Macoute Force to counterbalance and neutralize the armed forces, his main goal was to prevent the officers from engineering a coup d'etat against his administration. However, after a fraudulent election when he elected himself president-for-life in 1964, he began to swiftly transform his regime from an authoritarian to a totalitarian one. Toward that end, he devised a series of Machiavellian military-promotion policies to make sure that the officers and rank and file of the army became subservient and loyalist to the office of the presidency.    Papa Doc proceeded to place his own men in key positions in the various military departments and agencies of the nation. These military promotions were made not on the basis of merit and seniority, but rather as a form of cronyism. This practice had a negative impact on the morale of the army and was also a source of tension among the Duvalierist and nonconformist officers.    By the time of Francois Duvalier's death in 1971 -- he was replaced by his son, Jean-Claude Duvalier -- the army and the Tonton Macoute Force had informally coalesced their operational and strategic structures while remaining two physically distinct entities. Being on friendly terms with prominent Tontons Macoutes was a thoughtful strategy of survival used by some army officers as a way of protecting their own careers and also of gaining a promotion. Further, as a way of weakening the organization of the Army, both Duvaliers occasionally gave more power to subservient officers than to their hierarchical superiors. This was done in order to humiliate the latter and force them to adjust their behaviors to the unwritten policies or rules of etiquette of the government.    During the Jean-Claude Duvalier administration, the army's Leopard Battalion was established and some Tontons Macoutes were able to wear two hats, since they were also members of the armed forces. In the mid-1970s, it was not uncommon to find a man in military attire one day and the next day to see the same man in his distinctive, blue Tonton Macoute outfit. The marriage between the army and the Tontons Macoutes was now consummated, if not in ideological aspects, certainly in everyday and mundane praxis.    The army that Gen. Henri Namphy is left to command is made up of heterogeneous aggregates: moderate officers and soldiers, Tontons Macoutes-made army men and zealous Duvalierist officers. Evidently the great majority of army officers had joined the military service or had their promotions during the Duvalier years. They are the products of or were molded within the Duvalierist Tonton Macoute environment of the period. If these were the only problems at hand, the general could probably handle them. But one more complication must be added to the puzzle: the voodoo, secret-society connection.    Another major development in the army during the Duvalier years was the extent to which soldiers and Tontons Macoutes became involved in the network of voodoo secret societies. The secret societies function in Haiti as a paramilitary government with their own underground police forces, judicial bodies and spying agents. They even issue passports, without which one is ill-advised to travel in the countryside at night.    During the previous governments, there were soldiers who were connected to the secret societies, but the latter remained separated as units from the army. As Francois Duvalier was recruiting people without discrimination, a number of these individual voodoo practitioners were incorporated into the Tonton Macoute Force, sometimes as a group or they were able to reconstruct their group thereafter. When Gen. Namphy disbanded the Tontons Macoutes, this had no impact on the secret-society subgroups, for the simple reason that their organizations have a long tradition in Haiti, and are not exclusively military but also religious formations.    In the course of research carried out in one village on the Central Plateau, I was told by a soldier-informant that some of his comrades in the army have joined the secret societies because at night they are called to patrol the streets alone, exposing their lives to the secret-society people. They joined out of fear for their own lives, because of the suspected malevolent intent of their fellow soldiers and also because of their belief in the practice of voodoo as a way of getting a promotion.    The soldiers, who are supposed to protect the civilian population, cannot do so effectively when a secret society decides through its underground governing council to take action against an outsider. The inability of the army to control -- and also to understand the dynamics of -- the secret-society-related subgroup in its midst is a critical weakness of the structure that needs to be fixed. Much effort must be expanded to understand the strength, the operation and the relationship of the secret societies to the regular army if the country is to move toward the path of the establishment of pluralist democratic institutions.    A military intervention through a peacekeeping force is not the way to go. This will be interpreted by the army and the people as a whole as a national humiliation. It will probably backfire in the sense that the entire nation may rise not against the Tontons Macoutes, but rather against the invading force. This has been the history of all past interventions in Haiti and is, in fact, what has strengthened the secret societies in the past.    A military operation may solve the short-term problem -- that of holding the general elections -- but will by no means solve the long-term problem of the installation of democratic institutions in Haiti. Dialogue with political leaders should address the real forces at work in Haiti. For example, bringing voodoo out in the open through official recognition would drain the secret societies of perhaps their most powerful raison d'etre: secret protector of the national religion. A nonmilitary, compromised solution may yet be found to the Haitian problem.    ---   Mr. Laguerre is associate professor of Caribbean affairs at the University of California, Berkeley. He is the author of several books on Haiti, including &quot;Politics and Voodoo Still a Potent Combination in Haiti,&quot; to be published by Macmillan. </TEXT></DOC>