<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890912-0059 </DOCNO><DD> = 890912 </DD><AN> 890912-0059. </AN><HL> Presidential Power -- Limits of Power:@  Bush Vows to Protect@  Authority, Yet Brings@  Congress Into Decisions@  ---@  Some Believe His Conciliation@  Ultimately Boosts Clout,@  But Conservatives Protest@  ---@  The Politics of Contra Aid@  ----@  By Gerald F. Seib@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/12/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><GV> CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </GV><TEXT>   {Second of Two Parts}    WASHINGTON -- A few weeks after taking office, President Bush had a private lunch with Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, White House Chief of Staff John Sununu and presidential counsel C. Boyden Gray.    The single topic on the agenda: guarding the president's power. By lunch's end, Mr. Bush had ordered Mr. Thornburgh to watch for any congressional intrusions on presidential authority and to sound an alert whenever he spotted one.    Yet a few weeks later, Mr. Bush himself announced that he had struck a deal with Congress that some of his own supporters consider one of the biggest giveaways of presidential power in recent history. He gave up trying to persuade Congress to send military aid to the Contra rebels fighting Nicaragua's government. Moreover, he agreed to stop sending even nonlethal aid after November unless four congressional committees give him approval to continue -- a concession that may return to haunt his administration in coming weeks as it tries to keep aid flowing.    The contrast between Mr. Bush's philosophical concerns and his pragmatic style has produced a schizophrenia in the way his administration handles the fundamental issue of presidential prerogatives. Mr. Bush has declared that he feels strongly about protecting and expanding a president's power, and has challenged Congress on some particular issues. But at heart he is a conciliator, often trying to draw lawmakers into his decisions rather than confronting them over his authority.    The president has sent &quot;awfully mixed signals so far,&quot; says Edwin Feulner, president of the conservative Heritage Foundation, which has been one of the leaders of a campaign to cut congressional power and strengthen presidential authority.    The conciliatory approach seems wise to some analysts, who argue Congress is less likely to try to pre-empt a president's powers when it is consulted and cajoled.    But such a tack dismays conservatives, who are counting on Mr. Bush to take advantage of Democrats' recent ethical woes to cut the Democratic-controlled Congress down to size. &quot;I have urged the president to look for a challenge, to find a way to challenge&quot; Congress, particularly in foreign policy, says Paul Weyrich, a prominent conservative activist.    On some individual issues, Mr. Bush and his aides have signaled that they will confront Congress to enhance presidential authority. Mr. Bush a few weeks ago vetoed a bill that would have toughened the provisions of a deal the administration negotiated with Japan to co-produce the new FSX jet fighter. The president said the bill's provisions &quot;unconstitutionally infringe on the powers of the executive.&quot; Lawmakers may try to override his veto, setting up another showdown.    The White House also has refused to release Federal Bureau of Investigation background reports on administration job nominees to the staffs of congressional committees holding confirmation hearings. A spat over the FBI reports has held up some appointees, but Mr. Gray, the presidential counsel, asserts that the reports are prepared to help the president decide on a nominee and not &quot;to allow congressional staff to go roaming about very confidential material.&quot;    Similarly, Mr. Bush pointedly named Anne Brunsdale, a staunch free-trade advocate, to chair the International Trade Commission, ignoring language lawmakers last year inserted into a trade bill with the aim of discouraging the White House from picking her.    Currently, administration aides are contemplating proposing legislation to give a president enhanced &quot;recision authority,&quot; which would make it easier for him to refuse to finance congressionally approved spending projects.    But on many broader issues, Mr. Bush seems to drift away from his philosophical views on presidential power and stress presidential-congressional cooperation and compromise. Thus, though he proclaimed during his presidential campaign that Congress has intruded too far into foreign-policy matters, he has consulted extensively with lawmakers on a wide spectrum of foreign affairs.    He even has instituted regular meetings at the White House with the lawmakers most deeply involved with national-security issues. And when Congress recently adopted stronger sanctions than he had selected to punish China for its crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators, the administration's response was muted.    In domestic policy, rather than brusquely confront Congress for failing to close the budget deficit, Mr. Bush is trying to narrow the gap through virtually nonstop negotiations with lawmakers. He has proclaimed his support for a line-item veto, which would give presidents clear power to strike down individual projects in big congressional spending bills -- but his only public drive for a constitutional amendment so far has been for one to ban flag-burning.    In part, the Bush approach reflects the personality of the president. He loves the give-and-take of daily politics, and his natural inclination is to win over outsiders by pulling them into his deliberations. In addition, Mr. Bush himself is a former congressman, and the son of a former senator. He still values his friendships on Capitol Hill, and even pops up there occasionally. &quot;He has a very realistic view of Congress,&quot; says Democratic Rep. Lee Hamilton of Indiana, a senior member of the Foreign Affairs Committee.    The Bush approach of mixing confrontation with conciliation strikes some people as sensible, perhaps even inevitable, because Mr. Bush faces a Congress firmly in the hands of the opposition. &quot;Bush, it seems to me, is playing a very smart game,&quot; says Charles Jones, a scholar at the Brookings Institution who is doing a study on presidential power.    Rep. Hamilton maintains that a president actually loses power by &quot;thumbing his nose at Congress&quot; because his policies tend to get shot down in anger on Capitol Hill. The congressman, who was a co-chairman of the panel that investigated the Iran-Contra scandal in the Reagan administration, says the lesson of that affair &quot;is that you enhance presidential power when you follow the process.&quot;    Similarly, former President Jimmy Carter notes that in a report he helped prepare for Mr. Bush after last fall's election, Mr. Bush was urged &quot;to initiate a cooperation with Congress, to share with them on important ventures.&quot; Mr. Carter says that Mr. Bush has &quot;followed fairly well&quot; that prescription.    In fact, Mr. Bush's consultative approach has succeeded in heading off at least one important congressional effort to rein in presidential authority. Influential lawmakers from both parties have put off reintroducing a bill they floated last year that would require the president to notify top lawmakers of all covert actions within 48 hours. Maine Republican Sen. William Cohen, an architect of the bill, says he and other lawmakers are negotiating with the Bush administration toward reaching an informal understanding on notification that would make a new law unnecessary.    Sen. Cohen says he is trying to avoid pushing through a law on stricter reporting requirements that President Bush would feel compelled to veto.    Still, others see the Bush tendency toward consultation as too wishy-washy to force the institutional changes in Washington's power structure that they desire. By consulting and compromising rather than confronting, many conservatives argue, Mr. Bush runs the risk of giving up on both his principles and his power.    &quot;By pre-emptive concessions, he has sort of avoided any hard tests,&quot; says Frank Gaffney, a former Pentagon official who now is head of the Center for Security Policy. &quot;I don't think that's the same thing as protecting your position. I think it's eroding it.&quot; Conservatives would like, for instance, a bigger push by the administration to rewrite the War Powers Act, which requires congressional approval for any prolonged stationing of troops in hostile areas abroad. Bills to make the act more flexible have been introduced, but they are bogged down.    Nowhere has the split personality of the Bush administration on presidential power been more apparent than in Mr. Bush's deal with lawmakers on Contra aid.    Mr. Bush campaigned as a Contra supporter, and he and his secretary of state, James Baker, took office determined to obtain as much Contra aid from Congress as possible. But they also wanted an agreement that would end constant wrangling with lawmakers. The question of whether to send military aid to the Contras was the most bitter issue dividing Mr. Reagan and Congress, led to the Iran-Contra scandal and clouded cooperation on all Central American policies.    Mr. Baker began intensive negotiations with influential members of Congress, and concluded there wasn't any hope of winning military aid. He and Mr. Bush decided to cut a deal to win as much nonlethal aid as they could. They accepted a package in which Congress would provide the Contras roughly $4.5 million a month in such aid through next February. But Mr. Baker also agreed to send Congress a &quot;side letter&quot; pledging to end the aid in November unless the president receives letters of approval to continue from four congressional committees.    Messrs. Bush and Baker argued that the deal actually enhanced presidential power by squeezing out more Contra aid -- and thereby meeting a top Bush priority -- than otherwise would have been possible.    The administration also avoided giving Congress a formal veto, by putting the agreement in the side letter rather than in legislation, says Louis Fisher, a specialist on executive and legislative powers at the Congressional Research Service. Moreover, Mr. Fisher contends that rather than being forced into the arrangement, &quot;it was obviously what Baker wanted&quot; because he thought it gave the president an advantage.    But conservatives were aghast. Mr. Bush's own counsel, Mr. Gray, distributed an internal memo trying to block the deal. Former President Gerald Ford, who generally praises Mr. Bush's handling of questions of power, says: &quot;In some respects, I think he gave up some of his presidential prerogatives.&quot;    Elliott Abrams, the former assistant secretary of state who was at the heart of the Reagan administration's fight over the Contras, says: &quot;The question is what price do you pay to avoid fights on the Hill.&quot;    Mr. Bush may yet pay a higher price than he expected. His maneuvers on Contra aid could leave him looking too weak to counter a handful of congressional committee chairmen.    Some Democrats argue that continued aid of any kind to the Contras will undermine the spirit of the regional peace plan crafted by Central American presidents this summer, which calls for the voluntary disbanding of the Contras and their reintegration into Nicaragua. So the administration will have to fight a public-relations battle this fall to keep the Democratic-controlled committees from cutting off aid in November without a vote in Congress. </TEXT></DOC>