<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861230-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/30/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. HAS DECIDED it won't impede the return of assets to Iran.    As U.S. and Iranian negotiators met in The Hague to discuss the transfer to Tehran of $500 million from an escrow account established in 1981, senior Reagan officials said the U.S. wouldn't raise technical barriers to block the return of funds. Separately, Meese told Congress earlier this month that Lt. Col. North told Justice Department aides that an Israeli official first suggested the idea of diverting to Nicaraguan rebels the profits from Iranian arms sales, officials said.    Justice Department investigators have failed to confirm North's assertion, and Israel has denied any involvement or knowledge of the diversion of funds.    ---   CHINESE STUDENTS MARCHED in Peking, defying a ban on protests.    Thousands of pro-democracy activists, led by students from at least four Peking universities, marched through the capital as officials issued stern warnings that the unauthorized march was illegal and that lawbreakers would be punished. The pre-dawn rally came despite a weekend announcement that election rules would be changed to allow more than one candidate to run for seats in local people's congresses. Police didn't interfere in the march.    Students at Peking University hung posters calling for another pro-democracy demonstration Thursday in the capital's central Tiananmen Square.    ---   The Justice Department said an agreement was reached with the families of four of the seven astronauts killed in the Jan. 28 explosion of the shuttle Challenger. Department officials didn't release details of the accord, including the share Morton Thiokol would pay, but other officials said the families each would receive at least $750,000.    ---   South Africa issued new state-of-emergency powers that allow education officials to bar pupils from schools and to ban courses that aren't approved by the government. Parent groups had planned to offer alternative courses in black schools to supplement government syllabuses that they see as designed to prolong white supremacy.    ---   The Philippine government filed a $750 million suit against Marcos and others, the first such action in the Philippines to recover part of the fortune it says the ousted leader amassed during his 20-year rule. Manila is seeking possession of property in New York, as well as $500 million in punitive damages.    ---   Top officials in Japan approved an increase in defense spending that would end a decade-old policy of holding military outlays to a maximum of 1% of GNP, defense officials said. The equivalent of $22.13 billion would be allocated to defense in the year beginning next April 1, up 5.2% from the current fiscal year.    ---   Reagan bestowed presidential medals of achievement on the two pilots and designer of the globe-circling Voyager aircraft. At a ceremony in California, the president said the experimental plane's record-setting flight was &quot;just about the best Christmas present America could have had.&quot;    ---   France's Transport Ministry suspended a proposed salary system that is being contested by striking railroad workers and named a mediator to try to resolve the walkout that has disrupted service throughout France for nearly two weeks. The move came after Premier Chirac met with cabinet ministers to assess the rail strike.    ---   North Korea announced that President Kim Il Sung was reelected by Parliament. Kim, who has led the country since 1945, was the subject of assassination rumors last month. A new premier and planning chief also were named by the Parliament, which presented a seven-year economic plan aimed at ending food shortages.    ---   Israel's Justice Ministry said in a report that the former head of the country's secret service ordered the 1984 killing of two captured Palestinian bus hijackers and a subsequent cover-up. The report, which cleared Prime Minister Shamir of any wrongdoing, said a presidential pardon shielded the intelligence official from prosecution.    ---   Scattered violence flared in India's Punjab state during a general strike called by Sikh militants to protest the death sentences imposed on the assassins of Indira Gandhi. The three Sikhs were convicted in October 1984, and the sentences were upheld Dec. 3. The strike is to continue today.    ---   Libyan troops seized control of the strategic Zouar oasis in northern Chad, officials said. The oasis had been controlled by rebels currently aligned with Chad who were forced to retreat into surrounding hills. In Paris, government officials discussed the situation in the former French colony, but details of the meeting weren't disclosed.    ---   Died: Harold Macmillan, 92, former British prime minister, near London. . . . Andrei Tarkovsky, 54, exiled Soviet film director, in Paris, of lung cancer. </TEXT></DOC>