<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870408-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. WILL STUDY whether to raze its new embassy in Moscow, Reagan said.    The president, trying to limit political damage from the Moscow spy-sex scandal, barred the Soviets from moving into their new Washington embassy -- where occupancy has begun -- until the U.S. is sure its unfinished, $191 million building can be made safe from eavesdropping, though an accord already provides for mutual openings. Reagan also said ex-Pentagon chief Laird will head a new panel to oversee all security investigations.    Of three Moscow embassy ex-guards arrested, Staff Sgt. Robert Stufflebeam, who was accused of rules violations, was freed because of insufficient evidence.    ---   MEESE ASSURED Webster U.S. arms sales to Iran were appropriate and legal.    The attorney general informed the FBI chief last August, when Webster first raised questions about the secret sales, that &quot;all legal requirements were met&quot; before weapons were shipped, Webster has told associates and others. Webster is to testify today before a Senate panel considering his nomination to head the CIA.    The committee hearing also will provide the first detailed public examination of Meese's actions during the early phases of the Iran-Contra affair.    ---   The Pentagon has set up a secret program to develop early deployment of antimissile space systems, a Senate staff study says. The study also says the &quot;Star Wars&quot; organization has redirected funds to technologically simpler approaches that could be deployed sooner than exotic systems such as laser weapons.    ---   The U.S.S.R. has given up insisting on a complete nuclear test ban, arms control agency chief Kenneth Adelman said, and Reagan called the shift encouraging. Adelman said the concession could lead to serious talks on restricting nuclear testing. The U.S. seeks improved verification for two unratified treaties limiting tests' size.    ---   Divers recovered about 30 bodies from a British ferry after salvage teams righted it off Belgium, unconfirmed reports said. An official said about 50 bodies were sighted in the upper decks of the 7,951-ton vessel that capsized March 6 on a trip to England; of 543 people aboard, 348 survived and 61 bodies were recovered initially.    ---   Secretary of State Shultz told Jordan's prime minister the U.S. wants hostile parties in the Mideast to work out an accord for themselves. Zaid Refai cited progress in talks with Shultz on convening an international conference on peace. West Germany's Chancellor Kohl met with Israeli President Herzog and backed such a conference.    ---   Syrian troops entered the Shatila refugee camp in Beirut, ending a five-month blockade by the Shiite Moslem Amal militia. The siege had halted food supplies and pushed residents of the Palestinian camp to the brink of starvation. The move allowed the 8,000 refugees in the shantytown to leave safely for reunions with relatives.    ---   The White House is considering sending AIDS information to every U.S. household, but the plan is sparking disagreement about what the mailing will say. The Centers for Disease Control is pushing the proposal, which faces tough scrutiny from Health Department officials.    ---   New Jersey's Supreme Court agreed to hear surrogate mother Mary Beth Whitehead's appeal of the ruling that terminated her parental rights to Baby M, the girl she bore under a $10,000 contract, thus bypassing an appeals court. Oral arguments were set for Sept. 14. The court also will consider a stay of the lower court decision.    ---   Gangs of gunmen in Ulster threw firebombs and grenades at police and torched motor vehicles in riots by thousands of supporters of the Irish Republican Army. Police sources said the violence in Belfast and Londonderry apparently was triggered by a clash between police and mourners at the funeral of a slain IRA member.    ---   Polish police detained a senior adviser to Solidarity founder Walesa and at least 12 others this week in Gdansk and Wroclaw, activists in the banned labor movement said, citing plans to protest food and fuel price boosts. In a small protest in Wroclaw yesterday against the price increases, demonstrators urged workers to strike.    ---   Gorbachev still plans to visit Czechoslovakia this week despite &quot;a slight flu&quot; that postponed the Soviet leader's trip from Monday, a Foreign Ministry spokesman in Moscow said. The delay had prompted speculation about Gorbachev's health and about possible divisions between the Kremlin and the conservative Czechoslovak leadership.    ---   John Paul II said consequences for South America could be grave if economic development isn't accompanied by progress in social justice and human rights. In Argentina, the pope also heard the bishop of Viedma, the proposed new capital, suggest Roman Catholic leaders didn't always defend human rights during 1976-83 military rule.    ---   A Pentagon official called for less adversarial dealings with defense contractors and recommended policies to strengthen the U.S. industrial base. The comments, amid formation of new policies, suggest a move away from what contractors have claimed are overly harsh rules designed to curb procurement abuses.    ---   Afghan guerrillas killed dozens of Soviet and Afghan soldiers in fighting in the northwestern city of Herat after the Moslem insurgents were surrounded in part of a major government offensive that began over two weeks ago, sources said. Guerrilla leaders said that at least 52 soldiers were killed and that combat was continuing.    ---   New fighting broke out between Philippine government forces and communist and Moslem rebels, leaving at least 21 dead and seven wounded, Manila's news agency said. Two of the battles occurred Monday near Labangan and Josefina in Zamboanga del Sur province, and other clashes were reported on central Negros island.    ---   Iran launched a three-pronged offensive against Iraqi forces near Basra in southern Iraq, the Baghdad command said. Iraq said it repulsed the attacks on two fronts and was trying to repel the third. Each side reported inflicting thousands of casualties.    ---   France dropped a project to set up privately run prisons and announced a new state-funded prison building program. Privatization was favored by Prime Minister Chirac's conservative administration and opposed by Socialist President Mitterrand. Over 50,000 people are detained in French prisons, which have a capacity of 32,500.    ---   Egypt's ruling party mounted a decisive lead in parliamentary election returns, partial results showed. President Mubarak's centrists were winning 75% to 80% of the vote, a polling official said, in contrast to 72.9% in the 1984 elections. Rioting over purported vote fraud continued for a second day south of Alexandria, security sources said. </TEXT></DOC>