<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0105 </DOCNO><HL> The Computer Is In; More DoctorsUse High-Tech Help for Diagnoses---By Richard GibsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   A teen-age girl suffering severe stomach pains is admitted to an emergency room. A doctor begins to treat her but makes the wrong diagnosis, and the girl dies.    The doctor's computer sounds &quot;Taps.&quot;    &quot;The Case of Lower Abdominal Pain in a Young Girl&quot; is a computer simulation -- one of dozens being written to help physicians diagnose real illnesses and keep up with rapid changes in medicine. For years, hospitals and medical laboratories have used computers to analyze blood and run other routine tests, but only recently have computers found their way into the doctor's bag.    &quot;The computer will have the same impact on medicine that the microscope did in the 19th century,&quot; predicts Marsden Blois, president of the American College of Medical Informatics, which tracks biomedical information management.    Among other uses, existing desktop programs help doctors evaluate coughs, detect early signs of heart failure, treat diabetes, determine proper drug dosages, suggest diets to reduce hypertension and calculate the odds on how much longer a person who stops smoking will live.    Using computers for diagnosis is still limited by a shortage of proven software, by legal and ethical questions, and by a bad case of computer illiteracy among physicians. Moreover, doctors may lack the patience to learn to use computers. &quot;We tend to be oriented toward doing things in a time-efficient manner, so a literature search of 10 minutes is just too large an investment,&quot; says John Sandness, a physician at the University of Minnesota's medical school. Calling a specialist on the phone still may be faster.    A recent American Medical Association survey found that while 45% of the doctors who responded have computers in their offices, less than 9% are using the devices to help make diagnostic decisions. Still, nearly a fourth say they eventually intend to do so.    Younger doctors are the best candidates, partly because medical schools are increasingly employing computers as teaching tools. In one experiment, Harvard Medical School has been substituting computer terminals for large lecture-oriented classes. Some universities even offer graduate studies in medical computing. University of Minnesota medical students who spend their third year in the field, training with physicians, take computers along.    One such student, Joseph Stanford, uses his terminal at a group practice in Hutchinson, Minn., to tap into various medical data banks, including the library in Minneapolis 70 miles away and to stay abreast of health developments through a nationwide news service. He also wrote a program to plot female patients' fertility for contraceptive purposes.    While some older doctors in the clinic avoid his computer, Mr. Stanford says others like George Gordon embrace it. A 39-year-old family practitioner, Dr. Gordon uses a personal computer at home as a way of continuing his medical education. Several companies and universities produce continuing medical education courses on floppy disks.    Such programs typically pose hypothetical situations, then ask doctors to indicate the proper examination procedure, what tests to order and the appropriate treatment. &quot;For me it's been very valuable,&quot; says Dr. Gordon. &quot;It gives you intensive feedback on how you did.&quot;    But he is disappointed that there isn't more software to help him quickly diagnose a real patient. &quot;Say I have a 38-year-old guy with stomach pains. A computer could play doctor and ask logical questions,&quot; he says, rather than &quot;for me to sit down and dig through a medical book and look at every possible kind of abdominal pain.&quot;    Big medical institutions and private companies are taking on that challenge. Huge data bases are being assembled that, when finished, will allow doctors anywhere to tap in and get expert advice on all manner of disease. Others are confined to one ailment. Oncocin, for example, a data base being developed at Stanford University, recommends drug therapies for certain types of cancers and keeps track of patients' progress.    DXplain, a data base that is part of a nationwide AMA-sponsored computerized information network, can advise the inquiring physician why his or her suggested diagnosis isn't supported by the evidence given the computer. Its creators, all of whom are medical doctors, say DXplain is intended to help clinicians rather than replace them.    Crammed with thousands of case histories, such systems take advantage of the computer's superior memory. &quot;We've long since exceeded the point where any human doctor will remember all this, but the computer can,&quot; says a Stanford spokesman.    Floppy disks that doctors can load into their own microcomputers aren't as elaborate, but still offer quick analysis as well as a teaching format perhaps more entertaining than a textbook.    In a program called The Case of the Confused Housewife, a woman comes into an emergency room complaining of dizziness. The software, made by Cardinal Systems Inc. in Minneapolis, not only includes standard textbook data but also has a simple graphic of the sympathetic nervous system. Physicians can plug in characteristics of an actual patient and test a hypothesis. The program also indicates appropriate therapeutic drugs, by brand name and cost, with this caveat: &quot;Suggested drugs shouldn't be prescribed without your careful assessment of the individual patient.&quot;    To help doctors and medical students sort through the thousands of pills and potions on the market, another computer program called McDope, written at McMaster University in Ontario, allows the user to administer drugs to a variety of patients and immediately witness the likely results. Until it was revised, the program included this line: &quot;Your patient just died; do you have a good lawyer?&quot;    Indeed, numerous legal and ethical questions need to be considered before the medical community accepts computerized diagnosis. For instance, can software designers and their users be held liable for a glitch in a computer diagnosis?    So far, no significant cases have come before the courts. But Edward Shortliffe, a leading medical programmer, argues in the current Journal of the American Medical Association that: &quot;It is unrealistic to require that decision-support programs make correct assessments under all circumstances.&quot; The Food and Drug Administration is still reviewing whether diagnostic programs come under its jurisdiction as medical devices. One dilemma underlying such issues is the probable nature of medical diagnoses; they're often couched in phrases like &quot;seem to have&quot; and &quot;the tests indicate.&quot; Some legal specialists believe doctors eventually might risk malpractice suits for not consulting computer programs.    Other intriguing possibilities are raised because the programs presumably would be available to the public. Might insurance company clerks run diagnostic programs to second-guess a physician's therapy and fees?    Translating how doctors think into computer code also remains a major challenge. &quot;A lot of things we do in medicine are hard to write down in rules,&quot; says David Olson, a professor at the University of Nebraska medical school. Doctors quickly determine a great deal about a patient in a single glance, while a computer would have to be told whether the person is a man or woman, young or old, bedridden or not.    But M. Rex Wheeler, a California physician who is working on a uniform medical code for software, says such issues will dissipate in the need for rapid, better data in an extremely complex profession. &quot;The physician must review old charts and get information from patients who don't remember, and as a result may make diagnoses from inadequate information,&quot; he says. &quot;He shoots from the hip and has no choice because that's what a paper-based system presents him.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>