<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880418-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAELI AGENTS KILLED a PLO leader, sources in Jerusalem said.    An eight-member squad including members of the Israeli intelligence service, navy and an elite commando unit carried out Saturday's assassination of Khalil al-Wazir in Tunis, according to sources quoted by the Associated Press. Palestinians angered by the slaying boycotted their jobs and staged protest marches in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Israel imposed curfews in the areas. At least eight Arabs were wounded in clashes with Israeli soldiers.    At least 17 Arabs were killed Saturday in violence sparked by al-Wazir's death. It was the highest one-day toll since the uprising began in December.    ---   THE CONTRAS REJECTED a new peace proposal presented by the Sandinistas.    Nicaragua's defense minister, at talks that began Friday in Managua aimed at a permanent truce in the six-year civil war, submitted the new plan to U.S.-backed rebel leaders. Details weren't disclosed. But the insurgents said the Sandinista proposal had raised &quot;tremendous doubts&quot; about whether a preliminary cease-fire accord signed last month could work. The rebels also presented a proposal.    A deadlock in the talks reportedly was caused by the Contras' insistence that the constitution be rewritten. Managua wants a truce signed first.    ---   Arab hijackers agreed to continue negotiations in Algeria, allowing a departure deadline to lapse. A passenger aboard the hijacked Kuwaiti jet told the negotiators via radio that the about 35 passengers on the plane, commandeered nearly two weeks ago, faced certain death if Kuwait refused to release 17 convicted terrorists.    ---   Administration officials said Meese's choice for a top Justice Department post is &quot;seriously reconsidering&quot; his commitment to the attorney general. The aides said John C. Shepherd, a St. Louis lawyer, is likely to announce in the next few days that he won't stand for nomination to be deputy attorney general.    ---   Dukakis defeated Jackson by a 3-to-2 margin in Saturday's Arizona presidential caucuses. The Massachusetts governor won 22 delegates to the Democratic National Convention in July. Jackson received 14 delegates and Gore got none. All three candidates continued campaigning in New York for tomorrow's primary election.    ---   France is recalling its ambassador to Ottawa after four French politicians and 17 residents of Paris-held islands south of Newfoundland were arrested for illegally fishing in Canadian waters. France's Foreign Ministry said the decision to recall the envoy was taken because of a &quot;worsening of the French-Canadian dispute over fishing.&quot;    ---   Iran has accelerated its mine-laying operations in the Persian Gulf, Pentagon officials said. But the officials said that, for the time being, it won't be necessary to send additional U.S. forces to the region. Officials in Tehran denied placing mines in the gulf, saying last week's explosion that crippled a U.S. frigate seemed suspicious.    ---   Afghan guerrilla leaders have asked refugees to be patient and remain in Pakistan until Afghanistan's government is replaced by Islamic leadership. Following last week's signing in Geneva of an accord on a Soviet military withdrawal from Afghanistan, Kabul's leader, Najibullah, urged the estimated five million exiles to return.    ---   FBI agents traveled to Naples to explore a possible link between a Japanese man carrying pipe bombs in New Jersey to last week's bombing of a USO club in which four people were killed. Japanese terrorists were blamed. Meanwhile, police in Rome sought the Red Brigades for Saturday's killing of an aide to Prime Minister De Mita.    ---   Bangladesh's President Ershad freed 272 political prisoners, but accused opposition leaders of inviting foreign powers, including the U.S., to interfere in Dhaka's internal matters. Opposition sources said the freed dissidents were among about 5,000 activists arrested during a drive to disrupt last month's parliamentary elections.    ---   Sweden's prime minister threatened to ban all his country's arms exports because of a series of scandals involving illegal weapons sales to the Mideast and Third World. Ingvar Carlsson criticized the arms makers, accusing them of flouting the law and damaging Sweden's reputation abroad.    ---   Thousands of Poles marched through the site of Warsaw's former Jewish ghetto in an unsanctioned rally to mark the 1943 ghetto uprising. Police didn't interfere in the march, which retraced the route of condemned Polish Jews to the deportation site for the Nazis' Treblinka death camp. </TEXT></DOC>