<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880303-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Henry George Wouldn't Be Big on Today's Growth Controls </HL><AUTHOR> Fred E. Case and Jeff Gale </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> REL CON </IN><TEXT>   The housing industry has managed to provide home ownership to more than 60% of American families and generally acceptable rental housing to the rest, but this may no longer be possible if local growth-control movements continue to gain momentum. They appear to be accelerating as more communities, faced with declining revenues, decaying neighborhoods and inadequate public facilities, use a combination of growth controls and &quot;exactions&quot; on new development to reduce traffic congestion, school overcrowding and the overtaxing of sewers, water and power.    The growth controls are rooted in governmental efforts to protect the &quot;public welfare&quot; while exactions are government efforts to reduce public costs. These two activities came together beginning in the 1960s as cities tried to solve their fiscal and growth problems by reducing the number of new housing units permitted per acre while also requiring the builders to contribute streets, sewers, schools and parks in proportion to the demand created by the new development for these facilities. More recently, urban authorities have begun to demand provision of more such items than might be needed by the new developments themselves.    The difficulties of using strict controls and high levels of exactions are exemplified by Santa Monica, Calif.'s Colorado Place, now entering its final phase of construction after eight years of battles between developers, regulators and the local population. An attractive low-rise, multi-use structure with underground parking, street-level shops and restaurants and upper levels of office space, it continues to be the center of controversy over how much additional land, low-cost housing units, parks and public improvements the developer must provide. Protracted bitterness of this sort is a prospect when a builder wants maximum profits and the city wants to minimize its infrastructure costs and redistribute income by recouping some of the potential development profits.    Yet the record of growth checks so far is more than one of hard feelings. Continued traffic congestion, higher housing prices, and public-debt worries through many of California's growth-control belts testify to the failures of limits and exactions. Hardly has this mattered, however. Even where elected officials have balked at more stringent regulations, citizen groups in such hotbeds as Orange County are mounting efforts to impose these measures by referendum.    Proponents justify their increasingly strict ordinances by accusing developers of receiving &quot;unearned profits&quot; from appreciated values while leaving cities and counties to deal with the higher public costs and a lack of affordable housing. Builders and property owners reply that housing costs have been raised by as much as 30%, to unaffordable levels that discourage additional housing construction. They are beginning to resist such moves as unjustified public takings of private property, and relocate projects to areas with less onerous restrictions.    The local-government actions embody some elements of the thinking of Henry George, who in &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot; (1879) urged that all local revenues be obtained from land taxes. The thrust of his proposals, some of which actually had considerable merit, seems to be gaining favor in many communities.    George wanted to redistribute the &quot;monopolistic profits&quot; of the land speculators who were buying California land at low prices, holding it while local communities grew, and then selling high. He urged (1) that all land be taxed on the basis of its potentially highest and best use and not its current use; and, (2) this tax be the only one imposed by local government. George assumed this would force the most economic uses of all land, prevent speculative purchases and holdings and recapture undeserved gains for the public. His views were strongly rejected by politicians and mainstream economists as too &quot;socialistic,&quot; too unorthodox to receive serious attention. Not today.    Experienced builders understand, however, that in many localities controls and exactions do not prevent the monopolistic profits predicted by Henry George but may even add to them. While developers are discouraged from operating in these controlled markets, a few determined survivor-builders operate successfully. Ultimately the demand for growth permits the surviving developers to recoup the increased costs while charging an artificial premium. Meanwhile adjacent areas receive the congestion that the slow-growth areas wanted to avoid.    Even though the current uses of controls and exactions have overtones of Henry George's ideas about taxation, they do not fully use them. Georgian taxation of land values was intended to recapture substantial amounts of &quot;unearned monopoly profits&quot; from all properties rather than only minimal amounts from new developments as currently collected through exactions. In addition, George's approach encouraged rather than discouraged the rapid and full development of land. Today's growth management makes land more valuable by limiting development and provides no motivation for more efficient uses. The &quot;public surplus&quot; is thus constricted.    A basis now exists on which Georgian ideas of taxation could be applied more fully. The Supreme Court ruled last term in First Evangelical Lutheran Church v. Los Angeles that &quot;local governments must pay damages to landowners who are deprived even temporarily of all use of their land by zoning regulations.&quot; This is a tacit recognition that government activities can create or destroy private profits. It would suggest that if government must pay for actions that destroy private values it should be able to recover some portion of private profits created by public actions, such as the construction of a nearby expressway off-ramp or mass-transit stop.    This has ramifications for traffic and infrastructure. Underdeveloped properties that do not maximize tax revenues also shift new development to the urban fringes, thereby increasing congestion and the need for more public facilities and services. Growth control that gives incentive for more intensive development in core areas would seem to be an answer.    When less than 40% of American families at this point can afford to purchase a home, some municipalities are strapped and large areas of central cities remain underdeveloped, current community &quot;exactions&quot; and growth controls cannot be justified. Let's re-examine Henry George's ideas and give them a proper test.    ---   Mr. Case heads the Real Estate Research Program at UCLA. Mr. Gale is a professor of business administration at Loyola Marymount in Los Angeles. </TEXT></DOC>