<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880906-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Nation in Flux: On Eve of Olympics, South Korea Is a Land Of Clashing Cultures --- Part First World, Part Third, It Modernizes Anxiously; Rejecting Japan Analogy --- Shamans and Semiconductors </HL><AUTHOR> Urban C. Lehner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This city's ubiquitous street vendors have always haggled with gusto, so the visiting Korean-American student demanded to know why this one wouldn't. The vendor blithely explained: &quot;Korea is a First World country now.&quot;    Many Koreans these days say the same, and their pride is understandable. Seoul has modern skyscrapers, an extensive new subway system and factories in its suburbs that make semiconductors and computers. When a nation's hot new businesses include ice-cream parlors, flower shops and driver-education schools, clearly it is coming of age.    But South Korea is changing so fast that First World and Third World often exist side by side. One out of five Koreans still works on farms, compared to fewer than one of 20 in the U.S. Wildly careening, smoke-belching buses terrorize the traffic and foul the air of the big cities, but complaints about &quot;quality of life&quot; are just starting to be heard. The percentage of the population with telephones is half that of some industrialized countries, and most technology in the semiconductor and computer factories was imported from Japan or the U.S.    The 1988 Olympics, beginning in Seoul Sept. 17, are focusing the world's attention on South Korea and its &quot;economic miracle,&quot; much as the 1964 Tokyo Games did for Japan. Park Seh Jik, the head of the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee, says &quot;the Olympics are an excellent way for a people to be introduced to the world.&quot;    But what kind of country will the world meet? &quot;We Koreans have been wondering about that, too,&quot; says Kim Kyong Hwan, a former Korean ambassador to the U.S. &quot;What kind of country is this?&quot;    Few nations are more in need of an introduction. Although Korea exports world-wide, many foreigners' knowledge of the place could be summed up by a recent Doonesbury comic strip in which a student suggests that Korea is the planet after Mars.    A Korean report recommending economic reforms represented an attempt at building a consensus and understanding the country's new role as a major world trading power.    Not a 'Second Japan'   Just 15 minutes from a stop on that gleaming new subway in northern Seoul, the urgent banging of a traditional Korean drum and cymbals jars the mountainside. A Shaman priestess in flowing robes is communicating with the spirit world, just as priestesses in this animistic religion have for millenniums. Christianity claims one-fifth of all Koreans, and Buddhism almost another fifth, but whatever their faith, some Koreans still ask the shaman priestess to intervene with the spirits to help their businesses prosper or to chase away their illnesses.    Between bouts of chanting and dancing, the old woman stops to report to the white-clad family of mourners who have hired her to inquire after a recently deceased relative. &quot;I see him seated next to two important spirits, reading philosophy,&quot; she says.    Resuming her dance, she balances a tomato from the altar on her head. She balances the head of a pig on a trident fork. She throws rice at the pigeons milling outside the shrine.    ---   Korea, as any Korean will tell you, is not a &quot;second Japan.&quot; But different Koreans mean different things when they reject the Japan analogy. Those who have traveled widely and understand the threat of protectionism fear that Korea's economic takeoff will be aborted if the rest of the world suddenly starts treating Korea like Japan too soon.    Other Koreans, caught up in today's heady climate of nationalistic self-confidence, agree with Koh Chun Goon, a garment worker in Seoul: &quot;Korea will go on to even greater development than Japan, because we're a step above where Japan was in 1964.&quot;    Regarding 1964, at least, Mr. Koh has a point. In this Olympic year, South Korea expects to have a $10 billion trade surplus and a gross national product of $3,000 for each of its 42 million inhabitants. By contrast in 1964, when Tokyo was host to the Summer Games, Japan had a $734 million trade deficit, and its per capita GNP, even adjusted for changes in price levels since then, was below $2,500. In contrast to today's high-rise Seoul skyline, Tokyo in 1964 had but one real skyscraper.    Yet in other respects, Japan had a much stronger claim to first-world status in 1964 than Korea does today. Unlike Korea, which was industrially backward until the 1960s, Japan had been one of the world's great powers from the late 19th century until it embarked on a suicidal war against the U.S. in 1941.    Kim Chongsoo, an economist at the Korea Development Institute, visited Japan in 1967 as a college sophomore, and he thinks today's Korea is &quot;more or less the same&quot; as mid-1960s Japan. The Japanese were becoming big ice-cream eaters then, just as the Koreans are now. The Japanese government was beginning to give foreign aid to other countries then, as the Koreans are today. &quot;The air pollution of Tokyo,&quot; Mr. Kim vividly recalls, &quot;was really bad at the time -- perhaps as bad as it is in Seoul now.&quot;    Cultural Turmoil   When the black ships of Commodore Perry started arriving in the 1850s, the Japanese responded pragmatically. Barbarians the invaders might be, but the barbarians had battleships, and for Japan to retain its political independence it would have to learn to build battleships, too.    The Koreans had few illusions about independence. A shrimp-shaped appendage the size of Indiana dangling from the vast body of China, Korea had become accustomed over the centuries to maneuvering delicately to preserve some semblance of sovereignty. It called its rulers &quot;kings&quot; rather than &quot;emperors&quot; in recognition that the only true emperor was China's.    But though they lacked political independence, the Koreans had a strong sense of cultural superiority. They were in no hurry to change their ways when confronted with a technologically rich but (in Korean eyes) culturally impoverished modern world. For Korea had preserved and perfected Chinese culture and its crowning glory, Confucianism, even after Confucianism had declined in China itself. Korea had even tried to pass its culture across the sea to Japan, notes one Korean intellectual, &quot;but we were never entirely able to civilize the Japanese.&quot;    When the Japanese, having absorbed the technology and &quot;philistine&quot; culture of modernity, colonized Korea by force in 1910, the Koreans were stunned. How could this inferior culture dare try to supplant their superior Confucianism? Koreans who advocated modernization were tarred as soft on the hated Japanese.    ---   The conflict between romantic traditionalists and rationalizing modernists continues to this day. Some of today's student protesters are among those who wonder if the benefits of industrialization were worth the costs. The country might have remained unindustrialized but for a 1961 coup that brought forth the most powerful rationalizer in Korea's history, Park Chung Hee. Mr. Park ruled the country with an iron hand until he was assassinated in 1979, but his single-minded pursuit of industrialization made Korea what it is today.    Many of the 40-year-old mandarins who manage the country's economic miracle today grew up in rural villages so poor that people didn't have shoes. In 1961 per capita gross national product was a miserable $87 a year. Since then, Koreans have not only multiplied their income 35 times, but they have also deserted the countryside in droves, boosting Seoul's population to 10 million from three million in 1960.    Change has brought unimaginable material comfort to many, but it has also shaken traditional values. A currently popular movie, &quot;Kkamdong,&quot; tells the tale of an aristocratic young woman of the 15th century unable to marry her true love because of a change in the political order. Forced instead to marry an impotent man, she is driven to depravity and ruin in a plot that becomes increasingly improbable, not to mention pornographic.    Still, modern Korean audiences sympathize because they feel caught up in tumultuous changes themselves. Politically, the country is moving from authoritarianism to democracy under president Roh Tae Woo. Socially, the country is trying to come to grips with the infiltration of Western notions, like women's rights, while hanging on to the best aspects of Confucianism, that all-encompassing set of social norms that for so many centuries ordered relationships here.    Educated young people, who tend to take the country's economic well-being for granted, are among those most concerned about the passing of traditional values. &quot;Confucianism placed a lot of emphasis on etiquette and courtesy, but we're seeing a breakdown of that now,&quot; frets Seo Hyun Chul, a 29-year-old banker from the village of Kumsan who recently graduated from Seoul National University and is studying in his spare time to become a judge.    Even worse, in Mr. Seo's eyes, is the breakdown in respect for parents. &quot;I have a lot of friends who have not gone back {to their native villages to be with their parents} even though they were oldest sons,&quot; he says with genuine horror. (As a youngest son, Mr. Seo is free under Confucian principles to remain in Seoul.)    Reacting to the erosion of Confucian values, many Koreans are turning to religion, especially Christianity. Buddhism is enjoying a resurgence as well. &quot;They're looking for something,&quot; says Mr. Seo. Others are looking to the past. On college campuses, students are joining clubs to learn traditional Korean arts and crafts. Many anti-government, anti-American student demonstrations are carried out to the beat of traditional Korean drums.    But the same students who perform Korean folk dances after class are likely to stop off for a bite later at McDonald's or Baskin-Robbins, says Mr. Seo: &quot;No one can deny modernity.&quot;    The Entrepreneurs   Koreans have been growing ginseng for at least 1,500 years. They use it for its medicinal powers -- as a hangover cure, as a nerve-calming agent, as a strength rebuilder after an illness, even as an aphrodisiac. If you are discussing ginseng with ginseng growers and sellers in Kumsan, in the heart of ginseng-growing country, it will undoubtedly be over a cup of ginseng tea, with perhaps a bit of raw ginseng root to chew on as well.    Modernization has been good for ginseng. More Koreans can afford to use it now that the country is prospering. But with demand rising, farmers have had to go farther and farther afield to find land for ginseng crops. The finicky plant produces only one crop every four years, and that crop so devastates the soil that it may not be planted in ginseng again for an additional 10 years. Kim Sang Up, a 51-year-old ginseng farmer here, says some of his 5,000 pyong of ginseng land are now as far as two hours from his house, and only 2,000 are planted in ginseng at any one time. (A pyong is about four square yards.)    Mr. Kim's biggest problem is labor. &quot;So many young people have moved to the cities that I have to use old people and women,&quot; Mr. Kim complains. &quot;The cost of labor is going up, the quality of labor is going down.&quot; With the breakdown of Confucian values, many farmers also find that their sons no longer want to take over the family farms. Fearing this, Mr. Kim has had long talks with his eldest son, who, at age 22, has finally agreed to stay in Kumsan and will soon enroll in an agricultural college.    ---   Hyundai. Samsung. Daewoo. Goldstar. In business circles, Korea is famous for the giant conglomerates that dominate its economy and compete abroad with the best of the world's economy. In public-policy circles, it is famous for government policies that favor big business.    Yet a visitor here is constantly amazed by the vitality of small business in Korea. And by the candor of the small businessman's devotion to the profit motive. In few countries are people as forthright as they are here about wanting to make it big.    &quot;Take me to America. I hear you can make a lot of money there,&quot; says a self-styled &quot;Buddhist saint&quot; and sometime shamaness, who at the moment is making her money by praying to a mountain spirit on behalf of a bookstore owner who wants his business to thrive.    &quot;Put my address in the newspaper. I know I can get rich if I can meet some buyers in America and Japan,&quot; says the owner of a small ginseng store in the western town of Kumsan.    &quot;For 30 million won {$42,000}, you can start a knitting factory with machines for 40 people, and make a profit of about 700 won per sweater,&quot; calculates Koh Chun Goon, the Seoul garment worker, who hasn't done it himself only because he doesn't have the 30 million won.    Knitting &quot;factories&quot; that produce arms, fronts and backs of sweaters are all the rage among Korean entrepreneurs because they are so easy to run. Some employ as few as four people, often paying by the piece rather than by the hour. Most work on subcontracts from larger concerns, which provide the raw yarn and patterns, handle the final assembly, and market and ship the finished product. Using his garage as the &quot;factory,&quot; the entrepreneur need only have the capital to purchase a few Korean-made knitting machines that cost less than $1,000 apiece.    On Cheju Island off Korea's southwest coast, the new business rage is growing bananas in plastic hothouses. The hothouses are needed because Cheju is about the same latitude as Chattanooga, Tenn., and its winters are anything but tropical. To keep the bananas flourishing in winter, you need a $3,400 heat blower and $5,500 of diesel fuel.    In the warmer climes of Southeast Asia, people raise bananas without all those costs. But in the past the government here used import controls to keep banana prices high; it wanted Koreans to spend their money on domestic fruits instead. The government kept the prices so high that students visiting from Japan would get off the ferry in the southern city of Pusan with bunches of bananas stuffed in their luggage. By selling them on the black market, they could recoup the cost of the trip.    About six years ago, a couple of sharp entrepreneurs on Cheju figured it out: Even shelling out for hothouses and blowers and fuel, a grower could make enormous profits in bananas. Soon anyone who could get his hands on a little land was a banana grower.    It didn't matter that the government was already warning that it planned to liberalize banana imports as part of a plan to sell Korean apples to other Asian countries. &quot;From the beginning, the government discouraged banana growing,&quot; concedes Kang Yong Hyun, a 50-year-old grower who converted from oranges to bananas two years ago. &quot;But people saw the profit in it and did it anyway.&quot;    Now so many people are growing bananas that the wholesale price has come down to near some growers' break-even points -- and the government is finally getting serious about imports. &quot;Once we start importing bananas, everyone on Cheju will be ruined,&quot; Mr. Kang says. But he hardly seems panic-stricken at the prospect. Having made the investment in a hothouse, he is, like many other growers here, already calculating what else might be profitable to raise in a hothouse. His current best bet: muskmelons.    Uneasy Images   Yun Sang Tae used to sell rice, but at 70 he can't hoist the loads anymore. So he sells garlic. In one of his stalls in a back-alley market deep in Seoul's south side he sells nothing but garlic: Hundreds of straw &quot;chops&quot; or lines hang from the ceiling, each chop with 100 bulbs of garlic attached to it, each bulb containing five to 10 cloves. Mr. Yun, like other garlic sellers, hires women to tie the bulbs of garlic onto the chops. It keeps longer that way, and most Korean housewives find it convenient to buy garlic 100 bulbs at a time.    The Japanese call Korea &quot;the land of the garlic eaters.&quot; Koreans don't appreciate the epithet, but in fact garlic and hot peppers are indispensable spices in Korean cooking. Some foreigners regard the extroverted, assertive Korean temperament as a reflection of the national cuisine.    In Mr. Yun's neighborhood, the average household uses three to five chops of garlic a year. Housewives mix the garlic with red peppers and other spices to make &quot;kimchi,&quot; a spicy, pickled Chinese-cabbage dish consumed at practically every meal. The kimchi ferments in big earthenware jars buried in the back yard or -- in today's increasingly urban Korea -- stored on the apartment balcony or roof. Some young two-career couples are starting to buy pre-made kimchi at the grocery store, but this occasions hand wringing among traditionalists: What will happen to Korea when its daughters no longer buy garlic by the chop?    ---   When foreigners think of Korea, a number of images come to their minds. Unfortunately for Koreans, few of these images are flattering.    The oldest and most enduring is the &quot;MASH&quot; image of a desperately poor, war-ravaged land -- still always on the flashpoint of violence, it seems, with its brother Korea to the north. But there is also the menacing, weird image provoked by the Unification church of Rev. Sun Myung Moon (who has little following in his own country). There is the corrupt image left by the Washington influence peddling of Park Tong Sun during the Koreagate scandals of the 1970s.    There is the shoddy-product image born of years of cheap exports, and the new &quot;second Japan&quot; image as Korean exports have moved up-market to autos, steel, television sets and semiconductors. There is the police-state image the country gained during the years when it brutally repressed its dissidents, and the unsafe, unstable image it has gained recently as it has allowed its dissidents to throw fire bombs night after night on American television.    Many Koreans are acutely aware of how foreigners perceive them and hope that the Olympics will portray a new image of their country to the world. They express this to some extent in negativesthey don't want to be known as a second Japan, or as a police state. They express it also in predictable platitudes: They want foreigners to know how friendly Koreans are, how beautiful Korea's scenery is.    But more than anything they want foreigners to come to know something of their culture and history. Says Kim Suk Woo, a Korean diplomat in Tokyo: &quot;We are not Japan. We are not China. We are an independent country with a unique culture, one of the few countries that have kept their identity over thousands of years.&quot;    Mr. Park, the head of the Seoul Olympic Organizing Committee, puts it another way. He wants the world to understand that the real Korean &quot;miracle&quot; has been its ability to survive over 5,000 years as an independent country without attacking its neighbors. This very survival is, he says, a testament to &quot;the tenacity of the Korean people.&quot;    With their society in flux, with their traditional values changing, Koreans are counting on their tenacity to help them continue to survive in the future. </TEXT></DOC>