<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880516-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Making Internationalists Out of Domestic Politicians </HL><AUTHOR> Koichi Kato </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   The fact that I campaigned for Kiichi Miyazawa, one of last year's contenders for what is now Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita's position, is no secret. But should you ask if I thought Japanese politics would be much different had Mr. Miyazawa won, I would have to objectively and somewhat regretfully say &quot;no.&quot; The reason lies in the gap between our desire to improve Japan's cooperative relationships abroad and the constraints of our domestic politics. The gap between the best policies, internationally, and the necessary policies, when domestic and international pressures are considered, is a common problem of democracies.    For some years, Japan has been urging the U.S. to put its fiscal house in order, because, of course, this is also in our best interest. Since Japan has had its own fiscal austerity program, we have a hard time understanding why it is so difficult for the U.S. to do the same. Americans, on the other hand, are frustrated with the slowness of Japanese changes in trade and macroeconomic policies that many Japanese agree are needed. American statements that do not take into account the realities of Japanese domestic politics hit a stone wall. That is why &quot;Japan-bashing&quot; basically does not work. Sometimes it seems to create progress, but in fact a more sophisticated approach would yield better results with much less cost to our relationship.    Although Japan's political problems are basically the same as those in any democracy, there are important differences in style. For example, policies in Japan are rarely decided by a public process of majority voting.    In my Liberal Democratic Party, for instance, the rule against the use of a simple vote in decision-making is absolute. The party's Executive Council, its highest decision-making body, reviews not only the personnel and policy matters of the party, but also all bills destined to be submitted by the government to the Diet. Compromises are made, just as when a bill goes through the U.S. Congress. But in the Japanese case, these changes are not decided by voting. In the 30-year history of LDP, only two policy questions have been decided by majority vote. Both involved China -- one was the normalization of relations and the other was an aviation agreement. In these cases, the consensus was for a pro-China posture.    How is compromise achieved? It begins with informal negotiations behind the scenes, a process we call&quot;nemawashi.&quot; As it proceeds it allows for &quot;letting off steam,&quot; which we call &quot;gasu nuki,&quot; to permit the venting of views for constituency purposes. Again, I think there are close parallels in the U.S. with &quot;sense of the Congress&quot; resolutions or amendments that are allowed in the bills on the floor but are intended to be dropped in conference committees. In Japan, the interested members gradually are persuaded to entrust the final decisions to a leadership group including appropriate committee chairmen. The process ends when the remaining opponents are encouraged to absent themselves from the vote.    A key part of this process is to make sure that opponents &quot;take a walk.&quot; Because the opposition is thus silenced, it often appears from the outside that ultimate decisions are unanimous. But in Japan, a consensus does not imply unanimity. Another rule of party policy making is that once the decision has been made, it is binding. It is a cardinal rule of the party that no LDP member, no matter how unhappy, may vote against it. Those who are unhappy absent themselves from the vote and tell their constituents that they fought the best they could, but it was the fault of bureaucrats. In the U.S., too, the executive branch often serves as a scapegoat for congressmen.    Setting the producer's price for rice is a good example. When this price is negotiated annually, we have daily meetings lasting from early morning until late at night for a week or more. These meetings are attended by close to half of our 440 LDP Diet members. It is not surprising, therefore, that agricultural trade issues are so controversial in U.S.-Japan relations.    You are probably wondering how foreign interests can get a hearing in this process. Japan, of course, is often criticized for focusing exclusively on its own interests while failing to contribute to international interests. Japanese politicians, however, increasingly recognize that actions in accord with international interests are often in the best interest of Japan. For example, although it is not well-known, the Japanese government, unlike any European ally, has been paying a portion of the salaries of Japanese employees on U.S. bases in Japan since 1978. Japan also is seeking to support the U.S. military presence in the Persian Gulf indirectly by contributing more to the support of U.S. troops in Japan. Another area where Japan is rapidly increasing its international efforts is in the field of foreign assistance. Our foreign assistance will double over a five-year period that began in 1986, and we plan to recycle $20 billion in untied loans to developing countries.    How then can we move forward incrementally to promote better U.S.-Japan relations in the delicate trade and monetary areas? One way to improve this situation is to scale down unrealistic rhetoric and approach the Japanese political process in a more sophisticated manner. Americans should understand that Diet members who have construction companies in their districts are not going to state that they support hiring foreign firms to do Japanese government public-works projects. They would no sooner do this than a congressman from Detroit would stand up and say that in the interest of free trade he wants to end restraints on auto imports.    Admittedly, it is difficult to instruct domestic interest groups and domestically oriented politicians on how to operate most effectively to influence a foreign political process. One constructive possibility might be to encourage direct discussions among those who are strongly associated with domestic interests. If this kind of exchange among politicians becomes possible, I believe the frictions between the U.S. and Japan can be reduced and a stronger bilateral relationship of trust and cooperation can be built. Of course, we on the Japanese side would have to understand that U.S. politicians would continue to introduce bills we don't like, but we would know that those bills are often for public consumption or to present an initial position.    Ultimately, of course, the act of reconciling domestic pressures and international responsibilities is the individual responsibility of each of us in the political world. That is why it's important that more politicians, especially domestically oriented politicians, participate in the Trilateral Commission and similar international organizations. Politicians need to think in broad terms. World peace and international prosperity depend on politicians with a vision that rises above the narrow confines of domestic constituencies.    ---   Mr. Kato is a member of the Japanese Diet. This article is adapted from a speech given at a Trilateral Commission meeting in New York this winter. </TEXT></DOC>