<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880727-0141 </DOCNO><HL> The Mormon Church's Diplomatic Mission </HL><AUTHOR> Anson Shupe </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST MDEST AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   Earlier this month Hungary granted full recognition to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That means the Mormon Church has permission from Budapest to conduct worship services, missionary activities, teaching and baptisms. This Mormon diplomatic coup follows a similar one achieved five years ago when the church was given permission to conduct groundbreaking ceremonies for a temple in Freiberg, East Germany, after considerable negotiations. The fact that a temple was needed would suggest that there already are thousands of Mormon East Germans.    Mormonism's ability to gain footholds both in liberal democracies and in totalitarian societies is a marvel. The 158-year-old American-born church has the fastest percentage growth of any religion in the U.S., as well as on our entire planet. There are now close to seven million members world-wide, about half in the U.S.; in 1983, church statisticians estimated about 14 million world-wide by the year 2000. Brigham Young University mathematics Prof. Donald R. Snow in 1982 provided country-by-country estimates of projected membership in the year 2000 that are less conservative, with 1.5 million members in Brazil, one million to two million in Chile, two million in Colombia, one million in Mexico, nearly one million in Peru, 1.6 million in the Philippines, three million in Spain, and 270,000 in Italy. Church membership doubled every 15 years between World War II and 1970, and tripled between 1970 and 1985.    The key to this growth is not simply the Mormons' high birth rates or aggressive spreading of their gospel. Rather, it is the flexibility built into the faith.    For example, the church's theological ban on admitting blacks to its lay priesthood, the first level of which is reached by all male members in good standing at age 12, had reduced conversion prospects to close to zero in much of the non-Asian Third World. A New York consulting firm hired by the church in the 1970s to streamline its bureaucracy and analyze growth potential strongly advised reconsidering this racial policy. Finally, in 1978, then-Church President Spencer Kimball announced his revelation from God to let the church admit blacks. Suddenly Africa, the Caribbean and such South American countries as Brazil became worthwhile targets for evangelizing.    Now the Second World as well as the Third is opening up to Mormon expansion. East Germany and Hungary are the fruits of a patient diplomatic effort begun by the church more than a decade ago. Using musical and folk-dance groups from Brigham Young University, the Mormons have managed to bypass the repression and noncooperation normally faced by missionaries in most Communist countries.    Initially playing down their religious intentions and affiliation, five Brigham Young University touring troups performed in Poland between 1977 and 1981. One 1979 tour took the school's American Folk Dancers to Romania, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and the Soviet Union. These clean-cut college students were widely shown on Russian television. Such visits, always including high-ranking Mormon Church officials, have been used to gain entree for negotiations on setting up Mormon facilities and missions.    Similar efforts have been undertaken in China, where Brigham Young student groups, and their ecclesiastical chaperons, have toured since 1979. Mission work is even continuing in countries that officially prohibit evangelization, among them Saudi Arabia, Libya, Egypt, Jordan, Somalia and Israel. Rather than going door-to-door and openly announcing their presence, missionaries in these countries use personal contacts with friends and business associates as a gradual means to conversion.    Flexibility is again the reason why the Mormon Church is finding itself so successful in many different kinds of societies. Mormons generally make good law-abiding citizens of whatever government they find themselves living under, for they know that according to the church's millennial teachings and pronouncements all regimes are transitory. Christ is soon to return, and they are meanwhile creating an earthly foundation for his rule. Mormons are encouraged by the church to make their peace with the status quo, create tightly knit families and church communities, and promote civil stability.    In 1978, Mormon Church Ambassador-at-Large David Kennedy, secretary of the Treasury under Richard Nixon, told the Brigham Young University Alumni College: &quot;We must find a way to spread the Gospel of Jesus Christ without confronting particular governments.&quot; Mr. Kennedy's statement has deep roots in Mormon tradition. The church's book of revelations includes the following: &quot;We believe that all men are bound to sustain and uphold the respective governments in which they reside . . . and that all governments have a right to enact such laws as in their own judgments are calculated to secure the public interests; at the same time, however, holding sacred the freedom of conscience.&quot;    That was essentially the message told to Polish officials in the early 1980s when Mr. Kennedy successfully negotiated to set up a mission in Poland. Modern Mormons adapt to local conditions, he assured the Poles. They aren't trouble-makers.    Their accommodationist tendencies are certainly much easier for many Communist officials to tolerate than the sometimes more militant behavior of Jews and Baptists, who repeatedly point out that there is a higher power than the state. Mormons tend to be less outspoken on this point and tend to more quietly render unto Caesar what is Caesar's. And in countries accused of violating human rights and religious liberties, the Mormons have the potential to be used by officials as the exception to dismiss the rule.    In addition, the wealth of the Mormon Church has been used as a lever to gain entry into Marxist and Third World countries. Since the early 1980s, for example, church leaders have donated such services as well-drilling in Somalia (as well as in other African nations such as Senegal and Zimbabwe) through Africare, a nondenominational voluntary organization. In 1985 the church raised $440,000 from a special &quot;fast&quot; (in which members contribute the cost of one skipped meal) for Ethiopia, spending $382,000 of it on a dam project near Geddobar. Altogether the Mormon Church has pledged $1.1 million to build the dam. In other cases, such as in more restrictive Moslem Arab countries, however, the missionizing and service simply have to operate sub rosa.    Missionizing is the life-blood of this still-young religion, and that it has infiltrated hostile cultures is not surprising. Back in 1979, President Kimball referred to China as a &quot;door opening&quot; for Mormon mission work. Actually, the late Mr. Kimball may have envisioned a far broader field.    ---   Mr. Shupe is chairman of the department of sociology and anthropology at Indiana-Purdue University at Fort Wayne, Ind. He is co-author of &quot;The Mormon Corporate Empire&quot; (Beacon Press). </TEXT></DOC>