<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Stock-Index Prices Drop a Second DayOn Weak Dollar, Rising Interest Rates---By Scott McMurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK INDEXES (NDX)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><TEXT>   Stock-index futures prices fell for a second day in step with weakness in the dollar and rising interest rates. Traders predicted that the futures will drop still lower before rebounding.    Once again comments from Treasury Secretary James Baker that neither the U.S. or other industrial countries are about to act in support of the dollar triggered a sell-off in stock-index futures and bond futures, traders said. The dollar bounced back in the afternoon, which brought the stock and bond futures back to close above their lows for the day.    &quot;We might have seen the highs for some time&quot; in stock-index futures and Treasury bond futures, said Rajiv Sharma, president of Serco Investments Inc., Mill Valley, Calif. He said that his firm sold both contracts &quot;short&quot; in expectation of buying them back later at lower prices.    Mr. Sharma estimated that the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index future for March delivery could trade as low as 250.00 in the foreseeable future. In yesterday's trading, the March Sandamp;P 500 future declined 3.50 to close at 275.85.    A trader in the Sandamp;P 500 pit at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, who asked not to be identified, said that based on yesterday's trading the stock-index future may be in for a 10-day to 14-day correction that could take it as low as 265.00.    &quot;We're in a well-deserved corrective phase&quot; following the market's run-up of the past several weeks, said J.R. Fredericks, an analyst with E. David Stephens Commodity Corp. in Chicago.    The Sandamp;P 500 stock-index futures contract broke through several technical price support levels that are followed by many traders as they plot futures prices, said John Gustafson, a Chicago-based analyst with Discount Corp. of New York Futures. He estimated that the contract will fall to the next technical support level of about 272.00.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ALUMINUM: Futures prices soared to their highest level in 10 months in response to a decline in the monthly inventory reported by an industry group. The International Primary Aluminum Institute released figures showing that aluminum stockpiles in non-Communist nations in December fell nearly 2%, or 68,000 tons, to about 3.6 million tons -- the lowest level in more than two years. The decline &quot;was substantially more than the market expected,&quot; said Frederick Demler, metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., New York. On the Commodity Exchange, aluminum futures contracts for March delivery surged 1.9 cents, to 56 cents a pound. Traders and analysts said the price rise in New York largely followed a rally on the London Metal Exchange. &quot;London is the market that's clearly leading the way,&quot; one trader in New York said. Nonetheless, Comex contracts were buoyed by heavy cash-market aluminum demand from the Far East and Western Europe. &quot;There's been good, steady Japanese buying,&quot; said a New York analyst. Chart-oriented technical trading and buying related to the expiration of London options contracts added to yesterday's gains, analysts said. And several traders, noting that the options-related buying may have exaggerated the rally, expect some profit-taking in the coming days.    SUGAR: Sugar futures closed higher after fluctuating 1/3 cent a pound during the session. An initial rally encountered resistance as it neared the eight-cent level in the March contract. After reaching 7.98 cents, it fell to 7.66 cents before rebounding toward the close. Though India bought between 20,000 and 30,000 metric tons of refined sugar for delivery after March 31, it was offered more than 300,000 tons. The market was strong despite this news. &quot;This reinforces the fact that for all the problems Brazil is having and despite the purchases by the Soviet Union, there is still an overabundance of sugar,&quot; said Judy Weissmann, analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. Some analysts are concerned about the relatively large open interest of 42,531 contracts, as of Monday, for the March contract. But William O'Neill, research director for Elders Futures Inc., said, &quot;People are always concerned when there is a large open interest in a maturing contract, but seldom does it cause as much of a problem as it is feared.&quot; The market isn't giving any negative signals, he said. This, he said, may indicate that &quot;strong hands,&quot; such as trade houses, may own a good portion of the open contracts. One analyst noted the possibility that trade houses that had their contracts deferred to next year by Brazil may have been buyers in futures. Mr. O'Neill observed that the March contract yesterday was the strongest on the board. The March contract will cease trading Feb. 27, the last trading day of the month.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Pork belly futures prices tumbled further as traders continued to react to the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's decision to reduce individual traders' holding limits on the February contract. Holdings are to be reduced to a maximum of 50 contracts, from the current 150, by the end of today's session. The Merc said it took the step to prevent price distortions in view of the unusually low supply of pork bellies available for delivery. The March and May pork belly contracts joined the February contract in yesterday's descent, as traders worried about deliverable supplies for those months as well, analysts said. &quot;There aren't going to be enough deliverable supplies in March or May to satisfy those longs either,&quot; said Charles Levitt, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in Chicago. Mr. Levitt estimates that as of Feb. 1, total U.S. warehouse storage of pork bellies, was 35.5 million pounds, down 25% from the year-earlier level of 47.6 million pounds.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat futures prices on the Chicago Board of Trade fell after the Agriculture Department revised carry-over and export estimates from Monday's supply and demand report. The department, which had estimated a 10 million bushel decline in soft red winter wheat carry-over stocks and a 10 million bushel increase in soft red wheat exports, said there would be no cutback in supplies or increase in exports. Corn futures faced continuing weak demand and soybean futures closed mixed. </TEXT></DOC>