<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870423-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Studies of Nicotine's Effect on BrainYield Ways to Kick Smoking Habit---By David StippSpecial to The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Help is on the way for smokers who want to quit, thanks in part to growing knowledge about how cigarettes affect the brain.    Research shows that being hooked on nicotine isn't much different physically from being addicted to a drug like cocaine. Armed with knowledge gained from treating drug addicts, researchers are testing chemicals that can block nicotine's rewarding effects and reduce its withdrawal symptoms.    Others are devising new ways to give a quitter temporary doses of nicotine without smoking, and learning how to use an old standby, nicotine gum, more effectively.    &quot;We're going to see a wave of studies in the next few years on different kinds of drugs&quot; as quitting aids, says Nina Schneider, who studies smoking cessation at the University of California at Los Angeles. The drugs probably will include some existing blood-pressure medicines, tranquilizers and anti-depressants, which have helped cocaine addicts, she adds.    Even though these drugs are already in use as treatments for other conditions, they may not be widely used as anti-smoking aids soon. More study -- and in some cases federal Food and Drug Administration approval -- is needed.    And when such methods are available, they won't be panaceas, since cigarettes hook people with more than nicotine -- the pleasure, for instance, of inhaling or the habit of lighting up after dinner. Old-fashioned willpower will still be needed, but scientists are working on better ways to break habits, too.    The market for aids to quit smoking has grown to an estimated $100 million in recent years, with more growth in sight. Many of the 36 million Americans who have already stopped were relatively light smokers and those most motivated to quit. The more than 50 million Americans -- almost one of three adults -- who still light up are typically heavy, long-term smokers who will have more trouble kicking the habit. And they are under pressure to quit, now that smoking is increasingly frowned upon or even outlawed.    Even with help, about 75% of people who quit smoking resume within a year, and the typical quitter succeeds only after three or more tries. Researchers say those statistics indicate nicotine's addictive power.    The tobacco industry strongly disagrees. &quot;If smoking is addictive, it's difficult to explain how 35 million people have walked away from it,&quot; says Scott Stapf, a spokesman for the Tobacco Institute, an industry association in Washington.    Nevertheless, scientists note that laboratory animals will self-inject nicotine at rates comparable to self-injection of cocaine, and that drug abusers often mistake laboratory injections of nicotine for cocaine or amphetamines.    Other research suggests that nicotine's chemical ghost haunts the body for months, even though nicotine itself remains in the blood for only a few hours after smoking. Hormones may partly explain why. Many smokers start puffing in their early teens, a time of major hormonal changes. Thus, their hormone systems may be shaped partly by nicotine, says Jack Henningfield, a researcher at the federal Addiction Research Center in Baltimore. Cutting off nicotine after decades of use, he adds, may cause months of hormonal adjustment.    Nicotine also affects neurotransmitters -- chemicals that conduct signals between cells of the nervous system and control such diverse functions as memory and mood. Researchers say smokers unconsciously learn to &quot;fine-tune&quot; transmitters that control emotions by taking nicotine for stimulation when they feel down or to soothe themselves when anxious.    Indeed, nicotine is almost unique among psychoactive drugs in its capacity to both sedate and stimulate, say scientists. Such complex effects have stymied efforts to find a replacement drug for it that could be used as a quitting aid.    Still, scientists hope that reversing or blocking nicotine's action on brain chemistry will help smokers quit. One recent finding is that exercise may counteract some effects of withdrawal by stimulating release of certain neurotransmitters -- the same ones, including endorphins, that are thought to cause &quot;runners' high.&quot;    Even more promising are drugs that counteract nicotine. One, called mecamylamine, blocks nicotine's rewarding effects, theoretically making smoking easier to give up. The drug, developed to reduce high blood pressure, has side effects that will probably limit its usefulness to smokers, says Forest Tennant, a researcher in West Covina, Calif., who is studying it. Still, he says, in low doses it may help some smokers.    Another blood-pressure medication, clonidine, blocks withdrawal symptoms and may be more helpful. In a preliminary study, 10 of 15 patients who stopped smoking while using it reported that the drug significantly reduced their craving for cigarettes. Scientists caution, however, that further research is needed.    Researchers are also finding more effective ways of using nicotine to wean smokers with few side effects. The only form available in the U.S., nicotine gum, hasn't lived up to expectations, probably because smokers don't chew enough of it or stay with it long enough.    But the problem could be the gum itself. Many scientists believe gum doesn't provide enough nicotine quickly enough to curb the craving for cigarettes. Smokers get a surge of nicotine in the brain seven seconds after taking a puff. Gum produces significant brain effects only after about 15 minutes of chewing. To replicate the surge without cigarettes, researchers are experimenting with nicotine nasal sprays, which get the drug into the brain faster than gum but slower than cigarettes.    But gum and nasal sprays can't match the pleasure of inhaling smoke -- one of cigarettes' main hooks. In one experiment, blindfolded smokers whose taste had been blunted by an anesthetic reported that inhaling a citric acid aerosol was more like their usual brand of cigarettes than puffs they took on a low-tar, low-nicotine cigarette. (An acid was chosen because it irritates the throat as smoke does.)    Based on the findings, Jed Rose, a researcher at a Veterans Administration hospital in Los Angeles, has developed a hand-held device that vaporizes a solution containing residue from cigarette smoke. The vapor contains only a tenth of the tar and nicotine of smoke and none of the toxic gases, he says. Several companies have expressed interest in commercializing the idea, he adds.    Mr. Rose is considering combining the inhaler with nicotine skin patches, which transmit nicotine through the skin to prevent withdrawal symptoms. That might separate nicotine's effects from the psychological pleasures of smoking -- enabling smokers to divide and conquer parts of their habit, he says.    The idea of separating smoking's psychological and chemical rewards also helped inspire another recently developed quitting aid, a credit-card-sized computer called LifeSign. The $70 computer uses an individual's pattern of smoking to calculate a plan for cutting back and quitting.    Carried in a pocket or purse, it beeps when a smoker should light up. Users of the computer sometimes find themselves smoking when they don't want a cigarette and not smoking when they do. That helps break the habit, says Health Innovations Inc., a Herndon, Va., company that makes the computer.    The company claims that about 25% of smokers who quit with the computer stay off cigarettes for more than six months. Others who quit on their own typically achieve success rates of 15% or less. </TEXT></DOC>