<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880706-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   MEESE ANNOUNCED he would resign as attorney general by early August.    The surprise announcement, which came in a California news conference, followed by a few hours the filing in court of a report by independent prosecutor James McKay, who decided to forgo seeking criminal charges against Meese. McKay's report urges further investigation of Meese's activities by Justice Department ethics officials. Meese said he had been &quot;completely vindicated&quot; by the report, which is not due to be made public until later this month. No successor has been chosen.    Reagan said his longtime friend &quot;was a darn good attorney general,&quot; and that he would be missed. He denied that Meese had become a political liability.    ---   THE PENTAGON SAID an Iran Air jet was broadcasting on a military channel.    Offering further explanation for the Navy missile attack on the civilian aircraft, a Defense Department spokesman said the jetliner was using a frequency usually identified with fighter aircraft. The spokesman said, however, that the plane was transmitting an identifying signal usually associated with civilian aircraft when a U.S. cruiser fired two missiles and killed all 290 aboard. Meanwhile, some legislators called for compensation to Iran.    A six-member U.S. investigating team arrived aboard the USS Vincennes to sift through the ship's computer records of the Persian Gulf accident.    ---   The Soviet Communist Party criticized the country's law-enforcement agencies in resolutions passed at last week's party conference and released yesterday. While the resolutions don't name the KGB, Moscow's secret police organization, its inclusion is clearly implied in resolutions on the need to &quot;eliminate abuses.&quot;    ---   A federal judge approved a two-part plan to distribute a $240 million Agent Orange settlement fund to Vietnam War veterans. The move, which follows a decision by the Supreme Court last week, removes the last obstacle to ending the lengthy litigation.    ---   Shultz briefed Reagan on his trip to Central America last week, but no decision has been made on a new Contra-aid request. The secretary of state began a 2 1/2-week trip that will take him to nine Pacific and East Asian nations. Separately, Nicaragua said 12 people died in the biggest Contra attack since a cease-fire was signed three months ago.    ---   Mexicans vote today in what is likely to be the most strongly contested presidential election in recent times. Despite unusually stiff challenges from both the left and right, Partido Revolucionario Institucional candidate Carlos Salinas de Gortari is expected to win.    ---   Arab merchants closed their shops in the West Bank and Gaza Strip to honor a strike called by leaders of a seven-month-old Palestinian uprising. Meanwhile, Israeli troops opened fire while breaking up a demonstration in Nablus, wounding one youth.    ---   Armenian activists called a general strike in the Soviet republic over a territorial dispute with Azerbaijan, and Isvestia confirmed that the airport in Yeravan had been closed. Anti-Armenian riots in Azerbaijan in February killed 32 people.    ---   Soviet inspectors said they were satisfied following weekend visits to U.S. military installations as part of the verification process called for in the treaty banning superpower arsenals of intermediate range nuclear missiles. The inspection groups, which preceded the stationing of permanent monitoring teams, left for Moscow yesterday.    ---   A federal judge postponed a decision on the Justice Department's request to immediately install a court-appointed officer to oversee certain affairs of the Teamsters international union.    ---   Church of England leaders voted in favor of proposals to admit women to the priesthood, the first major hurdle to be cleared in a process that could take up to four years. The proposals were approved in a vote by the General Synod of bishops, clergy and laity despite the opposition of Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Runcie.    ---   The FDA announced a crackdown on illegal marketers of Retin-A, a prescription anti-acne drug that, according to a recent research article, also fights wrinkles. The agency said it will investigate several companies that illegally make and promote potentially harmful Retin-A-type products.    ---   Soviet army commanders are bungling their withdrawal from Afghanistan, which is taking a heavy toll in casualties and equipment, U.S. intelligence officials said. The officials said the clumsy tactics may mean the Soviets won't be able to fulfill a pledge to have half of their 115,000 troops out of the country by Aug. 15. </TEXT></DOC>