<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880926-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Argentina Skirts IMF With Reform Plan As Fund's Director Quarrels With U.S. </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Truell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM FORGN GOVMT </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><DATELINE> WEST BERLIN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Amid a furious behind-the-scenes quarrel between the U.S. and International Monetary Fund Director Michel Camdessus, Argentina bypassed the IMF and announced structural economic reforms supported by a $1.25 billion World Bank loan.    For the World Bank to take such a prominent role without Argentina's first agreeing on an economic program with the IMF is unusual, if not unprecedented. But the World Bank effectively is stepping into the breach left by a recalcitrant IMF. Ironically, in an apparent attempt to challenge the U.S.-dominated international debt strategy, Mr. Camdessus -- who usually takes a soft line toward heavily indebted countries -- seems to have put the squabble with the U.S. before Argentina's interests.    Although the IMF now is discussing an economic program with Argentina, this summer it unexpectedly delayed such talks for two months at a time when the country desperately needed international assistance to help launch its August anti-inflation and austerity program, the so-called primavera plan, according to Argentine and U.S. officials.    The new measures announced here yesterday at a joint news conference by Argentina's Economy Minister Juan V. Sourrouille and World Bank President Barber B. Conable are designed to bolster the primavera plan by improving tax administration and collection, further reforming public-sector finances, removing quantitative restrictions on imports, reducing tariffs and simplifying export procedures.    Underlying this situation are substantial differences between the Fund's managing director and the U.S. government over the handling of the international debt problem, and, it seems, an attempt by Mr. Camdessus this summer to force the issue in Argentina's case by withholding IMF support at a crucial juncture in that country's attempts to cut its inflation rate and rein in government spending.    The clash over Argentina is just the latest in a series of disputes between Mr. Camdessus' IMF and the Reagan administration. Earlier this month, a top IMF official, speaking anonymously, told reporters in Washington that the U.S.-dominated process for economic policy coordination and managing exchange rates should be changed in ways that would enhance the role of the Fund.    Mr. Camdessus has at times spoken warmly about debt relief and been critical of the U.S.-dominated management of the debt crisis. He also has allowed the IMF in its World Economic Outlook publication this year openly to contradict U.S. government economic expectations about continued reduction of the trade deficit, and generally has sought more independence from his major shareholders. IMF officials also have spoken much more warmly than the U.S. government of debt plans that would involve refinancing Third World bank loans with government-backed bonds.    At a news conference last Thursday, Mr. Camdessus said progress in handling the international debt problem &quot;hadn't been extraordinarily brilliant&quot; in the past year. Through a spokesman, Mr. Camdessus declined to be interviewed for this article.    All of these statements out of the Fund have left the U.S. Treasury seething at Mr. Camdessus. While there hasn't been any public criticism, Treasury officials privately accuse him of trying to build up the role of the IMF at the expense of its major shareholders.    Meanwhile, IMF officials privately ascribe the Fund's recent unwillingness to help Argentina to the country's failure to reach previously agreed-on economic targets, and emphasize that they now are talking with the Argentine government in Buenos Aires about a new program. Nevertheless, some IMF officials recently criticized Argentine economic reforms privately for being &quot;insufficiently tough.&quot;    &quot;I don't know why the Fund has been so critical,&quot; said Argentine Central Bank President Jose Luis Machinea. The breakdown in relations between Argentina and the IMF ostensibly was precipitated by the country's missing a quarterly target for its government fiscal deficit, Mr. Machinea said, even though it met several other targets.    But despite the lack of IMF support, Argentina got its August economic plan started, with the promise of a $500 million bridge loan from the U.S. and other industrialized countries. That loan, which should be disbursed soon, had to be bridged to the planned World Bank loan program because of the IMF's sudden recalcitrance toward Argentina, World Bank officials said.    &quot;The primavera plan is doing quite well in spite of the Fund,&quot; Mr. Machinea said, pointing out that inflation, measured by an average of the consumer and wholesale price indices has fallen to about 6% or 7% a month in September from more than 20% a month in August. A further improvement is expected for October.    The World Bank-backed program now should substantially boost the country's economic reform by further opening up the economy and improving government revenues, Mr. Sourrouille, the economy minister, said.    The $1.25 billion World Bank loan is divided into four main parts: a $400 million loan to help finance structural reform in the financial sector; a $300 million loan to liberalize trade; a $300 million loan for low-cost housing and a $250 million credit to improve the power sector. Disbursement of slices of each loan will depend on satisfactory reviews of the reform program's progress, said Shahid Husain, World Bank vice president for Latin America.    Provincial governments and public enterprises in Argentina now won't have access to the government's annual budget: two areas that drained funds in the past. Partly by raising revenue, the government is determined to reduce the public-sector deficit to 2.4% of gross domestic product in 1989 from 4.6% of GDP in 1988, Mr. Sourrouille said. To achieve this, Argentina will improve tax administration and collection and broaden the tax base, he added.    Argentina is projecting a $3 billion trade surplus this year, up from a $700 million surplus in 1987. But despite this rise, caused primarily by an improvement in agricultural export prices, Argentina has been adversely affected by increases in international interest rates. These have caused the country's interest-payment costs to rise about $1 billion. Mainly for that reason the country is projecting a current account deficit of $2.5 billion next year, compared with a projected current account deficit of $2.2 billion in 1988, Mr. Machinea said.    Trade and competition also should be boosted by reforms that will modify the policies requiring Argentine enterprises to buy many of their requirements from local producers. Mr. Husain characterized the trade reforms as &quot;most far-reaching, and next to those reforms recently carried out in Mexico and Chile.&quot;    As well as negotiating further credits with the IMF, Argentina starts talks with commercial-bank creditors in October to work out an agreement for 1988 and 1989 and to clear an estimated $1 billion of interest-payment arrears to foreign banks. Argentine officials probably will ask their banks for between $3 billion and $3.5 billion to help finance interest payments for 1988 and 1989. This would represent about half the interest the country owes to banks during that period. Argentina, Latin America's third-largest debtor, has $54 billion of foreign debt, of which about $40 billion is bank debt.    Meantime, ministers of the so-called Group of 24 developing countries said in a communique that world economic expansion would be relatively high this year but regretted that it &quot;will be unevenly distributed and that economic and financial conditions in the developing countries will show hardly any improvement.&quot; They called for more resource transfers to heavily-indebted countries, which they said particularly had borne the heavy burden of international adjustment. High interest rates in reaction to fears about inflation in industrialized countries could &quot;aggravate the debt problem,&quot; they said.    The Group of 24, chaired this year by Brazilian Finance Minister Mailson Ferreira da Nobrega, also criticized the present debt strategy, which it said hadn't restored growth, creditworthiness or access to voluntary new lending. The group called for political leadership by the major industrialized countries in addressing the debt problem.    ---   Walter S. Mossberg contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>