<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861222-0197 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Narita's Mistakes Are to Be Repented in Osaka---By Clyde McAvoy</HL><DD> 12/22/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANAIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Working in close but mute collaboration, man and fossil contrive to ferment, find, refine and transport a gallon of aviation fuel from the Middle East to offshore Japan for 41 cents, a journey spanning 6,000 miles and 70 million years. There the Japanese distribution system takes over and finds it necessary to charge an additional 15 cents to take it the next 31 miles and eight hours to Tokyo's Narita airport.    By the time the fuel is pumped into the wing of a Boeing 747 bound for Hong Kong, the unwitting passenger has coughed up an additional $7 on his ticket to pay for his share of an engineering nightmare. The villain is the world's most inefficient fuel pipeline, a money-eating monster of a Japanese airport that planners foisted onto airline passengers as a fait accompli with the opening of Narita in 1978.    Not surprisingly, the thought of these same planners now sitting down to design a giant new airport outside Osaka has the airlines who will use it in a minor panic.    The airlines' fears are well grounded, since much of the same plot development that preceded the construction of Narita is unfolding in the Osaka version. Paramount is a stubborn lack of consultation with the foreign airlines that will have to help pay for the airport in the form of landing fees and fuel-transportation costs. In response to questions about the new airport, the airlines are told that plans are &quot;not yet complete,&quot; while foreign contractors are told that plans are &quot;too far advanced&quot; to permit foreign participation.    Although not scheduled for completion until 1993, the new Osaka airport, which will serve the Kansai area of western Japan, already is badly needed. Itami Airport, which currently serves the Osaka area, is so restricted by environmental factors that this year less than 15,000 flights will be accepted there. This means that although Itami serves 40% of the nation's population, it accommodates only 18% of its flights.    Criticism of the airport project addresses shortcomings as basic as the length of the runway, which is planned at 3,850 yards, well short of the 4,180-yard-minimum necessary in wet weather or the 4,400 yards provided at Narita and most international airports. Japanese airport authorities respond that a longer runway is planned for Phase 2 construction. But their track record in keeping promises isn't good.    They gave similar assurances in 1978 when airlines requested a crosswind runway at Narita, and nine years later none is yet in sight. In any event, the destinations from Osaka are virtually the same as those from Narita, and the two runways need to be of similar length.    Costs are the common denominator in virtually all the complaints. Planners say the airport will cost $6.5 billion, but outside analysts believe $8 billion is more realistic. In particular, critics urge planners to avoid folding environmental costs into user charges. This would include such costs as the $125 million promised to the Federation of Osaka Fishermen in compensation for building the airport on reclaimed land. Critics urge the government to sell off the land on which Itami airport is located and use those funds to help offset such costs.    Given the planners' past performance at Narita, there is small chance of that happening. The astonishingly inefficient Narita pipeline was rationalized on similar grounds of environmental disruption and civic antipathy. While that may have explained the decision to build a pipeline rather than use an existing rail spur, it does not explain the Abbott-and-Costello engineering that went into it.    Using outdated pipeline technology, Narita authorities sought to compensate by applying an expensive chemical coating, only to discover after the pipe had been planted 30 feet underground that they were supposed to have coated the inside rather than the outside of the pipe. Fuel pumped through it thus becomes dirty and unusable.    An expensive filter system was then constructed to clean the fuel. Alas, this was built at the wrong end -- where the fuel is unloaded from barges. So the fuel is cleaned and then pumped into the outdated pipeline only to arrive dirty again at the airport. Another expensive filter system had to be constructed at the airport to repeat the process. The total cost of nearly $500 million exceeded by 2,340% the cost of a new pipeline in Europe of similar length. Believe it or not, based on sketches showing an absence of fuel-loading facilities, the construction of a Narita-style pipeline at the new Osaka airport appears likely.    Other planned features of the Osaka airport suggest that the planners haven't learned the lessons of Narita. The new airport will be constructed on a man-made island in Osaka harbor. Access will be by a single double-decker bridge for cars and trains, making the airport vulnerable to civic unrest of the kind that has plagued Narita.    Also like Narita, the size of the Osaka airport is too small to accommodate full-size passenger and cargo terminals. These will be located in the city, planners say as airline executives roll their eyes skyward. They have had a taste of this already at Narita where the cargo-handling terminals are located 25 miles from the airport. The result is extra handling fees that escalate air-freight charges 20% over other comparable cities. As with remote cargo terminals, city passenger terminals also mean redundant staffing and extra costs.    Many of these plans can be challenged on the basis of common sense, providing that essential data and blueprints are made available. But beyond a few schematics, they are not.    The best hope for rescue of the airlines from another costly mistake in Japan is for them to make common cause with the foreign construction companies undertaking to pry open Japan's closed bidding practices, under which contracts for the airport are to be awarded. A Ron-to-Yasu letter in October presumably described the seriousness with which the U.S. regards market exclusions in the construction industry. But follow-ups by a presidential trade delegation and a regiment of 100 American businessmen resulted in only token gestures.    Just as foreign traders have learned that nothing gets done in Japan on a visitation basis, the 52 U.S. construction companies and 15 airlines with a direct interest in the new airport must face up to the need to establish offices in Tokyo and Osaka to lobby their case. To stand any chance at all, they need a steady flow of informal information and a permanent channel to the airport planners. They need, in short, the same type of commitment Japanese companies undertook in winning $2 billion in construction contracts in the U.S. last year.    This means assigning full-time contract and airport specialists to Japan, leasing office space and hiring Japanese staff with access to the corridors of power. It means a budget for entertaining, golf-club memberships and intensive Japanese language study. It means recruiting natural allies -- and there will be some -- who find it advantageous to play a role.    To do all this in two of the world's most expensive cities will cost airlines and contractors a considerable amount of money. Not to do so will cost substantially more.    ---   Mr. McAvoy is an international airline executive based in Tokyo. </TEXT></DOC>