<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0083 </DOCNO><HL> China's Hollow Ideology---By Amanda Bennett</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   After weeks of student protests that brought demands for democracy nearly to his door and swept the Communist Party up in intense ideological debate, Deng Xiaoping has finally cracked down.    Subtly but ominously the word spread: Dissent will no longer be tolerated. Dissenters will be dealt with harshly. In the past few weeks, more than a dozen people have been detained, and some leading intellectuals, guiding lights of the student movement, have been expelled from the party. Most remarkable, Mr. Deng last week sacrificed his own protege, Hu Yaobang, who was forced to step down as the party's general secretary.    The fact that Mr. Hu's successor as Communist Party chief, Zhao Ziyang, is another handpicked Dengist shows that Mr. Deng is still firmly in control. What's more, while Mr. Deng loses the man he once groomed to succeed him, signs had been building for well over a year that Mr. Deng had learned to regret his choice. Mr. Hu, who sympathized a bit too much, if not with the goals of the students, at least with their quest, had alienated friend and foe alike with his indiscretions. So while Mr. Deng now faces a scramble to set up a new succession plan, in the end he may emerge from this crucible having scored points all around for taking the opportunity to pluck Mr. Hu from power.    So far so good. But where does Mr. Deng go from here?    Having quashed the hopes of the students and their sponsors for a freer political climate, what does he offer to them in return? What is to be China's ideology for the next decades? Students, encouraged by their views of the world outside China, are asking: What shall we believe in? Does this system we have work? But behind the political struggle at the top lies a bitter debate: How far should the country go in answering them? Many of those in power who grudgingly accepted a more liberal economic climate resist succumbing to the demands for a more liberal political climate that naturally seem to follow.    By squelching protest and eliminating the loudest protesters, Mr. Deng has effectively begged the question for a while. But it will recur. And solving the problem won't be as easy as ordering a crackdown or masterminding a purge. For, over the past decade, Mr. Deng, by his economic reforms and opening to the outside world, has systematically, if inadvertently, exposed the hollowness of the ideology that has guided China for the past four decades -- without profferring anything to take its place.    Ideology is particularly important to Chinese, who have long judged their rulers in moral terms. &quot;The Chinese people really want to have something to believe in,&quot; says one longtime State Department China watcher. &quot;They're very responsive to that, and at sea when it's not there.&quot;    Early in the days of the Communist revolution, the party's Marxist-Leninist-based ideology filled that role. Tired of the excesses of the corrupt Nationalists, the Chinese welcomed the almost ascetic dedication of the Red Army. After years of violent extremes of wealth and poverty, the lure of building an egalitarian society was strong. After the humiliation at the hands of the occupying Japanese in the 1930s, the Communist Party's call to self-reliance held a powerful appeal.    But the vision of a country led into modernization by mass mobilization of the political will of the people was proved hopeless and crazy by such economic travesties as the Great Leap Forward. Egalitarianism faded into economic stagnation. During the Cultural Revolution of the 1960s, dedication exploded into fanaticism.    In the 1970s and 1980s, picking up the pieces of the debacle, Mr. Deng threw open the long-closed country. He threw away the collectives in favor of individual farming, encouraged private enterprise, the pursuit of education and the development of technology.    But while the practical side of his policies has been successful in invigorating the economy and improving people's lives, the ideological side has been a dismal failure. Fearful of throwing open the entire system to scrutiny and debate, party leaders have rummaged around in their ideological warehouse to try to develop suitable new concepts from old ones.    What they've come up with has been more negative than affirming. In the wake of the student demonstrations, for example, the party has called for renewed political study and vigilance against &quot;bourgeois liberalism&quot; -- a catch phrase for Western-style political ideas. Similarly, a campaign against &quot;spiritual pollution&quot; swept China a few years ago as leaders railed against perceived Western-style social ills such as pornography and rock music.    Yet if they preach what they are not, they offer no coherent vision of what they are. Some of their new slogans -- such as &quot;Let some get rich before others&quot; -- are crass and bloodless. Some are baffling as when the party asks that people follow the &quot;socialist road&quot; or that they help build a &quot;socialist spiritual civilization&quot; or that they create a &quot;socialism with Chinese characteristics&quot; -- vague concepts that they have never adequately defined, let alone infused with any life.    It's no wonder that democratic ideals such as a free press, free speech and free elections -- however dimly understood -- have such a cachet among young people and their supporters these days. These ideas offer not only the practical benefit of a possible escape from stifling and repressive conditions, they also have the romantic appeal and soul-stirring intensity that the party once had but forfeited.    The heart of the problem, though, is many Chinese leaders' fear of Western ideas. While many senior officials want to open the country to modern technologies, outside scientific influence and more liberal economic policies, they will accept only the most minimal liberalization of political and social systems. That has been the Chinese way ever since the days of Matteo Ricci, the Jesuit who in the late-1500s brought to the Chinese clocks, which they accepted, and Christianity, which they rejected.    Today the problem takes on new intensity. Some intellectuals in China -- tacitly supported as it now appears by a few people at the top like Mr. Hu -- want to encourage free discussion and free examination of new ideas from the outside, letting the chips fall where they may.    But the risks are high. The competing ideas that are creeping in from the West and Japan are eating away at the unquestioning allegiance to the party on which the whole system rests. Meanwhile, the unquestioned supremacy of the party in all matters is crumbling into cynicism in the face of modern science, technology and economics, and revelations in the government's own newspapers of the ignorance, venality and greed of many old cadres.    Few know where Mr. Deng himself stands on the question. What is apparent is that, for reasons of his own, or because of pressure from more conservative advisers, he has chosen repression as his route.    But as long as the country remains open to outside influences, the ideas will remain. And failing some satisfaction, they will continue to require periodic crackdowns to control. That is Mr. Deng's dilemma, as it will be the dilemma of whoever succeeds him.    ---   Ms. Bennett, a reporter in the Journal's New York bureau, was the Journal's Peking correspondent from 1983 to '85. She recently returned from a trip to China. </TEXT></DOC>