<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0087 </DOCNO><HL> China's Conservative Shift Starts to Affect the Economy---Deng's Reformers Are Backing AwayFrom Free-Market Experiments---By James R. SchiffmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PEKING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   China is moving to expand the role of central planning this year, reversing the trend toward more market influence in the economy. The shift, in line with a general return to more-orthodox Marxism in China, provides further evidence that go-slow conservatives have become more forceful within the country's leadership.    Under leader Deng Xiaoping and other pragmatic reformers, China in recent years had embarked on far-reaching efforts to introduce Western-style free-market practices into China's state-run and centrally planned economy, hoping to make it more efficient and productive. But demonstrations in recent months by students and other intellectuals, who were demanding Western-style freedoms to go along with the economic changes, have put into sharper focus a question that the reformers for years have danced around: How many Western-style reforms can China absorb and still call itself a socialist country?    That conflict was evident in a recent interview with Xue Muqiao, one of the country's leading economists and a chief architect of Mr. Deng's economic reforms. His message: The government will restrain investment outside the central plan, at least temporarily.    Under the reforms of the past several years, the scope of economic central planning had been reduced. Enterprises, provinces and localities have been able to acquire funds and invest them in projects outside central plans.    The new move to enhance central planning could be termed a retreat from reform, says Mr. Xue, who is a member of the standing committee of the National People's Congress. &quot;But this is only very temporary,&quot; he adds. &quot;I think that once we have solved the problem of the economy running out of control, we will go back to the policy of reducing the scope of the planned economy and further opening market forces.&quot;    To soak up funds that otherwise would be used to finance investments not in the plan, Mr. Xue says the government this year will issue the equivalent of $3.2 billion in national bonds, a sixfold increase from 1986. Enterprises and localities will be required to buy the bonds. Bank credit also will be further tightened, the 82-year-old economist says.    Mr. Xue's comments indicate that China is attempting to make major economic changes consistent with the beliefs of conservatives in the leadership, who have gained greater influence following the sacking last month of the Communist Party secretary-general, Hu Yaobang. China's conservatives generally favor greater reliance on planning and slower implementation of market-oriented polices than reformers.    Signs of the conservative shift abound. In a speech to a national finance conference, Vice Premier Tian Jiyun called for belt-tightening, thrift, increased revenues and reduced spending. Mr. Tian, regarded as one of the most important reformers in economic affairs, also called for controlling out-of-plan, nonproductive investment projects. The plea was echoed by other ministers.    Mr. Xue, the economist, denies that the firing of Mr. Hu is linked to the economic changes. But he blames the former party chief for advocating go-go economic policies and says his removal will make belt-tightening measures easier.    Mr. Xue says Premier Zhao Ziyang, who replaced Mr. Hu as acting party secretary-general, favors slower growth and smaller-scale development. Premier Zhao -- who for more than six years had promoted experimentation with almost any policy, capitalist or socialist, that would promote production -- seems to have jumped on the conservative bandwagon.    In a major policy address, Mr. Zhao declared that a fundamental requirement of Mr. Deng's open-door and reform policies is to uphold the &quot;four principles&quot; -- shorthand for greater adherence to doctrinaire Marxism and Maoism. He said the recent drive to suppress intellectual dissent and &quot;bourgeoise liberalism,&quot; a phrase used to mean Western political ideas, is necessary to safeguard Mr. Deng's reforms.    With the current emphasis on ideological purity, socialist justifications for using capitalist tools may become harder to defend. That includes stock ownership.    In recent months, a proliferating number of enterprises in several cities have raised funds by issuing stock, most of which is sold to employees, although some is held by the general public. Last year, Shanghai opened an experimental stock market, and more are planned.    But conservatives argue that opening exchanges would bring speculation and exploitation, both of which are regarded as capitalist evils. The result, economists say, is that factories can still issue stock to their employees, but expansion of stock trading is being put on hold.    Post-Mao economic reform hasn't been uniformly successful. After gaining dramatic increases in food production by dismantling communes and reintroducing family farming and private plots, Chinese authorities tried to reform industry.    The role of central planning was gradually reduced, and the market economy grew. Factories were told to assume more responsibility for their own profits and losses. But, while workers' living standards improved, the industrial sector failed to make substantial gains.    At first, reformers decided the main problem was the crazy-quilt pattern of state-set prices. In many cases, factories paid more for raw materials than they could charge for the finished product, leaving them hopelessly in the red. But dismantling the pricing structure threatened to unleash inflation, and budget-busting subsidies were out of the question.    So leaders compromised, and while they decided last year to emphasize improving managerial efficiency, they also allowed a small number of prices, notably steel, to float with supply and demand. But price tinkering was one of the first casualties of the conservative shift in the leadership; in mid-January, the policy-making State Council banned unauthorized price increases in steel and other industrial raw materials.    The tone of public utterances on economic affairs also has changed in recent weeks. Maoist-like rhetoric has begun to replace reformers' calls for letting markets determine production and prices. Several senior officials have been unusually candid in pointing out problems with the reforms of the past few years. For example, Xu Dixin, an 81-year-old member of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, said in an interview that market forces have pulled so much money and materials from the state-planning apparatus that state projects are being delayed.    &quot;This shows that the market has pounded at the state-planned economy, and this is very difficult for us,&quot; Mr. Xu said. He said he agreed with the reformers' goal of reducing the scope of central planning, but that abolishing mandatory planning would be tantamount to returning to capitalism. </TEXT></DOC>