<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880303-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors: Unwanted Advice From Abroad </HL><AUTHOR> Martin Feldstein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP JAPAN </CO><IN> MON ECO FIN BON </IN><G> TRE FED </G><TEXT>   Frightened by the prospect that the falling dollar will continue to weaken their own economies, the governments of Europe and Japan have been trying to persuade the U.S. to take steps to stop the dollar's decline. We should firmly resist that advice.    Although boosting the dollar is advocated under the banner of &quot;international policy coordination,&quot; the policies they propose would be harmful to the U.S. in both the near term and the more distant future. The advocacy of such policies by foreign governments reflects not the possibility of mutual gains from policy coordination but the rational pursuit of foreign self-interest and a misunderstanding of the American economy.    It is not surprising that the Europeans want us to defend the dollar. The economies of continental Europe are slowing down and their unemployment is rising. The increase in European unemployment rates from 3% in the 1970s to more than 6% by 1980 was the result of labor-market rigidities and the adverse incentives caused by high tax rates and overgenerous unemployment benefits; the more recent jump of European unemployment rates to double-digit levels reflects the shrinking world demand for European products.    The falling dollar has caused European exports to decline while imports have increased from the U.S. and from the other countries whose currencies follow the dollar. The real volume of West German exports, for example, is lower now than in 1985 and the volume of German imports is up more than 6%. With this type of imbalance continuing in the coming year, Germany's real gross national product will grow less than 2% in 1988 and German unemployment will continue to rise.    Instead of following the successful Japanese approach of stimulating domestic activity to replace declining net exports, the Europeans are trying to persuade the U.S. government to adopt policies aimed at postponing the needed adjustment of the U.S. trade deficit. They are joined in this effort by the Japanese who, despite the current health of their economy, fear the effects of a further shrinking in their own trade surplus. If they succeed, the European and Japanese economies will grow faster in the coming year but the U.S. expansion will slow and the risk of a recession will rise. Moreover, if the foreign governments get their way, it will be the American taxpayers who will bear the direct cost of these policies.    The Europeans and Japanese scored a partial victory in December when the U.S. joined in a G-7 communique declaring that the dollar was at an appropriate level and agreed to back up that assertion with massive currency intervention. But foreign officials recognize that declarations and intervention are not enough to stop the dollar from declining substantially further in 1988. They are therefore urging the American government to shift policy to support the dollar.    Led by British Finance Minister Nigel Lawson and Dutch Finance Minister Onno Ruding, who is currently chairman of the IMF Interim Committee, foreign officials are calling on the U.S. to raise interest rates to make dollar investments more attractive. Less publicly but no less clearly, European and Japanese officials are asking the U.S. Treasury to issue &quot;Reagan bonds&quot; denominated in marks and yen and to use the proceeds to buy dollars, thereby boosting the dollar's value relative to that of foreign currencies.    Propping up the dollar would hurt the American economy. The decline of the dollar that began three years ago has been very good for American industry. By making U.S. products more competitive in world markets, it caused U.S. exports to rise more than 20% in the past 18 months despite the weak overall demand in Europe and Japan. It has also caused American consumers to substitute American-made goods and services for foreign imports. During 1988 and 1989, the continued improvement in the trade balance is likely to account for about one-half of total U.S. economic growth and could make the difference between continued expansion and a slide into recession.    But although the U.S. trade balance is beginning to improve, the current level of the dollar is still too high to shrink the trade balance to a level that can be financed by private capital inflows from abroad. Experts calculate that that will require the real value of the dollar to fall by at least another 15% to 20%. Moreover, since the dollar prices of U.S. manufactured products are rising faster than the yen prices of Japanese goods and the mark prices of German goods, the dollar must fall even further just to maintain existing competitiveness.    Last year, foreign central banks tried to slow the dollar's decline by selling their own currencies and buying more than $100 billion of U.S. securities. Even so, the dollar fell 15% against the yen and 10% against the mark, causing the foreign governments to incur losses worth billions of dollars.    Foreign governments are eager to avoid a repetition of last year's losses. They therefore want the U.S. to defend the dollar with higher interest rates and slower economic growth. And since some decline of the dollar is inevitable, they want the U.S. Treasury to bear the resulting currency losses by borrowing foreign currencies so that foreign central banks can reduce their own intervention.    A rise in U.S. interest rates that is sufficient to stop the dollar's decline in 1988 would push the U.S. into recession. It would not only mean a fall in output and employment but would also create an economic environment in 1989 in which it would be impossible to enact legislation to reduce the fiscal deficit. Foreign officials who urge higher U.S. interest rates either do not understand the American economic and political system or do not care about the consequences for the American economy.    A Treasury decision to issue tens of billions of dollars of yen-denominated and mark-denominated &quot;Reagan bonds&quot; might temporarily convince private investors around the world that the U.S. was determined to stop the dollar's decline. If this confidence trick worked, the dollar's decline could be halted for several more months. But the plan could equally well backfire. World financial markets might properly interpret such foreign-currency borrowing by the U.S. Treasury as evidence that neither private investors nor foreign central banks were willing to finance the U.S. external deficit at the existing level of the dollar and of U.S. interest rates. The result would then be an overwhelming private sale of dollar securities that caused the dollar to fall sharply and U.S. interest rates to rise.    Whatever might be the short-run effect of such borrowing, the dollar would continue to fall substantially over the next several years and the U.S. taxpayers would suffer the financial loss of having to repay the yen and mark debt at a higher price. The issuing of so-called Reagan bonds would not only be an admission of policy failure but would force American taxpayers to pay for the counterproductive action of slowing our own export growth.    The U.S. should reject the advice that it is receiving from abroad. The Federal Reserve should avoid repeating the mistake of 1987 when the use of monetary policy to defend the value of the dollar led to interest-rate increases that were a primary factor in precipitating the stock-market crash.    Since election politics unfortunately preclude any action on the budget deficit until after November, the Fed's primary goal should be to maintain an economic environment in which the new president and Congress can enact the legislation that will eliminate the budget deficit over the next several years. The Europeans and the Japanese should concentrate less on giving advice to us and more on achieving domestic policies that will provide healthy growth in their own countries.    ---   Mr. Feldstein, past chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard. </TEXT></DOC>