<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Rehnquist and Scalia Push Conservative CausesBut High Court Liberals Still Hold Upper Hand---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The era of William Rehnquist as chief justice began, somewhat surprisingly, much the way the tenure of Warren Burger ended -- with a Supreme Court dominated by others and committed to actively protecting civil rights and liberties.    In the court term that is likely to end today, the justices expanded the rights of women, strengthened the legal foundation for affirmative action, broadened protection of free speech and built up the wall of separation between church and state.    But in a number of these cases, Chief Justice Rehnquist and the court's newest member, Justice Antonin Scalia, proved to be more conservative than the majority, expressing their views in forceful, but apparently unpersuasive, dissents.    Indeed, it was Justice William Brennan, long the leader of the court's liberal wing, who as the senior justice voting with the majority either wrote, or assigned to others, many of the court's most far-reaching rulings.    &quot;What this term shows,&quot; said A.E. Dick Howard, a professor at the University of Virginia Law School, is that &quot;over the next few years, without changes in personnel, it is going to take more than intellectual persuasiveness to alter the court's direction.&quot;    This is not to suggest that the Rehnquist-Scalia combination hasn't had an impact. The caliber of conservative firepower has increased noticeably, as court observers predicted it would last June when President Reagan nominated Justice Rehnquist to move into retiring Chief Justice Burger's chair and Appeals Court Judge Scalia to join the court.    A note of caution is necessary. Change has always come slowly to the Supreme Court and the Rehnquist era may well last to the end of the century. Moreover, in the case of Justice Scalia, it takes even the most experienced judges some time to feel comfortable being a justice.    For the court's conservative wing, the greatest success was in rejecting, 5-4, a broad claim that the death penalty is applied in a racially biased way in a number of states. A second major victory was a 6-3 decision upholding a federal law that allows judges to refuse bail to accused criminals who may pose a threat to society.    The isolation of the conservatives, particularly on what might be seen as litmus-test issues, was most apparent in their defense a week ago of Louisiana's law providing for the teaching of creationism along with evolution. Only Justices Scalia and Rehnquist voted to uphold the law, which the majority ruled had the unconstitutional purpose of promoting religion. The Reagan administration, never reticent about sharing its views with the Supreme Court, stayed out of the case.    That Chief Justice Rehnquist wasn't more influential doesn't surprise many Supreme Court experts, since he has always tended to state his views without regard for whether anyone else agreed.    But Harvard Law School professor Laurence Tribe said it is &quot;somewhat puzzling&quot; that the &quot;powerful opinions&quot; of Justice Scalia &quot;haven't attracted more support.&quot; This is even more curious since Justice Scalia's outgoing style and warm personality made him quickly welcome among his colleagues.    Early in the term, Justice Scalia made conservatives nervous by voting with the liberal wing in a couple of criminal cases and to uphold a California law that requires employers to provide unpaid pregnancy leave and reinstatement to women workers. But by the end of the roughly 145 opinions issued in the term, he had become a more dependable, although still independent, ally for the conservatives. &quot;He is by no means a moderate or a closet liberal,&quot; says Prof. Tribe, &quot;but it is not fair to say that he's just a sure vote for the right.&quot;    Chief Justice Rehnquist's impact has been felt most strongly in the tone and style of running the court. He kept his colleagues moving at a breezy pace, bringing the curtain down on the term the earliest in 14 years. He swept away much of the heavy-handed approach that made his colleagues chafe under Chief Justice Burger. He has delegated authority in a way his predecessor never would, tapping Justice Sandra O'Connor, for example, to plan the court's bicentennial efforts.    The continuity of Chief Justice Rehnquist's first term with the past may have one other effect. It practically guarantees, if there was any doubt before, that the possibility of turnover in the court's membership will become an issue once again in the national campaign, for the third consecutive presidential election. When the next court term opens in October, four justices will range in age between 81 and 78 and the average will be 69.5 years.    The first term of the Rehnquist court was an active one for cases affecting business and industry. The high court upheld the California pregnancy-leave law and two affirmative-action plans, one requiring promotions for black state troopers in Alabama on a one-for-one ratio with whites, the other a voluntary plan for public workers adopted by Santa Clara County, Calif.    The justices ordered Texaco Inc. out of federal court and back to the state courts in Texas in its fight to avoid having to post a $12 billion bond in its dispute with Pennzoil Co. over ownership of Getty Oil Co. The court also upheld an Indiana law giving shareholders of companies based in the state a chance to slow or block hostile takeover bids, the first time the high court has said the states may regulate tender offers. And the court ruled that securities-fraud disputes between brokers and their customers should be settled by arbitration if the investment contract calls for it, a decision that will affect hundreds of cases.    In two victories for the banking industry in its fight with the securities industry, the court ruled that national banks may open discount brokerages nationwide, and also let stand a decision by the Federal Reserve Board that national banks may sell commercial paper for their customers.    Among other important business decisions, the high court ruled that:    --Landowners may sue planning boards for damages if zoning regulations deprive them of any use of their property.    --States may require employers to pay severance pay to workers displaced by factory closings or relocations.    --Offices of public employees may be searched for records without a warrant if officials have a &quot;reasonable suspicion&quot; to justify the search.    --Companies that sue competitors for antitrust violations must prove a real anticompetitive threat, rather than simply a deteriorating economic position resulting from stiff competition.    --New York's liquor-pricing law violated antitrust laws because it in effect allowed wholesalers to determine retail prices.    --A Pennsylvania law that requires coal mine operators to leave enough coal in the ground to preserve the land and nearby buildings doesn't violate their property and contract rights.    --Labor unions may be held liable for racial discrimination if they fail to pursue a worker's complaint of bias by an employer. </TEXT></DOC>