<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0141 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> BEIDAIHE, China  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last Thursday night, Li Ruihuan, a rising star in the Communist Party, invited Vice Premier Wan Li to dinner. The location: Kiessling, a European restaurant here that has catered to officials and tourists for four decades.    The two men talked for three hours over seafood, steak, salad and vanilla ice cream. &quot;Beidaihe is great,&quot; Mr. Li exclaimed as he got up from the table. &quot;Kiessling is great.&quot;    The scene could have taken place only at Beidaihe, China's unofficial summer capital. Each July and August, fleets of Mercedes limousines bring the ruling elite to this seaside resort to escape sweaty, sooty Beijing, 180 miles away. They come to conduct party business, but the sojourns also offer a rare chance for China's somber leaders to let their hair down.    Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, is here. So is Zhao Ziyang, the premier and acting party chief. Even Hu Yaobang, removed from the party's top slot amid severe criticism in January, made the trip.    For the next six weeks, the leaders and their colleagues will meet in their secluded, heavily guarded colonial-style villas to discuss the country's problems. The talks typically are informal, sometimes held at beachside or over hands of bridge, Mr. Deng's passion.    Despite the informal air, this year's meetings are critical to China's future. The Beidaihe gathering is the last opportunity to thrash out the issues that divide the leadership before this autumn's party congress, an event held about every five years to select the country's top officials and to set national goals.    &quot;This is the equivalent of an election year in China,&quot; says a Western analyst in Beijing. &quot;Beidaihe is the smoke-filled room.&quot;    For seven months, China's leadership has been wracked by disagreement and factionalism. Student demonstrations in December and January unnerved Mr. Deng and other officials. Fear of continuing unrest emboldened the party's conservatives to seek the dismissal of the liberal Mr. Hu as party secretary-general and attack ideas and party members they deemed to be overly Western, anti-socialist or anti-party.    For months, the more liberal, reform-minded leaders battled with the conservatives behind the scenes and through official propaganda organs. Though a consensus emerged that the policy of liberalizing the economy should continue, rifts surfaced in major areas, including culture, education and the social role of the party. The conservatives also delayed certain economic reforms, including a law that would have put factory managers -- and not party officials -- in control of state enterprises.    But in recent weeks, signs of the power struggle have faded. The party media organs once again are churning out propaganda for ambitious reforms, both political and economic. Diplomats in Beijing and Hong Kong believe Mr. Deng has weathered the worst of the conservative storm. But many China watchers are looking for hints from the Beidaihe gathering that the reformers, including Mr. Deng and acting party chief Zhao, control the agenda.    The major issues to be resolved before the party congress, the 13th since the founding of the party in 1927, concern personnel. Mr. Deng, nearly 83 years old but still firmly in charge of the country, has indicated repeatedly that he will step down from the Politburo's five-man Standing Committee, the party's highest policy-making organ -- but only if he can persuade other senior leaders to do the same, analysts say.    Those most likely to step down in such an arrangement are Li Xiannian, 78, the state president, and the ailing Chen Yun, 82, head of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection. Peng Zhen, 84, may also be under pressure to leave the chairmanship of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, China's primary law-making body. Mr. Peng, a conservative, posed a public challenge to Mr. Deng and other reformers at the National People's Congress meeting in March.    Mr. Deng's goal, analysts agree, is to move younger, more liberal colleagues into leadership positions. Above all, Mr. Deng wants to ensure continuation of the economic-reform policies he has championed since 1978. The chain-smoking octogenarian wields far more power than his two nominal posts -- chairman of the Central Advisory Commission and the Central Military Commission -- would indicate. Mr. Deng himself assures visitors that he will look after state affairs even if he retires from the Politburo and one or both of his commission chairmanships.    &quot;If Deng moves out, all he would need is a telephone and a courier to keep a grip on the country,&quot; says a Western analyst.    Yet Mr. Deng's unchallenged hold on power is a troubling problem for the party over the longer term. When he dies or becomes incapacitated, there is probably no one who can command the broad support that has enabled Mr. Deng in the past decade to heal the wounds of Mao Tse-tung's chaotic Cultural Revolution and direct a crash program to unshackle the economy from rigid communist orthodoxy.    Mr. Hu once was the designated heir-apparent, but that plan fell apart in January. At a spry 68 years of age, Premier Zhao, Mr. Deng's other protege, generally is considered too inexperienced to be paramount leader.    &quot;The whole country hinges on Deng,&quot; says Kenneth Lieberthal, director of the Center for Chinese Studies at the University of Michigan. &quot;China hasn't resolved the problem of personalistic leadership. The policies are good, but the situation does serious damage to the institutional underpinnings of the political system.&quot;    Western analysts fear that China faces uncertainty and lack of direction once Mr. Deng dies. Mr. Zhao's own future has to be sorted out between strolls on the beach at Beidaihe. After Mr. Hu's ouster, Mr. Zhao added the post of acting party chief to the premiership. Mr. Deng says Mr. Zhao will keep only one of the posts, most likely the party job.    That would put the premiership up for grabs -- creating a battleground between conservatives and reformers. As premier, Mr. Zhao has pushed through a broad economic liberalization. Without a like-minded reformer in that slot, the country's liberal economic programs could stall.    The most talked-about candidates for the premier's post include a conservative, Li Peng, and a reformer, Wan Li. Another possibility would be an elderly compromise candidate to serve as caretaker while the opposing camps spar. One candidate is Yang Shangkun, the 80-year-old military chief who visited the U.S. in May.    The main policy issue on the agenda at Beidaihe is political reform. Mr. Deng has promised that a blueprint for such reform, involving the transfer of functions of the government away from the party, will emerge at this year's congress. Mr. Deng tried to push political reform last year but was stymied by elderly leaders.    To be sure, Mr. Deng isn't pushing Western-style democracy. Anything that emerges from the congress is sure to emphasize the supremacy of the Communist Party and of socialism, albeit with elements of capitalism. &quot;China isn't talking about installing the Statue of Liberty,&quot; says a Western diplomat.    But the movement toward political change is significant. Mr. Deng has outlined goals for such reforms, including streamlining the bureaucracy, attacking party corruption and decentralizing many economic powers. He also hopes to increase democracy at grass-roots levels.    But issues aside, the most important matter for many leaders is just to put in an appearance at Beidaihe. &quot;This is the fashionable place to be at this time of year, to show that you have some power,&quot; says a Western diplomat. &quot;If you aren't here, you really don't count.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>