<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880222-0077 </DOCNO><HL> How a Wealthy 'Arb' Enmeshed in Scandal Turned to Violence --- Mulheren, Ex-Ally of Boesky Caught With Guns, Felt Persecuted and Betrayed </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart, Daniel Hertzberg and Bryan Burrough (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR </IN><TEXT>   John Mulheren Jr. was more than a business associate of Ivan Boesky. He had once arranged a bailout of the now-convicted insider trader, he gave to Mr. Boesky's favorite charities, he even was the trustee for Mr. Boesky's children. &quot;He idolized Ivan,&quot; says a friend, Barry Wish.    And last week, say the police, he set out to kill him.    Mr. Mulheren, who ranked with Mr. Boesky on the top tier of Wall Street's most successful arbitragers, emerged late Thursday from Riveredge, his Rumson, N.J., mansion, and put in the back seat of his car a gym bag holding army fatigues and a loaded .233 caliber Israeli Galil assault rifle. According to the police, his mission was to kill both Mr. Boesky and Mr. Boesky's former head trader, Michael Davidoff.    Both Mr. Boesky and Mr. Davidoff had implicated Mr. Mulheren in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal, although he hadn't been charged with a crime. The pressures of the yearlong investigation kept mounting inexorably. Early last week, when Mr. Mulheren's lawyers told him he was close to being indicted by a federal grand jury for securities crimes, he snapped.    This is the story of how Mr. Mulheren, a volatile trader but a generous man and devoted father, was transformed into a would-be killer. While Mr. Mulheren's circumstances are unique -- he has long been treated for manic depression -- many others on Wall Street are also suffering under the intense pressure of the government's major investigation. The bizarre circumstance of Mr. Mulheren's arrest confirms fears that the magnitude of what is at stake in Wall Street's scandal -- the many millions of dollars, the careers and reputations, the power to shape the destiny of corporations -- would someday trigger violence.    &quot;This is a tragedy,&quot; says Barry Wish, one of Mr. Mulheren's closest friends and the general managing partner of Oxford Financial Group.    Early last week, the climax of the government's investigation of the 38-year-old Mr. Mulheren appeared to be at hand. The Manhattan U.S. attorney's office gave Mr. Mulheren's lawyers strong indications that prosecutors were preparing to seek an indictment of him from the federal grand jury hearing evidence in the Wall Street scandal. It was probably Mr. Mulheren's last chance to gain more favorable treatment by negotiating a guilty plea. His response: He called his lawyers Wednesday night and dismissed them.    Until then, say people close to the arbitrager, he had never accepted the fact that he, like Mr. Boesky, would have to face the shame and humiliation of criminal charges. Mr. Mulheren had never exchanged cash in suitcases, the way Mr. Boesky had, for inside information; all he had done, he believed, was accommodate Mr. Boesky by taking certain stock positions for him.    Mr. Boesky and Mr. Mulheren were extremely close. When Mr. Boesky's firm faced insolvency in 1982, Mr. Mulheren, then working at Spear, Leeds andamp; Kellogg, a New York securities and arbitrage firm, arranged a complex rescue. Mr. Boesky made Mr. Mulheren his family's trustee and influenced his charitable giving. When Mr. Boesky made a large donation to endow a library at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York, Mr. Mulheren headed the fund-raising drive and the dinner in Mr. Boesky's honor, and he made a large donation himself. Mr. Mulheren was one of &quot;the largest non-Jewish donors to Jewish charities in America,&quot; says Mr. Wish.    Virtually everyone who knows Mr. Mulheren cites him for his generosity. Most of his donations were made anonymously; it is known that he gave heavily to his alma mater, Roanoke College in Virginia. One Christmas he gave all of his brothers and sisters new cars tied with red ribbon. He had many friends, among them rock star Bruce Springsteen (a Rumson neighbor), former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan, and T. Boone Pickens Jr. and members of the Belzberg family, the corporate raiders.    Like Mr. Boesky, Mr. Mulheren was hugely successful as an arbitrager in an era of unbridled takeover speculation. He often said he made more money than he knew what to do with, but he loved the thrill of beating other traders. His moods could swing wildly, from buoyant good humor to inexplicable nastiness. Six-feet-two and built like a linebacker, he once got into a fistfight with one of his own traders on the trading floor.    For Wall Street, his attire was eccentric. At the office he typically wore dungarees or khakis and loafers without socks, and he may have been the only arbitrager sometimes seen in suede pants. No one thought it unusual that he kept at his lavish mansion an arsenal of sophisticated guns.    Despite his success, Mr. Mulheren was ambivalent about his career. Several years ago, one of his five adopted children fell into the family's swimming pool while Mr. Mulheren was distracted by an arbitrage-related phone call, friends say. Mr. Mulheren rescued the child from the bottom of the pool and, according to a friend, stood shaking the child as tears streamed down his face, crying, &quot;Don't die, don't die.&quot; Though the child lived, the experience was one of the reasons Mr. Mulheren quit Wall Street in 1984 to reassess his life, friends say.    But the thrill of stock-market triumph proved too potent a lure. Six months later he launched his own firm, Jamie Securities, which soon became a force in major takeover transactions. Mr. Mulheren resumed his nearly daily phone calls with Mr. Boesky and Mr. Boesky's head trader, Mr. Davidoff. Mr. Mulheren traded huge stock positions; Mr. Davidoff referred to him as &quot;the big ticket.&quot;    During the fall of 1986, Mr. Boesky gave Mr. Mulheren no hint of his impending agreement to plead guilty and cooperate with the government. When the stunning announcement came that November, Mr. Mulheren &quot;felt dismayed and abandoned,&quot; says Mr. Wish. Mr. Mulheren quickly fell under government scrutiny himself, but friends say he was calm about it, at least at first.    His problem was stock &quot;parking.&quot; As reported by this newspaper last year based on accounts by people familiar with the investigation, the government has evidence suggesting that Mr. Mulheren took stock positions for Mr. Boesky so that the true ownership would be hidden, with Mr. Boesky presumably guaranteeing Mr. Mulheren against loss and Mr. Mulheren agreeing to return profits to Mr. Boesky. To settle accounts, Mr. Boesky sent regular invoices for trades executed by Mr. Boesky's firm on behalf of Jamie. Each time, Mr. Mulheren's firm overpaid Mr. Boesky by amounts totaling more than $400,000, apparently to disguise payments related to the parking arrangement.    Mr. Mulheren, for the most part, cooperated with the Securities and Exchange Commission in its inquiry, confirming much of what Mr. Boesky had already told the agency about the two men's relationship and implicating others in stock parking. Despite the warnings of his lawyers, he seemed convinced that he wouldn't be charged with any crime.    Indeed, parking, in itself, may not be a criminal violation, lawyers say. Much depends on the purpose. Parking to evade net-capital requirements, for example, could be a criminal violation, though one of the less serious ones. Parking as part of an illegal takeover conspiracy -- as a result of which unwilling companies may be dismembered, jobs lost and raiders enriched by hundreds of millions of dollars -- is viewed as one of the most serious of securities crimes, even graver than insider trading.    In January last year, Mr. Davidoff pleaded guilty to a felony count of evading net-capital requirements as part of a parking scheme and agreed to cooperate fully with the government. The move, the first criminal plea to a parking charge ever, jolted Wall Street, and especially Mr. Mulheren, friends say.    Over time, Mr. Mulheren became less and less cooperative with the government, especially the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office handling criminal aspects of the case. He indicated he was willing to settle civil SEC charges, but balked at any criminal plea. He was also upset by a report in this newspaper indicating he had cooperated, because it led others on Wall Street to shun him as someone who might be implicating still more people.    Recently, Mr. Mulheren grew &quot;more and more depressed,&quot; says a friend and former colleague. &quot;He couldn't take being dragged in. His name was being ruined. He became convinced that the government would never leave him alone.&quot;    The intense pressure seemed to have a destabilizing influence, friends say. About two weeks ago, he stopped taking his regular dose of lithium, a drug often given for manic depression.    Early last week, says a friend who talked with him, &quot;he was ranting about the government, about Boesky, and especially about Davidoff.&quot; This friend says Mr. Mulheren had become convinced that Mr. Davidoff, in choosing to plead guilty to a felony, had turned parking into a crime. Increasingly frustrated by his lawyers' inability to deflect the government, Mr. Mulheren said he had decided to take matters into his own hands, says another friend, who assumed this only meant replacing the lawyers.    After he fired his lawyers Wednesday night, one of them, alarmed by Mr. Mulheren's apparent instability, tried to reach Mr. Mulheren's psychiatrist, only to learn he was vacationing in the Caribbean. On Thursday morning, according to an account Mr. Mulheren later gave police, the arbitrager went to Mr. Davidoff's house in New Jersey. Mr. Davidoff wasn't home. That afternoon, Mr. Mulheren's wife, Nancy, called the Rumson police, saying she was alarmed by her husband's emotional state, especially in view of his access to firearms.    A Rumson police officer went out to the Mulheren estate on North Ward Avenue, a tree-lined cul-de-sac in the exclusive community. Soon after, Mr. Mulheren emerged from the house and got into his car. The patrolman blocked the driveway and intercepted him, seizing three loaded weapons from the car: a nine-millimeter semi-automatic pistol, a .357 Magnum pistol, and a 12-gauge pistol-grip shotgun. Because Mr. Mulheren had permits for the weapons and hadn't left his property, the patrolman didn't arrest Mr. Mulheren, who returned to his house.    Late that afternoon, Mr. Mulheren again emerged, this time carrying the gym bag. He drove the car out of the driveway and into the street before the policeman could force him to halt. Mr. Mulheren threatened the officer, according to police, saying, &quot;Do you want it to start here?&quot; Mr. Mulheren started to flee in his car but was halted by a second patrol car. After discovering the Galil attack gun, the police arrested him for carrying the weapon off his property, a violation of state law.    Mr. Mulheren, described as being in an emotional, &quot;pumped-up&quot; state, told police he was after Mr. Boesky and Mr. Davidoff. &quot;There was no doubt he would do something drastic,&quot; says John Kaye, a Monmouth County, N.J., prosecutor. &quot;He was trying to kill them.&quot;    Mr. Mulheren spent Thursday night in jail. Early Friday afternoon, the arbitrager was led into a county courtroom, his left wrist shackled to a line of a dozen other prisoners. He appeared calm, sitting motionless through a hearing attended by his wife and parents. He was charged with two weapons violations and pleaded not guilty. Bail was set at $17,500.    The Manhattan U.S. attorney's office also rushed to issue a federal complaint and arrest warrant Friday, charging Mr. Mulheren with threatening and attempting to threaten a witness in a federal case. If he posts bail in New Jersey, he will be turned over immediately to federal authorities. Mr. Mulheren's lawyers say they are trying to have him hospitalized.    Though authorities will take his mental state into account, prosecutors deem the threatening of witnesses extremely serious, as it can damage their ability to win convictions and gain the cooperation of others (Mr. Boesky at one time expressed concern for his safety). There already are concerns that other witnesses now may be afraid to cooperate, and over the weekend some people who are helping in the Wall Street investigation moved into seclusion.    Whatever Mr. Mulheren's previous problems, they have been vastly compounded by his behavior last week. He faces an array of new charges and has probably sacrificed any chances for leniency in his parking case, lawyers say.    Otto Obermaier, one of Mr. Mulheren's lawyers, asked to comment on the contents of this story, said: &quot;It is known that John Mulheren has been upset by the investigation by regulatory authorities of securities activities and by the rumors and publicity which developed and which he felt unfairly impugned his honesty and integrity. The important thing now is for him to get the help and support to permit him to resume his normal and constructive life.&quot;    Mr. Obermaier says he personally didn't get a call from Mr. Mulheren firing him and says there are inaccuracies in the story, which he declines to specify. He added that it is &quot;regrettable&quot; that the press &quot;has chosen to attempt to write a scenario that subsequent legal proceedings, characterized by their search for accuracy, will find inaccurate.&quot;    Says Mr. Wish, Mr. Mulheren's friend: &quot;If anything, he's a victim of our age. He got pulled into a world of greed, excess, insider trading. I see him as a tragic figure.&quot;    (Revised WSJ Feb. 23, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>