<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870903-0074 </DOCNO><HL> States Do Good, Arab Economies Done Ill---By Dennis D. Miller</HL><DD> 09/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><TEXT>   Despite its loss of hundreds of lives, its exposure to even more such losses, and its expenditure of tens of billions of aid dollars, the U.S. will probably fail to secure its long-term geopolitical goal of peace and stability in the Mideast and North Africa. This is because these objectives ultimately depend more on what individuals there do to develop their own comparative economic advantages than on any good that their governments or the U.S. try to do for them. And, ironically, it is well-intentioned policies that still block the development of the region's comparative economic advantages.    Almost without exception the economies of the 16 Arab nations in the Mideast and northern Africa are declining or stagnating. Excluding Iraq, for which comparable data were not available but likely reflect even worse trends, the growth rate in real per-capita gross national product for the countries averaged 4.3% a year from 1973 to 1983. For 1983, the latest year for which figures are available, this rate had slowed to below 1%. Since then, evidence suggests real per-capita growth is still flat or even negative.    During the late 1960s and through the 1970s, the 16 nations had such high hopes of petroleum income that there seemed to be little need to heed comparative advantages other than oil and, in the case of non-oil-exporting countries, plentiful domestic labor to send abroad.    Also during this time, governments grew and took the major initiatives in economic development. For example, from 1965 to 1980, the economic plans of Jordan, Syria, Iraq, Libya, Egypt and Saudi Arabia gave 50% to 91% of total investment to government, leaving the rest to the private sector.    By taking the initiative for development, governments slighted the potential of private enterprise. Political decisions, rather than market processes, usually directed the course of economic growth. As a result, most of the 16 countries seriously lack competitiveness in the international product market.    This is particularly true in countries with nationalized industrial sectors, such as Algeria, Syria, Iraq and Egypt. One searches in vain for a manufactured product from them that is competitive in international markets.    Lacking manufacturing competitiveness, these countries rely on the international resource market for foreign exchange. Less processing is needed in this market, since the benefits of the raw material are inherent or importing countries add value through competitive manufacturing. Thus, the export earnings of Algeria, Syria, Iraq and Egypt come mainly from crude oil or other raw materials, such as phosphates.    But the export of raw materials is much too flimsy a foundation on which to build an economic future. In this period of subdued world inflation, commodity prices are unlikely to be an adequate source of income. And should the Iran-Iraq War end, petroleum prices will fall. Even if the standoff should continue, energy prices are likely to creep up only slowly.    Yet even when government coffers were bursting with income from record oil prices and production rates, crude-oil exporting countries were distinguished by having the largest development projects most prone to cost overruns. One World Bank survey found that in a sample of the top 19 developing countries with investments in individual projects costing more than $100 million, only five were non-oil-exporting countries. Of projects costing from $100 million to $250 million, more than one-fifth had long delays with cost overruns of 30%. The survey also reported that of the projects costing more than $1 billion, nearly half were delayed, with an average overrun of 109%.    The problems don't stop there. Governments compound harm when they undertake projects that are also based on comparative disadvantages.    Take arid Saudi Arabia, for example. In 1981 it grew only 187,000 metric tons of wheat, importing the rest of its needs. Now self-sufficient in wheat, Saudi Arabia grows nearly two million metric tons a year.    But that self-sufficiency came at the cost of giant subsidies that dwarf U.S. and European Community price supports: The Saudi government pays domestic growers $1,000 a ton for wheat that could be bought on international markets for $80. In other words, Saudi Arabia paid $2 billion for wheat it could have bought for only $160 million, hardly an example of rational economic choice. This makes it easier to understand how the Saudi government can be financing an agriculture system that produces only 1.1% of the country's gross domestic product when employing 25% of the native work force.    Of course, Saudi Arabia offers the same reason, national security, that the U.S. offered in the 1950s for its quotas on petroleum imports. And as the U.S. policy accelerated the rate of depletion of U.S. petroleum reserves, the Saudi policy is accelerating the depletion of Saudi Arabia's water.    In response, Saudi officials argue that their country has water resources plentiful enough to equal the flow of the Nile for 500 years. But water-resource specialists rejoin that such resources are deep -- as much as 4,000 feet -- and the deeper they are, the saltier and hotter they become. Thus, deep drilling, desalination, and cooling towers multiply costs, damping the economic potential considerably.    Libya is another case. Admittedly the U.S. is better off if Libya, as long as Moammar Gadhafi is at its helm, uses a faulty economic compass. And Col. Gadhafi is obliging. Irrigation is depleting Libya's coastal aquifers. In response, Col. Gadhafi is constructing a boondoggle: a huge project to bring water from desert oases to the coastal areas. Its cost of $22 billion is more than four times Libya's estimated petroleum earnings in 1986. The average Libyan must pay for this by standing longer in line for scarce consumer goods.    Countries such as Libya and Saudi Arabia are fighting self-defeating wars when they try to win such large degrees of self-sufficiency. The resources just don't exist to turn deserts inexpensively into bountiful farm land. Valuable resources are wasted that could better develop comparative advantages for export.    This does not mean that the 16 countries cannot improve agricultural production. Allowing farmers to reap profits from what they sow would help to realize whatever potential exists. Free-market pricing of farm products would allow limits to agricultural development to become clearer, as farmers would cut back on unprofitable acreage and production. But it does mean that comparative advantages must be allowed to emerge by getting prices right and curtailing government meddling.    Few regions of the world need economic efficiency as badly as the Middle East and northern Africa. The region has arable and permanent cropped land equal to 15% less than the total area of Texas. In 1986 this limited area had to support a population of roughly 160 million. An annual population growth of 3% adds 4.8 million more people each year. And now, North Africa and the Mideast constitute one of the fastest-growing food-deficit regions in the world. From 1950-52 to 1982-84, grain production per person fell more than 30% in Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and Syria.    A continent away, tiny Hong Kong illustrates possibilities. Economically prosperous despite a dense population, no mineral or petroleum resources and a major dependence on imported food, Hong Kong shows that even the most populated and least resource-endowed place can do well by developing whatever comparative advantages it has.    Hong Kong also shows that discovering comparative advantage is a market process, not compatible with government excess. But more often than not, the 16 Arab nations of the Mideast and northern Africa have fostered the excess and neglected the process.    In Jordan, for example, government services and construction accounted for more than 64% of employment growth but only 32% of the increase in real GDP from 1975 to 1985. The remaining 68% of the increase in real GDP apparently came from the less than 36% of employment growth provided by the private sector, indicating considerable potential for the private sector. As late as 1979, Morocco's tax burden at 19% of GDP was one of highest in the developing world. Making matters worse last year, it adopted a value-added tax. It reduced its maximum tariffs on imports from more than 100% -- but to a still high 45%.    In sum, if the 16 governments in the region gave more leeway to market forces and tried less to do good with their financial and political power, comparative advantages could more easily develop.    In 1884 while in London, Sheik Mohammed Abdou, a highly reputed Egyptian Pan-Islamist, remarked to the British who were then occupying Egypt: &quot;Do not attempt to do us any more good. Your good has done us too much harm already.&quot; A century later the citizens of the region could address his comment to their own governments. Now as then, less &quot;doing good&quot; would be doing better.    ---   Mr. Miller, an economist at Baldwin-Wallace College in Berea, Ohio, taught in Cairo from 1982 to 1984. </TEXT></DOC>