<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870108-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE HOUSE VOTED to create a special panel to probe the Iran-Contra affair.    By a 416-2 vote, the House urged the committee to undertake &quot;a full and complete investigation and study&quot; on the arms sales to Iran and the diversion of funds to Nicaragua rebels. The panel's authority runs to Oct. 30, but could be extended. Separately, Sen. Inouye, chairman of the Senate select committee on the affair, said that panel is considering interviewing foreign heads of state. He expressed particular interest in Israel.    A Panama-registered firm has been identified by intelligence sources as an important link in the private network resupplying Nicaragua insurgents from an air base in El Salvador.    ---   French warplanes attacked a Libyan radar installation in northern Chad. French officials said the target was &quot;neutralized&quot; in the raid, which was in retaliation for a Libyan bombing raid on southern Chad. Chad's envoy to Paris said Libyan jets attacked a government post in southern Chad hours after the French strike.    ---   Rep. Les Aspin was repudiated by House Democrats as Armed Services chairman, but a successor wasn't named. Mr. Aspin, of Wisconsin, who won the post two years ago in an insurgent candidacy, lost to a similar effort led by Rep. Marvin Leath. A conservative Texan, Leath now is the leading candidate for the post.    ---   Reagan might be released as early as today from Bethesda Naval Hospital, his aides said. The White House physician said &quot;things could not be better&quot; for Reagan following prostate surgery. A CAT scan showed no recurrence of colon cancer.    ---   The FDA takes an important step next week toward the first government approval of a prescription drug for treating AIDS. An advisory panel, made up of independent doctors and scientists, will meet next week to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of Burroughs-Wellcome's drug AZT, or azidothymidine.    ---   Britain is launching a nationwide AIDS warning campaign that urges the use of condoms for people who won't restrict their sexual partners. Leaflets that are being delivered to 23 million households warn that AIDS isn't limited to homosexuals. Officials say television warnings will follow.    ---   Portugal agreed to return Macao to China in 1999, according to the Portuguese news agency Lusa. The agency, quoting sources close to senior advisers of President Soares, said that under a plan being negotiated with Peking Macao will become a special administrative region of China, after four centuries of Portuguese rule.    ---   Anonymous bomb threats forced the evacuation of a San Juan hospital treating victims of the Dupont Plaza Hotel fire. Puerto Rican officials also ordered the evacuation of the Dutch Inn, a hotel where Dupont Plaza management had set up an operations center. Police reported bomb threats at two other locations in the city.    ---   The Soviet Union offered to set a timetable for pulling out its troops in Afghanistan through U.N.-sponsored peace talks. The Kremlin had maintained that such a schedule could be worked out only between Moscow and Kabul. The Soviet news agency Tass reported the offer as Foreign Minister Shevardnadze ended a visit to Kabul.    ---   The Air Force wants about $600 million over the next two years for more work on B-1 bombers. The request was included in the supplemental fiscal 1987 military budget. Air Force officials said that the B-1 program still will fall within the $20.5 billion cost cap set early in the Reagan administration.    ---   India claimed to have documents showing that a Union Carbide engineer was directly responsible for the final design and construction of the Bhopal pesticide plant, the site of an accident that killed more than 2,300. In court filings in Bhopal, India also argued that the U.S. firm knew safety gear there was inadequate.    ---   Federal investigators found that tape had been placed over a warning whistle in the cab of the Conrail locomotive involved in Sunday's collision with a speeding Amtrak passenger train. National Transportation Safety Board officials are likely to question the Conrail engineer and another crew member who survived.    ---   Black students returned to their classes in South Africa after months of sporadic school boycotts. Hundreds of thousands of pupils, responding to pleas from parents and community leaders, reported for the new academic year. The boycotts began last year after authorities imposed a state of emergency aimed at ending black unrest.    ---   China said fighting was continuing along its Vietnamese border as Hanoi's forces launched a dozen attacks on Chinese positions. The official New China News Agency also dismissed Vietnam's claims of battle victories there as &quot;sheer boasting.&quot;    ---   Ugandan police reported that a plot to overthrow the 11-month-old government of President Museveni was broken up. A senior police officer said that security forces arrested 12 people who were at a &quot;subversive meeting&quot; outside Kampala. Authorities didn't identify those who were detained.    ---   Died: Walter E. Walpole, 81, founder and chairman of Walbro Corp., last Thursday, in Indianapolis. . . . Walter R. Mansfield, 75, federal appellate judge in New York, yesterday, in New Zealand. </TEXT></DOC>