<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870119-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. SAID it won't seek the death penalty for a suspected TWA hijacker.    Ending an impasse between Washington and Bonn, the Justice Department said it wouldn't seek a death sentence for the suspected hijacker of a TWA jetliner if he is extradited from West Germany and convicted in the U.S. The suspect, Mohammed Ali Hamadi, was arrested last week in Frankfurt. He is wanted by the U.S. for conspiracy to commit air piracy and murder during the 1985 hijacking of the jet to Beirut. A Navy diver was killed and 38 Americans held hostage during the incident.    Bonn said a West German businessman was abducted in Beirut, and reports circulated that the kidnappers hoped to trade him for Hamadi.    ---   ZHAO DISMISSED concern in China over Hu Yaobang's abrupt ouster.    The Chinese premier and acting chief of the Communist Party said that Hu's dismissal Friday wouldn't have any effect on Peking's policies and that fears of political instability were &quot;unwarranted.&quot; Despite Zhao's comments, Hu's ouster leaves unanswered the question of who will succeed leader Deng Xiaoping. The suddenness of Hu's fall also suggests to some that, while Deng remains in control, conservative opposition to Hu over his handling of student protests won out.    Peking said new Hong Kong Gov. David Wilson, who succeeds the late Edward Youde, would contribute to the return of Hong Kong to China in 1997.    ---   Afghan leader Najibullah denounced a guerrilla decision to reject Kabul's ceasefire bid as a &quot;crime against the people.&quot; Leaders of Afghanistan's seven guerrilla groups announced the rejection Saturday in Peshawar, Pakistan. Najibullah also said that Soviet troops would remain in the country until the civil war was over.    ---   Iran said Iraqi air raids on Qom and 10 others cities killed 200 civilians, but Tehran claimed that its forces captured two islands in the Shatt al-Arab waterway and pushed into the suburbs of the Iraqi city of Basra. Baghdad denied the Iranian assertion, saying the situation was stable on the southern front of the Persian Gulf war.    ---   Ecuador's president said he would fight any attempt to impeach him for yielding to kidnappers' demands. Leon Febres Cordero was held for 12 hours Friday by rebellious air force officers. He was freed in exchange for the release of Gen. Frank Vargas Pazzos, who was imprisoned for staging two unsuccessful rebellions last year.    ---   The Justice Department said Lyn Nofziger may have lobbied illegally for corporate clients within a year of leaving Reagan's staff. In its formal request for an independent counsel, the department said a preliminary inquiry found &quot;credible&quot; data that the former White House aide may have violated U.S. ethics laws.    ---   Reagan's Iran-Contra panel is expected to seek an extension of the Jan. 29 deadline for its report on the NSC's role in the arms sales to Tehran and diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels, sources said. The panel, headed by former Sen. John Tower of Texas, reportedly has had difficulty obtaining certain data about the operation.    ---   Philippine President Aquino traveled to Mindanao and appealed for peace following a series of attacks last week by Moslem separatists. In Manila, the army remained on full alert because of concern of a possible coup attempt. Former Defense Minister Enrile said there was restiveness in the military, but denied knowledge of a coup plot.    ---   Shultz said in an NBC-TV interview that the latest round of U.S.-Soviet arms-control talks in Geneva was &quot;off to a good start.&quot; The Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda, however, accused the U.S. of refusing to seek arms pacts in Geneva, contradicting Reagan's assessment that prospects for accords were the best in years.    ---   Normal winter weather returned to much of Europe following two weeks of snowstorms and record low temperatures. The death toll from the freeze, which had spread from Western Europe to the Soviet Union, was nearly 350, officials said.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir ordered increased security in Jerusalem following Saturday's stabbing of two Jewish brothers by suspected Arab guerrillas. Jerusalem's mayor appealed for calm. Last November, the stabbing death of a Jewish student prompted a week of anti-Arab violence.    ---   Police in Spain captured eight suspected members of the Basque separatist organization ETA over the weekend, making what is considered a significant advance in the fight against Basque terrorism. In Vitoria, political clashes continued over the formation of a new Basque regional government.    ---   A Justice Department agency said about half of the 20 million violent crimes in 1982 through 1984 were committed by someone known by the victim. The report found that 10% of the offenders were known only by sight and 39% of the crimes involved friends, relatives or acquaintances.    ---   Died: Paul Kalmanovitz, 81, owner of Milwaukee-based Pabst Brewing Co., Saturday, in Tiburon, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>