<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880411-0064 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Wine: Rhone Reds Are All the Rage </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Robert M. Parker Jr., America's reigning wine guru, swirls the intense dark red wine in his glass, inhales deeply, then sips. This, he pronounces, &quot;is the single best wine of France.&quot; Its price may also be the highest: At one New York wine store a bottle of the 1979 vintage costs $159.    Is this a fabled Burgundy of the Domaine de la Romanee Conti? Or one of the first-growth chateaux of Bordeaux?    Hardly. The wine in question is from one of France's humbler wine regions, the Rhone Valley. It is concededly from top producers, Etienne and Marcel Guigal, who have adopted the Burgundian status symbol of a single-vineyard appellation, La Mouline, for this wine. But in truth, La Mouline has more in common with the Cotes du Rhone red wines that have washed down countless plebeian feasts than it does with the refined, elegant top Bordeaux and Burgundy.    Rhone red wines are currently all the rage, in part because Mr. Parker is championing them. Last fall Mr. Parker published &quot;Wines of the Rhone Valley and Provence&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 456 pages, $22.95). In his newsletter and in his earlier book, &quot;Bordeaux,&quot; Mr. Parker raved about the 1982 vintage in Bordeaux, and whether the result of his remarkably perceptive palate or fortuitous timing, a buying frenzy followed that drove up the prices of classified Bordeaux to record levels. Is the same fate about to befall the Rhones?    Mr. Parker recently led a day-long tasting of Rhone wines at Manhattan's International Wine Center that, at $185 a person, sold out months in advance and quickly became the winter's most eagerly anticipated wine event. It provided an unusual opportunity to taste and compare about 40 of the region's best wines, most from the highly acclaimed 1985 vintage, and to assess their investment potential.    Geographically, the Rhone appellation runs along France's Rhone River from Vienne, south of Lyon, to Avignon, the site of the old papal palace, where the region gives way to Provence. Visitors are usually struck by the intense sun and the chalky-gray, rocky soil, out of which improbably spring mile after mile of grape vines. The climate and soil produce grapes that are ripe and concentrated, and the consistent weather means variation in quality from one vintage to another is less than just about anywhere else in France.    The best vineyards are in the north, bearing the Cote Rotie and Hermitage appellations. These are the most expensive wines of the region; La Mouline is a Cote Rotie wine. Moving south, the prices and reputations drop. Crozes-Hermitage, Cornas, St.-Joseph, and Gigondas aren't well-known in the U.S. Outside Avignon is the region's most famous and largest appellation, the Chateauneuf-du-Pape. And any wine from the region that doesn't bear a local appellation can be labeled Cotes du Rhone.    Mr. Parker's tasting tour focused only on the best red wines of these appellations (most Rhone white wines are an acquired taste). Almost all of them were outstanding. They are dark red wines, full in flavor, rich, alcoholic. They clearly appeal to Mr. Parker's own taste for big red wines. In the ongoing debate in wine circles about which is the most &quot;masculine&quot; of France's wines, surely these have no serious rivals.    Most striking was the consistency in quality from the most exalted and expensive labels to the humbler, less costly wines. Mr. Parker may find La Mouline to be the best wine of France; my tasting neighbors and I found numerous rivals within the Rhone appellation alone, most selling for about one-tenth the price. Particularly outstanding were the three Gigondas wines tasted, the Domaine Les Goubert and the Domaine Raspail, both 1985, and the 1983 Domaine Les Pallieres. These wines sell at retail for about $12-$15 a bottle.    Also strikingly good were some of the Chateauneuf du Papes, a wine justifiably shunned by many consumers because of its uneven quality (in particular, the wines of Chapoutier, widely distributed in this country, should be avoided for this reason). Several tasters hailed the 1983 Chateau Rayas as the single best wine of the day, outpacing even La Mouline, and the 1985 Chateau Beaucastel was a favorite. The Rayas is hard to find and can be expensive ($30-$35 a bottle), but the Beaucastel is widely available for $15-$20. And the greatest surprises of the day were the unpedigreed Cotes du Rhone -- from Guigal, Coudelet and Chateau de Fonsalette -- which were every bit as good as some of the top wines. Many Cotes du Rhone sell for under $10.    High quality notwithstanding, consumers and investors should pause before rushing out to snap up cases of these wines in anticipation of the kind of price appreciation that swept Bordeaux after the 1982 vintage. True, retailers report that prices are surging already. Ray Jobes, wine consultant at Crossroads Wines andamp; Liquors in Manhattan, a store that has long stocked Rhone wines because of their relatively low prices, says that &quot;prices took off incredibly about a year ago.&quot;    It is currently hard to find a Cote Rotie or Hermitage from a respected producer for under $20. The 1985 J.L. Chave Hermitage, for example, sold for $25 a year ago; it is now $32-$35. The 1980 vintage sold for $10 as recently as 1985. Chave wines and other top labels are beginning to be sold as futures, a vehicle for investment likely to drive more of the wine into the hands of speculators.    Still, prices of the lesser-known labels and appellations haven't soared, and it's unlikely that supply and demand alone will continue to push up prices of even the fashionable Rhone wines. Mr. Parker's tasting and his comparisons to France's other great wines help explain why. For all their virtues, the Rhone wines are not like the great wines of Burgundy and Bordeaux. Weather variation doesn't make them as scarce. They don't have the histories of the great domaines and chateaux of France's better-known regions. Their names haven't entered popular culture as symbols of taste, affluence and sophistication, which is what drives certain wine prices into the stratosphere.    And there are substitutes that should keep the lid on Rhone prices. Unlike the top Bordeaux and Burgundies, the robust, full-bodied Rhones face direct competition from many Italian wines, from Spain and Portugal, even from California and Australia, often at lower prices.    When the current hype has faded, it seems safe to predict that the prices of most Rhone wines will be what they have been for decades -- reasonable. Meanwhile, wine lovers can sample the region's rising quality by experimenting with the lesser known Rhone appellations, still some of the great bargains in wine.    ---   Mr. Stewart is a reporter in the Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>