<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Fighting Back---The Future Elixirs:Tomorrow's Drugs Promise Memory Help,Better Pain Relief and a Dieter's Dream---By Michael Waldholz</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AHP JNJ UPJ LLY SKB GLXOY ACY CHTL EUROP PFE MRK AMGN GENINOVX GOVMTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   THE DRUG industry is expecting a flurry of promising new medicines in the next few years.    The optimism springs from advances in understanding diseases at their most basic levels, where scientists say new drugs have the greatest chance of slowing or reversing an illness.    While many of the new drugs are merely improved versions of existing medicines, others reflect completely new ways of fighting disease. In many cases, drugs that have been created for one purpose hold promise for fighting other problems.    Here is a look at some areas where the advances are likely to reach the public soon. The drugs would be available by prescription only.    Aging   Drug industry genies haven't found an elixir for eternal youth. But scientists are slowly uncovering the body's chemical machinery that wears down after decades of use and are tinkering with ways to repair it.    Memory loss and senility can happen with advancing age, and researchers are searching for &quot;cognition activators&quot;: drugs that enhance the flow of natural brain chemicals whose movement becomes sluggish with age.    A leading candidate is a drug discovered by Hungarian scientists called vinpocetine. In some studies it has improved -- even restored -- memories of stroke victims whose thinking is impaired. Later this year, American Home Products Corp.'s Ayerst Labs plans to test the drug, derived from common periwinkle plants, in Alzheimer's patients.    Unable to stop the aging process, some researchers think they've found a way at least of making people look younger.    Dermatologists at the University of Pennsylvania recently showed that Retin-A, an anti-acne cream available by prescription, reversed some skin damage from sun exposure in middle-aged women.    The study showed that the cream, a vitamin A derivative, smoothed out tiny wrinkles and promoted faster replacement of skin cells and blood flow through the skin. The drug, marketed by a Johnson andamp; Johnson unit as an acne fighter, has some side effects -- such as causing skin irritation on some patients and causing some birth defects in animal studies. Retin-A is undergoing further testing for its wrinkle-removal properties.    Arthritis   Scientists are getting smarter at figuring out what causes the painful inflammation of joints. Only in recent years did they discover that aspirin short-circuits a set of natural chemicals, called prostaglandins, that promote healing. But they also discovered that excess prostaglandins generate unwanted swelling and pain.    Researchers now think a faulty message to the body's immune system may trigger an excess of prostaglandins, a process they are seeking ways to block. Most anti-arthritis drugs being studied are mostly super-potent versions of aspirin, but Upjohn Co. says Japanese researchers have something new.    Upjohn expects to begin testing late this year a drug called CCA that it says may act on &quot;the underlying cause&quot; of the disease. Although the company declines to be more specific, some scientists say the drug may inhibit an early step in the process that releases too many prostaglandins.    Asthma   About 10 years ago, researchers discovered the chemical chain of events involved in many types of asthma, and drug makers have been seeking ways of breaking it ever since.    Eli Lilly andamp; Co. and SmithKline Beckman Corp. think they found an answer with drugs that block the activity of natural chemicals called leukotrienes, which inflame the lung's airways, making breathing painful and difficult. Lilly's drug, called LY171883, appears to stymie leukotrienes.    Meanwhile, Glaxo Holdings PLC, a British drug maker, is studying a drug that provides asthma relief with just two doses a day with an inhaler. The drug, salmeterol, is under study as a replacement for current inhalants that must be used many times daily.    Baldness   Until Upjohn sprouted interest in its drug minoxodil as a legitimate hair restorer, the mee mention of research into treating hair loss was considered a joke. But the favorable review Upjohn's topically applied drug received last month is expected to prompt copycats.    American Cyanamid Co.'s Lederle Labs is trying to coax hair growth with its prescription lotion viprostol. Still, both drugs have only limited usefulness, take months to yield a crop of hair, will be costly and must be lathered daily in order to work.    Such drawbacks have convinced a small drug maker, Chantal Pharmaceutical Corp., that its drug, Cyoctol, will be head and shoulders above the others. Cyoctol disrupts the action of the human hormone androgen, believed responsible for such characteristics as acne, baldness and prostate gland enlargement. Currently the drug is being tested on men in Japan. Testing on U.S. men is expected to begin this year.    Contraception   French scientists are developing a once-a-month injection for women that works by interfering with progesterone, a hormone needed for implantation of a fertilized egg in the uterus.    Early studies suggest the drug, known as RU 486, blocks pregnancy. But researchers say much more rigorous side-effect studies must be conducted. There is also concern that the drug, if viewed as a &quot;morning after&quot; treatment, will raise questions by some pro-life advocates.    Diabetes   Drug company researchers say they have figured out how to block the onset of severe, sometimes life-threatening, complications such as damage to eyesight, severe pain in the arms and legs, and loss of kidney function that can accompany the disease.    Pfizer Inc.'s sorbinil, Ayerst's Tolrestat, and Merck andamp; Co.'s statil are the first of a family of drugs that interrupt the chemical process causing diabetes-related problems. The drugs are in late stages of testing, and some may be available next year.    Heart Disease   Cholesterol, indicted as a major culprit in causing heart attacks and other heart ailments, may meet its pharmaceutical match in a group of drugs that squelch its production in the body.    The first of these drugs, the Mevacor brand of lovastatin, developed by Merck, is expected to be available later this year. The drug reduces cholesterol levels 30% to 40%, much more than diet or other available drugs, and will be recommended for those who have failed to lower cholesterol with other methods.    The severity of a heart attack may be controlled with several new drugs. Tissue plasminogen factor, or tPA, is a human protein that disintegrates blood clots. When injected into the bloodstream, tPA frees the flow of blood to the heart, cutting short a coronary attack. TPA, produced in large amounts through genetic engineering techniques, is expected to be available this year.    Another drug being tested for the same purpose is Pro-urokinase, a natural enzyme. Some doctors believe the combination of these two drugs will produce a synergistic effect, halting heart attacks for those who can reach a physician or hospital early.    Kidney Disease   The industry's biotech wizards have identified and are mass-producing a natural body protein that holds promise in battling the severe anemia that afflicts the several hundred thousand patients who have lost the function of their kidneys and must have dialysis several times a week.    Called erythropoietin, or EPO, the new substance is being developed by Amgen Corp. and Genetics Institute Inc., two small biotech firms. Most dialysis patients require regular transfusions to beef up their supply of red blood cells. EPO, which may be available by next year, appears to boost red blood cell production, dispensing with transfusions.    Obesity   The dieter's dream, a fat-fighting pill with few side effects, is being tested by Lilly.    The drug, Prozac, is an anti-depressant that raises the body's level of serotonin, a chemical in the nervous system important in curbing hunger.    Although Prozac may gain government approval this year for treating depression, studies to prove its weight-loss ability are in early stages. There are indications the drug also may be useful in combating alcoholism and smoking addiction.    Pain Relief   Stronger versions of over-the-counter pain relievers are expected. But the real action, in the form of nonaddictive superpotent pain relievers, will result from new research into chemicals produced by cells in the body's central nervous system.    The first of these to be tested was developed by Nova Pharmaceutical Inc. The drug works by stopping the body's manufacture of bradykinin, considered by scientists to be the most powerful pain-producing substance in the human body. Nova expects to begin testing an ointment form of its bradykinin-blocking agent, which holds promise of being the most potent topical pain-reliever available. The company also is planning to test the agent as a cold treatment since researchers now believe bradykinin is key to the development of such symptoms as stuffy noses.    Whooping Cough   Scientists at the government's National Institutes of Health are studying a substance they believe may replace the current vaccine for whooping cough.    Although considered safe, the current vaccine isn't perfect. It is produced from a deactivated version of the whooping cough bacterium and in rare cases has caused severe seizures and brain damage. The new substance turns on the body's immune fighting defense against the bacteria, but is made from a segment of the bacteria that can't cause the illness. Early tests have just begun.    ---   Mr. Waldholz reports on science and medicine from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>