<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID that U.S. officials held talks with Iranians last month.    According to congressional sources, the secretary of state told a closed-door hearing of the House Foreign Affairs panel that State Department and CIA officials met with the Iranians in Europe on Dec. 6, but that the department ended the session after the Iranians presented a document that included an arms-for-hostages proposal. Shultz said the CIA aides nevertheless held another session with the contacts. The meeting came after the White House disclosed that funds from arms sales to Iran had been diverted to Nicaraguan rebels.    Reagan will confer Monday with a panel investigating National Security Council operations. The panel was given three extra weeks to finish its work.    ---   GUNMEN REPORTEDLY KIDNAPPED a second West German businessman.    Bonn's embassy said an anonymous caller claimed that an engineer with Siemens AG was abducted in Beirut, the second West German kidnapped since the arrest in Frankfurt last week of a Lebanese on charges of hijacking a TWA jetliner in 1985. While Attorney General Meese urged Bonn to assert its &quot;political will&quot; and extradite the hijacking suspect to the U.S., authorities indicated such a move might be delayed. They declined to say if the Arab would be swapped for a West German captive.    Anglican envoy Terry Waite met with Shiite Moslem extremists in what was apparently a negotiating session aimed at freeing two Americans in Lebanon.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that federal law permits states to deny unemployment compensation to women who give up their jobs because of pregnancy. The justices upheld a Missouri law that denies unemployment benefits to all employees who leave work for reasons that aren't caused by the job itself.    ---   Transportation Secretary Dole proposed stiff drug-testing rules for transportation workers, including random screening of airline pilots and air traffic controllers. She also urged Congress to pass legislation giving the department expanded authority to adopt similar rules for train operating crews.    ---   The Senate approved a $20 billion Clean Water Act identical to legislation vetoed by Reagan last year. Final Senate approval came on a 93-6 vote. The House cleared the same measure by a 406-8 vote Jan. 8. Separately, the House passed a five-year, $91 billion bill for highway and mass transit programs.    ---   Canada urged the U.S. to increase spending on acid rain control, but U.S. officials didn't give any indication that the administration would comply. Vice President Bush said that he &quot;got an earful&quot; of complaints from Canadian Prime Minister Mulroney, and that he would relay the concerns to Reagan today.    ---   Iraq's president issued a call for a negotiated end to the war with Iran. Both sides reported fighting, but the two-week-old Iranian drive on the port of Basra appeared stalled. Tehran said its troops captured an Iraqi town east of Basra, and Baghdad said its forces carried out air raids in Iran.    ---   Assailants attacked a home in a black South African township near Durban, killing at least 12 people. Officials of the United Democratic Front anti-apartheid coalition accused a Zulu group for the attack. Kwa-Zulu homeland chief Buthelezi said the incident was &quot;probably a continuation&quot; of fighting between rival black groups.    ---   Ecuador's government ordered investigations into last week's kidnapping of President Leon Febres Cordero, who was freed in exchange for a jailed air force general. The move came as the opposition-controlled Congress considered a resolution that the president resign for violating the constitution.    ---   Perez de Cuellar said Central American leaders lack the &quot;political willingness&quot; for peace in their region. The U.N. secretary-general's assessment came at the close of a two-day, five-nation tour of the region by a group of Latin American diplomats.    ---   China's Communist Party said writers and artists must serve the current political campaign against liberalism. The official press said their works should reflect party discipline. The party also indicated that the pace of market-oriented economic change might slow following the dismissal last week of party chief Hu Yaobang.    ---   The nation's top military officer said more information was needed before the Reagan administration could decide whether to deploy some version of a space-based antimissile system. Adm. William Crowe Jr. said that a decision wouldn't be made until at least 1988, and that deployment probably wouldn't occur until the 1990s.    ---   Europeans and Canadians filed more than 200,000 applications to immigrate to the U.S. during the first hours of a one-week waiver of immigration requirements. The U.S. -- accepting applications from 36 nations, colonies or provinces -- is expected to grant 10,000 permits over two years.    ---   Public-sector workers in India staged walkouts at factories, mines, offices and the national airlines to protest Prime Minister Gandhi's economic policies. About two million workers joined the strike, and rallies were staged throughout the country.    ---   Soviet authorities said they will try to restrict the birth rate in the mostly Moslem republic of Tadzhikistan, despite a nationwide campaign for larger families. The news agency Tass said the Central Asian republic's birth rate, the country's highest, was creating &quot;a demographic situation which is growing complicated.&quot;    ---   Died: Seymour J. Phillips, 83, chairman of Phillips-Van Heusen Corp., Friday, in Palm Beach, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>