<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0070 </DOCNO><HL> White House's Overtures Toward Iran Over Six YearsEntangled Administration in Web of Covert Dealings---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   During the 1980 presidential campaign, candidate Ronald Reagan assailed President Jimmy Carter's handling of the Iranian hostage crisis as &quot;grandstanding&quot; and offered this simple advice on what to tell the Iranians: &quot;We want our people back and we want them back today or the results are going to be very unpleasant.&quot;    But within months of taking office in 1981, the Reagan administration started a series of actions that have led to its own severe Iranian hostage crisis -- beginning with an early decision to tacitly condone Israeli arms sales to the anti-American regime in Tehran.    Determined to counter Soviet advances wherever they occurred, and to free Americans from terrorists, the Reagan White House has relied heavily on secret foreign-policy moves even when they may have contradicted at least the spirit of public policies set by Congress and the president himself.    Using the Central Intelligence Agency and an action-oriented White House staff, the administration plunged deeper and deeper into covert operations. Government officials dealt with shadowy networks of private arms dealers and financiers, and even with officials in Iran whose regime's kidnapping of American diplomats was so disastrous for Mr. Carter in 1980. Internal objections were tossed aside.    As some of these dealings and contradictions have become public over the past five weeks, public skepticism has soared and Mr. Reagan has had difficulty explaining his actions.    Here is a picture of the origins and major developments in the Iran-Contra affair, as they are known to date. It is based on official statements, interviews with participants and press disclosures. Additional events, and different versions of those already disclosed, are likely to emerge in coming weeks. But enough is now known to paint the following chronology of U.S. actions:    Embassy Hostages Freed   As Reagan Takes Office   On the day Ronald Reagan takes office, Iran frees the 52 U.S. Embassy hostages held since 1979. A few months later, Secretary of State Alexander Haig tacitly approves a resumption of Israeli arms sales to Iran for its war with Iraq. But the administration decides to tilt toward Iraq in the war, and Mr. Haig's tacit approval is countermanded in 1982 by the new secretary of state, George Shultz.    The fanatical regime in Tehran continues to plague the U.S. At Syria's behest, terrorists backed by Iran explode a bomb in October 1983 that kills 241 U.S. Marines in Lebanon. In January 1984, the U.S. officially places Iran on its list of terrorist nations and curbs exports to Iran. But in March, terrorists under Iran's influence start kidnapping Americans in Beirut. Among the first to be taken is William Buckley, the CIA's station chief in Lebanon. In December, two Americans are murdered aboard a hijacked plane at Tehran's airport.    Separately, the new administration decides to destabilize the fledgling pro-Soviet Sandinista government in Nicaragua. The CIA is assigned to help anti-Sandinista guerrillas, called Contras. And in 1984 The Wall Street Journal discloses that CIA agents directed an operation in which Nicaraguan harbors are mined. The incident touches off an uproar and Congress that year suspends U.S. military aid to the Contras. The White House decides to encourage private military aid in its place and National Security Council aide Oliver North, a Marine lieutenant colonel, is assigned to oversee the private aid project.    CIA Memo in May 1985   Warns of Soviet Efforts   In May 1985, the CIA writes a memo expressing concern that the Soviets have gained an edge on the U.S. in cultivating contacts in Iran for the post-Khomeini era. Because of the strategic location of Iran, between the Soviet border and the oil-rich Persian Gulf, the White House is concerned.    Lt. Col. North is assigned by National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane to analyze the CIA findings. Lt. Col. North, the NSC's chief covert operator, adds the Iran assignment to a portfolio that already includes working with rebels in Nicaragua and Afghanistan and trying to find ways to free the Lebanon hostages. He writes a memo with another NSC aide, Howard Teicher, calling for an opening to Iran, and suggesting the possibility of renewed arms sales. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger writes &quot;absurd&quot; in the margin of his copy of the memo.    In June, TWA Flight 847 is hijacked to Beirut. Its captors demand release of prisoners held in Israel, but the hostages are freed after the secret intervention of Hojatoleslam Hashemi Rafsanjani, the speaker of Iran's Parliament. The incident convinces the U.S. that Iran has more influence with certain Lebanese factions than Syria, and that Iran might be softening its support for anti-American terrorism.    President Reagan declares: &quot;Let me make it plain to the assassins in Beirut and their accomplices that America will never make concessions to terrorists; to do so would only invite more terrorism.&quot;    Meanwhile, the CIA has failed to free Mr. Buckley. Officials assume he has been tortured for his wealth of information about U.S. intelligence and covert activities in the Mideast. And more U.S. hostages have been taken.    In July, Michael Ledeen, an NSC consultant, is told by Israeli officials that Iran has sent feelers encouraging a political dialogue with the West, but that arms sales will likely be a condition. On his return, Mr. Ledeen recommends that Mr. McFarlane meet with the Israelis, who are eager to improve their ties to Iran and help block a victory by Iraq, an Arab enemy.    Mr. McFarlane meets David Kimche, director-general of the Israeli foreign ministry, who suggests doors can be opened in Iran using an Israeli contact, Manucher Ghorbanifar, an Iranian with ties to key figures in Tehran. He says Mr. Ghorbanifar has been used by Israel as a channel to supposed &quot;moderates&quot; in Iran's leadership, including Speaker Rafsanjani, who might help free the hostages. Mr. McFarlane, according to administration sources, reports this to President Reagan.    The president publicly blasts Iran, calling it part of &quot;a confederation of terrorist states.&quot; But privately, he sends Speaker Rafsanjani a message thanking him for his help in freeing the TWA hostages and expressing interest in improving relations. Mr. Rafsanjani replies that the U.S. should send Iran arms ordered by the late shah of Iran but never delivered.    McFarlane, Israeli Envoy   Meet Again in August '85   Mr. McFarlane and Mr. Kimche meet again in August. The Israeli official says the Iranians won't be willing to open a political dialogue with the U.S. or help free the hostages unless the U.S. agrees to send arms to Iran.    After a debate among his advisers, Mr. McFarlane has testified, President Reagan in August tells Mr. McFarlane to advise the Israelis that he authorizes Israel to make sales and that the U.S. will replace the weapons sold. Secretaries Shultz and Weinberger oppose the plan. But the president is swayed by Mr. McFarlane, White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan, and CIA Director William Casey, who all approve.    In early September, a privately owned cargo plane carries the first Israeli-arranged arms shipment pre-approved by U.S. -- 508 TOW antitank missiles -- to Iran. On Sept. 14, shortly after the arms arrive, hostage Benjamin Weir is released in Beirut. The U.S. hopes all the hostages will be freed, but no others are.    Israeli and U.S. officials meet in Geneva in October with Mr. Ghorbanifar to discuss further cooperation and arms sales. The hijacking of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro, while unrelated to Iran, helps cement relations between Lt. Col. North and the Israelis, who provide crucial intelligence that enables the U.S. to catch the hijackers.    In November, a second Israeli shipment of arms -- Hawk antiaircraft missiles-goes to Iran via Portugal in a CIA -- provided plane. Iran eventually returns the gear, saying it's out of date.    On Dec. 4, Mr. McFarlane resigns for personal reasons but remains on the White House payroll for a month. Vice Adm. John Poindexter, Mr. McFarlane's deputy, succeeds him.    Two days later, the president and his top advisers meet without Mr. Shultz, who is abroad. Mr. McFarlane says he advised that he found Mr. Ghorbanifar untrustworthy and unable to deliver either the political contacts or the hostages. President Reagan decides to tell the Israelis that the U.S. won't approve any more arms sales, but he remains willing to talk to Iran.    Mr. McFarlane flies to London to inform Mr. Kimche and Mr. Ghorbanifar. On returning, he informs another meeting of top advisers that Mr. Ghorbanifar will carry the U.S. offer of a dialogue. Participants leave believing the arms sales are over.    Iran Shows New Interest   In Hostage Deal in 1986   In 1986, Iran sends fresh signals it wants to do business with the U.S. Hostage families increase pressure on President Reagan to seek the release of the Beirut captives.    On Jan. 7, another White House meeting is convened to consider resuming arms sales. Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger again oppose this, but Mr. Casey, Mr. Regan and Vice Adm. Poindexter approve. No decision is made. That same day, President Reagan tells reporters that, to free the hostages, &quot;We have been meeting with, talking with, a number of individuals, a number of other governments, following every lead that we can.&quot;    On Jan. 17, Mr. Reagan signs a secret intelligence &quot;finding&quot; authorizing a rapprochement with Iran, including arms sales, and instructing Mr. Casey to withhold details from Congress. A complex system, including Swiss bank accounts and private financiers, is put into place to carry out the sales.    First U.S. Arms Shipments   Are Sent to Iran Via Israel   The first two U.S. arms shipments go to Iran via Israel, including TOW and Hawk missiles and other items, from Pentagon stocks. Israeli and other middlemen charge Iran a steep premium for these and subsequent weapons. The proceeds from the sales are deposited in one or more Swiss bank accounts at U.S. request. Some of the money is used to repay the Pentagon, some apparently is kept by middlemen. But other profits are diverted to aid the Contras in Nicaragua.    U.S. Planes Strike Libya;   Iranian Signals Continue   On April 14, U.S. warplanes bomb &quot;terrorist-related targets&quot; in Libya. Meanwhile, signals from Iran continue. A top official there says publicly they'd be willing to buy arms from the U.S., and two Iranian factions pass word to Lt. Col. North through Mr. Ghorbanifar that Ayatollah Khomeini may be dying and they're prepared to improve ties to the U.S. by freeing all the hostages.    Vice Adm. Poindexter contacts Mr. McFarlane and asks him to fly to Iran to open a dialogue with top Iranian officials. He tells Mr. McFarlane a deal is in the works for all the hostages in Lebanon to be freed before the U.S. delegation arrives in Tehran. Mr. McFarlane agrees on condition he can meet top Iranian officials, not just intermediaries.    Policy Rules Out Deals;   North Carries a Ransom   On May 6, the State Department declares that: &quot;The United States government will make no concessions to terrorists. It will not pay ransoms, release prisoners, change its policies or agree to other acts that might encourage terrorism.&quot;    But only about two weeks later, Lt. Col. North obtains a $2 million ransom from Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot and flies to Cyprus to deliver it to representatives of those holding the hostages. The ransom is part of a complex deal for the hostages that also involves sending another planeload of arms to Iran and freeing some 300 Shiite prisoners held by Israeli-controlled forces in southern Lebanon. But no one appears to deliver the hostages.    On May 27, Mr. McFarlane flies from Israel to Tehran, accompanied by Lt. Col. North, an Israeli official and retired CIA Iran expert George Cave as translator. Their Boeing 707 also carries spare parts for the Iranian military. The Iranians take the spare parts, but the hostages aren't freed and the promised senior Iranian officials never materialize. After four days in a Tehran hotel, the group leaves.    More Arms Flown July 4;   Contra Aid Is Stepped Up   Despite the collapse of the deal and the humiliating failure in Tehran, the U.S. sends another airborne arms shipment to Iran, through Spain and Yugoslavia, on the Fourth of July. On July 26, a second U.S. hostage, the Rev. Lawrence Jenco, is freed. But the White House is disappointed that others are still held.    During the summer, the Contras begin receiving more arms via a private air transport system reportedly set up with the help of a company run by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, a veteran of covert actions who had worked with Lt. Col. North and served as Mr. Weinberger's Mideast policy aide.    Hijackers of Pan Am Jet   Denied Landing by Iran   Iran refuses permission for a hijacked Pan American jetliner to land there. Congress completes action approving renewed official U.S. military aid for the Contras.    More Arms in September;   More Americans Abducted   The CIA makes another shipment of arms and spare parts to Iran, while the Israelis continue to send shiploads of materiel. Two more Americans are kidnapped in Beirut, apparently by terrorists with ties to Iran. The U.S. by now believes one of the first hostages, CIA official Buckley, is probably dead.    Third New Hostage Taken;   Iranian Link Again Feared   A third new American hostage is seized in Beirut, and the U.S. again suspects terrorists linked to Iran.    Official U.S. military aid for the Contras begins to flow again. But on Oct. 5 the Nicaraguans shoot down one of the private Contra supply planes and capture a crew member.    In Iran, officials arrest a terrorist leader for trying to smuggle explosives into Saudi Arabia; some 200 Iranians linked to international terrorism are jailed.    CIA Director Casey and his aides meet with an old Casey friend, New York consultant Roy Furmark, who tells them that a group of private Canadian investors, established to help finance the Iranian purchase of the U.S. arms at a profit, hasn't been fully paid. He tells Mr. Casey that he suspects the proceeds are being diverted and that the investors may expose the operation in a lawsuit. Mr. Casey says he informs Vice Adm. Poindexter.    The Los Angeles Times learns of the Iranian arms sales, but agrees to withhold publication, in order to avoid jeopardizing the hostages' lives or chances for freedom, until all hostages are free or the story appears elsewhere.    Jacobsen Freed on Nov. 2;   McFarlane Trip Disclosed   On Nov. 2, a third of the original seven hostages, David Jacobsen, is released. The next day, apparently in retaliation for the arrests in Iran, a Lebanese weekly magazine, al-Shiraa, discloses that the U.S. had supplied arms to Iran and that Mr. McFarlane had secretly visited Tehran. Iranian Speaker Rafsanjani confirms the McFarlane trip in a speech. The White House detects in his words signals that further contacts are possible.    On Nov. 6, the president says the Lebanese article has &quot;no foundation.&quot; But the Los Angeles Times and the Washington Post disclose the U.S. arms sales to Iran and the U.S.-Iranian contacts. The disclosures cause a bipartisan uproar in Congress and public amazement that Mr. Reagan's administration would arm the reviled Iranian government.    Mr. Reagan goes on television Nov. 13 to confirm the arms sales and contacts. But he says the sales were &quot;modest,&quot; able to fit into one cargo plane, and insists &quot;We did not, repeat did not, trade weapons or anything else for hostages, nor will we.&quot;    Administration aides start quarreling, in public and private. Secretary Shultz says his information on the sales was &quot;fragmentary&quot; and hints at his disapproval. The president is advised by various friends to fire Mr. Shultz, Mr. Regan, Vice Adm. Poindexter and Lt. Col. North.    Six days later, in a news conference, the president concedes there was dissent among his advisers on the sale but defends the policy as correct and takes responsibility.    Mr. McFarlane calls the arms sales a &quot;mistake.&quot;    On Nov. 25, the president and Attorney Gen. Edwin Meese make the stunning disclosure that some of the proceeds of the Iran arms sale were diverted, via a Swiss bank, to the Nicaraguan Contras. Mr. Reagan fires Lt. Col. North, saying he was the only man in the White House who knew full details, and announces that Vice Adm. Poindexter, who knew in general, has resigned. Mr. Meese says neither the president nor any of his senior officials, including Mr. Casey, knew of the diversion, and that Mr. Reagan only learned of the 1985 Israeli arms shipment after the fact.    The next day, the Justice Department launches a criminal investigation and Mr. Reagan names a three-member panel, headed by former Sen. John Tower, to review the role of the NSC staff. On Dec. 2, the administration asks a special court to name an independent counsel to investigate the Iran-Contra affair and names veteran official Frank Carlucci as the new national security adviser. The next day, Vice President George Bush publicly admits &quot;mistakes were made&quot; in carrying out the Iran policy. On Dec. 4, congressional leaders agree to form select committees to investigate in January.    Three congressional committees begin hearings. Lt. Col. North and Vice Adm. Poindexter refuse to answer questions, citing their Fifth Amendment rights. Mr. McFarlane testifies that the president approved the 1985 Israeli shipments in advance, contradicting Mr. Meese's statement.    On Dec. 11, several newspapers report that Mr. Casey testified at the hearings about his October meeting with his old friend, Mr. Furmark, publicly throwing into question Mr. Meese's assertion that senior officials were unaware until November of any diversion of funds.    ---   Also contributing to this article were John Walcott and Karine Roesch. </TEXT></DOC>