<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870213-0099 </DOCNO><HL> A Blockade of Iran---By David Bar-Illan</HL><DD> 02/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><TEXT>   Again the West finds itself in a no-win situation. What seemed like a triumph in the war against international terrorism -- the apprehension of Mohammad Hamadei, a participant in the hijacking of an American airliner to Beirut and the murder of an American passenger -- has turned into another exercise in frustration.    If Hamadei is extradited to the U.S., the lives of hostages will be threatened -- with some probably murdered -- and the administration will again be under tremendous pressure from anguished families to release him. If, in another capitulation to blackmail, he is traded for the hostages -- a meaningless exchange, considering the unending supply of potential hostages -- the campaign against terrorism, sorely shaken by the revelations of the Iran affair, will suffer yet another body blow.    It's clear the lessons of recent events haven't been properly learned. Not the trials of the Hindawi brothers, one convicted of attempting to blow up an El Al airliner in London, the other of bombing a cultural club in West Berlin, and both implicating Syrian President Hafez Assad's intelligence chief. Not the revelation that hostage William Buckley was transferred from Beirut to Iran's capital to be tortured and murdered by Iranian intelligence agents. Not the reports trickling in from the Pakistani investigation of the Pan Am massacre in Karachi, where the arrest of a Libyan intelligence officer and other evidence point to Moammar Gadhafi as the mastermind of the operation. And, finally, not the secret American negotiations with high Iranian officials for hostages and the resultant release of three of them.    These events all point to an inevitable conclusion: The home offices of terrorist groups in the Middle East, the headquarters where large decisions are made, are not in a Beirut basement or a training camp in Baalbek, but in the cabinet rooms of the governments of Iran, Syria and Libya. If nothing else they should have finally put to rest the myth that Mideast terrorism is perpetrated by clandestine, uncontrollable groups of fanatics whose elusiveness makes effective countermeasures impossible.    The West, at least on the official level, seems able to distinguish myth from reality. McFarlane andamp; Co. went to Tehran, not to Beirut, to negotiate the hostages' release; the West German government is now negotiating with the Iranian Foreign Office, not the Hezbollah, for the release of the German captives, and the Anglican Church has directed its supplication to the speaker of the Parliament in Tehran, not to Terry Waite's captors. But there also is a general reluctance to drop the belief, so expertly nurtured by the terrorists, that the abductors are merely desperate victims of unspeakable injustices acting spontaneously and autonomously to attract attention to their plight.    Thus it was, even after it became obvious that Terry Waite's role in the release of hostages was to serve as a fig leaf for the Tehran arms deal, that support for his mission remained unshaken. His detention was immediately interpreted as a result of local rivalry between terrorist factions when, quite obviously, such a major step could not have been taken without an order from Tehran. The administration, too, seems to prefer making threats against lowly and always replaceable terrorists on the ground in Lebanon, rather than weighing moves against their masters in Tehran and Damascus.    The reluctance to use force against sources of aggression is traditional in the West: the risk of escalation, unmanageable complications or even superpower confrontation is always present, and the temptation to postpone the moment of truth is understandable, no matter how futile it has proved in the past.    But, as the raid on Libya has shown, a limited, proportionate response can be not only effective in putting a terrorist state on the defensive -- Libya stopped operating in Europe, shifted its activities to the less hostile environment of Islamic countries and in general has acted more cautiously -- but also sufficiently contained to avoid an international backlash and gain public approval. In the aftermath of the raid, support for it, both in the U.S. and abroad, actually grew. Though they had no illusions that one strike could deal terrorism a final blow, America's allies, including those initially vehemently opposed to the action, joined in Tokyo in a strong statement on state-supported terrorism, and matched deed to word by imposing diplomatic and economic sanctions on Libya.    Ironically, the only parties that failed to heed the lessons of the raid were its begetters. In one of the most enigmatic policy reversals in recent history, an administration professing a Churchillian aversion to appeasement chose to disregard its own success, discard the proverbial stick in dealing with a terrorist state, and offer instead a series of carrots in the form of arms shipments even before any hostages were released.    True, Iran is not Libya. It is a major, important nation, it borders on the Soviet Union and on Afghanistan, it hovers over the Persian Gulf, and it threatens its neighbors not only with subversion, terrorism and invasion but with a tidal wave of Shiite fundamentalism. Nor would a Libya-style air raid be as effective in a country subject to daily raids by Iraq.    But, like Libya and all other dictatorial states throughout history, Iran cannot but view &quot;gestures of good will&quot; as an irresistible invitation to further bullying.    How, then, can Iran be made to release the hostages and desist from terrorist activities? The answer is brutally simple: by credibly threatening to make the price of terrorism too high. The Iranian regime may be fanatic, but it is not oblivious to the cost-effectiveness of its actions. If it is calculating enough to deal with such Satans as Israel and the U.S. to pursue a war, it is rational enough to release hostages and abandon the terrorist option to avoid unacceptable penalties.    Ideally, the threat of such penalties should come from the whole community of nations. The larger the number of major nations willing to participate, the less drastic the sanctions need be. If, for example, the West were to impose a total ban on trade with Iran, the Iranian-Syrian &quot;influence&quot; with the Hezbollah abductors would suddenly show dramatic results.    But since such unity is unlikely, the U.S. would have to go it alone, making the measures it must take necessarily harsher. Its options are several, including arming the rebel Kurds and Baluchis, and bombing terrorist training camps in Shiraz and Meshed. But the most effective and least risky is the threat of a naval blockade. Without open sea lanes, Iran can neither export oil nor import large quantities of arms. The blocking of its ports in the Persian Gulf, a relatively easy task for our Navy -- Iran has no viable naval or air forces that could threaten it -- would bring the Iran's economy to a virtual standstill after a few months and cause the collapse of its war effort. It is not a price Iran can afford to pay for sponsoring terrorist groups, let alone for holding a handful of hostages.    Like any major military action, a blockade is not risk-free. But Iran's options would be severely limited. It could threaten to kill the hostages. But if the Iranians were warned that such actions would not only ensure a prolonged and devastating blockade but additional military measures, it is most unlikely they would act out of character and commit what would amount to national suicide. To Iran's disadvantage, the public mood in the West has changed appreciably, from &quot;get the hostages out at any price&quot; to &quot;they had no business being there in the first place,&quot; and the likelihood of great pressure against firm action is minimal.    Iran may also threaten to invade Kuwait in the hope that the prospect of committing American troops to the defense of this vulnerable but vital source of oil will raise an outcry in the West. But diverting troops from Iraq at this critical moment would ensure an Iraqi penetration of the Iranians' lines and quash all hope of Iranian victory.    Iran could, it is claimed, turn to the Soviets for help. This is the most common excuse for appeasing aggressive regimes in the Middle East. But, in fact, nothing breeds greater respect than power and the willingness to use it. After the Libya raid, despite the calumny heaped on the U.S., Arab leaders distanced themselves from Col. Gadhafi and privately cozied up to Washington. It is much more likely Iran would turn to the U.S.S.R. as a consequence of U.S. vacillation and inaction than in response to a show of force.    Will the public support such a move? It is easier to take an air raid in stride: Its lightning speed makes hand-wringing a retroactive and futile exercise. A blockade is a slower process. If the threat to impose it proved insufficient, and American warships were actually deployed, there is little doubt that the usual critics would be joined by governments and corporations doing business with Iran.    But the general public, which instinctively felt the rightness of the raid on Libya, would realize that such measures are today's imperatives. Not for the sake of a few hostages, but as a deterrent and warning to Syria and Libya as well as to Iran (and the dictatorship in Iraq); as, indeed, the only kind of step that can bring an end to international terrorism.    The only alternative is to emulate the French and pay ransom. Sufficient ransom to secure the release of the present hostages, in the form of arms, money, political concessions or the release of Hamadei and convicted terrorists in Israel and Kuwait, can probably be raised. But any such deal, no matter how well cloaked in diplomatic euphemisms, would constitute an abject surrender to terrorism and an abdication of our national and international responsibilities. And it would make all Americans, as a nation and as individuals, hostages to the whims of gangster regimes, with no end in sight.    ---   Mr. Bar-Illan directs the Jonathan Institute, a private anti-terrorist group based in New York and Jerusalem. </TEXT></DOC>