<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871119-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN WAS sharply criticized in the congressional Iran-Contra report.    The House and Senate committee report portrays the affair as an operation of &quot;secrecy, deception and disdain for the law,&quot; carried out in an environment &quot;created or at least tolerated&quot; by the president. The panels found no firm evidence that Reagan knew of the transfer of U.S.-Iran arms-sale profits to Nicaraguan rebels in 1986 but concluded that White House aides who ran the operation &quot;believed with certainty that they were carrying out the president's policies.&quot;    Independent prosecutor Walsh said the report won't significantly affect his criminal investigation. The White House said pardons for North and Poindexter haven't been ruled out.    ---   GORBACHEV WANTS to meet with business leaders during his U.S. visit.    Soviet officials who were in Washington last week to plan the Soviet leader's three-day visit told their American counterparts they wanted to leave time in the schedule for meetings with U.S. business leaders, presumably to discuss trade and investment in the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, administration officials said two verification issues remain unresolved in the treaty banning U.S. and Soviet arsenals of medium-range nuclear missiles.    House Speaker Wright said Gorbachev was invited to address Congress Dec. 9, but at least 75 House members signed a letter opposing the invitation.    ---   A fire killed at least 32 people in a London subway station and others were missing. Smoke forced hundreds to flee, and at least 80 were hurt. Police said the death toll could rise in the fire, which started at about 7:30 p.m. in an escalator linking the subway with King's Cross train station.    ---   Thousands of Latvians battled Soviet police in Riga on the anniversary of the Baltic republic's independence, a human rights group said. The Baltic-Helsinki group, citing Latvian exile sources in West Germany, said as many as 8,000 demonstrators fought police to protest Latvia's forced incorporation into the Soviet Union in 1940.    ---   An Indian judge granted a third deadline extension to Union Carbide and the Indian government, giving them nine more days to decide on compensation for victims of the 1984 Bhopal accident, which killed 2,660 and severely hurt 20,000. New Delhi is suing for $3 billion. The company said its current offer is $496.2 million.    ---   The Senate approved legislation to cut $171.6 million from funding Reagan requested for Strategic Defense Initiative reasearch. It also voted to speed the search for a high-level nuclear waste dump. The measures were part of a $15.9 billion bill for energy and water projects in the current fiscal year.    ---   Continental Airlines said a 26-year-old copilot with only 36 1/2 hours flying time in a DC-9 was at the controls Sunday when the jet crashed in a snowstorm in Denver, killing 28. The carrier wouldn't comment on reports that the pilot may have tried to take over the controls at the last moment.    ---   The Kremlin named ousted Moscow Communist Party chief Yeltsin as first deputy chairman of the newly reorganized Soviet State Committee for Construction, a post that carries the rank of minister. Yeltsin was ousted from his former, higher-ranking post last week after criticizing the pace of Gorbachev's economic reforms.    ---   Italy's Goria reached agreement with the Liberal Party on reviving a five-party governing coalition that collapsed last week. The prime minister-designate will now seek a vote of confidence in Parliament. The Liberals said they rejoined the coalition after obtaining concessions on a budget plan.    ---   South Korean students stormed a Seoul police station and police broke up anti-government demonstrations at a university in the capital as the country's presidential campaign officially began. South Korea's chief prosecutor ordered his deputies to attend major political rallies in order to prosecute agitators and halt violence.    ---   Iran backtracked on predictions that a Chernobyl-like disaster could result from attacks it said Iraq made on a nuclear plant under construction in Bushehr. A spokesman said no radiation leakage was detected. Separately, Beijing said it has halted international sales of Silkworm missiles, but continued to deny selling them to Tehran.    ---   Morocco said its troops killed 245 Algerian-backed Polisario guerrillas and suffered 72 dead in fighting in the Western Sahara. The guerrillas have been fighting Morocco for control of the area since 1976, when Spain evacuated its former colony.    ---   Cigarette smoking doubles the risk of heart attacks for women who smoke as little as one a day and raises the risk about 11 times for heavy smokers, a new Harvard School of Public Health study says. The study, the largest of its kind, says 90% of heart attacks among women smokers could be prevented by quitting.    ---   U.S. Jewish leaders decided to postpone a December meeting on the Holocaust that was set up jointly with the Vatican to heal a rift over the pope's meeting with Austrian President Waldheim. The decision came in response to remarks by a Vatican official that Jewish leaders denounced as an invitation for them to convert to Christianity. </TEXT></DOC>