<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:A Private Concern Still Needs a Public Profile---By Henry O. Timnick</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Huge, billion-dollar leveraged buyouts (LBOs) were a major feature on the 1986 financial landscape. This year, names like Viacom International Inc. and Owens-Illinois Inc. continue to steal headlines as tax-reform and takeover fears fuel LBO announcements and speculations.    Yet behind the headlines is the fact that well over 200 of the approximately 315 LBOs announced in 1986 were divestiture LBOs, in which overgrown conglomerates sold parts of their empires to division managers.    Where managers are resourceful and energetic, and believe in their capabilities as directors and owners -- rather than as employees -- LBOs have worked well. After the glow of pride fades from lining up the numbers and putting the deals together, what can corporate managers expect to find as the new owners of their former company stores?    One serious threat to success is the inability of some managers to make the transition from company men to entrepreneurs. Others become so absorbed with cost cutting and debt reduction that they forget to reinvest in the underlying business. Many managers also miss the abundant opportunities for reducing operating costs in areas where they have no technical competence, such as pensions, medical programs and insurance. Substantial savings can be realized in each of these areas without reducing benefits or coverage.    But the biggest danger in going private lies in management becoming close-mouthed. Many buyout groups react to freedom from quarterly earnings statements and shareholders by constructing moats around their companies. Building real value, whether a firm is public or private, means not only communicating company strategy to employees but talking with outsiders as well.    In 1979, I was a group president of Mead Corp. in charge of Virginia-based Stanley Furniture Co. Stanley was healthy but had not achieved its full potential as part of a big paper company. When I studied the situation I quickly realized that Mead would be better off without the $120 million contributed by furniture and fabric sales, and that Stanley would be better off without Mead's corporate structure. Stanley no longer fit Mead's strategy. It was also clear to me that furniture divisions of large corporate entities usually did not perform well. Therefore, Stanley's managers opted for a leveraged buyout.    The risks our buyout group faced seven years ago were enormous -- personally and professionally. None of us was wealthy. We all had to take out second mortgages to help finance our investments in Stanley. Interest rates had surged beyond 20% and business was in its worst slump since World War II. Gone were the security, perks and resources of the parent company. If the venture failed, the 2,000 jobs that supported the economy of Stanleytown, Va., would disappear along with our investment. But I was confident that a revitalized Stanley, even as a highly leveraged enterprise, could prosper.    As an owner I learned that we needed to do more than agree on management objectives -- we had to communicate our resolve to everyone working at Stanley. This came to a head during an early planning session when a production manager asked what company policy was on a particular matter. &quot;I don't know,&quot; I said. &quot;It's our company now; we have to create the policy.&quot; From that point on we set in motion an open-door communications program to get both our managers and employees thinking like spirited owners. This type of aggressive dialogue wasn't necessary under corporate rules where everyone knew his place, but it was an essential ingredient in our new company.    I made a special effort to keep our banks informed of our progress, much the way the chief executive officer of a public company gives updates to securities analysts. We discussed the results of marketing plans and new products with the banks and improved their feelings of confidence toward us at critical stages of our development. Similarly, we kept the press, customers and local officials informed of company developments.    When I had been a division president I rarely had time to spend with retailers, but as a manager-owner it was important for me to keep customers informed of our long-range plans. We also didn't forget Stanleytown. Civic programs, such as scholarships and recreational facilities, were maintained and, in many cases, enhanced. In essence, Stanley was a private company with a public profile.    Our dialogue with employees extended to company finances as well. We opened the books to all managers and they in turn began to appreciate what cash flow was all about. Soon, they were no longer talking about what they had to have, but about what they no longer needed. We also set up performance incentives that reached well down the chain of command -- incentives based on long-term profitability, not just revenue growth.    Companies that undergo leveraged buyouts must learn quickly to cope with their problems in order to maximize cash flow and pay off debts without compromising growth. Many of the executives in these newly created private companies will protest that they don't have the time or resources to waste on communicating their goals. But it is the obligation of management groups to talk candidly to employees and the outside world, especially during the early stages following a buyout. That's when the greatest opportunity exists to shape an LBO company into an entrepreneurial enterprise.    ---   Mr. Timnick, former chairman and CEO of Stanley Interiors Corp., is a principal of the New York-based private investment firm Clayton andamp; Dubilier Inc. </TEXT></DOC>