<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890821-0037 </DOCNO><DD> = 890821 </DD><AN> 890821-0037. </AN><HL> Justice Delayed:@  Kidder's Mr. Wigton,@  Charged as 'Insider,'@  Ends His Long Ordeal@  ---@  Handcuffed at Work by Feds,@  He Withstood Pressures,@  But Was Stripped of Job@  ---@  From the U.S., No Apology@  ----@  By Steve Swartz and James B. Stewart@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/21/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GE </CO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BIOGRAPHY (BIO) </IN><GV> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </GV><TEXT>   The news that could change Richard Wigton's life could wait. Last Wednesday, Mr. Wigton, a few pounds lighter than he was when arrested for insider trading two years ago, pumped away on the exercycle at a health club in Short Hills, N.J. He had made himself unreachable by telephone -- even knowing that as he exercised, federal prosecutors would be phoning his lawyer, Stanley Arkin, to announce whether Mr. Wigton would be re-indicted.    Only after the rumpled and jowly 59-year-old finished his cycling, lifted a few weights and drove home in his Ford Bronco did he learn the news: The government was dropping its investigation of him and his former colleague at Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., Timothy Tabor. The unflappable Mr. Wigton ate his lunch and set off for the driving range. He still hasn't celebrated.    &quot;The main concern I have,&quot; says the soft-spoken Mr. Wigton, in his first public comment since his ordeal began, &quot;is people that don't know me: What do they think and feel?&quot;    Mr. Wigton was one of the Wall Street Three, whose dramatic arrest in February 1987 symbolized the federal government's drive to root out corruption on Wall Street. The others seemed fitting symbols for the go-go 1980s. Robert Freeman, 46, of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., was one of the country's most powerful takeover-stock speculators, or arbitragers, a fiercely aggressive man who could influence stock prices and major corporate deals with one telephone call. Mr. Tabor, 35, an athletic Rhodes Scholar and former accountant who set his company's record for number of hours worked in a year, was the consummate Manhattan yuppie.    But if these men represented the new Wall Street, Dick Wigton represented an older, slower, more conservative Wall Street that seemed to be buried by the bull market of the '80s. A former credit analyst who got a job on Wall Street in 1956 through a friend of his wife's father, Mr. Wigton found himself 30 years later on the same playing field with merger wizards like Bruce Wasserstein and Kidder's own Martin Siegel and with billion-dollar arbitragers like Ivan Boesky. If someone put together &quot;an All-American arbitrage team, would I be on it?&quot; Mr. Wigton muses, concluding with a shrug, &quot;No.&quot;    That may have been something that eluded prosecutors. Searching for a brilliant, ruthless arbitrager who systematically manipulated the stock market for his own gain, the government instead arrested &quot;Wiggie,&quot; as his friends call him.    Prosecutors expected Mr. Wigton to cave in under the pressure of an indictment. After all, General Electric Co., Kidder's parent, stripped him of his trading responsibilities and at one point stopped paying his salary and his legal fees. But Mr. Wigton held out, in part, he says, because he didn't do anything wrong, and in part, because, after the initial shock, he didn't find life under a cloud to be all that bad.    In contrast to the life of almost any other successful arbitrager one could imagine in similar circumstances, Mr. Wigton's life changed little during the past two-and-a-half years. There were no glitzy Manhattan society balls to which he could be disinvited; there was no highly leveraged mansion in the Hamptons or co-op in Trump Tower to lose.    He didn't need money, since his Kidder stock alone was worth $6 million when GE bought control of the investment bank in 1986, and he spent little of it. He passed his time in the suburban New Jersey home he has occupied for 27 years with his wife, Cynthia, poring over stock-market research reports, trading for his own account, entertaining his three grown children, playing a couple rounds of golf a week and having dinner at the local country club. &quot;I'm anything but flamboyant,&quot; he allows, which seems, if anything, an understatement.    Neither was the Wall Street Mr. Wigton joined in 1956. The only child of a telephone company manager and an interior decorator who lived on Long Island, Mr. Wigton graduated from New York's Hamilton College, worked as a trainee at Chase Manhattan bank and wrote reports for a credit bureau before getting a job as a trading assistant at Kidder.    After kicking around various Kidder trading desks, Mr. Wigton was asked in 1971 to look into the business of arbitrage, an unpopular and little-practiced field at the time.    Classical arbitragers bought securities in one market and sold in another to profit from price differences between the markets. The arbitrage Mr. Wigton learned was somewhat different: It involved buying the securities of a company when its acquisition by another was announced, but before the market price of the securities rose to equal the acquiring company's purchase price. Arbitragers would typically make a modest short-term profit when the takeover went through.    The merger boom of the 1980s and a new breed of arbitragers like Mr. Boesky changed all that. Arbitragers bet heavily on tips and rumors before any deal was announced and made huge profits when they scored. Information was everything, and successful arbs worked the telephones like concert artists on a piano. The new arbs were flashy, sometimes charming, sometimes obnoxious, always aggressive.    Mr. Wigton struggled in this environment. He says he found it hard to get much useful information from investment bankers. Still, for many years he did well enough at Kidder. He made good money, several hundred thousand dollars a year, though it was far from the millions commanded by Wall Street superstars. Kidder chairman Ralph DeNunzio was also of the old school. He thought of Kidder as a family, and he was suspicious of the new breed. &quot;We don't have to be the best,&quot; he told one rising investment banker.    But even Kidder had to be profitable. In the mid-1980s, the firm was falling dangerously behind its rival firms. To bolster the modestly profitable performance of the arbitrage department, Mr. Wigton began receiving investment advice from the firm's mergers chief, Mr. Siegel. Mr. Wigton also inherited a new assistant in young Mr. Tabor, who had been working directly for Mr. DeNunzio.    While reluctant at first to take on Mr. Tabor, Mr. Wigton says the two soon became friends. The Wigtons made one of their infrequent trips into Manhattan to attend Mr. Tabor's Christmas party, and the couple attended Mr. Tabor's wedding and rehearsal dinner. (Through his attorney, Andrew Lawler, Mr. Tabor declined to be interviewed.)    Mr. Wigton's relationship with Mr. Siegel was far different. In his late thirties, strikingly handsome and one of the smoothest talking strategists on Wall Street, Mr. Siegel was idolized by many at Kidder, including Mr. Wigton. &quot;He was brilliant,&quot; he says. &quot;The fact that he was helping us -- I couldn't believe my good luck. I respected, almost worshipped the guy.&quot;    Suddenly the performance of Kidder's arbitrage department soared. Mr. Wigton concedes that he and Mr. Tabor made bigger bets when they got advice from Mr. Siegel, but he says he never suspected that Mr. Siegel was illegally passing on inside information.    Just what Mr. Siegel has said to prosecutors about his dealings with Mr. Wigton isn't known. However, people familiar with the investigation say he never explicitly identified the source of his information to Mr. Wigton. Nonetheless, prosecutors found it hard to believe that given the timing and pattern of Kidder's trading in Goldman Sachs deals, that a man of Mr. Wigton's experience wouldn't have known inside information was a factor.    Mr. Siegel's attorney, Jed Rakoff, won't discuss Mr. Siegel's testimony, and the U.S. Attorney's office has declined to discuss Mr. Siegel's disclosures other than to say they are satisfied he told the truth.    On the morning of Feb. 12, 1987, the stock market was active and Mr. Wigton was busy in his office off the Kidder trading floor when a receptionist told him that a Mr. Moreno was in the reception area asking to see him. This was no time to entertain job applicants off the street, Mr. Wigton thought to himself, so he asked the receptionist to politely decline. &quot;He insists: no ifs ands or buts,&quot; the woman responded.    When Mr. Wigton arrived in the reception area, he was met by two postal inspectors who told him that he was under arrest. Mr. Wigton says he was so stunned he could neither speak nor move. One of the agents grabbed him, threw him against a wall and frisked him before cuffing his hands behind his back. Then Mr. Wigton was paraded to his office through the trading floor as his shocked Kidder colleagues looked on.    Kidder's president at the time, John Roche, rushed to the scene and called Kidder's lawyers at Sullivan andamp; Cromwell. Mr. Roche then telephoned Cynthia Wigton with the news. &quot;Will he be home for dinner?&quot; she asked.    Only after being arraigned and fingerprinted did Mr. Wigton learn from his attorney that he was being charged with insider trading and that the information that led to his arrest had come from his hero, Mr. Siegel. The involvement of Mr. Siegel in the investigation hadn't yet been publicly disclosed. &quot;I was angry, disbelieving,&quot; Mr. Wigton recalls. Later, at the offices of Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, Mr. Wigton was introduced for the first time to Bob Freeman, the kind of high-powered trader who had never had time for Mr. Wigton's calls.    &quot;Hello,&quot; Mr. Wigton said. &quot;Hi, how are you?&quot; answered Mr. Freeman.    In what he describes as a reflex action, Mr. Wigton went back to his office, where he was greeted with cheers from the Kidder trading desk. That evening at 5:45, just as they did every day, he and the other two members of his car pool headed home to New Jersey. They didn't discuss the day's events.    Mr. Wigton tossed and turned in bed all night, wondering, he recalls, &quot;My God, why has this happened to me?&quot; The next morning, he surrendered his passport and the deed to his home. Mr. Arkin, his attorney, told him to prepare for a long ordeal. Neither man anticipated just how long it would be.    From the outset, Mr. Wigton tried his best to maintain business as usual. He continued to hold his posts as head of arbitrage and over-the-counter trading at Kidder. The night after his arrest, he and his wife had dinner at the Baltusrol Golf Club. At least six other members came to his table, shook his hand and told him they believed in him.    But on April 9, 1987, Messrs. Wigton, Tabor and Freeman were indicted for insider trading. Mr. Tabor was unemployed, having been dismissed earlier by his latest employer, Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. Mr. Freeman retained his job at Goldman Sachs, which paid his legal expenses, although he has acknowledged that the pressure of the investigation effectively kept him from taking part in the firm's business. That day, Mr. Wigton recalls, one of his Kidder superiors called him up to the executive floor: &quot;We've been told by the people up in Fairfield {GE's headquarters} that it would not be fitting for you to be sitting on the trading desk and running the trading department,&quot; Mr. Wigton says he was told. He was moved to an empty office on the executive floor; he was also told that the firm wouldn't pick up his legal expenses or pay his salary any longer. &quot;I was hurt,&quot; he says. &quot;Why was I being treated differently&quot; from Bob Freeman?    Shortly thereafter, Mr. Wigton was moved again, this time to another office building where Kidder maintained a retail branch. There, isolated from the mainstream of the firm, he settled into a routine, coming in about once a week, spending most of his time at home working on his defense, trading stocks for his own account -- successfully, he says -- and answering mail, generally from well-wishers. One letter to the contrary stands out: A woman from Texas who didn't know him asked, &quot;How could you have done such a thing?&quot; Mr. Wigton didn't reply.    In May 1987, Kidder itself settled the case against it stemming from Mr. Siegel's admission that he helped the firm earn money through insider trading; Kidder paid a $25.3 million fine, and Messrs. DeNunzio and Roche were forced out. The settlement with the government was negotiated by GE, which was determined to avoid a criminal indictment of its subsidiary. As part of its effort to curry favor with prosecutors, however, GE suddenly got tough with Mr. Wigton.    It told his attorney, Mr. Arkin, that if Mr. Wigton was guilty, he should plead guilty. If he fought and lost, GE told him, Mr. Wigton risked being sued by GE to recover the $3 million it had paid him for his Kidder stock and having GE withhold the additional $3 million it still owed him.    After hearing this, Mr. Arkin says he stormed out of a GE lawyer's office. &quot;It was petty, inhumane and mean spirited,&quot; says Mr. Arkin. &quot;I think GE treated Mr. Wigton badly.&quot; GE officials couldn't be reached for comment. A Kidder spokesman said, &quot;Since the indictment was dropped Mr. Wigton's legal fees and his salary have been paid by Kidder, and this was done with GE's concurrence.&quot;    GE wasn't the only one applying pressure. On three occasions, Mr. Arkin says, he encountered government prosecutors who, he asserts, said such things as, &quot;You really should bring him in: We've really got him.&quot;    Mr. Wigton says he heard from another person that Mr. Tabor had been offered a light sentence if he would agree to testify against Mr. Wigton and Kidder chairman DeNunzio, who was never charged with wrongdoing. Mr. Lawler, attorney for Mr. Tabor, couldn't be reached yesterday. Such tactics can subject defendants to excruciating pressure as they fear others might turn against them, but Mr. Wigton says he was unfazed.    Not long before the Kidder settlement, when a federal judge denied a government request for more time, prosecutors dropped the charges against the three individuals. The government said it planned to bring an even broader indictment against them in the near future. Still, GE resumed paying Mr. Wigton's legal bills and salary. In the summer of 1987, Mr. Wigton spent three days with prosecutors in their offices at Foley Square to try to convince them of his innocence. Mr. Arkin says his client also passed a polygraph examination, and returned for an additional day when the criminal division of the U.S. Attorney's office got a new head.    Mr. Wigton says the prosecutors, for their part, &quot;always acted very professionally&quot; toward him. After their meeting in September 1987, neither Mr. Wigton nor his attorney heard from the prosecutors again until last week.    As time went on, Mr. Wigton says, his confidence grew, yet he remained in a frustrating limbo, concealing his anger. Kidder wouldn't let him return from his paid leave of absence, and he couldn't get another job on the Street. He says he never considered what it would be like to go to prison, and &quot;I never considered giving up.&quot;    Early last Wednesday morning, U.S. Attorney Benito Romano informed Mr. Arkin that the Wigton investigation was over. Mr. Arkin spoke to Mr. Romano about a press conference that the prosecutor would hold, and asked, &quot;Can you say something nice about Dick?&quot;    Mr. Romano said there would be no vindication and no apology. &quot;We're just doing our job, Stanley,&quot; Mr. Arkin recalls him as saying.    Now Mr. Wigton says he remains bitter about the workings of the criminal justice system in his case. &quot;It's wrong,&quot; he says. &quot;The system is wrong that can let something like this drag out&quot; for two-and-a-half years. Of former U.S. Attorney and now New York City mayoral candidate Rudolph Giuliani, who authorized Mr. Wigton's arrest, he says, &quot;I hear he has said he regrets the arrest, but that wasn't on the front page. I was on the front page.&quot;    As for his former hero, Mr. Siegel, Mr. Wigton says, &quot;I think I would handle&quot; a meeting with Mr. Siegel &quot;very badly. I would probably turn my back and walk away.&quot; Mr. Rakoff says Mr. Siegel always liked Mr. Wigton and was saddened by his arrest.    This morning, Mr. Wigton will appear at Kidder, Peabody to ask to be put to work. Kidder has been wracked by defections over the past few years, as young investment bankers and traders have complained of everything from skimpy bonuses to incompetent leadership and the excessive dominance of General Electric. In Mr. Wigton's absence, Kidder has become very much a part of the new Wall Street. But for Mr. Wigton, Kidder is still family. He says everyone at Kidder -- as opposed to GE -- was very supportive throughout his ordeal. He still refers to the firm as &quot;we&quot; and he recently paid his own way to a Kidder function in Chicago honoring the 20th anniversary of the head of Kidder's office there. &quot;It's hard to put 31 years behind you,&quot; he says. Kidder &quot;was a nifty place to work.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>