<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890802-0096 </DOCNO><DD> = 890802 </DD><AN> 890802-0096. </AN><HL> Police Corps Plan Is Poor Weapon Against Crime@  ----@  By Lawrence W. Sherman </HL><DD> 08/02/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><GV> CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><TEXT>   For the first time in 20 years, Congress is seriously interested in fighting crime with federal money. The plan is to add as many as 100,000 state and local police officers to the 550,000 or so currently employed. Cost estimates range from $290 million to $1.4 billion a year, depending on the success of the program. The method would be a kind of ROTC for police, with $40,000 in college loans forgiven for graduates completing four years of service.    Skeptics might remind Congress that the 1988 legislation to fight drugs has not yet been fully funded. Nonetheless, there seems to be serious support in both houses, from both liberals and conservatives, for the national Police Corps plan, developed by New York attorney Adam Walinsky and Jonathan Rubenstein, a respected author on police issues.    The congressional proposals come at a time of a national crisis in recruiting police personnel. In one department after another, massive retirements are expected in the next three years. The seeds of this crisis were sown in the late 1960s, when race riots and rising crime spurred many cities to hire more police officers. As the World War II generation retired, the Vietnam generation replaced it in even greater numbers. But with police officers typically eligible for pensions after 20 to 25 years of service, the Vietnam era officers will soon be gone.    Many police departments already are scrambling to replace the retirees. The congressional goal of increasing total strength by nearly 20% seems almost impossible, absent radical changes in recruiting practices. Recruiting college students with generous scholarships is certainly a radical change. But it is hardly the best way to spend hundreds of millions of dollars a year to fight crime.    --There are good reasons to stop recruiting young men as police. One major cause of the police recruiting crisis is the same as that of some other industries: &quot;baby bust&quot; reductions in the number of people turning 21. The current options are either to lower personnel standards, or to expand the range of recruitment targets to include older men and more women.    Male officers under 25 shoot their guns and use other physical force significantly more often than older officers, who appear more adept at talking suspects into cooperating. Younger officers also have more traffic accidents. It is possible these traits are linked to inexperience at any age; since police departments prohibit hiring older people, it is hard to get valid comparisons. But as criminologist James Q. Wilson and others note, most violence, in most societies throughout history, has been committed by young men. By age 25, &quot;testosterone poisoning&quot; generally starts abating substantially.    Hiring more young women might be one way around this problem. But for whatever reasons, police departments have not been able to hire more than a relative handful of women since the legal barriers to their equal employment fell in the mid-1970s. They have been only slightly more successful in hiring minorities, leaving policing primarily to young white men.    --Mid-career recruitment could diversify police more. By shifting the recruitment focus to ages 25 to 45, departments would enjoy a much broader recruitment pool. Minorities retiring from 20 years of military service would be a highly qualified pool, for example, as would women returning to the work force after raising children. College graduates in a wide range of fields, looking for more secure or interesting work, would also be attracted.    Some have claimed the Police Corps could reinvigorate burnt-out police departments. But people who know the drawbacks of other jobs might be more enthusiastic about -- and adaptable to -- the freedom and responsibility of police work than are 21-year-olds with no other experience.    --Police work is too complex for the inexperienced. The Police Corps plan is to release officers from service after four years. This makes as much sense as paying surgeons to go through internships and residencies only then to abandon the practice of medicine. Congress would encourage police departments to squander as much as six months of classroom training and the human capital of experienced officers just to have a continuous supply of inexperienced college graduates.    --There are better ways to fight crime with federal dollars. Many voters would prefer federal support for prison and jail construction. Others would invest in more prosecutors and judges, now forced into assembly-line justice and lengthy delays. Some criminology professors may benefit from a Police Corps through larger enrollments, but my own preference (as a National Institute of Justice grantee) would be to put the same dollars into research and development.    Federal spending for research on health is $35 per American per year. We spend eight cents per person for research on crime control. We spend 10 times more on the National Institute for Dental Research than we do on the National Institute of Justice, the primary federal agency for crime-control research. We have never grasped the idea that police work needs more brains than brawn, and that controlled experiments in police methods could help to fight crime. Police chiefs around the country are eager to conduct such experiments, but there is enough funding available for only a handful of them each year.    --If we must spend the money on a Police Corps, we can spend it more wisely. We can use the money for actual police salaries of newly recruited college graduates of all ages, rather than educational loans for the young. This would encourage cities to raise their archaic educational requirements for police (high school or less) and drop their age discrimination in police recruitment.    The war on crime is too complicated to be left to the rookies. We need more veterans to help turn the tide.    ---   Mr. Sherman, a University of Maryland criminology professor, is president of the Crime Control Institute in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>