<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   GATES SAID he wouldn't &quot;tolerate&quot; NSC staff involvement in covert operations.    Testifying at Senate confirmation hearings, Reagan's nominee to succeed Casey as CIA director said it was a &quot;serious mistake&quot; to use the NSC in intelligence acts. He also said he told the former CIA chief last September that the then-secret arms sales to Iran &quot;should be called off.&quot; Meanwhile, as the president discussed Mideast peace prospects with Israeli Prime Minister Shamir, Israel's government agreed to allow House and Senate investigators to receive from certain Israelis testimony relevant to their Iran-Contra inquiry.    White House officials said Reagan changed his testimony to the Tower Commission on a key point regarding arms sales to Tehran after talking with Chief of Staff Donald Regan. Separately, there was continuing speculation on whether Regan will remain in his job.    A Senate panel cleared a measure to halt U.S. aid to Nicaraguan rebels. Reagan is expected to veto the legislation if approved by the full Congress.    ---   FIGHTING RAGED in Beirut as Druse militiamen seized a Shiite stronghold.    With both sides ignoring threats of Syrian intervention, an alliance of Druse Moslem and Communist gunmen stormed the Commodore Hotel in West Beirut, routing Shiite Amal militiamen in the fourth day of fighting in the mainly Moslem sector. Lebanese police said at least 25 people were killed and 80 wounded in battles around the hotel and at the American University of Beirut. The casualties raised the toll since fighting erupted Sunday to at least 65 killed and about 280 wounded, police said.    The fighting has halted efforts to locate Anglican envoy Terry Waite, who disappeared in Beirut Jan. 20 while trying to win the release of hostages.    ---   A Soviet official in Geneva said Kremlin authorities have signed an unconditional pardon for imprisoned Jewish activist Iosif Begun. In Moscow, Yelena Bonner said dissident circles hadn't received any confirmation that psychiatrist Anatoly Koryagin and Christian activist Alexander Ogorodnikov have been freed from prison.    ---   Irish Prime Minister FitzGerald said partial returns from Tuesday's national elections indicated that challenger Charles Haughey &quot;is likely to be elected&quot; prime minister. It was uncertain whether Haughey's party won a majority in the 166-seat Parliament. Final results weren't expected until today.    ---   Iraqi jets bombarded six Iranian cities, but Baghdad announced that it would stop shelling border towns for two weeks beginning today at the request of the Iranian resistance. There wasn't any response from Tehran. The Mujahedeen Khalq leader, Massoud Rajavi, sought a halt to the shelling to aid the anti-Khomeini movement.    Weinberger confirmed in congressional testimony that the U.S. had provided Iraq with &quot;substantial&quot; intelligence and subsequently gave Iran secret data as well. The defense secretary declined to give details.    ---   Philippine President Aquino named a task force to investigate associates of ousted leader Marcos, who are suspected of defrauding state banks of more than $7 billion. Manila also said that about $5 billion allegedly taken by Marcos and his associates had been traced to Swiss bank accounts.    Communist guerrillas escalated attacks in Philippine provinces and police tightened security following reports that the rebels planned to launch a bomb campaign ahead of the anniversary next week of the revolt that brought Aquino to power.    ---   The premier of Kazakhstan said that two people died and about 200 were injured during December's nationalist riots in the Central Asian city of Alma Ata. The prime minister of the Soviet republic portrayed the rioting as more widespread and violent than Moscow's official reports. He said about 3,000 people participated in the riots.    ---   Officials in Virginia filed felony charges against 16 associates of political extremist Lyndon LaRouche, contending that LaRouche fund-raisers obtained about $30 million in fraudulent loans from about 3,000 people nationwide and overseas. LaRouche wasn't named in the 78-count indictment.    ---   Amnesty International launched a campaign against the death penalty in the U.S., saying it is &quot;arbitrary, racially biased and unfair.&quot; The London-based human rights organization said the U.S. -- in which 37 states have death-penalty statutes on the books -- is one of only five countries world-wide that executes juvenile killers.    ---   A congressional report concluded that a two-year study by the Pentagon hasn't found evidence that polygraph exams would be useful in screening employees for sensitive posts. The unreleased report by the Office of Technology Assessment said the Pentagon hasn't collected the data needed to know whether lie-detector tests are accurate.    ---   Nicaragua accepted an invitation to attend a meeting of Central American presidents in Guatemala, and the Managua government stressed its support for peace talks sponsored by the four-nation Contadora group. Nicaragua had been excluded from a recent summit in Costa Rica. </TEXT></DOC>