<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880915-0146 </DOCNO><HL> How to Clean Up Superfund's Act </HL><AUTHOR> Amal Kumar Naj </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ENV </IN><G> CNG EPA </G><TEXT>   In 1980 Congress authorized the Environmental Protection Agency to locate toxic waste sites and force the parties responsible to clean them up. Eight years later, the results are dismal: Of the 27,000 or so sites that have been identified so far -- 2,500 of them requiring urgent attention -- only about three dozen have been cleaned up and 275 are in early cleanup stages.    The 1980 Superfund Act, by most accounts, hasn't healed the wounds from America's industrial past. The toxic waste cleanup program needs a new focus and sharper guidelines.    The years of effort to secure cleanups have exposed some fundamental flaws in the program. Chief among them is that the act itself encourages a bewildering amount of litigation, much of it delaying tactics by the companies. Superfund's success ultimately depends upon the development and commercialization of technology for effective, permanent cleanups, but this isn't getting very much attention.    The law is structured in such a way that the EPA enforces it by initiating cleanups on its own, using a multibillion-dollar trust fund established by Congress, if the parties responsible won't volunteer or can't be tracked down. The agency then sues to recover the money.    The EPA controls the selection of the technology for treatment of the contaminants and the cleanup standards to be attained. Moreover, companies are liable even years after the work if the treatment is found to be inadequate or if the regulators tighten the cleanup standards after the work already has been done.    The problem with this approach is that companies have very little say on, and hence very little control of, a situation that requires them to spend tens or hundreds of millions of dollars. The average cost of cleaning up a site has been running at about $25 million, and some companies, such as Westinghouse, Allied-Signal and Monsanto, face liabilities in 40 to 100 sites. A conservative estimate is that it will cost about $100 billion to clean up the nation's hazardous waste sites. The Office of Technology Assessment, the investigative arm of Congress, says $500 billion -- up from its 1985 etimate of $300 billion -- will be needed over the next 50 years.    Companies readily acknowledge that it is worth spending millions of dollars on lawyers to put off spending hundreds of millions of dollars on cleanups. &quot;The only way {left} for the companies to negotiate is through litigation,&quot; says Jerome Strauss, director of the hazardous waste division at Versar Inc., an environmental engineering firm in Springfield, Va. &quot;Otherwise the companies feel they are being stabbed in the back.&quot;    Consider: Shell Oil along with its insurers spent $40 million in legal fees before agreeing to spend several hundred million dollars to clean up a vast site near Denver, and five other companies spent a total of $16 million in legal fees before agreeing to clean up a St. Louis site at a cost of $14 million. Some companies are suing each other over their shares of the liabilitysince many sites contain wastes from several companies. Then there are the suits that companies have filed against their insurers to get them to pick up the tab, and the suits with which insurers have retaliated; altogether 300 such suits are working their way through the courts.    Meanwhile, the EPA's selection and administration of technology have come under harsh criticism. The Office of Technology Assessment has said the EPA's cleanup efforts are too lenient. After examining 100 sites, it said in a June report that the EPA often chose technologies that didn't result in permanent cleanups, or it selected &quot;permanent&quot; technologies that hadn't been proved to be such. &quot;Many good, permanently effective waste treatment technologies are on the market but, too often, are not fully examined, or are not selected for use,&quot; the report also said.    &quot;Even after eight years, cleanup technology is a new and fast-changing field and the work force {at the EPA} is relatively young and inexperienced, {and} people in contractor firms also lack experience,&quot; the report added.    It's hard to say how much of the caustic tone of the report was motivated by finger-pointing by Congress, which is saying to its constituents, in effect: Look, we gave the EPA all this money, and it's the EPA that's bungling. Winston Porter, head of the EPA's hazardous waste treatment division, bristles at the mention of the report. &quot;That report is superficial and incomplete,&quot; he says. But he concedes that &quot;there's a lot of room for improvement&quot; in the Superfund program.    The environmental agency is in a tough position: In a 1986 amendment of the Superfund Act, Congress required the EPA to give preference to permanently effective cleanup technologies that at the same time are cost-effective. Some of the &quot;permanent&quot; technologies that would clean up all of the contaminants are so expensive -- given the state of their development -- that most of the fund will be consumed by just a few sites. The Office of Technology Assessment, on the other hand, asserts that the EPA, in an attempt to spend its money on a large number of sites, often miscalculates cost or inflates the numbers to reject a better technology.    The dispute aside, what's clear is that Congress hasn't created incentives or an environment that will foster a competitive rush for new, effective technologies.    As the EPA has found, even the most sophisticated and well-designed treatment is fraught with uncertainties. The landfills -- packed with metals, acids, organic compounds, solvents and numerous other deadly substances for decades -- are each so different in character that they defy common technological solutions. Incineration doesn't work for many sites, because it would let off poisonous gases; sometimes chemical treatment doesn't remove the deadly substances; and oftentimes each identified toxic element has to be targeted and extracted in a process so complex as to make treatment impractical.    In any one year, the EPA has been able to test and approve only 10 to 20 treatment technologies. If Congress were to allow the companies themselves to select the cleanup technologies -- leaving the EPA to monitor cleanup standards -- this would more than likely lead to competitive bids from environmental engineering firms and the companies that put the stuff in landfills in the first place. And more than likely, the result would be cost-efficient, permanently effective technologies. Without such a change, Congress will find itself in the untenable position of considering subsidies to foster development and commercialization of the technologies.    Of course, no amount of technological development will do much good if the companies aren't sure what cleanup standards they must attain. The 1984 amendment set ground-water quality goals established under the Safe Drinking Water Act for the Superfund sites. But they cover only 22 chemicals. Federal and state regulators continue to struggle with the issue of acceptable risk for the vast majority of other chemicals and metals.    Sometimes they set standards based on available research studies. But &quot;many times the numbers are pulled out of thin air,&quot; says A. Patrick Nucciarone, an environmental attorney with Hannoch Weisman in New Jersey and former chief of the environmental protection section of the U.S. Attorney's Office in that state.    The result is a hodgepodge of enforcement decisions, especially with states playing an increasing role in cleanup efforts. Olin Corp., for instance, spent $3.5 million to clean up mercury contamination at its Saltville, Va., plant site in an agreement with state authorities. But the EPA said the standard wasn't satisfactory. The company now figures it will have to spend an additional $10 million to $15 million.    Some environmentally conscious states, on the other hand, are using cleanup criteria more stringent than those of the federal government. For instance, New Jersey's permissible radioactive emission standard is three times stricter than the federal standard. To avoid conflicts, it may make sense for a company to comply with the higher of the two cleanup standards. &quot;But that means a jump in the order of two to five times in the cleanup cost,&quot; says Mr. Nucciarone. &quot;Sometimes it can't be justified, because the lower standard doesn't threaten the ground water.&quot;    Congress must decide the acceptable level of risks from toxic wastes -- in other words, how clean is clean. While in theory it would be preferable to reduce the risks to zero, the current high price of such a standard wouldn't allow much of a cleanup of America's graveyard. If, however, Congress were to give private industry an incentive to concentrate on developing technology, we would stand a greater chance of restoring most of the poisonous landfills to their original state.    ---   Mr. Naj covers environmental issues from the Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>