<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870108-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Panama-Registered Company Is LinkedTo Contra Aid by Intelligence Sources---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Panamanian-registered corporation, Amalgamated Commercial Enterprises, has been identified by intelligence sources as an important link in the private network resupplying Nicaragua insurgents from an air base in El Salvador.    Incorporated in November 1984, the firm is a shell company that appears to have been activated the following year. According to two sources, it helped administer an extensive airlift operation from the Ilopango military base. The airlift is believed to have ended last year after a C-123 cargo plane was shot down Oct. 5 by Nicaraguan forces, and Eugene Hasenfus, an American crewman, was captured.    The operation was the most dramatic effort by a private network linked to the National Security Council to assist the Contras, as the Nicaragua insurgents are called. Funding for the Contras is believed to have come at least partially from profits on the sale of U.S. arms to Iran.    Panamanian corporations are an important focus of current investigations into the Iran-Contra affair, but the country's strict secrecy laws serve to disguise the flow of funds behind the supply operation. All of Amalgamated's officers appear to be employees of International Management andamp; Trust Corp., a Panama City incorporator with past ties to Steven Samos, a Panamanian businessman who has testified in a U.S. court to laundering millions of dollars for the head of a drug-smuggling ring in the late 1970s.    Norlando Pelyhe, now president of International Management, denied speculation that Mr. Samos retained control of the company, also known as Intertrust, even after he sold its assets in December 1983. What role Mr. Samos had, if any, in the creation of Amalgamated is unknown, but he also has had extensive dealings with Banco de Iberamerica, a Panama bank that sources believe may have been used in the Contra money trail.    Mr. Samos, who was granted immunity in return for his testimony and cooperation in the drug-smuggling case, couldn't be reached for comment, and efforts to contact his Miami attorney, Bill Clay, were unsuccessful.    According to records in Panama, Amalgamated's president is Virginia Cover Rodriguez, a former aide of Mr. Samos. As did many of Mr. Samos's former employees, she remained at Intertrust after he sold the corporation's assets. In an interview, Mr. Pelyhe identified all of the remaining officers and the resident agent for Amalgamated as employees of Intertrust. But under such shell-company arrangements, individuals listed as officers often have little or nothing to do with the actual use of the firm by the owner-client.    Yadel Bloise Quijano is described in Panamanian records as the corporate secretary for Amalgamated. Julio Antonio Quijano, a Panama City attorney, has acknowledged being instrumental in setting up several other corporations linked to the Iran-Contra affair, but he denied being related to the Mrs. Quijano who is employed at Intertrust or having any knowledge of Amalgamated's existence.    Yet another piece in a complex puzzle, the emergence of the Panamanian corporation underscores how much still isn't known about the money trail that runs from the Iran arms sales to the Contras, and about the Contra supply network. Yesterday, on a 416-2 vote, the House followed the Senate in authorizing its own select committee to investigate the entire affair.    Both houses are under self-imposed deadlines to complete their inquiries by next summer or fall. The House yesterday set an Oct. 30 deadline -- three months later than the Aug. 1 date set by the Senate. Congressional Republicans are anxious that these deadlines not be extended, for fear of the impact on 1988 elections.    Michigan Rep. William Broomfield, the ranking Republican on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, argued there was &quot;no justification&quot; for a deadline later than April 15. But that debate was overshadowed by a fight over the release of information already collected by the Senate Intelligence Committee in weeks of secret hearings during the past two months.    The Senate panel voted narrowly this week to withhold a report on its hearings, a move the White House bitterly attacked as partisan maneuvering aimed at undermining President Reagan. The administration has disclosed portions of the report that are favorable to the president and critical of fired National Security Council staffer Lt. Col. Oliver North.    But there is bipartisan concern in Congress that release of the document could hurt the fledgling committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair. There were major gaps in the information available to the Senate Intelligence panel, and Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), vice chairman of the new Senate select committee, said he fears that the Intelligence Committee report could come to be seen as the &quot;official line&quot; on the affair and thus unduly shape future testimony.    The select committees are expected to begin a new round of public hearings next month, and the House panel is scheduled to hold an organizational meeting this morning. Among the leading candidates to be the panel's special counsel is John Nields, a Washington attorney who served as chief counsel to the House Committee on Standards and Official Conduct during the &quot;Koreagate&quot; influence-peddling inquiry of the late 1970s.    Mr. Nields, who declined to comment, is well known to Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), who was part of the Koreagate investigation and now is chairman of the new House select committee.    Meanwhile yesterday, Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel appointed to investigate the Iran-Contra affair, announced 11 associate counsels he intends to hire. The group includes Guy Struve, a New York lawyer and longtime associate of Mr. Walsh.    Mr. Walsh, who plans to set up offices in New York and Washington, said the appointments, and others he intends to announce shortly, won't become final until background checks and security clearances are done by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. That could take several weeks, according to law enforcement officials.    The list of associate counsels, six of whom come from major Wall Street law firms, also includes a number of current or former Justice Department prosecutors, the president of the District of Columbia Bar and two recent law school graduates. In addition to Mr. Struve, who will be in charge of the New York office, three other assistants will come from Davis, Polk andamp; Wardwell, the New York law firm where Mr. Walsh worked from 1961 to 1981.    Mr. Walsh, who was appointed three weeks ago, is expected to appoint at least eight or nine other assistants shortly, according to law enforcement officials. The staff may grow further as the investigation heats up.    Yesterday's appointments included Audrey Strauss, who works at Mudge, Rose, Guthrie, Alexander andamp; Ferdon and is a former senior prosecutor for white-collar crime cases in the U.S. attorney's office in New York; John Douglass, a former federal prosecutor who helped convict Soviet spy Ronald Pelton; Richard Ford, who worked with Mr. Walsh at the law firm of Crowe andamp; Dunlevy in Oklahoma City; Paul Friedman, a former federal prosecutor and current head of the District of Columbia Bar; David Zornow and Michael Bromwich, both federal prosecutors; and Robert Schwartz, an attorney with the New York firm Debevoise andamp; Plimpton and a former federal prosecutor.    ---   Also contributing to this article was Martha Brannigan in Miami. </TEXT></DOC>