<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880126-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Civil Charges Against Drexel and Milken To Be Sought by SEC Staff, Sources Say --- Major Violations Are Seen On Securities Statutes; Inquiry Nears Climax </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK BON SCR </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Securities and Exchange Commission has notified Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. that the SEC staff will recommend civil charges of major securities law violations against Drexel, its junk-bond chief Michael Milken and other employees, according to people familiar with the investigation.    The decision by the staff to seek charges indicates that the massive, 15-month government criminal and civil investigation of the major securities firm is nearing a climax. Drexel has been the subject of both SEC and Manhattan federal grand jury investigations ever since it was implicated by former arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky in the largest scandal in Wall Street's history.    According to people familiar with the investigation, Drexel, Michael Milken and his brother, Lowell Milken, and several other Drexel employees have recently received formal notification from the SEC that the agency's staff has decided to ask the commission to file civil charges. The SEC has invited Drexel and the employees to submit a written statement to the commission, if they wish, explaining why charges shouldn't be filed.    While the notice didn't identify the precise charges the staff will recommend, the SEC has been investigating the possibility of numerous violations by Drexel and some of its employees of securities laws in takeover situations. These include &quot;parking&quot; takeover-related stocks to conceal the true ownership, falsification of books and records, and failure to make required disclosures to the SEC of stock ownership positions.    The SEC notice -- known as a &quot;Wells&quot; request, after a prominent securities lawyer -- is part of a standard procedure by the SEC designed to allow potential defendants a chance to argue to the commission that it shouldn't follow its staff's enforcement recommendations. Based on the submission, the commission may decide against filing charges against Drexel or any of its employees, or the staff might change its mind about filing. However, lawyers who practice before the SEC said that such submissions rarely succeed in persuading the commission to overrule the staff's recommendations.    If the five-member commission formally lodges the charges, Drexel would have to decide whether to fight what is likely to be a long, costly court battle, or whether it should reach a settlement with the SEC. If Drexel intends to fight, it may choose not to make a submission that vigorously disputes the staff recommendations, since it would risk revealing its possible defense strategy.    But, if Drexel wants to reach a settlement, securities lawyers say that now is the time to begin serious settlement talks to head off what is likely to be a highly publicized case.    If any charges are eventually filed, they would be brought in federal district court by the commission, and Drexel would have the opportunity to contest the charges in a public trial.    A separate criminal investigation of Drexel is being carried out by the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office. Any SEC charges are likely to be scrutinized closely to assess Drexel's potential criminal exposure, since willful violations of most of the provisions of the securities laws that might give rise to any SEC civil suit also are felonies, according to people familiar with both investigations.    Steven Anreder, a spokesman for Drexel, said, &quot;As we have said repeatedly, the investigations are legally secret or confidential, and therefore we cannot comment on rumors, even if they may be untrue.&quot; Drexel has denied any wrongdoing, and has said its own investigations have produced no evidence of any wrongdoing by any of its employees. Mr. Anreder declined comment on behalf of both Michael and Lowell Milken.    Gary Lynch, chief of enforcement for the SEC, declined comment.    The SEC staff's decision is the first indication that, after reviewing more than a million documents and numerous sworn statements, the government thinks that civil charges are warranted. Drexel has been under investigation since November 1986, when Mr. Boesky agreed to settle SEC charges for a record $100 million and agreed to plead guilty to a felony. He was sentenced to three years in prison late last year.    Any charges against Drexel could have a major impact on Wall Street, especially on the huge market for high-yield junk bonds, where Drexel remains by far the largest underwriter and market-maker for the high-yielding securities.    With more than $2 billion in capital, much of it generated by its hugely successful junk-bond business, closely held Drexel is one of the largest and most powerful firms on Wall Street. However, the government's long investigation has already tarnished the firm's image and taken a toll on its business, especially in the field of hostile takeovers, where Drexel was once dominant in providing financing. In a recent spate of major takeover bids, Drexel has been conspicuously absent.    The staff's recommendation of charges against Michael Milken and his brother, Lowell, also strikes at the heart of Drexel's most lucrative business, its junk-bond operations. Michael Milken built junk bonds and his Beverly Hills, Calif., headquarters into a major force in American finance. Junk bonds have financed a wide range of business activities, from the most controversial hostile takeovers to expansions by fast-growing, entrepreneurial companies.    While Michael is widely credited with being the mastermind of junk bonds, Lowell is also viewed as extremely influential within Drexel. A lawyer, he also oversees much of the brothers' vast and complex personal financial empire.    Other individuals identified by the SEC in its notices couldn't be determined.    People familiar with the notices said that the SEC told Drexel that three takeover situations are the focus of the staff's recommended charges. They are the 1985 takeover of Fischbach Corp. by financier Victor Posner; the 1986 merger of Lorimar Inc. and Telepictures Corp. into Lorimar Telepictures Corp.; and the 1986 leveraged buy-out of Safeway Stores Inc. by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts Inc. The three situations were previously identified as being under investigation by this newspaper. Drexel raised money for Mr. Posner, Lorimar and Kohlberg Kravis.    Recipients of Wells requests are ordinarily given two weeks to make their submission, but in a case as complicated as this, extensions would be routinely granted, according to lawyers familiar with the SEC's procedures. Thus, any SEC charges against Drexel may not be filed for weeks.    It appears that government prosecutors in the criminal investigation of Drexel and others implicated by Mr. Boesky are nearing a crucial decision about whether to seek charges from a Manhattan grand jury. At a hearing last Friday, U.S. District Judge Milton Pollack, who is presiding in a civil suit by Mr. Boesky's former limited partners against Mr. Boesky and others, said after talking to prosecutors that, in the criminal investigation, &quot;there are several irons in the fire that may climax.&quot; He added: &quot;At this late stage&quot; of the government's investigation, &quot;I don't want to hobble&quot; the government.    A spokesman for the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office declined comment on any aspect of its investigation.    One of the stocks in the SEC recommendations, Fischbach, was the one stock cited by the government when Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty last March to a takeover plot with other alleged conspirators, one of whom is Michael Milken, according to people familiar with the investigation. Lorimar-Telepictures was named on subpoenas that appeared shortly after Mr. Boesky settled with the SEC. Mr. Boesky owned stock in Lorimar before the merger. Safeway surfaced last summer as a subject of investigation. Mr. Boesky owned a stake in Safeway prior to its acquisition by Kohlberg Kravis.    Fischbach and Lorimar-Telepictures are also two of the stocks that figured in the calculation of a suspicious $5.3 million payment from Mr. Boesky to Drexel in March 1986. As reported by this newspaper early last year, the government has evidence that the payment was related to a suspected stock parking scheme between Michael Milken and Mr. Boesky.    In parking, one investor holds stock for another in order to conceal the true ownership, often to evade SEC disclosure and net capital requirements. Parking has also emerged as a key component in suspected takeover conspiracies.    Drexel has said repeatedly that its investigation of the $5.3 million payment turned up no evidence of wrongdoing and has said that the payment was for legitimate investment banking services that it provided for Mr. Boesky. Lowell Milken is one of two Drexel officials who signed a letter saying the payment was for investment banking services, according to people familiar with the investigation.    Should the SEC file charges, lawyers said, Drexel would face intense pressures to settle. They note that the need to disclose the proceedings and their possible adverse consequences could seriously handicap Drexel's ability to engage in any financing activities requiring SEC disclosure.    Last year Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. agreed to pay $25.3 million to settle, without admitting or denying guilt, SEC charges of insider trading, parking and other securities law violations, rather than contest the charges.    Kidder's decision to settle the charges and implement reforms also helped persuade the Manhattan U.S. attorney not to file criminal charges against the firm. The Wells notice, lawyers said, is often interpreted by its recipients as a signal to begin serious settlement talks. Drexel has previously denied having any settlement talks with the SEC. </TEXT></DOC>