<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Runyon Decision Doesn't Deserve to Stand </HL><AUTHOR> Michael S. Greve </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> SUP </G><TEXT>   The Supreme Court's 5-4 decision to reconsider the 1976 case of Runyon v. McCrary has unleashed a storm of protest. More than 100 civil-rights organizations, along with 171 congressmen and senators and 47 state attorneys general, have filed briefs urging the court to uphold its earlier decision and the &quot;substantial protections&quot; it affords minorities. Solicitor General Charles Fried has decided to stay out of this hurricane, and last week announced he would not file a brief in the case.    Amid all the clamor and the debate about the solicitor general's peculiar decision to remain on the sidelines, it is worth noting that Runyon is one of the most ill-considered civil-rights cases on the books. The decision is clearly wrong. Moreover, it is not the cornerstone of racial equality its supporters make it out to be. The case law that has developed under Runyon raises concerns that ought to be aired and addressed in Congress.    In Runyon, the court was asked to determine the scope of a civil-rights statute passed after the Civil War. The pertinent clause of the law, now codified as Section 1981 of Volume 42 of the U.S. Code, provides that &quot;all persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall have the same right in every state and territory to make and enforce contracts as is enjoyed by white citizens.&quot; The court, in Runyon, interpreted this language to mean that a private school cannot refuse, on racial grounds, to admit black children.    In the 12 years since Runyon, the court's reasoning has been applied in more than 100 recorded cases and to a wide variety of contractual relations, including, most notably, employment relations. (Patterson v. McLean Credit Union, the case that prompted the Supreme Court's reconsideration of Runyon, was an employment discrimination suit for damages.) Moreover, Runyon has been applied not only in cases of racial discrimination but also when allegations of discrimination on the basis of age and lack of U.S. citizenship have been brought. The case is on its way toward affecting almost every commercial transaction to which a member of a minority is or can be a party.    Realizing this, some lower courts have balked at Runyon and its extensions. For example, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals last October expressed its dissatisfaction with the case in the course of rejecting an alien's discrimination suit for damages against a bank that had turned down his credit-card application.    It isn't just the expansion of Runyon that seems to trouble the current Supreme Court; it is the case itself. Stripped of all rhetoric, Runyon entitles blacks and members of other minorities to force private parties into contractual agreements. This interpretation of Section 1981 is absurd. The provision was not intended to give blacks a special right not possessed by whites -- namely, to coerce others into contracts they do not wish to enter.    As Justice Byron White explained in his dissent in Runyon, the language of Section 1981 meant to the authors of the statute that blacks could not be prohibited by law from making contracts, and that they had the same rights as whites to enforce contracts in court. In other words, the statute applies only to government action, not private conduct. This was perfectly well understood by judges and legislators for more than 100 years. In 1964, Congress passed Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, a system of prohibitions and remedies against private employment discrimination that would have been unnecessary had Section 1981 meant what the Supreme Court took it to mean in Runyon.    Among those who attack the court for reconsidering Runyon, very few bother defending it on substantive grounds. Instead, they argue that considerations of precedent dictate that Runyon should be upheld. Those who raise this argument -- civil-rights organizations, Laurence Tribe, Sen. Edward Kennedy, Justices Harry Blackmun, William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall and John Paul Stevens -- never had much respect for precedent when it came to inventing ever-new judicial rights and remedies, no matter how flimsy their foundations. Indeed, the Warren Court's and, to some extent, the Burger Court's political agenda was built upon overruling decades and sometimes centuries of well-established precedents. Cases that come to mind include New York Times v. Sullivan, Miranda, and Roe v. Wade.    The difference between those cases and Runyon, we are told, is that the abrogation of newly minted rights is very unsettling to minorities. Justice Stevens first made this argument in his concurrence in Runyon, all the while conceding that the decision was wrong on the merits. He has now repeated it in his dissent from the Patterson order. Reconsidering Runyon, he wrote, would &quot;replace what is ideally a sense of guaranteed right with the uneasiness of unsecured privilege.&quot;    But this argument represents the triumph of symbolism over substance. It elevates the concerns of political constituencies over the canons of statutory construction, and would insulate even the most defective products of liberal judicial ingenuity from reconsideration.    One might want to let Runyon stand if overruling it would have significant detrimental effects upon the living conditions of blacks and other minorities. However, this is not the case. With regard to employment relations, which is what most of the Runyon progeny are about, the need for Section 1981 actions is less than pressing. Title VII of the Civil Rights Act and a variety of other anti-discrimination laws (for example, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act) set up an elaborate system of administrative and judicial remedies for adjudicating discrimination complaints.    In contrast to the ad-hoc judicial determination in Runyon, these statutes represent Congress's considered judgment as to how the general principle that contracts are private should be reconciled with a public policy of nondiscrimination, and how that policy should be implemented. For example, Congress excluded enterprises with fewer than 15 employees from the reach of Title VII while making it easier to prove discrimination under Title VII than is the case under Section 1981.    The overlap is not complete. Runyon reaches some employment and other contractual relations not covered by Title VII. And in contrast to Title VII and the rest of the modern civil-rights machinery, Section 1981 offers compensatory and punitive damages.    But it is an open question whether these features justify the judicial construction of a federal contract and tort system on top of the anti-discrimination system Congress has put in place. In the kinds of situations covered by Runyon v. McCrary and its progeny, the victims of discrimination typically have numerous easily available alternatives. Mr. and Mrs. McCrary were not the victims of system-wide school segregation; they could have sent their child to any one of the many integrated private or public schools in their neighborhood. Given the health of the economy, Mrs. Patterson could easily find employment elsewhere. A non-citizen whose credit-card application is turned down by one bank can turn to another, less risk-averse financial institution.    Acts of discrimination are always ugly. For the victims, they can be emotionally disturbing. However harsh it may sound, though, it isn't clear that there should be a judicial remedy for each and every distressing experience.    No government or judicial office keeps reliable, comprehensive data on Section 1981 litigation. But a cursory glance at the case law suggests that Runyon may have less to do with a public policy of racial justice in employment, which is already accomplished by Title VII, than it has to do with money. The reason disgruntled employees, parents, or credit-card applicants go to court -- instead of getting on with their lives -- is that the remedies available under Section 1981 can make it worth their (and their lawyers') while. The punitive damages awarded in these cases can amount to three or four times the compensatory damages. Section 1981 cases are only rarely handled by the NAACP, which doesn't care about damage awards and prefers to litigate Title VII cases that benefit a large number of actual and potential employees. Runyon may well be a loose cannon on the deck of the U.S.S. Civil Justice System. It isn't a big gun yet. Intentional discrimination is still fairly hard to prove, and damage awards are negligible compared with the sums that change hands in, say, product-liability suits. But this may change. A few more generous findings of intent to discriminate, a few more arguments to the effect that the defendants are racists who ought to pay, a few more compassionate juries -- and Section 1981 becomes an entry ticket to the costly national lottery known as tort law.    This could be what we want. Since the tort system now pays damages without proof of causation or even injury, and since it collects money from people who have committed no tort, we may well decide to award damages for incidents of discrimination, in which there is at least some injury and an identifiable perpetrator.    But we cannot make an informed, responsible decision about this issue if the Supreme Court upholds Runyon and lower courts and juries expand it into unforeseeable directions. An informed decision presupposes accurate information about the size and frequency of damage awards and settlements under Section 1981 -- data we currently do not possess and can be created and brought to attention only in an open, public debate.    Under these circumstances, we should not settle for cheap declarations of support for Runyon by state attorneys general and congressmen, nor for assurances that Congress already has implicitly endorsed Runyon by not overturning it. Responsible political decision-making requires an open vote for which congressmen can be held accountable. Let the Supreme Court overturn Runyon, and let's have a public debate about a minority-oriented civil-justice system. And let's have that debate, and a vote, in Congress.    ---   Mr. Greve holds the Alexander Hamilton chair for law and public policy at the Washington Legal Foundation, a public-interest law firm in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>