<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871007-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Nominee Rejected the AdviceOf Keeping Low Profile;Opponents Set Strategy---Impact of Sen. Kennedy's Call---This article was prepared byWall Street Journal staff reportersStephen Wermiel, Gerald F. SeibAnd Jeffrey H. Birnbaum</HL><DD> 10/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At 11:45 last Thursday morning, Republican Sen. Arlen Specter called Robert Bork to say that he would oppose the judge's nomination to the Supreme Court.    &quot;I'm disappointed to know that,&quot; Judge Bork said. &quot;I thought I addressed your concerns.&quot; Recounting the conversation, the Pennsylvania lawmaker says that he replied: &quot;You did address my concerns, but you didn't resolve the doubts that I had.&quot;    With that conversation, the Bork nomination -- the most important of the Reagan administration -- began sliding toward probable defeat.    The administration's effort has been beset with problems from the beginning. Conservative hard-liners in the Justice Department and pragmatists in the White House disagreed from the start about strategy; at one point in August, the divisions were so deep that Edwin Feulner, president of the conservative Heritage Foundation, took it upon himself to convene a peace conference at his offices for top White House and Justice Department officials.    The White House wanted Judge Bork to keep a relatively low profile, but he wanted to talk to reporters and give extensive answers at his confirmation hearings. Administration aides tried to prep him for the hearings by holding mock question-and-answer sessions, but he resisted.    Meanwhile, Judge Bork's opponents settled early on a strategy aimed at focusing the debate on general questions of civil rights and individual liberties like privacy, rather than on specific issues. Calls from senators mobilized blacks and white Southern Democratic officeholders. Civil-rights groups organized into task forces and met weekly to coordinate efforts. Democratic leaders orchestrated announcements of senators opposing the nomination to give the appearance of a building tide.    At one point, a telephone call from Sen. Edward Kennedy woke up the Rev. Joseph Lowery in a New Orleans hotel room. After speaking with the senator, the minister turned the Southern Christian Leadership Conference's annual convention into an anti-Bork organizing session.    In sum, the nomination appears to be failing because three crucial trends have converged. The divided administration failed to anticipate that its opponents could turn the nomination into an emotional public referendum on the direction of the Supreme Court. &quot;I don't think anybody imagined the kind of campaign you'd have,&quot; says White House communications director Thomas Griscom.    Then, Judge Bork's opponents succeeded in focusing the debate on whether he would reverse civil-rights gains -- a question of critical importance to the black voters who provide crucial electoral support to Southern Democrats. Finally, Judge Bork himself increased doubts about the nomination as he adhered to some highly provocative views, dropped others and appeared aloof and cold at his hearings.    The fate of the nomination may have been sealed yesterday. The Senate Judiciary Committee voted 9-5 to send Judge Bork's name to the full Senate with a negative recommendation, and a key Southern Democrat, Alabama Sen. Howell Heflin, said that he opposes confirmation.    The repercussions of the failing Bork nomination are enormous for President Reagan. He pledges to fight on despite the long odds against Judge Bork, declaring yesterday that &quot;I am saying I am not going to withdraw this nomination.&quot; But if he doesn't, he will have to devote the next two weeks to a divisive fight that could leave him weakened, with less political capital to devote to other crucial issues, like aid for Nicaragua's Contra rebels and an arms deal for Saudi Arabia.    White House aides insist that they haven't started discussions on an alternate candidate, but Mr. Reagan may soon have to pick another nominee and begin the difficult confirmation process all over again. Having been bloodied once, the White House has to be concerned that groups that battled Mr. Bork could be energized again. The administration would be likely to consider Patrick Higginbotham, a federal appeals court judge in Dallas; Roger Miner, a federal appeals court judge in New York; and J. Clifford Wallace, a federal appeals court judge in San Diego.    The opposition to Judge Bork began forming at a remarkably early point. Anticipating a Bork nomination, Ralph Neas, the director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, convened a meeting the day before the formal announcement with representatives of some 40 civil-rights, labor and women's groups at the conference's Washington offices.    They decided to spread the word quickly that a Bork nomination would be the fight of the decade and that moderate senators shouldn't rush to support the nomination. They also quickly distributed copies of Judge Bork's speeches and articles criticizing parts of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and attacking court decisions throwing out the poll tax, restrictive housing covenants and affirmative action.    The mobilization clearly helped win over Southern senators. Black opposition &quot;was intense,&quot; says Democratic Sen. David Pryor of Arkansas. &quot;It permeated into the black churches of the South. Ministers were talking about it, choirs were singing about it.&quot;    Early on, some Southern Democratic lawmakers, including J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana and Terry Sanford of North Carolina, began conveying concerns to Judiciary Committee Chairman Joseph Biden of Delaware. They worried about Judge Bork's stand on individual liberties and that he might reopen old wounds over civil rights.    Sen. Biden began calling Southern Democratic governors, winning the support of Bill Clinton of Arkansas and others. He also lined up committee appearances by William Coleman, a moderate Republican and former Ford administration cabinet member, and former Democratic Rep. Barbara Jordan, both of whom are black and who proved to be the most forceful witnesses at the hearings. At first the two thought that the Bork nomination was so likely to succeed that they didn't want to take such a high-profile role, and Sen. Biden had to spend hours lobbying them to appear. But they were exceptionally effective, largely because they are respected figures who are widely accepted by Washington's political establishment.    Sen. Kennedy spent two days in August calling black leaders from his Hyannis summer home. After calls to New Orleans's current mayor, Sidney Barthelemy, and a former mayor, Ernest Morial, both black, a strong appeal was aimed at Louisiana's black lawyers, and that spilled into the black churches as well. In Alabama, Sen. Kennedy spoke with Birmingham Mayor Richard Arrington and Tuskegee Mayor Johnny Ford, both of whom organized other black leaders.    Labor also played a part; in a September conference call, Sen. Kennedy energized 40 state and regional AFL-CIO leaders. He also called Democratic fundraisers around the country who spread the word to senators counting on their support.    While the opposition was coalescing, administration officials were having major problems. The decision to nominate Judge Bork had never really been in doubt. When Chief of Staff Howard Baker informed the president last June that Justice Lewis Powell was retiring, he asked whether Mr. Reagan wanted any particular names on a list of possible replacements. The president's response: Be sure that Robert Bork's name is there. But the nomination soon became enmeshed in the political infighting that has plagued the Reagan administration.    After Judge Bork's selection was announced, moderate aides associated with Mr. Baker sought to keep Attorney General Edwin Meese and his conservative aides in the Justice Department from assuming the role of point men for the nomination. The White House faction argued that Mr. Meese's influence had been diminished because of his role in the Iran-Contra affair and his link to an investigation into government contracts granted to Wedtech Corp.    As a result, Mr. Meese remained in the next room while President Reagan announced the nomination at the White House. When White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater heard later that day that a Meese aide might be planning a press conference to discuss Judge Bork's record, Mr. Fitzwater saw to it that the idea was dropped.    The tension between the conservative and moderate camps led to a bigger problem: a basic schism over strategy. Conservative hard-liners in the Justice Department and outside the administration wanted the campaign to be confrontational, with Judge Bork's conservative credentials flaunted and his opponents attacked as soft on crime and abortion. But White House officials calculated that such a fight would alienate moderate Republicans and sympathetic Democrats, particularly on abortion. &quot;We just didn't see the votes there if you made this a right-wing litmus test,&quot; says a top White House aide.    As a result, the White House campaign stressed the line that, despite Mr. Bork's provocative writings over the years, he now is in the legal mainstream. This strategy meshed with the 60-year-old jurist's own inclination to emphasize his record as a federal appeals court judge for five years and as solicitor general in the Nixon administration for almost four years.    Nearly a month after the nomination was announced, the White House was worried enough about the opponents' momentum to prepare a thick analysis of Judge Bork's record for distribution to senators. But this, too, became the subject of an internal tug of war. The White House wanted Mr. Bork depicted as open-minded and respectful of precedent, and as a result toned down the Justice Department's draft. Ultimately, an administration official says, the White House even forbade department aides to deliver the report to Capitol Hill.    Things improved somewhat after Mr. Feulner's peace conference at the Heritage Foundation, but conservatives continued to complain that the White House was making it too easy for fence-sitting senators to vote against Judge Bork.    One problem for the White House was trying to manage the strong-minded Mr. Bork. At the judge's first meeting with William Ball, the White House legislative director, Mr. Ball suggested turning down interview requests. Within hours, though, Judge Bork was talking to reporters. And despite White House cautions, the judge felt strongly that, because of his controversial background, he had to break with the tradition of circumspection and talk in detail about his views on specific issues during his confirmation hearings.    To help Mr. Bork bone up for the hearings, the White House brought in Tom Korologos, an experienced lobbyist. The judge and his advisers, including former Carter White House aide Lloyd Cutler, met for several hours in a final skull session at Judge Bork's Washington house the Sunday before the hearings began.    Senators boned up, too. Sens. Biden and Kennedy met separately with panels of experts, and they were almost never without thick briefing books from their staffs. Trouble in Sen. Biden's presidential campaign threatened to overshadow the hearings, but the senator's withdrawal from the race allowed the focus to remain on Mr. Bork.    With the stage finally set, Judge Bork testified for five days. While administration aides scurried behind the scenes to write helpful questions for Republican senators to ask, administration lawyers argued that Mr. Bork was handling legal issues well. But the political staff quickly sensed a problem. Administration officials say that Judge Bork's responses were clinical and without compassion.    Democratic senators, meanwhile, tried in their questions to translate legal issues into human terms -- with mixed results. Sen. Kennedy's questioning, for instance, was often harsh and shrill.    But the Democrats continued to maneuver. Instead of relying for testimony on civil-rights and other groups, which Republican senators were accusing of lies and distortions, they lined up panels of experts whose qualifications were hard to attack. And the organized opposition began bearing fruit in another way: It raised enough money to air television commercials against Judge Bork, including one with actor Gregory Peck that the White House considered particularly damaging.    Perhaps the surest sign that the end might be near came on Sept. 26, when Judge Bork, at the White House for a meeting with top officials, sharply criticized the administration effort and asked why President Reagan, Vice President George Bush and Mr. Baker couldn't do more to save the nomination.    Finally, at 6:30 p.m. Monday night, Sen. Biden, operating with the fair hand he demonstrated throughout the hearings, called Mr. Baker at the White House, told him that he was sure of a 9-5 defeat for Judge Bork and gave the chief of staff a chance to withdraw the nomination. Mr. Baker declined and said the fight would continue. </TEXT></DOC>