<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880219-0187 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: U.S. Protectionists May Choke Jamaica's Gains </HL><AUTHOR> Edward Seaga </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM SLE </CO><IN> MON TEX </IN><DATELINE> KINGSTON, Jamaica  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For all its recognition as a renowned resort area, the Caribbean long has found itself in the unenviable position of the young starlet who complains that movie producers value only her good looks, ignoring her brains. But with the introduction of the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) by the U.S. in 1984, the Caribbean came to be known not merely for its green mountains, blue skies and white sands, but as an area of special interest and special importance, both politically and economically.    Nowhere else in the world does such a conglomeration of parliamentary democracies exist as in the Caribbean. No other geographical sphere can attest to 29 practicing democracies -- not Africa, nor Asia, nor Latin America, not even Europe nor North America. Thus, democracy not only has survived but also has prospered in this area where it normally would be considered least likely to succeed.    Similarly, the ministates of the region, academically proclaimed as nonviable economic units, now have the potential to become the next &quot;fast-growth&quot; area of the world, because of the unique mix of a compatible market economy and parliamentary democracy, both strongly embedded in the character of the region.    And yet just when the prospects for development of the Caribbean as a production center in 807-type industries such as electronics, apparel and footwear seemed brightest, the region finds itself confronted by the specter of protectionism that could dash its hopes for a positive economic flow.    Under 807 of the Tariff Schedules of the U.S., yard goods that have been both manufactured and cut in the U.S. and that are sent abroad for sewing or assembly and return to the U.S. will be charged duty only on the value added by the cost of assembly. Companies such as Hanes Printables, Levi Strauss, Ocean Pacific and Jockey International are developing apparel products out of Jamaica and many others are following. Because of this interest, the number of Jamaicans employed in 807 industries has increased in Jamaica by 350% and foreign-exchange earnings in this area have risen by 970% in the past six years. Four years ago, we had four plants doing this kind of work with 2,000 or 3,000 people. Now there are more than 70 plants that employ 20,000 people.    Last November, for example, Hanes Printables signed contracts worth $24 million (U.S.) with three Jamaican companies for the manufacturing of apparel. The local companies -- the government-affiliated Jacon Industries, and Windmill and Apparel Handlers -- are all situated in Montego Bay. They have been manufacturing T-shirts and sportswear under the Hanes label. That Jamaica has been able to attract companies such as Hanes Printables, a subsidiary of Sara Lee Corp., is quite an achievement for what was until a couple of years ago a fledgling 807 apparel industry.    The microsize of our Caribbean countries, 20 of which can fit into the King Ranch in Texas, provides an internal minimarket insufficient to support industrial growth, even within the context of the Caribbean Common Market. The special need of the area has therefore been the generation of new economic activity that does not at the outset require the establishment of new marketing relations or linkages. For this reason, 807-type operations involving the assembly of semifinished goods and their return to ready-made markets in their country of origin have seemed the best immediate answer to this special regional problem.    A strong CBI is vital for the continued economic and political viability of the democracies in the Caribbean. As for the benefits to the U.S., we said, &quot;Remove the quotas, but make goods subject to the use of American textiles.&quot; That is precisely the way it turned out, garment-makers report. They had to lay off some workers at the machines, but they are picking up more workers in the finishing aspects.    Those who are promoting protectionism in the U.S. Congress -- and on the presidential campaign trail -- should consider two things with reference to the Caribbean. In the first place, the 807 type of economic relation is symbiotic; the advantages to be gained are far from one-sided. Caribbean countries reap the benefit of greater employment, but the country of origin reaps the benefit of enlarged sales arising from the greater competitiveness of the goods that are finished and returned with cheaper labor costs. Cheaper costs of the final product mean more sales of U.S. goods and greater competition. Enlarged U.S. sales inevitably mean greater U.S. employment, too, which offsets any conceivable loss of employment consequent on the production-sharing symbiosis of the Caribbean and U.S. enterprise.    Further, foreign-export earnings are used to import goods that are largely of U.S. origin, which therefore increases U.S. exports. And the Caribbean is one of the areas in which the U.S. enjoys a trade surplus.    The experiences of Jockey International's association with Jamaica under 807 are illustrative. President Edward Cooley has reported that his company's total U.S. employment has increased significantly since it started operating under 807. He thinks the program is good for Jamaica, the U.S. and Jockey International. The program has worked so well for him that he is building a new 130,000-square-foot knitting mill in North Carolina largely to supply fabric for operations in the Caribbean.    He told one of my aides: &quot;I'm proud of our 807 operation. We're not taking anybody's job away.&quot; He points out that whenever the company produces goods under 807, workers in a dozen U.S. states benefit: from farmers in California who grow the cotton to shippers in Wisconsin who load the goods. And Mr. Cooley sees 807 as a means of giving the U.S. a competitive edge. He said, &quot;Many of the products produced under 807 are enabling U.S. manufacturers to compete successfully with Far Eastern suppliers.&quot;    Any turning back of the positive economic gains generated under the CBI and the growing production-sharing arrangements would raise doubts among the region's electors as to the ability of the current moderate political and economic systems to provide for the region's well-being. Such a risk seems hardly worth it when one considers, for example, that 1986 apparel imports by the U.S. from the Caribbean under the 807 plan totaled an infinitesimal .04% of all garment imports into the U.S. If this were multiplied fivefold (with considerable benefits to the Caribbean), it still would be only a drop in the U.S. bucket of imports, a portion irrelevant to the problems associated with the protectionist sentiments in the U.S.    The past 25 years have been momentous for Jamaica and the Caribbean. We have gone from being a socialist backwater, noted more as the back yard of Fidel Castro's Cuba than for any entrepreneurial proclivities, to being the U.S.'s most stable political and economic ally in the region. For the future, the goals we have set for our people are achievable, provided the groundwork that has been laid is not reduced to rubble by short-sighted policy making at this critical stage.    ---   Mr. Seaga is the prime minister of Jamaica. </TEXT></DOC>