<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870410-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Are You Dreaming of the White House?---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 04/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   As you may have noticed, the ranks of presidential candidates have lately been thinning, especially among Democrats. The best known dropout is Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York, unless you count Ted Kennedy, the perennial might-have-been. Others who plan to rest, not run, include Sens. Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Sam Nunn of Georgia, and Chuck Robb, former governor of Virginia.    But not to worry. We're in no danger of holding an election with no entries to bet on. The Democrats still have Gary Hart, Richard Gephardt of Missouri, and Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, as well as the Rev. Jesse Jackson. The Republicans have Vice President George Bush, Rep. Jack Kemp and of course Alexander Haig.    So one way or another, come January 1989 somebody new will move into the White House, and good luck to him. He'll need it. In fact, I'm not puzzled by the outbreak of reluctant candidates. What I wonder about is why anybody wants to be president at all.    It's true that the president's house is comfortable enough if you don't mind sightseers tramping around it all day. The food is usually not bad and you get lots of people to do your bidding, as well as a splendid airplane to carry you about. There can be a certain pleasure, too, in hearing &quot;Hail to the Chief&quot; and having people stand up when you make an entrance. Altogether there's plenty of panoply that goes with the office, and you're sure of a mention in the history books.    All the same, recent occupants of that famous house haven't had what I would call a happy time. The last one to serve two terms and leave with the plaudits of his fellow citizens was Dwight Eisenhower, and his first inauguration was nearly 35 years ago. Those were the last tranquil years (mostly) for the presidency.    Perhaps John Kennedy would have ended his term in honored glory were it not for that day in Dallas. Yet he had already had his woes, being insulted by Khrushchev in Vienna and being burned by the Bay of Pigs debacle. Indeed, the reason he was in Dallas that fatal day was that he was in political trouble.    His immediate successors fared worse politically. Lyndon Johnson was crushed by Vietnam, practically driven from office and died a broken man. Richard Nixon was actually driven from office to escape impeachment.    Gerald Ford, our only never-elected president, wasn't driven from office. He was just rejected by the voters. So too, after one term, was Jimmy Carter, who followed him. Both were the nicest men you'd ever want to know, but both were harassed by the slings and arrows that wound the pride if not the flesh.    That brings us to Ronald Reagan. His first four years were certainly successful and he appears to have enjoyed the office, even reveling in it as no man has since possibly Franklin Roosevelt. He's by nature a blithe spirit and my impression is that for him the office was fun, more fun than he got out of any Hollywood role.    Up to now, that is. My guess is that the hullabaloo over Irangate (or whatever you call it) will pass, but it certainly hasn't been fun for either Mr. Reagan or his wife. Yet just two years ago -- remember? -- he was reelected by a landslide. Treacherous things, landslides. Lyndon Johnson had one and so did Richard Nixon, and look what happened to them. Even FDR had his woes after his 1936 landslide when he was humbled by his Supreme Court fight.    Some people have suggested that overwhelming victories pose the greatest danger, bringing on a touch of hubris in the victors that leads them to do things that get them wounded. And I guess it is a heady thing to be chosen by the populace as our most eminent citizen.    My own thought is somewhat different. It arises from the ambivalent feeling we have always shown toward our presidents. On the one hand, we revere the office and want to honor its holder. On the other hand, we also want to remind him he's just another citizen serving at our pleasure. So almost as soon as he's elected we want to see him &quot;cut down to size,&quot; reminding him of the fragility of his eminence. This makes him vulnerable to his political opponents.    As with so many things, this all began with George Washington. Honored by unanimous choice as our first president, he was no sooner installed than he began to be picked at and pummeled from all sides. So much so that at last he retired in disgust to Mount Vernon.    Even the now sainted Abraham Lincoln was often reviled while in office, sometimes painted by cartoonists and editorial writers as &quot;that baboon in the White House.&quot; Woodrow Wilson and the great FDR didn't escape their whippings either. As a matter of fact, I can't think of any president who did. A president's lot is simply not a happy one. Nor is that of his wife and children, or in some cases even his dog.    To all these woes of office modern times have added the ignominy of getting there. William McKinley was the last candidate to win it by sitting on his front porch ignoring the hustings. Today's would-be president must be about morning and night all over the country begging not only for votes but for money, the essential oil for any campaign today. And should he lose, he must still go a-begging to pay off his debts. The whole process must be demeaning to any prideful man.    Taken all and all, that's why I'm not surprised by the dropouts or by the worthies who never even consider offering themselves for the presidency. Just the thought of running reminds me a bit of the Mark Twain story about the fellow who was being tarred and feathered and run out of town on a rail.    As he was being led away by an enthusiastic crowd, he was heard to remark, &quot;If it warn't for the honor of the thing I'd just as leave do without it.&quot;    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>