<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870929-0028 </DOCNO><HL> Early White House Tie to GhorbanifarDescribed in Data Released by Congress---By David Rogers and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   House and Senate committees released previously secret testimony giving details of early White House contacts with Iranian middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar and the often tangled financial relationships among those behind the clandestine U.S. initiative to improve ties with Tehran.    Theodore Shackley, a retired Central Intelligence Agency officer who sought in early 1985 to promote Mr. Ghorbanifar as a potential intermediary to Iran, is identified as having had a prior business relationship with Michael Ledeen, a White House consultant at the time.    By late 1985, Mr. Ghorbanifar is described as having advanced as much as $300,000 to a senior Iranian official who hasn't been identified, and a special account was established by an Israeli middleman for the purpose of funneling money to people in the Tehran government.    Mr. Ledeen denied receiving any private funds for his part in the initiative. But the transcripts released yesterday raise new questions about an estimated $80,000 payment in 1986 to a New York businessman friend of the late Central Intelligence Agency director, William Casey.    Though he never testified publicly, Mr. Ledeen was interviewed at length by investigators regarding his role in the Iran-Contra affair. The transcripts released yesterday represent the most complete record yet of his depositions that began last spring. A figure of some controversy himself, he played a lead role in the early months of the Iran initiative and maintained extensive contacts with Mr. Ghorbanifar long after the consultant was forced out of the operation in late 1985.    From this vantage point, Mr. Ledeen's testimony offers insight into early U.S. dealings with Israel and Iran, and he stakes out a position critical of the direction taken by the administration and its failure, he says, to pursue contacts in Iran who opposed what became an arms-for-hostages strategy.    Initially suspicious of Mr. Ghorbanifar -- who he once worried might even be a Soviet agent -- Mr. Ledeen became the champion of the Iranian among the National Security Council staff and sought to advance various covert projects outside the Iran arms-sales operation.    These included a plan to sell dud explosives to terrorists planning an attack in a Mideast nation that investigative sources believe to be Saudi Arabia. Mr. Ledeen also told of a &quot;sting&quot; operation in which millions would be collected from Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi for the faked assassination of one of his opponents abroad.    Mr. Ledeen testified that even after he was ordered off the Iran initiative in November 1985, he met at least twice in Europe with Mr. Ghorbanifar the next month and actively sought to overcome CIA suspicions regarding the businessman. Mr. Ledeen testified that he was unaware then that the White House was moving toward direct U.S. weapons sales to Tehran, but the record shows that Mr. Ghorbanifar emerged as a lead figure in these shipments in February and May of 1986.    When the White House later in 1986 established a second channel for dealing with Iran, Mr. Ledeen was again Mr. Ghorbanifar's champion, and he acknowledged that he pursued the Libyan sting operation as a means to raise funds for the Iranian. &quot;It acquired greater urgency later when the $10 million problem emerged,&quot; Mr. Ledeen said, referring to Mr. Ghorbanifar's claim that the arms sales left him in debt by this amount in fall 1986.    Prior testimony by Attorney General Edwin Meese has established that Mr. Ledeen spoke generally of reviving the Ghorbanifar channel to Iran last November after the U.S. arms sales became public, but Mr. Ledeen has said this conversation was never intended to promote further weapons transactions that might profit Mr. Ghorbanifar.    CIA records indicate that such a course was being advocated by New York businessman Roy Furmark, who had gone to Mr. Casey in October 1986 to warn him of Mr. Ghorbanifar's financial problems and the risk of disclosure by angry investors in the arms sales. Mr. Ledeen acknowledged in his testimony that he also spoke with Messrs. Furmark and Casey regarding these concerns in the same period, and he suggested that Mr. Furmark was among those who stood to lose.    Mr. Furmark, whose office said yesterday that he is traveling abroad and therefore couldn't be reached for comment, has in the past denied profiting from the arms sales. But he had past dealings with Mr. Ghorbanifar and enjoyed a longstanding relationship with Mr. Casey through a mutual friend, the late John Shaheen.    Prior to his death in 1985, Mr. Shaheen was in frequent contact with Mr. Casey, according to sources familiar with the CIA director's phone logs, and questions asked in Mr. Ledeen's deposition indicate the late oilman may have played a larger role than has been so far disclosed in connection with the CIA and Mr. Ghorbanifar.    Mr. Ledeen said Mr. Ghorbanifar had contacts inside Iran who possessed intelligence information of great value to the U.S., but that the Reagan administration repeatedly failed to develop those contacts. Unlike many U.S. officials, who felt Mr. Ghorbanifar was a liar, Mr. Ledeen said he believed Mr. Ghorbanifar was a reliable source of data.    Specifically, Mr. Ledeen cited a case where the U.S. didn't &quot;follow up&quot; and meet with a &quot;senior Iranian official.&quot; This official, Mr. Ledeen said, opposed the sale of U.S.-made weapons to Iran because he thought they were strengthening his opponents, the more radical elements of the Iranian government.    According to Mr. Ledeen, Mr. Ghorbanifar put him in touch with the Iranian official in fall 1985. He said the official &quot;believed it possible to, in essence, change the nature of the Iranian regime through peaceful, parliamentary methods,&quot; leading to an end of Iranian-sponsored terrorism and improved relations with the U.S.    Mr. Ledeen said the official wanted to cooperate closely with the U.S., and asked only for small arms to protect himself and his allies from their opponents and for secure communications equipment to coordinate their actions with the U.S. The former NSC consultant said he briefed a senior U.S. official about the proposal, but never received an answer.    Mr. Ledeen also testified that Mr. Ghorbanifar told him that he had paid the Iranian official about $300,000. In an interview yesterday, Mr. Ledeen said he thought the payments weren't related to arms sales to Iran, but he said Mr. Ghorbanifar had hoped to recoup his money from future arms transactions.    In his deposition, Mr. Ledeen also said that, at his suggestion, Israeli arms dealer Al Schwimmer set up a bank account that could have been used to &quot;provide money for a cooperative project with people like this senior Iranian official and or others.&quot;    The account was set up in Geneva, Switzerland, but Mr. Ledeen said the account was never used. He said the idea was to have a &quot;contingency account&quot; to cover expenses such as communications gear, weapons, airplane tickets, and hotel bills for the Iranians. He acknowledged that the account could have been used to cover their expenses within Iran, but added: &quot;What was never discussed was anything like personal money to them or bribes to them.&quot;    He said Mr. Schwimmer or perhaps another Israeli arms dealer, Yaacov Nimrodi, suggested that funds for the account might be generated from the arms sales to Iran. </TEXT></DOC>