<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Missile Deal Strains German Coalition---By Rene Herrmann</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> MUNICH  </DATELINE><TEXT>   West Germany's coalition government is under pressure to make up its collective mind on the proposed Soviet-American arms deal, and the partnership is showing the strain. The results of the decision by Helmut Kohl's Christian Democratic Union; its sister party, the Christian Social Union; and the coalition's junior partner, the Free Democratic Party, will affect Bonn politics. They will also affect any deal between Washington and Moscow.    Differences over defense policy among the coalition's liberal wing, the conservative centrists and the harder-line Bavarian conservatives have long marked the coalition. But the debate on the &quot;double-zero&quot; solution is creating some of the worst tension since the coalition's birth in 1983.    The conservatives -- all of them -- let it be known early that they disliked the proposal. But Mr. Kohl has tried to keep the quarrel behind closed doors and to impose a minimalist consensus: The longer-range, first &quot;zero solution&quot; is acceptable, and everything else will be decided after &quot;due deliberation and consultation.&quot; To no avail. The Bavarian Christian Social Union has continued to demand an ironclad linkage between longer-range Intermediate Nuclear Forces disarmament with Soviet cuts in shorter-range missiles and conventional forces.    The foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher of the Free Democrats, insists there should be no dismissal of a Soviet offer that even contains elements of a unilateral Soviet disarmament. He says the Soviets' suggestion may herald a truly new beginning in Soviet policies toward the West.    Such disunity puts the conservatives, traditional supporters of Washington, in an ironically difficult situation. Mr. Genscher, who has been a proponent of detente and arms control since he became foreign minister in 1974, for a change seems to be better attuned to the needs and wishes of the Reagan administration than its West German conservative soul mates. The reasoning behind Mr. Genscher's stance is plausible: The West German government cannot even try to deny the U.S. an arms-control agreement that the Reagan administration clearly wants, and that may move East-West relations into calmer waters.    To Mr. Genscher, also, the Soviet offer seems to look good enough on its own merits to sacrifice some of the West German security concerns. Finally, the Free Democrats can't afford to be seen as a party that's foiling an arms-control agreement. Much of their voter appeal rests on their role as the guardian of detente within the West German government.    The conservatives' concerns are, nevertheless, well justified. They are driven by a triple worry. A treaty with the proposed features may be the beginning of a slide toward the complete denuclearization of NATO. Such a treaty might break the coupling of European defense to the U.S.'s defense. It might also leave West Germany isolated within NATO.    These concerns address the foundations of NATO's political stability and military credibility. NATO needs a nuclear deterrent because NATO's confidence in deterrence by conventional means is not sufficient. A conventional buildup would be expensive: With the demographic downturn in West Germany, there will not be enough manpower for expanding conventional forces. Nor will there be enough money for an armaments program.    But even if NATO could arm itself to the teeth, conventionally, this would only serve to make Europe -- and its prospective main battlefield, West Germany -- &quot;safe for conventional war.&quot; Nuclear deterrence has kept the peace in Europe -- conventional deterrence can't do the same, short of Soviet unilateral disarmament. Nuclear forces that would remain under the agreement are clearly insufficient to serve as NATO's nuclear deterrent.    As the West Germans see it, everything hinges on the U.S. nuclear commitment to Europe. Western Europe is just a small promontory of the Soviet-dominated Eurasian continent. In the view of the West German conservatives (but not only them), the treaty-sanctioned removal of so many links in the chain of deterrence cannot but weaken the credibility of the U.S. commitment. They view the loss in nuclear deterrence outweighing by far the gains in the nuclear-force balance. These gains can't make up for the strategic and political exposure into which West Germany is already moving. Land-based nuclear forces not to be covered by the prospective treaty mostly would be stationed in West Germany. The range of the remaining Soviet nuclear forces in Central and Eastern Europe would limit their use to West German targets: making West Germany &quot;safe for tactical nuclear war.&quot;    There is also a political problem involved in backing disarmament. West German governments have worked hard to rationalize the deployment of the Pershing 2 and ground-launched cruise missiles. The reasoning was that a counter had to be provided to the Soviet deployment of the SS-20s, SS-22s, SS-23s and other weapons. The West German government is seeing its own rationale used against it. The Soviets have exposed a substantial West German hypocrisy. So has the U.S. government.    As things stand now, Mr. Genscher and his Free Democrats clearly prefer the idea of negotiating an agreement on the basis of the Soviet proposals. They also hope to create sufficient momentum for conventional-arms reductions and for breaking the strategic-arms negotiations deadlock. The Christian Democrats would prefer the option of forgoing the second &quot;zero solution&quot; (for missiles in the 300 mile to 600 mile category) and perhaps building up to a low common nuclear ceiling for Soviet and Western missiles. But they also know that these missiles would have to be installed in West Germany against still-larger public protests than accompanied the deployment of the Pershing 2s.    In the end, the West German government will have to come out for the double-zero solution, for domestic reasons as well as for reasons of German-American relations. Nevertheless, this decision will likely come with some conditions. Conservatives might seek a Soviet commitment to negotiate further unilateral constraints upon Soviet deployment of nuclear forces in Central and Eastern Europe. They might ask for Soviet acceptance of a declaration of principles to guide conventional reduction.    Within NATO, the West German defense minister might also press for the inclusion of strategic bombers armed with air-launched cruise missiles in NATO's forces and perhaps also the conversion of nuclear submarines to cruise-missile carriers and their exclusive assignment to NATO. From the coalition's viewpoint, the latter option would have the advantage of getting the U.S. again under the SALT II ceiling it broke out of at the end of last year.    Whatever the precise shape and form of the compensation, it is quite certain that it will less affect the prospective treaty itself than NATO's nuclear forces. And these efforts will clash head-on with the U.S.'s more-pronounced efforts to improve NATO's nonnuclear forces. Mikhail Gorbachev's concessions will haunt NATO and German-American relations for years.    ---   Mr. Herrmann, a fellow at the West German research foundation, the Max Planck Gesellschaft, publishes frequently on defense. </TEXT></DOC>