<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Hospitals Enlist Profit-Minded PartnersFor Ventures to Generate New Business---By Udayan GuptaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DMN CMRKPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Nonprofit hospitals, looking to attract patients, are linking up with for-profit partners.    Increasing numbers of the hospitals -- through joint ventures with profit-minded corporations and doctors -- are offering home health care, rehabilitation therapy and other new services.    The strategy puts large sums of hospital capital at risk. In Birmingham, Ala., for example, it cost Baptist Medical Center $2.8 million to become a partner in Highland Diagnostic Center, whose basic business -- radiology -- is highly competitive.    The hospitals are betting such ventures are worth the risk because they promise to attract new patients, result in more-efficient use of facilities and spiff up hospitals' images as innovators. At the same time, patients gain access to a broader variety of services -- sometimes at a savings.    For example, a basic CAT scan, a type of X-ray of the brain or other body part, costs $425 and takes about 45 minutes at Highland Diagnostic; at Baptist Medical Center the procedure costs $575 and can require half a day. &quot;Patients will now receive care with less red tape and bureaucracy, during more-convenient hours and in a more-comfortable setting,&quot; says Kenneth Kaufman, a Northfield, Ill., consultant to the hospital industry.    But the ventures draw criticism, too, particularly from those who fear that doctors with a financial stake in such projects may develop a conflict of interest.    Joint ventures began to catch on among many of the nation's more than 3,300 nonprofit hospitals about four years ago, when changes in federal reimbursement rules began forcing them to cut costs and seek new revenue sources. A 1985 survey of 700 nonprofit hospitals by the accounting firm Ernst andamp; Whinney found that one in three were involved in for-profit joint ventures and most others were considering them.    &quot;Even those not-for-profits that are relatively healthy are considering joint ventures to help establish a competitive identity and a constant flow of patients,&quot; says Sam Davis, a White Plains, N.Y., hospital consultant.    Although some hospitals have tried setting up for-profit ventures on their own, others prefer the joint-venture approach because of their partners' experience and marketing expertise. To get more use out of its $1.8 million testing laboratory, MacNeal Hospital near Chicago took a partner, Damon Corp., a diversified biotechnology company in Needham Heights, Mass. Damon, which benefits from access to MacNeal's well-equipped lab as well as from added credibility for its Chicago-area marketing because of its association with a major hospital there, splits its profits from commercial medical testing with MacNeal.    For hospitals such as MacNeal -- whose average occupancy rate is only 52%, compared with the national average of 67% -- joint ventures are a survival strategy. Since 1982, MacNeal -- trying to decrease its dependence on Medicare, which provides more than half of its revenue -- has become involved in six ventures, including four with physicians.    In two years, the venture with Damon has saved MacNeal an estimated $750,000 in purchasing costs, because of economies of scale at its testing lab. On top of that, the venture has generated more than $600,000 in earnings for the hospital. The venture conducts blood and urine tests as well as cell and tissue studies.    In Boston, New England Medical Center is teamed up with Caremark Inc. of Newport Beach, Calif., in a venture to provide home health care. The hospital also plans a joint venture to operate a 224-bed nursing home, including an Alzheimer's-disease center. Its proposed partners are Lawrence (Mass.) Memorial Hospital and ADS Inc., a nursing-home owner in Lowell, Mass.    With occupancy at almost 95%, New England Medical isn't hurting for money; it thinks its joint ventures will reinforce its reputation as an innovative provider of health care. By working with Caremark, an experienced provider of home health care, New England Medical is able to benefit from the company's ability to deliver quality care at low cost. &quot;Our job is to make sure that our patients can now be better served at home,&quot; says Dr. Jerome Grossman, the president of the hospital.    Even though Baptist Medical in Birmingham operates two in-house diagnostic units, its joint venture -- because it is physically situated in a different neighborhood, seven miles away -- draws from a different pool of patients.    Many hospitals' venture partners are physicians. One reason is that the hospitals are discovering that their own doctors can become competitors -- and they'd rather join them than fight, says Mr. Kaufman, the consultant. For example, he says one Northern California hospital initially refused to participate in a venture with some of its own surgeons and anesthesiologists -- who then treated patients in their own clinic instead of at the hospital. After losing almost half its surgery admissions to the new practice, the hospital was forced to become a partner.    Some ventures raise conflict-of-interest questions. Dr. Arnold Relman, the editor of the New England Journal of Medicine, says the fear is that doctors with a direct financial stake in a hospital venture will refer their patients to it whether or not it is best for the patients. Studies so far confirm only that doctors with a financial stake in a facility tend to use it more than they otherwise would, Dr. Relman says.    Those with a stake in joint ventures tend to dismiss the criticism. In Highland Diagnostic's case, its president, Dr. Neil Templeton, says the center more often refers patients to the nonprofit hospital than the other way around, indicating that doctors will steer patients to source of the most appropriate care.    Nevertheless, the American Medical Association is working on new rules of professional conduct aimed at eliminating conflicts of interest due to joint ventures. For example, one rule under consideration would prevent a doctor from referring patients to a medical facility paying profits to the doctor.    State licensing laws impede hospitals from directly investing in new businesses. But the hospitals -- including those with a nonprofit status owing to their traditional sense of social mission -- can easily set up separate holding companies that make such investments. Some hospitals and their partners are also creating capital pools for investment in still-unspecified projects.    Despite their promise, many of the initial joint ventures haven't achieved their founders' goals. Often, says Mr. Davis, the consultant, venture partners fail to assess markets carefully -- overestimating demand for health services and underestimating competition. He cites one New York hospital that flopped in a diagnostic-imaging venture largely because demand wasn't strong enough. The hospital left the field after losing an undisclosed sum.    Joint ventures don't create instant profits, warns Gordon Clemons, president of Caremark, which has 14 projects with nonprofit hospitals. &quot;Profits will always lag.&quot;    Such experience may slow the growth of joint ventures. &quot;There's no clear indication of where joint ventures are headed,&quot; says Susan Nathanson, a program manager for the American Hospital Association, a major trade group. She says uncertainty resulting from the new tax act -- which eliminates some tax breaks for investors -- and the mixed record of the early ventures by hospitals suggest that &quot;joint ventures may not be right for many hospitals.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>