<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0056 </DOCNO><HL> REAL ESTATE:Real-Estate Groups Start BidFor Greater Political Influence---By William Celis IIIStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   AS POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS MARCH into 1988, real-estate trade and lobbying groups are assembling fatter campaign coffers and pushing to elect more industry representatives as delegates to the political conventions. The burgeoning interest comes after a series of setbacks since the 1984 elections that showed the industry it &quot;needs to pay more attention to the bottom line,&quot; says Robert D. Bannister, senior vice president of the National Association of Home Builders.    Some of the increased activity can be attributed to the presidential election, but trade group executives say it also is spurred by growing frustration over the lack of a national housing policy, the retrenchment in housing programs for the poor, and setbacks suffered by the industry in the 1986 tax code. Under the code, Congress stripped real-estate syndications of favorable tax treatment and killed the tax-exempt industrial development revenue bond program that gave developers low-interest money to build.    &quot;The 1986 tax bill got everybody's attention. It's caused a lot of (industry executives) to refocus on public policy issues,&quot; says Wayne Thevenot, executive director of the National Realty Committee, a lobby representing 275 real-estate concerns and individual developers. By increasing their political activities and contributions, trade groups hope to open more doors in Washington when legislation harmful to industry interests is proposed.    THUS INDUSTRY GROUPS are aggressively working their memberships for more money. The National Association of Realtors, for example, estimates that its contributions to presidential and congressional candidates next year will total about $5 million, compared with the roughly $1 million raised in 1984. The group's growing political involvement was evident at a recent fund-raising seminar. About 175 people attended the event, the most ever for the annual gathering; 75 people attended a similar 1984 meeting. In addition, the home builders estimate that they will dole out more than $2 million to the current campaigns, up from $1.9 million four years ago.    Some of these groups, meanwhile, also are moving well beyond simply contributing. The home builders, for example, are attempting to increase the number of its members who served as delegates to the 1984 presidential conventions to about 150 delegates from the roughly 80 elected four years ago.    Not everyone is rushing to increase campaign contributions or activities. Los Angeles-based Ticor, for one, says its employees' political action committee doesn't plan to give congressional candidates any more in 1988 than the $20,000 to $25,000 total it contributed to the 1984 campaigns. One reason: The company doesn't believe contributions help much in gaining accessibility to candidates. Once a candidate is elected, explains E. Peter Miller, a Ticor senior vice president, they often don't recall who contributed to their campaigns.    ---   SOUTHLAND CORP. IS LEARNING that being a big-time developer is more difficult than selling its Slurpee soft drinks.    As part of the company's previously reported leveraged buyout, Southland -- the Dallas owner of 7-Eleven stores -- sold off some of its operations and no longer needs all the space in its 42-floor Cityplace office tower that's still under construction.    But the company says that the extra space will be leased out at a rate that is below what it had been counting on when it first launched the project. Indeed, commercial leasing agents say that because of the overbuilt Dallas office market, Southland can expect rental rates of $12 to $15 a square foot, a far cry from $18 to $24 a square foot three years ago.    Southland also has scuttled plans to build a second tower, which would have been connected to the first tower by a walkway spanning a freeway. The second building won't be built, the company says, until the office market improves, a prospect that under the rosiest projections is expected to take at least two more years.    Perhaps the company's biggest hurdle is a rezoning request Southland has made to the city. Southland wants Dallas to rezone 135 acres of the 160-acre Cityplace project, to allow the company to build residential, retail and commercial space close together. Scheduled for a Feb. 11 zoning hearing, the request has generated more complaints than usual, says a city zoning official. In particular, neighborhood groups grumble that the proposal would create traffic congestion.    ---   WHAT IS THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S responsibility with regard to housing? Builder magazine and the National Association of Home Builders recently asked presidential aspirants that question. A majority of candidates identified two roles: Addressing the lack of affordable housing and improving housing programs for the poor.    Ten candidates submitted housing policy statements to the magazine -- former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt, a Democrat, and Pat Robertson, a Republican, didn't respond -- and housing programs for the elderly was the third issue most often mentioned. Other issues mentioned: preserving the mortgage-interest tax deduction for homeowners, allowing public-housing tenants more control over their units and pursuing full enforcement of fair-housing laws. </TEXT></DOC>