<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870421-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Foreign Insight:Suharto Won't Let Indonesian PoliticsGrow Up, Despite 21 Years of Stability---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> JAKARTA, Indonesia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Other Asian nations have excuses for the political immaturity that clouds their economic progress in the minds of country-risk analysts and potential long-term investors. Indonesia has only ghosts.    South Korea has North Korea. Taiwan has the Chinese mainland. The Philippines hs insurgencies, communist and Moslem. Malaysia has Chinese-Malay racial tensions. Hong Kong faces Peking's rule after 1997. Singapore can't get over being the little kid on the block.    Yet, though progress has been spotty, these places are addressing the need for political development, mechanisms for the orderly succession of power, informed public debate and criticism, political checks and balances, a livelier press and rule by laws not legions. Some haven't gotten very far. Others open the door a crack, then snap it shut.    What makes Indonesia unique is that it has enjoyed 21 years of stability in which to experiment with both political and economic development, the twin pillars of insurance against turmoil. Progress on the latter has sometimes been admirable. Progress on the former has been minuscule.    The reason is that President Suharto's government believes too much political heat, not too much control, triggers explosions like the attempted communist coup in 1965 and subsequent bloodbath that cost hundreds of thousands of lives. The military, under Mr. Suharto, suppressed the revolt and seized power the following year. The specter of those events haunts his regime to this day.    Thus, Indonesia's political system remains dangerously adolescent. Gen. Suharto and his coterie of military officers and civilian cronies run a government that brooks little criticism, smothers debate and treats would-be opponents as subversives. They refuse to let Indonesian politics grow up.    In the 25-day campaign leading up to parlimentary elections on Thursday, criticism of Indonesia's leaders has been banned. The Suharto government chose the parties allowed to participate, screened their candidates, approved their banners and campaign literature and supervised their rallies.    Golkar, the government organization in the running, claims to be non-political. It is an eight-million-member coalition of groups ranging from girl scouts to civil servants.    The other two contesting parties, the Moslem-based United Development Party and the Indonesian Democratic Party, made up of remnants of former President Sukarno's party and several small Christian groups, don't call themselves the opposition because the government says the word connotes Western, liberal ideas. They are referred to as Golkar's &quot;partners.&quot;    Both announced before the campaign they supported another five-year term for President Suharto, who is 65 years old and reportedly healthy. He earlier changed his mind about stepping down, supposedly because the people still want him.    Whether they really do is an open question; affection for him seems genuine enough in some quarters, but the absence of reliable opinion polls and the ubiquitousness of government propaganda make an accurate judgment impossible.    In the Thursday vote, 94 million voters will choose 400 members of the House of People's Representatives. Actually, the voters choose the parties and the parties choose representatives from government-screened lists. Another 100 seats are reserved for the military and appointed by the government. The House has never initiated legislation. It usually approves government programs without debate.    Next March, the 500-seat house plus another 500 government appointees will come together to form the People's Consultative Assembly to pick the next president. Thus, even if Golkar lost 400 elected seats, the government would still have nearly a two-thirds majority in the assembly.    But Golkar doesn't plan to lose. In the last election, in 1982, it got 64% of the vote, the United Development Party got 28% and the Indonesian Democratic Party got 8%. This time, Golkar is aiming for 70% -- not a very difficult goal, since election rules forbid the parties from campaigning at the village level, where most of the nation's 165 million people live.    The bogeyman, which the government and military use to justify such close supervision of the public, is extremism from left and right, namely communism and Islamic fundamentalism. Advocating either dogma is outlawed.    The government further ensures domestic placidity by running the nation's single television station, with some of the dullest programming in Asia, and periodically shutting down local newspapers.    Still, election time allows more freedom of expression than usual, and serves a national temperature-taking function. Very carefully, candidates have demanded more political rights and an end of business monopolies. And government candidates have promised reforms.    Yet precious little public frustration gets vented in a 25-day campaign that is so tightly controlled, even though the government has labeled it a &quot;festival of democracy.&quot; Like the volcanoes that form the spine of this sprawling, 13,667-island archipelago, unvented pressures can build up.    One hint of the public's mood came on Friday, the last official campaign day, when an estimated one million people showed up at an opposition rally in Jakarta. It was perhaps the biggest political gathering in 20 years.    Mr. Suharto can rightly boast that his party has assured social stability. In the more than two decades since he came to power, Indonesia has suffered less political violence than South Korea does in a single student revolt or India does in a single election campaign. And the government likes it that way.    As a further inducement for calm, it has imposed a five-day &quot;cooling-off period&quot; before Thurday's balloting. Campaign activities are banned, newspapers are prohibited from publishing political stories, banners and posters have come down, and the armed forces have been placed on alert. If equatorial Indonesia cools down any more, it will have a permafrost problem. </TEXT></DOC>