<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880317-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. INDICTED Poindexter, North and two others in the Iran-Contra affair.    A federal grand jury in Washington, which has been investigating the scandal for 14 months, charged the former national security adviser and the Marine officer with conspiracy, fraud and theft. Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord and his business partner, Albert Hakim, also were indicted on the charges, the most sweeping allegations of high-level government corruption since Watergate. The grand jury accused the four of &quot;deceitfully exploiting for their own purposes&quot; the White House's covert sale of arms to Iran.    The 23-count indictment charged that Poindexter and North directed and concealed the use of U.S. funds for unauthorized purposes, including the diversion of proceeds to Nicaragua's rebels.    ---   REAGAN ORDERED U.S. troops to Honduras in a &quot;training exercise.&quot;    The White House said four military battalions would be sent today to southern Honduras on an &quot;emergency deployment&quot; exercise as a &quot;measured response&quot; to a reported incursion by Nicaraguan forces into that country. U.S. officials said Sandinista soldiers had invaded Honduras in an offensive against Contra rebels based inside the Honduran border. The 3,200 U.S. troops aren't to engage in combat.    Managua said its forces had pushed the Contras into Honduran territory, but denied that Nicaraguan soldiers were fighting inside the neighboring country.    ---   NORIEGA THWARTED a coup attempt as renewed street protests erupted.    A band of Panamanian soldiers tried to oust the military chief, but troops loyal to Noriega prevailed. He emerged from army headquarters in Panama City after the sounds of battle were heard, calling the gunshots &quot;kisses.&quot; Following the attempt, thousands of people took to the streets to protest Noriega's rule. It was viewed as the largest outpouring of discontent since demonstrations last summer.    Noriega's opponents warned that the failure of the coup -- by mainly mid-level officers -- apparently would temporarily strengthen his grip on power.    ---   Reagan conferred with Shamir about a U.S. initiative for Mideast peace. The Israeli prime minister, who expressed &quot;strong reservations&quot; about elements of the plan, said he expected the Israeli cabinet to vote on the proposal next week. The coalition is divided over the initiative, and a vote still might fail to produce a clear position.    Israeli troops killed four Palestinians in the West Bank. Violence raged throughout the occupied areas despite measures imposed by Israel to contain the unrest, including a severing of international phone lines, a fuel ban and nightly curfews. A Palestinian-American was arrested in Jerusalem for organizing an illegal protest.    ---   An assailant in Belfast fired pistols and hurled hand grenades at a graveside service for three slain Irish Republican Army guerrillas, killing at least three people and wounding dozens. He was arrested. Organizers of the funeral for the guerrillas, who were killed by British troops in Gibraltar, blamed Protestant paramilitary forces.    ---   Reagan vetoed the Civil Rights Restoration Act, saying it would &quot;unjustifiably extend the power of the federal government&quot; over the &quot;affairs of private organizations.&quot; The bill requires entire schools, government agencies and private entities to meet antibias standards once any program or activity within them receives federal funds.    ---   South Africa's Botha rejected international appeals to halt tomorrow's scheduled hangings of the &quot;Sharpeville Six,&quot; a group of blacks -- five men and one woman -- convicted of a 1984 mob killing of a black township official. Botha's refusal to intervene in the case came as lawyers for the six urged the high court for a stay of execution.    ---   Gorbachev proposed that the U.S. and Soviet Union freeze the size of their naval forces in the Mediterranean as a step toward reducing tensions in the region. He recommended that the action begin July 1. In a wide-ranging speech to the Yugoslav Parliament, Gorbachev also said he was determined to resolve Soviet ethnic unrest.    ---   Kim Dae Jung resigned as leader of South Korea's Party for Peace and Democracy. In a statement, Kim said the move was an attempt to unite the country's divided opposition and ensure a victory in next month's parliamentary elections.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci met in Bern with Moscow's Defense Minister Yazov for talks on implementation of a U.S.-Soviet treaty to eliminate intermediate-range missiles and on the size of East-West military forces. A U.S. official described the discussions, which are to continue today, as &quot;positive, cooperative and candid.&quot;    ---   Dole held talks with aides and Senate supporters in an effort to reassess his campaign following Bush's victory in Tuesday's GOP primary in Illinois. The Kansas senator insisted he would remain in the race until Wisconsin's primary April 5. On the Democratic side, Simon defeated both Jackson and Dukakis in the Illinois contest.    ---   The U.N. Security Council demanded a halt to attacks on civilian targets by Iran and Iraq, and backed a move by Perez de Cuellar for peace talks with envoys of the two nations. In the gulf, Iran said its troops drove deeper into northeastern Iraq as both sides blasted each other's capitals with missiles and conducted air raids on cities.    ---   Italian President Cossiga asked Christian Democrat leader Ciriaco De Mita to try to form Italy's 48th government since World War II. De Mita reportedly accepted the mandate. Cossiga's move followed the resignation last week of Prime Minister Goria. </TEXT></DOC>