<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Nightmare:Multiple AllegationsOf Impropriety BesetSullivan andamp; Cromwell---Conduct of Elite Law FirmIs Assailed in Four Cases,And It's Thrown Off One---It Denies Any Wrongdoing---By Patricia Bellew GrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The case wasn't a typical one for Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, the elite corporate law firm. It involved a family feud, and, in an unusual move for a firm of Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's stature, the lawyers agreed to an arrangement in which the fee would be paid out of the damages won for the client. The firm's point man on the case was a young lawyer named Gary Beeney, and the assignment became a final test of his mettle as he was being considered for partner.    Today, Mr. Beeney stands accused by a New York state appellate court of having obtained secret files from another law firm by &quot;stealth&quot; and &quot;deceit&quot; in &quot;a thoroughly unprincipled effort to obtain a litigation advantage by whatever means seemed useful.&quot; And, in an extraordinary move, the court has thrown Sullivan andamp; Cromwell off the case.    One of the most powerful law firms in America, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell is an aristocrat of the legal world with a proud history. But today, its towering reputation is in danger. Besides the case involving Mr. Beeney, the firm faces allegations of improper or unethical conduct in three others:    --A court-supervised disciplinary panel is investigating accusations that a Sullivan andamp; Cromwell partner bribed and bullied witnesses in the bitter court battle last year over the estate of J. Seward Johnson, the pharmaceuticals heir.    --An investor group has accused Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, along with a corporate client, of improperly withholding vital information while fighting the investors' suit against the client.    --And the Securities and Exchange Commission has accused Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's senior takeover lawyer of violating SEC disclosure rules while defending a company against a hostile bid.    Sullivan andamp; Cromwell denies any wrongdoing in any of the cases -- though it acknowledges an &quot;error&quot; in the case of Mr. Beeney -- and it vows to fight all the charges. It says committees of senior partners have looked into all the allegations and found no merit in any of them.    The complaints show Sullivan andamp; Cromwell fights tough, says John Merow, its chairman, and &quot;clients like a law firm that's aggressive.&quot; He also plays down the problem by observing that allegations of improper law-firm conduct are made with growing frequency these days.    Legal experts agree, but they also note that the firms accused don't necessarily escape unscathed. Rogers andamp; Wells, sued over its role in advising J. David Dominelli, who now is in prison for fraud, last year settled the charges for $40 million. And Donovan Leisure Newton andamp; Irvine has lost several clients and partners since it was hit by a scandal some years ago. A partner had admitted lying under oath about destruction of evidence.    Even if misconduct allegations are more common now, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's situation is exceptional, and it is known to have upset some of the firm's clients. &quot;It is startling -- unprecedented, really -- that charges of misconduct have been made in four separate cases against a firm that is considered the bluest of the blue chips,&quot; says Stephen Gillers, a law professor at New York University. &quot;If these things are true, it will be the biggest scandal ever to hit a law firm.&quot;    Sullivan andamp; Cromwell has a rich tradition. Since its founding in 1879, lawyers at the firm have helped organize U.S. Steel in the late 1880s, helped plan the construction of the Panama Canal and helped negotiate an end to the Korean War. Among notables who have been partners was John Foster Dulles. Today its clients include such corporate leaders as Exxon, First Boston Corp. and Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co.    Last year Sullivan andamp; Cromwell had revenue of $115 million, 12th among U.S. law firms, and earned $665,000 of profit per partner, according to the American Lawyer magazine. (The firm disputes the numbers but won't provide others.) Its associates are paid a minimum of $65,000 a year to start.    Though it has grown rapidly to more than 300 lawyers, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell remains a conservative firm with traditional ways. It shunned the press until recently, and it eschews hourly billing in favor of simply setting a fee it considers &quot;appropriate.&quot; It named its first woman partner in 1981 (there now are four); it has no black partners.    But there is nothing sedate about the firm's courtroom tactics. It is known as an aggressive, tenacious litigator. Richard D. Parsons, a partner at Patterson, Belknap, Webb andamp; Tyler, likens the experience of opposing Sullivan andamp; Cromwell to &quot;having a thousand-pound tuna on the line.&quot;    Many other lawyers claim to see in Sullivan andamp; Cromwell an attitude of superiority, and some suggest that this has something to do with its current troubles. &quot;They're very, very good, but they are arrogant,&quot; says the managing partner of another big New York law firm, in a typical comment. He adds, &quot;They know the rules, but sometimes they act as if the rules just don't apply to them.&quot;    Nonsense, replies Marvin Schwartz, a senior Sullivan andamp; Cromwell partner; he says jealous rivals accuse Sullivan of arrogance because it is one of the few top firms that get their pick of new law-school graduates, while &quot;everyone else gets the leftovers.&quot;    Of the trials besetting Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, the most recent stems from the New York Surrogate's Court case of Wynyard vs. Beiny. Martin Wynyard, a Syracuse, N.Y., surgeon, retained the firm three years ago to sue his sister, Rotraut Beiny of London, the co-beneficiary with him of a trust set up by their mother. Its main asset was Antiques Co. of New York, a dealer in porcelains. Dr. Wynyard accused his sister of looting that asset by moving art objects to trusts she and her family controlled.    Sullivan andamp; Cromwell assigned the case to Mr. Beeney, then 30. He was juggling several other cases at the time, and his work on all of them would come under scrutiny as the firm considered him for partner. The fact that his firm's fee was to be paid out of the client's damages added to the pressure on him.    Trying to gather evidence, Mr. Beeney hit a brick wall. Documents specifying which assets the client's mother meant to put in the trust were tantalizingly out of reach, locked in a warehouse. They belonged to a law firm, now defunct, that had represented Dr. Wynyard's parents.    Mr. Beeney phoned the firm's liquidator, John Wiener, to ask for the files and was refused, according to an affidavit from the liquidator filed in court. Mr. Wiener told the lawyer he couldn't release the files without permission from the executor of the father's estate, according to the liquidator's affidavit.    Mr. Beeney then subpoenaed the liquidator, demanding the files. In a letter to Mr. Wiener, he said he was serving the subpoena on behalf of Dr. Wynyard, whom he identified as the executor of his father's estate. Mr. Wiener said in his affidavit that Mr. Beeney also assured him the files would be made available to lawyers for the other side.    But Dr. Wynyard wasn't the executor of his father's estate. And Mr. Beeney, after getting the documents, didn't supply them to the other side, until ordered to do so months later by the Surrogate's Court. In fact, the appellate court said, Mr. Beeney tried to use the files as a bargaining chip to get Mrs. Beiny to open the books on her other trusts. (Sullivan andamp; Cromwell says Mr. Beeney erred in failing to send a copy of the subpoena to the other side.)    The Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court assailed Mr. Beeney's action as &quot;grossly improper&quot; and a &quot;blatant abuse&quot; of the rules of litigation. It ordered the documents suppressed and disqualified Sullivan andamp; Cromwell from the case.    The decision was a blow to Dr. Wynyard. To continue to press his case, he must retain new lawyers, risking hundreds of thousands of dollars unless another firm agrees to be paid only out of damages won. Lawyers for the new firm would have to duplicate two years of pretrial &quot;discovery&quot; proceedings, at a cost that might run as high as $300 an hour, the rate for senior partners' time at some major New York firms.    Meanwhile, Antiques Co. of New York has been padlocked since the court appointed a receiver to take it over in March. &quot;This whole thing has been a disaster,&quot; says Michele Beiny Harkins, Mrs. Beiny's daughter and a manager of the company. &quot;The electricity has been cut off. The phone isn't being answered. We are in the middle of the hottest art market in years and we are kept out of it. Our good name is being ruined. I don't know that the company will ever recover.&quot;    Mrs. Beiny says her family intends to sue Sullivan andamp; Cromwell. And the firm could find itself picking up the tab for new lawyers for Dr. Wynyard, say some legal experts, who add that he might have a case against it for damage to his case.    Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, having been dismissed from the case, can't collect for its time. Earlier this year it estimated it had invested $2 million in labor on it. In what many lawyers saw as a last-ditch effort to clean up the mess, the firm four weeks ago asked the appellate court whether it could remain on the case long enough to negotiate a settlement between the parties. The answer was no, and Sullivan andamp; Cromwell is seeking the Appellate Division's permission to appeal to the state's highest court.    The firm has had some support in its reinstatement bid. In a move that raised eyebrows, Surrogate Judge Marie Lambert, who presided at the case before it reached the Appellate Division, tried to intercede on Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's behalf.    After the appellate court had denied Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's petition to stay on long enough to settle, Judge Lambert says she &quot;informally approached&quot; Francis T. Murphy, the presiding justice of the Appellate Division, to press him to reconsider his decision.    One of the &quot;punishments&quot; imposed on Sullivan andamp; Cromwell was the loss of its fee, she explains, &quot;so I thought, what if they gave up their fee? This is what I proposed to Judge Murphy, and he indicated he didn't think it would be possible. He indicated he wasn't interested in having them back on any basis.&quot; Through a spokesman, Justice Murphy declined to comment.    Judge Lambert also expressed her regret about the barring of Sullivan andamp; Cromwell to Judge Betty Weinberg Ellerin, who is a member of the Appellate Division but wasn't on the panel handling the Beiny case. Asked about this, Judge Lambert at first denied that any such conversation took place. When pressed, she said she recalled the telephone talk. But she added, &quot;If I did say anything, it was so casual that I have no recollection of it.&quot; Judge Ellerin, through a spokesman, declined comment. Sullivan andamp; Cromwell says it had nothing to do with any such efforts.    As for Mr. Beeney, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell says the lawyer (who didn't return telephone calls seeking comment) will be made a partner this fall.    Still, a court-supervised disciplinary panel is expected to begin an investigation of his conduct shortly. And inside Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, the matter is taking a toll. One associate complains that &quot;spooked&quot; partners are spending hours in meetings each week discussing the case.    Tempers have been frayed, too. Several months ago, Donald Christ, a senior partner at Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, erupted angrily at his opponent, a lawyer for Mrs. Beiny, during a meeting on the case in Surrogate's Court. As soon as the judge's clerk had left the room, Mr. Christ charged around the long counsel's table at David Dobbins of Patterson Belknap. According to witnesses, Mr. Christ grabbed him by the shoulders and shouted at him, and other lawyers moved to pull the two apart.    Efforts were unavailing to reach Mr. Christ, who oversaw Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's handling both of the antiques-company case and of the one involving the J. Seward Johnson estate.    The Johnson case is the second of the law firm's big headaches. In connection with it, the same disciplinary panel that is expected to investigate Mr. Beeney's conduct is looking into that of Robert M. Osgood, a Sullivan andamp; Cromwell partner. Mr. Osgood, a former Methodist minister, represented the widow of Mr. Johnson, the pharmaceuticals heir, in a bruising fight with his children over his $500 million estate.    The children had accused the widow of coercing their aging and cancer-ridden father to change his will and leave everything to her. She contended their father had cut his children off because he disapproved of their profligate life styles. Last year, a settlement that gave part of the estate to the children concluded the matter for everyone but Sullivan andamp; Cromwell.    In a lengthy memo filed during trial with the New York Surrogate's Court, the opposing law firm, Milbank, Tweed, Hadley andamp; McCloy, accused Mr. Osgood of bribing or threatening seven witnesses. They were nurses and others who had worked for Mr. Johnson at his estate in Florida and might have had knowledge of his state of mind. Milbank Tweed -- itself a prestigious New York law firm -- alleged that Sullivan andamp; Cromwell had &quot;embarked on a scheme to corrupt or silence those witnesses whose testimony would be most pertinent.&quot;    In an affidavit attached to the memo, a Johnson nurse complained that Mr. Osgood had tried to get her to sign an affidavit that was &quot;seriously inaccurate.&quot; Another nurse said that Mr. Osgood had offered to help get her a job with Johnson andamp; Johnson. A third nurse, Sheril Bennett, said in her affidavit that Mr. Osgood was &quot;harassing&quot; her and &quot;made it very clear he would make it unpleasant for me to testify.&quot;    Milbank Tweed documented $20,000 in payments by Sullivan andamp; Cromwell to one of the witnesses, the Johnson estate's caretaker. Sandamp;C explains that it hired him at $50 an hour as a &quot;litigation assistant&quot; to help it prepare for trial.    Mr. Osgood didn't return a reporter's telephone calls seeking comment. Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's Mr. Merow brushes off the matter as a &quot;vendetta&quot; against the firm by a Milbank Tweed partner and says he doesn't believe the disciplinary panel will start proceedings against Mr. Osgood.    Sullivan andamp; Cromwell denies that any of its actions were improper. In a hearing on the allegations during the trial, the firm's Mr. Schwartz said: &quot;No single piece of evidence amounts to a witness saying, 'Mr. Osgood offered me money to testify; he told me that if I came into the jurisdiction I would have my legs broken or my nose broken.' {There is} nothing in the nature of unequivocal misconduct. All we have is people suggesting they were offended.&quot;    While representing Mrs. Johnson, the firm tried to get Milbank Tweed to withdraw its accusatory memo. During settlement talks a year ago, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell unsuccessfully sought to make withdrawal of the allegations a condition for settling the suit between the children and their stepmother.    The third of Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's problems grew out of a 1983 suit against Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. filed by some European and American investors, who claimed the securities firm hadn't adequately warned them of the risks of certain investments. They sought $7 million and settled in 1985 for $2.7 million. But in April the investors filed another suit, also in federal court in New York. In it they allege that Pru-Bache and its counsel, Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, illegally kept them in the dark about key information that, had they known it, would have dissuaded them from settling for so little.    That information was that the New York Stock Exchange was investigating the way Pru-Bache marketed the investments. The exchange eventually censured and fined the brokerage firm for failing to disclose how risky the investments were. The investor group's suit asserts that Pru-Bache and Sullivan andamp; Cromwell violated court rules of pretrial discovery in failing to reveal the investigation; it also accuses Sullivan andamp; Cromwell of &quot;willful disregard of the ethical obligations of attorneys.&quot;    As evidence the firms knew of the Big Board investigation, the group cites a letter from the brokerage firm to the exchange acknowledging the probe and noting that a copy was to go to Sullivan andamp; Cromwell. Pru-Bache concedes it erred in not telling the investors of the Big Board inquiry, but Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, says a partner, David Cooper, wasn't aware of the exchange inquiry until after the settlement. The law firm and its client are seeking dismissal of the suit, arguing that the investors shouldn't be allowed to press it without giving back their settlement.    Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's fourth scrap, with the SEC, concerns the firm's senior mergers andamp; aquisitions lawyer, George Kern. He oversaw Allied Stores Corp.'s unsuccessful defense last fall against a bid from Campeau Corp. In the course of it, Allied held talks with a potential &quot;white knight,&quot; Edward J. DeBartolo Corp., about a possible asset sale or merger. News of those talks might have raised Allied's stock price, making it harder for DeBartolo to come to Allied's aid. But Mr. Kern and Allied didn't reveal the talks, and the SEC said they thereby violated its disclosure rules.    Allied has agreed not to violate such rules in the future, without admitting or denying that it did. But Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, in fighting the SEC charges, asserts that Mr. Kern didn't disclose the negotiations because they were preliminary and the transactions were subject to DeBartolo's getting financing.    Some in the legal community were shocked by the agency's attack on Mr. Kern, the 61-year-old head of Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's 20-member merger team. He is a colorful figure, burly and blustery, given to carrying in his suit-jacket pockets cans of soft drinks, which, with great ceremony, he sometimes pops open and guzzles during meetings.    He also is a highly respected veteran of dozens of takeover battles. &quot;There must have been a dozen lawyers the SEC could have gone after to make its point,&quot; one merger lawyer says. &quot;Why Kern? What did he do to tick off the SEC?&quot;    Others suggest the incident could affect Sullivan andamp; Cromwell's mergers practice. &quot;Kern will be a lot more cautious,&quot; predicts another takeover lawyer. &quot;Everything he does is sure to be watched by the SEC. Clients, with all their problems in a takeover battle, don't need to worry about his problems with the agency.&quot;    A Sullivan andamp; Cromwell senior partner, William Willis, says other firms are pressing that view to try to woo away Sandamp;C clients. But no clients or potential clients have expressed any concern about the incident, he says. </TEXT></DOC>