<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881014-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Politics and Policy -- Campaign '88: Neither Bush nor Dukakis Scores Blows, Commits Gaffes in Less Acrimonious Clash --- Standoff to Benefit The Vice President, Many Analysts Say </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   George Bush and Michael Dukakis battled over a range of issues in a second and final presidential debate that generally seemed less acrimonious than their earlier encounter and probably bolstered Vice President Bush's already bright election hopes.    Neither candidate scored any telling blows or made any major gaffes in the debate, which was held at the University of California, Los Angeles, as they argued over taxes, defense, Social Security, social issues and judicial nominations. But Mr. Bush, in particular, appeared more polished than he did in the candidates' first debate at Wake Forest University last month.    An instant poll by ABC News of more than 600 registered voters who watched the debate found that 49% thought Mr. Bush won while only 33% thought Gov. Dukakis did better. ABC said the debate didn't change the head-to-head race between the two candidates, with Mr. Bush holding the same lead after the debate that he held before it.    The failure of Mr. Dukakis, who trails in almost all polls, to adopt any new tactics or provide any high moments of drama, was a disappointment to many Democrats, who felt that some surprise was necessary last night to blunt the Republicans' electoral advantage.    Early in the encounter, Mr. Bush had to defend his controversial choice of Sen. Dan Quayle as his running mate. He insisted that the Indiana senator is more of an &quot;expert in national defense&quot; than is Mr. Dukakis, and accused critics of &quot;an unfair pounding&quot; of Sen. Quayle.    Mr. Dukakis, in turn, sought to deflect criticism that he is soft on national defense. He insisted that, while he remains opposed to both the MX and Midgetman land-based strategic nuclear missiles, he is prepared to support some less-expensive new missiles to modernize the U.S. nuclear arsenal. The two candidates criticized each other on the issue of taxes, although neither provided any new specifics. Mr. Bush reiterated his frequent pledge that he'd never raise taxes. But Mr. Dukakis charged that the Reagan administration broke earlier pledges not to increase taxes, and he said that the vice president has endorsed tax increases during this campaign that contradict his pledge.    They also sparred repeatedly over Social Security. Mr. Bush accused Mr. Dukakis and other Democrats of continually questioning Republicans' commitment to Social Security, and he sought to assure the public that he wouldn't touch the program's trust fund. In response to Democratic charges, Mr. Bush insisted &quot;I did not vote to cut&quot; cost-of-living increases for Social Security recipients. In fact, Mr. Bush cast a tie-breaking vote in the Senate in 1985 to reduce such increases.    Mr. Dukakis disputed Republicans' support for Social Security, asking: &quot;Why do people who want to balance budgets always go to those programs that benefit people of modest means?&quot;    In their closing statements, both candidates hit their usual, broad campaign themes, but they tried to strike a warmer, more likable pose.    Mr. Dukakis summoned the memory of former President John Kennedy, recounting that he had watched him win the 1960 Democratic presidential nomination and saying he &quot;never dreamed&quot; he'd follow in Mr. Kennedy's footsteps. He effusively thanked campaign supporters and insisted that he and his running mate, Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, are &quot;optimists&quot; about the country's future while Republicans are &quot;complacent.&quot;    Mr. Bush insisted that Republicans have brought the nation peace and prosperity, and repeated a campaign statement that he wants a &quot;kinder and gentler nation.&quot; Around the world, he said, &quot;America stands tall again and as a result we are credible.&quot;    Bush strategists crowed that Gov. Dukakis failed either to make himself more likable or move into the political middle -- two things they asserted the Massachusetts governor needed to do to revitalize his campaign. They believe that Mr. Dukakis revealed himself as a president who would raise taxes and harm the national defense, and they intend to hit those themes hard in the final weeks of the campaign.    Mr. Dukakis's advisers conceded that their man didn't deliver the &quot;knock-out punch&quot; that some of them had said he needed. Still, aides tried to put the best face on the contest, asserting that Mr. Dukakis met both his objectives for the debate: projecting himself more warmly and portraying himself as the candidate who identifies most closely with the average voter.    In general, Mr. Bush projected a warmer, more personable image than his sometimes stern opponent.    There was considerable discussion of social issues in last night's debate, with Mr. Dukakis charging that his rival is an &quot;apostle of the status quo&quot; and Mr. Bush again painting the Massachusetts governor as a leftist. The two nominees took opposing positions on the death penalty. Mr. Dukakis reiterated his view that there wasn't any evidence that the death penalty is a deterrent to violent crime. But the vice president said there were some crimes &quot;so heinous, so brutal, so outrageous,&quot; including the killing of a police officer, that they warrant punishment by death.    Mr. Bush and Mr. Dukakis continued their disagreements on abortion, each defending his position by citing the death of one of his own children. Mr. Bush opposed abortion except in cases of rape, incest and a threat to the life of the mother. Mr. Dukakis said, &quot;Who are we to say that, under certain circumstances, it's all right, but under others, it isn't,&quot; adding that &quot;it has to be the woman&quot; who decides whether a pregnancy should be terminated.    Both candidates shied away from embracing any &quot;litmus tests&quot; to determine Supreme Court nominations. Mr. Bush, however, vowed to &quot;appoint people to the bench who will not legislate from the bench,&quot; and said he supported President Reagan's ill-fated nomination of Robert Bork to the court. Mr. Dukakis replied sharply: &quot;If the vice president of the U.S. thinks Robert Bork was an outstanding appointment, that is a very good reason for voting for Mike Dukakis.&quot;    The candidates spent more time discussing personal issues than they did in their previous encounter. Mr. Bush praised his rival for his strong and close family. Mr. Dukakis upbraided Mr. Bush for repeatedly using labels, such as &quot;liberal,&quot; to describe him. &quot;If I had a dollar for every time you used that label,&quot; the Massachusetts governor said, &quot;I'd qualify for one of those tax breaks for the rich.&quot;    Mr. Bush ridiculed the Massachusetts governor's plan to cut the deficit by stiffening tax enforcement, charging that Mr. Dukakis would unleash &quot;a conventional-force army of IRS agents into everybody's kitchen.&quot; Mr. Dukakis repeated his frequent assertion that it is &quot;absolutely unfair&quot; to average taxpayers that $100 billion in taxes remains uncollected.    The two candidates, aware that the public has tired of the frequently low level of political discourse this year, promised to conclude the campaign in a more uplifting fashion. But Mr. Bush refused to participate in any more debates.    On the environment, Mr. Bush denied suggestions that, as head of the Reagan administration's regulatory-relief efforts, he helped undermine vital laws. He asserted that he had overseen a 90% reduction in the amount of lead allowed in gasoline, and said that despite Mr. Reagan's veto of a clean-water bill, &quot;I'm for clean water.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis, however, sharply attacked Mr. Bush on the issue, accusing him at one point of being a &quot;charter member of the environmental wrecking crew.&quot; And he swung back at the vice president's reference to pollution in Massachusetts, charging that the administration has cut money for pollution control. &quot;Boston Harbor has been polluted for 100 years,&quot; he said, claiming that he is the first governor to start cleaning it up -- &quot;no thanks to you.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis repeatedly invoked the name of his vice presidential selection, Sen. Bentsen, arguing that in the &quot;first presidential decision&quot; of choosing a running mate, he performed better than Mr. Bush had in selecting Sen. Quayle. Mr. Bush expressed his &quot;confidence&quot; in Mr. Quayle.    Mr. Bush several times sought to identify himself with President Reagan's achievements, including the economic recovery and the arms-control agreement with the Soviets. At one point he listed the president as one of his heroes.    When asked his heroes, Mr. Dukakis listed a number, including fellow governors, Olympic athletes and medical pioneer Jonas Salk. Although he mentioned law enforcement officials, he didn't emphasize any of the working-class voters whose support he needs in the election.    Mr. Dukakis had several opportunities to eliminate lingering doubts about his defense positions, but his comments on the subject weren't stronger or significantly different than those he made in the first debate. He more readily listed nuclear weapons systems he supports -- the Stealth bomber and the D-5 submarine-launched missile -- and insisted that Mr. Bush wouldn't be able to find enough money to pay for all the weapons he wants without hurting the national economy.    &quot;You can't divide our military security from our economic security,&quot; he said, in shifting the subject.    But Mr. Bush pointed out that it would take &quot;eight years, 10 years&quot; to develop a cheaper alternative to the MX and Midgetman missiles that Mr. Dukakis opposes, and insisted that the Soviets will modernize their missiles in the meantime. And the vice president cleared up one question about his defense views left lingering from the first debate by naming a defense system he is prepared to cut: an ammunition-hauling truck made in the home state of the House Armed Services Committee chairman, Democrat Les Aspin of Wisconsin.    ---   Rich Jaroslovsky contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>