<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880907-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS AND BUSH REACHED a preliminary agreement on debates.    Dukakis campaign manager Paul Brountas said the accord called for two debates by the presidential candidates and one between the vice-presidential candidates. Dukakis had sought three debates with Bush. No agreement was reached on a schedule or format, but the earliest likely date appears to be Sept. 25. On the campaign trail, Bush was booed by union shipyard workers in Oregon and a Dukakis speech in Illinois was disrupted by antiabortion protesters.    Reagan, addressing the national convention of the American Legion in Kentucky, accused the Democrats of advocating a &quot;Disneyland defense policy.&quot;    ---   Two cosmonauts landed safely following an anxious day during which their return from the space station Mir was aborted twice because of a malfunctioning guidance system, Tass said. The two cosmonauts, one from the Soviet Union and one from Afghanistan, had only a two-day supply of oxygen and were in danger of being marooned.    ---   Senior Burmese diplomats resigned from the ruling party to express opposition to the government of President Maung Maung. A statement signed by 187 foreign ministry officials said they were resigning en masse in an attempt to end 26 years of one-party rule in Burma. Meanwhile, mobs of looters ransacked food warehouses in Rangoon.    ---   Moscow's interior minister committed suicide in 1984 when authorities discovered he had accepted lavish gifts and huge bribes, the Soviet government charged. The accusations against Nikolai Shchelokov, the first official confirmation of the circumstances surrounding his death, came during a corruption trial of Brezhnev-era officials.    ---   Israeli troops sealed off a West Bank town, cut telephone lines, arrested dozens of Palestinians and set up army posts in a new tactic aimed at crushing a nine-month-old uprising. The army said it singled out Qalquilya, a town of 24,000 near Tel Aviv, because its residents include instigators of attacks on Israeli troops and settlers.    ---   Iraq offered an amnesty to Kurdish rebels, but guerrilla leaders demanded guarantees of Baghdad's sincerity. The Iraqi army has conducted a six-week offensive against the rebels, many of whom have fled into Turkey. Separately, the U.S. said it was investigating allegations of Iraqi use of chemical weapons against the Kurds.    ---   The U.S. is sending about $3.6 million in emergency aid to flood-devastated Bangladesh and will consider further requests for help, the State Department said. The country's three major rivers were reported to be receding after record flooding that has left at least 412 people dead and 21 million homeless since monsoons began in June.    ---   A Chilean opposition leader challenged President Pinochet to a public debate in advance of next month's plebiscite on whether to extend Pinochet's rule until 1997. Patricio Aylwin, who heads a coalition of 16 opposition parties, proposed the debate in a televised appeal for Pinochet's defeat in the vote.    ---   Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini sent a letter of criticism to Prime Minister Musavi, who attempted to resign to avoid what he feared would be a parliamentary vote of no confidence over postwar reconstruction policies he advocates. Musavi's resignation was rejected by President Khamenei hours before parliament was scheduled to vote.    ---   A bomb exploded in a restaurant in downtown Colombo, Sri Lanka, and police said five people were killed and at least 20 injured. There was no immediate claim of responsibility, but police said the bomb was probably planted by Sinhalese extremists in retaliation for the restaurant owner's defiance of a call for a general strike.    ---   Former Czech leader Dubcek is to travel to Italy in November to accept an honorary degree from the University of Bologna, his first trip outside Czechoslovakia in 18 years. Dubcek led the Communist government during the &quot;Prague Spring&quot; reform movement, but was ousted when the movement was crushed by the Soviets in 1968.    ---   South Korean opposition groups called for the release of 700 political prisoners before the opening of the Seoul Olympics. The coalition accused the government of using the Games to enforce dictatorial rule.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci met with top Chinese officials in Beijing and expressed concern over sales of Chinese arms in the Middle East. The Chinese officials, including Premier Li Peng, urged Carlucci to press the Reagan administration to allow U.S. satellites to be shipped to China and launched aboard Beijing's rockets.    ---   Turkish and Greek negotiators met in Ankara, their second meeting since May, but decided not to tackle major political issues because their differences are too great. The talks are the result of a January summit between the two countries' leaders after Greece and Turkey came to the brink of war over Aegean Sea oil-exploration rights.    ---   Died: Henry P. Glendinning, 63, former president of Butcher andamp; Singer Inc., in Fort Washington, Pa., Friday, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>