<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870226-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Deaver Blocks Bid for His IndictmentIn Last-Minute Constitutional Challenge---By Andy Pasztor and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDA FREST ROKJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A federal judge temporarily blocked an independent counsel from seeking a four-count perjury indictment against Michael Deaver, a former White House aide and one of President Reagan's closest friends.    U.S. District Judge Thomas Jackson, acting on an 11th hour challenge to the constitutionality of the independent counsel, issued a temporary restraining order yesterday barring prosecution of Mr. Deaver for allegedly lying to a federal grand jury and a House subcommittee. Both conducted wide-ranging investigations of whether Mr. Deaver violated federal conflict-of-interest laws by lobbying the Reagan administration on behalf of clients after leaving the White House in May 1985.    Independent counsel Whitney North Seymour Jr., visibly angry over the challenge by Mr. Deaver's lawyers, told the judge that he was planning to ask the grand jury to indict Mr. Deaver within hours. Publicly acknowledging for the first time his plans for prosecution, Mr. Seymour said: &quot;The grand jury is going to allege that he (Mr. Deaver) lied to them the very first time he came before them.&quot;    Asserting that Mr. Deaver's attorneys raised &quot;substantial questions&quot; about the constitutionality of the law and that Mr. Deaver could suffer &quot;irreparable harm&quot; if he were indicted, Judge Jackson set a hearing for March 11 for further arguments.    Mr. Deaver's lawsuit, which came as a surprise, was filed only one day after Lt. Col. Oliver North, a central figure in the Iran-Contra arms scandal, used the same constitutional arguments in a separate court challenge to the independent counsel provisions of the 1978 Ethics in Government Act.    Attorneys for Mr. Deaver originally asked for appointment of an independent counsel to clear their client's name, and they negotiated with Mr. Seymour's office for at least two months to try to resolve the case without an indictment. Only when those discussions broke down, according to officials familiar with the case, did they decide to challenge the fundamental legal authority of the nine-month investigation.    If the grand jury had accepted Mr. Seymour's recommendation for an indictment, the former White House aide and confidant of the President and the First Lady would have become the first target of criminal charges filed by a special prosecutor under the 1978 statute.    During the hearing, Mr. Seymour asserted that Mr. Deaver wouldn't have filed the suit if the investigation had cleared him of wrongdoing. &quot;It's only now that he has faced up to the fact that it's not coming out the way he wanted,&quot; asserted the independent counsel.    But in papers filed with Judge Jackson, Mr. Deaver's attorneys, Herbert J. Miller Jr. and Randall Turk, charged that the independent-counsel law violates the constitutional separation of powers, infringing on the powers of the executive branch. The law, they argued, transfers exclusive executive powers to the judicial and legislative branches.    The attorney general, they said, can remove the independent counsel from office only for &quot;good cause,&quot; and can be overruled by a special federal judicial panel that appoints the special counsels.    &quot;As the independent counsel . . . Mr. Seymour has, in effect, become the Attorney General of the United States, with Mr. Deaver and his associates as his sole and exclusive targets,&quot; the lawyers asserted in the court papers.    They also said that Mr. Seymour, with a staff of nine attorneys and four agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had conducted &quot;an unbounded investigation into virtually every aspect of Mr. Deaver's business and social activities&quot; since he left the White House. The lawyers disclosed that Mr. Seymour had brought more than 150 people before the grand jury, including Mr. Deaver, government officials and employees of many of his corporate and foreign clients.    Mr. Deaver's attorneys also claim that Mr. Seymour overstepped his authority by expanding his investigation to cover possible perjury and obstruction of justice by some of Mr. Deaver's associates. Mr. Seymour sought explicit court approval for that decision last December. But the suit alleges that such retroactive judicial action doesn't cure the law's basic constitutional shortcomings.    Mr. Seymour didn't provide any details about his plans after the ruling. If the case is appealed by either side, it could take months for an appeals court ruling. Until then, Mr. Seymour's investigation may be dead in the water.    Despite longstanding legal precedents that courts shouldn't interfere with grand jury deliberations before indictments are handed up, Judge Jackson concluded that a temporary delay is warranted. He said that &quot;no evidence is in danger of being lost&quot; and investigators don't face any statute-of-limitations problems.    According to the lawyers, Mr. Deaver's consulting firm, which bears his name, has lost most of its clients. Mr. Deaver's firm once had about 15 clients -- including foreign governments and prestigious corporate clients -- and earned nearly $4 million one year. But Mr. Deaver's problems began when his lobbying efforts for some of his clients, including Canada, South Korea and Rockwell International Corp., attracted the attention of the media and the House Energy and Commerce Committee's investigations subcommittee, headed by John Dingell (D., Mich.).    The subcommittee investigated whether Mr. Deaver violated conflict-of interest laws that restrict the lobbying activities of former government officials. Last August, the subcommittee asked Mr. Seymour to determine whether Mr. Deaver lied when he testified before the panel earlier in the year.    Mr. Deaver was harshly criticized by some on the subcommittee for his role, both as a White House aide and later as a lobbyist for Canada, in the controversial acid-rain issue. Mr. Deaver participated in discussions on acid rain before he left the White House. Then, as a lobbyist for Canada, he met with a presidential appointee who was working on the issue with a Canadian counterpart. </TEXT></DOC>