<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0066 </DOCNO><HL> A One-for-All Electoral College </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   As more than one commentator has noted, the election of 1988 holds out an arresting possibility: that the loser in the popular vote may be the winner in the electoral college and thereby our next president. Vice President George Bush might well carry enough Southern and Western states by narrow margins to pile up an electoral college majority, while Gov. Michael Dukakis wins enough Eastern and Midwestern states by large margins to carry the popular vote.    This last happened exactly a century ago when Grover Cleveland polled 95,000 more votes than Benjamin Harrison but Harrison had a majority of 65 in the electoral college. In fact, contrary to a widespread impression, 1888 is the only time the electoral college has given the presidency to the loser in the popular vote.    It is often said, as by the New York Times a few weeks ago, that &quot;on three occasions -- 1824, 1876 and 1888 -- (the electoral college) chose as president a man who received fewer popular votes than his opponent.&quot; But the first two cases cannot be blamed on the electoral college. In 1824 it was the House of Representatives, not the electoral college, that put in John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson. (Moreover, there was no popular vote in six states nor unit electoral vote in six others.) In 1876 Samuel J. Tilden initially led in the electoral college. It was a rigged electoral commission and a sectional bargain, not the electoral college, that gave the presidency to Rutherford B. Hayes.    For that matter, even 1888 is not all that clear a case. Neither Cleveland nor Harrison received a majority of the popular vote, and the gap between them was exceedingly small. The claim was widely accepted at the time (and by historians since) that more than 300,000 black Republicans in Southern states were denied participation in the election. Still, it is unprofitable to go behind official election figures, and 1888 may be conceded as a case of electoral college misfire.    Should another misfire happen in 1988, the constitutional situation remains clear. The winner in the electoral college, no matter how poorly he does in the popular vote, will be the next president.    Still, his legitimacy and his effectiveness would be weakened. In a democracy, the winner of the popular vote has logically the strongest claim to legitimacy. As Andrew Jackson put it, &quot;A President elected by a minority cannot enjoy the confidence necessary to the successful discharge of his duties.&quot;    Such an outcome would focus attention on manifest defects in the electoral college system. Under that system each state casts its entire electoral vote for the winner of the state's popular vote, even if that win is by a single ballot. This procedure does more than disenfranchise those who voted for the loser. It transfers their votes to the candidate they opposed. In an equitable system surely every vote should have equal weight and each vote should count as the voter intended.    If the popular-vote loser enters the White House in 1989, we can anticipate a revival of the campaign for the direct election of the president. &quot;To the people belongs the right of electing their Chief Magistrate,&quot; Jackson said when he first proposed direct presidential elections in 1829. A decade ago the idea of amending the Constitution to provide for direct election received widespread support: from presidents and ex-presidents such as Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter; from senators such as Edward Kennedy, Howard Baker and Bob Dole; from the American Bar Association, the League of Women Voters, the AFL/CIO, the Chamber of Commerce. Polls showed overwhelming public support for direct presidential elections.    The favored amendment, devised by then-Sen. Birch Bayh of Indiana, abolishes the electoral college and provides that, if no candidate gets more than 40% of the vote, the two top candidates would fight it out in a run-off election. This procedure, the argument goes, would guarantee the election of the people's choice. It would ensure equal treatment of all votes. It would reinvigorate party competition by giving parties an incentive to get out their votes in states they cannot hope to carry.    Yet direct election has its problems, too. The proposed change would hasten the decay, already well advanced, of the party system. Direct election with run-off would give single-issue movements, sore losers in major parties, media and pulpit adventurers an unprecedented incentive to jump into the presidential contests.    Under the present system only parties with a strong geographical base can pick up electoral votes. Green parties, old folks' parties, women's parties, racial parties, right-to-life parties, born-again parties, prohibition parties -- for that matter, communist and fascist parties -- don't have much future in the electoral college. But in direct elections such parties could drain away enough votes, cumulating from state to state, to force the contest into a run-off. The run-off itself would become the scene of frantic and squalid bargaining.    Moreover, direct elections would probably bring in a succession of presidents who fall short of a majority in the popular vote. The prospect would be a parade of 41% presidents or else wearisome double national elections -- in which case the prize might sometimes go to the person who came in second in the first round. In short, an amendment designed to make sure that the popular-vote winner gains the presidency may have the paradoxical effect of reducing the proportion of the popular vote required for victory. The result could weaken the presidential mandate and intensify mistrust of the political process.    In view of the perils of direct elections, it may be time to take a fresh look at a proposal made a decade ago by a task force of the Twentieth Century Fund. Jeane Kirkpatrick and Stephen Hess were co-chairmen of the task force, and its members included such political old hands as the late Richard Rovere, Thomas Cronin, Jules Witcover, Neal Peirce, John Sears, Pat Caddell and, to declare an interest, this writer.    For a while the task force seemed hopelessly divided between defenders of the electoral college and proponents of direct elections. Then discussion gradually produced consensus on the critical values the election process should serve. It was agreed that the ideal system would maximize the likelihood the candidate with the most popular votes should win, that it would encourage competition through a strong two-party system, that it would promote voter participation and that it would sustain the vitality of federalism.    Then a new proposal emerged that embodied these critical values and satisfied the major concerns of the opposing sides. This proposal, unanimously recommended by the Twentieth Century Fund task force, is known as the National Bonus plan.    Under the National Bonus plan, a national pool of 102 electoral votes -- two for each state plus the District of Columbia -- would be awarded to the winner of the popular vote. This national bonus would balance the existing federal bonus -- the two electoral votes conferred by the Constitution on each state regardless of population -- and would therefore fit within the constitutional framework. The plan would virtually guarantee that the popular-vote winner would also win a majority in the electoral college.    At the same time, by keeping state electoral votes on a winner-take-all basis, the National Bonus plan would preserve the role of the states, thereby contributing to the vitality of federalism. By deterring the multiplication of parties and candidates, the plan would strengthen the party system. By encouraging parties to seek votes even in hopeless states, it would stimulate voter turnout and revitalize state parties.    The National Bonus plan, in short, would combine the advantages of the historic system with the assurance the popular-vote winner would be the next president. It makes a lot of sense, and, in light of the apprehensions about the 1988 election, it deserves serious reconsideration.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>