<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0027 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   PLO LEADERS ACCEPTED a U.N. resolution recognizing Israel's right to exist.    A committee of the PLO's leadership, meeting in Algeria, agreed to accept all U.N. resolutions on the Palestinian issue, including resolution 242, which implicitly recognizes Israel's right to exist by saying all countries in the region have the right to live within secure borders. In exchange for peace, the resolution calls for Israeli withdrawal from land occupied in 1967. The move has been favored by Arafat. Despite opposition from hard-line factions, the PLO's parliament is expected to endorse the decision.    Israeli Premier Shamir reportedly has enough parliamentary support from Jewish religious parties, strengthened in general elections earlier this month, to be asked to form a new government.    ---   Bush is expected to begin naming his economic-policy team this week, probably starting with the reappointment of Treasury Secretary Brady. As the outlines of the president-elect's team take shape, it is becoming clearer that Secretary of State-designate Baker will influence both foreign and domestic policies.    ---   About 3,000 South Koreans marched through Seoul demanding better working conditions and the arrest of former President Chun on charges of corruption. Over the weekend, opposition leaders Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam said they would ask prosecutors to begin criminal proceedings against Chun.    ---   Philippine authorities arrested three prison guards and relieved three military officers of their duties after the commander of the Communist rebel army escaped. The guerrilla leader was allowed out of jail Saturday to attend a party. President Aquino ordered an inquiry into the incident.    ---   Alexander Dubcek criticized Czechoslovakia's government, saying the 20 years since &quot;Prague Spring&quot; had been marked by &quot;worsening economic stagnation, sterility and incalculable moral losses.&quot; The former leader's remarks were part of a speech prepared for delivery in Italy, where Dubcek received an honorary university degree.    ---   Angola, Cuba and South Africa agreed to extend their U.S.-mediated peace talks into an unscheduled fourth day in Geneva today. A U.S. official said an agreement on ending the conflict in Angola in exchange for Pretoria granting independence to Namibia was near after seven months of negotiation.    ---   Pakistan's Benazir Bhutto led thousands of supporters through Lahore as the opposition leader prepared for Wednesday's general election. Bhutto's chances of becoming the first woman leader of a Moslem nation were set back Saturday as Pakistan's high court required voters to show identification cards, which many haven't obtained.    ---   The president of Bonn's parliament quit amid condemnation of a speech in which he said many Germans believed Hitler's early years were a &quot;glorious&quot; time. The West German official, Philipp Jenninger, delivered his remarks during a ceremony marking Kristallnacht, the beginning of the Holocaust. He said he had been misunderstood.    ---   Brazil's oil industry is being crippled as refinery workers joined a strike to press demands for wage increases to match the inflation rate. A number of state-controlled oil installations were closing. About 70% of the 61,000 employees began participating Friday in a strike led by steelworkers.    ---   Chinese Premier Li Peng said that the &quot;most satisfactory&quot; time for Vietnam to complete the withdrawal of its troops from Cambodia would be next June. On a trip to Thailand, Li also reiterated Beijing's opposition to the return of the Khmer Rouge as an &quot;exclusive power&quot; in Phnom Penh.    ---   Finnish soldiers overpowered a Palestinian guerrilla holding them hostage at a U.N. peacekeeping outpost in southern Lebanon. A civilian was killed by the gunman, who was part of a five-member Arab squad that seized the observation post and held the five soldiers for about 17 hours.    ---   Opposition leaders in Poland said a hunger strike by about 80 people to protest police violence at an unofficial march Friday in the southern city of Katowice was continuing. Tens of thousands of Poles participated in the demonstrations in at least five cities to mark the 70th anniversary of the rebirth of the Polish state.    ---   Military authorities in Colombia blamed leftist guerrillas for what is considered the worst massacre in the country's recent history. As many as 42 civilians were killed and about 50 others wounded in the northern mining town of Segovia. Officials in the town accused right-wing paramilitary forces of the two-hour shootout Friday.    ---   Died: Lyman Lemnitzer, 89, retired Army general and former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Saturday, in Washington, of kidney failure. . . . Charles G. Sammons, 90, chairman of Sammons Enterprises Inc., Saturday, in Dallas. </TEXT></DOC>