<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0145 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Finally, It's Drexel's Turn </HL><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR BON </IN><G> SEC </G><TEXT>   The Securities and Exchange Commission rummaged through every transaction involving Drexel Burnham and Michael Milken, its junk-bond star. This scrutiny found some things that ought to be prosecuted, assuming Ivan Boesky's plea-bargain testimony is true. But the resulting 184-page complaint is startling for what it does not allege. Even if everyone is found liable for everything charged, this does not amount to any great conspiracy at the heart of the junk bond or takeover markets.    The filing dashes the hopeful expectations of legions of people with their own agendas who long ago declared Drexel guilty of crimes against humanity. In this respect, whether or not the defendants are guilty as charged is secondary -- and, by the way, even Drexel is innocent until proven guilty. The investment bank shook up the financial world when it developed the hugely profitable junk-bond market. These bonds are controversial, but clearly have made capital more readily available for many midsized businesses. Corporate executives, Drexel's banking competitors, and congressmen such as John Dingell and Ed Markey went after Drexel for the role of junk bonds in takeovers. We think takeovers have often been beneficial, but in any case by now the junk-bond genie is out of the bottle and employed by First Boston and other established firms.    Drexel will now finally get its day in court to defend itself against specific legal charges. This should be a relief after enduring an extraordinary two-year investigation that before any legal papers were ever filed smeared the reputation of an entire investment bank and several individuals.    More details will be known once the discovery process begins in the case, but thanks to the energetic reporting over the months by James Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg, Journal readers already had a sense of where the case was going. Our own view has been that many of the allegations are hypertechnical and indeed rather irrelevant to the market. In many ways, the SEC filing raises more legal questions than it answers.    The timing is curious. The SEC commissioners approved these same charges back in June. Manhattan federal prosecutor Rudolph Giuliani is apparently still not ready to bring criminal charges. There is a lower standard of proof in a civil case, but the defendants either did what the SEC alleges or they didn't. It would be outrageous if Drexel is again denied its day in court by Mr. Giuliani's asking for a stay of the civil case so he can keep gathering evidence.    One big problem for the prosecutors is that of the 18 transactions cited in the complaint, 16 hinge on Ivan Boesky. Part of the Boesky plea bargain was that he'd catch fish bigger than himself in that very small pond. Mr. Milken, Victor Posner and Drexel itself are good-sized fish. Even liars can sometimes tell the truth, but somehow Boesky doesn't seem like a very credible witness. The case is likely to turn on whether the prosecutors actually have the corroboration they suggest.    The other difficulty is that the charges duck the key questions we ask in securities violations cases: Who was harmed? And by how much? There are several charges of &quot;parking&quot; and other essentially disclosure violations, but no theory about how any of this might have actually harmed anyone in the market.    The one clear-cut crime would be the &quot;fraud on the client&quot; charge the SEC brought against Drexel. This is the agency's way of describing theft of confidential information. Drexel allegedly ripped off two clients by tipping off Boesky to buy the shares of target firms, thus forcing the acquirers to bid more. Wickes allegedly had to bid more for National Gypsum and Maxxam Group more for Pacific Lumber because of the leaks. Yet if there were such leaks to Boesky, why haven't Wickes and Maxxam sued Drexel for damages? If they don't, at the very least it seems unlikely that their executives would be helpful witnesses for the prosecution.    The other two of the four alleged cases of inside trading include allegations involving the two cases where Boesky was not involved. These deal with Drexel's transactions in shares of clients Lorimar and Viacom. Nothing in the SEC's complaint puts in doubt the obvious defense that Drexel maintains a Chinese wall between traders and mergers-and-acquisition specialists so that traders didn't have access to inside information. For example, Drexel says that the trader who covered a short position in Viacom was merely clearing his accounts before going on vacation.    Whatever eventually happens in the courtroom, it seems to us that Drexel and Mr. Milken have won the battle in the marketplace of financial ideas. Junk bonds for growing companies have played no small role in the country's five-year economic boom. Whatever happens to Drexel, the innovations it has made are now a permanent part of the financial markets. </TEXT></DOC>