<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870408-0129 </DOCNO><HL> A U.S. Pro-Trade Offensive---By Phil Gramm and Jack Kemp</HL><DD> 04/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN LATAM CANDA FREST JAPAN EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;Trading one brick at a time off our respective tariff walls will not suffice,&quot; President John F. Kennedy told Congress in 1962. &quot;We must talk instead in terms of trading whole layers at a time in exchange for other layers.&quot;    But now, 25 years later, instead of breaking down barriers to increase American trade, the congressional leaders of President Kennedy's party are proposing sweeping measures to raise new tariff walls &quot;whole layers at a time.&quot;    The much-ballyhooed &quot;new&quot; legislation out of the House Ways and Means Committee reduces the president's power to resist special interests while introducing national industrial planning, exchange-rate equalization tariffs and mandatory product-by-product retaliation. Other protectionist leaders are backing an amendment that goes even further by using market-closing sanctions against trading partners that run large surpluses with the U.S.    Meanwhile, attempts to appease the anti-trade forces with retaliatory strikes on imports from shingles to microchips have done little. This product-by-product strategy holds only the remotest chance of stopping the congressional protectionists and faint hope of increasing U.S. exports.    The high-tariff, &quot;fortress-economy&quot; approach of the protectionists is guaranteed to provoke foreign retaliation, speeding the free world's descent into a trade war. The first casualties will be American consumers (higher prices), farmers (closed foreign markets) and factory workers (lost exports, overall recession).    The world-wide economic disaster of the 1930s makes vividly clear that protectionism is doomsday economics, a certain path to mutual assured depression.    That's why we recently introduced the &quot;American Trade, Growth and Employment Promotion Act of 1987.&quot; It is a plan that would launch an American pro-trade offensive to force world-wide competition in lowering trade barriers. And our bill would make Congress come clean with the American taxpayer as to the real cost of punitive trade legislation.    Our bill would require the president to enter into negotiations to establish a North American Free Trade Area comprising the U.S., Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean Basin nations. This is a very realistic goal; talks with Canada are already under way, Mexico needs economic expansion and would greatly benefit, and the Caribbean Basin Initiative was a clear step down this path. Trade among these nations already accounts for 20% of the world's total, with more than one-fourth of U.S. exports going to Canada and Mexico.    Establishing a reciprocal free-trade agreement for the huge North American market would produce an escalation of commerce that would increase prosperity and expand export opportunities for the U.S. -- it also would put enormous pressure on our European and Asian trading partners to come to the negotiating table. Gaining equal access to the rapidly expanding North American market would become essential to these countries' economic welfare; the price of admission would be a lowering of trade barriers to American products. To achieve this, our bill gives the president new authority to negotiate with our trading partners to create expanded trade area agreements, making special provisions for poorer developing nations.    Of course, a few countries will resist an end to their unfair trade practices. In these cases, the president would be empowered to strike back by going to other countries that produce competing products and negotiating expanded trade agreements. Such pacts among free and fair trading nations would relegate the bad-actor nations to second-class status in the competitive international marketplace, a status that no exporting nation could long endure. Through this process, there would be a new form of recourse when a foreign government engages in unfair trading practices -- one that is more effective, helps rather than penalizes the American consumer and avoids propelling the free world into a tariff war.    To make sure the American government plays straight with the American people, our legislation requires a consumer -- or taxpayer -- impact statement for any &quot;trade&quot; bill passed by a congressional committee. When Congress undertook tax reform last year, it estimated down to the penny how the various tax proposals would affect American families. It is irresponsible for Congress to consider any trade legislation without devising some method to estimate the costs -- or even benefits -- of the legislation.    With U.S. trade barriers already costing American consumers $65 billion a year, it's more than possible that additional market-closing legislation would wipe out the $112 billion in tax relief over five years afforded individual taxpayers under last year's tax reform. Many of those in Congress now favoring protectionist bills were strong supporters of tax reform; they owe it to the American people to determine if their legislation will erase the gains of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.    U.S.-initiated expanded trade negotiations also could have the important side effects of speeding the pace of the current Uruguay round of GATT talks and helping to produce a more pro-trade consensus. Our proposal also would bring the World Bank and other international financial institutions into the market-opening process by making U.S. votes on loans to borrowing countries conditional upon their adoption of trade-liberalization policies.    A quarter-century ago, President Kennedy cautioned Congress against fulfilling the &quot;Marxist predictions of 'capitalistic' empires warring over markets,&quot; warning that a trade war would &quot;split the West.&quot; Yet today, some legislators seem to place the capitalist democracies of the free world on the same moral plane as the Soviet Union. Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.), in launching his campaign for the White House, suggested that the next president must be as tough with our trading partners &quot;as this president has been in negotiating with the Russians.&quot; And the same congressional liberals who have been doggedly opposing the Reagan Doctrine and urging one-sided arms-control giveaways are now trying to look tough by bashing America's allies.    With our bill, we are throwing down the gauntlet to the protectionists. Choking off world trade will do nothing for American competitiveness and may cripple us in the real competition with our real adversaries. In terms of both America's economic and strategic interests, protectionism is a problem, not a solution.    What the Democratic congressional leadership is proposing has little to do with economics and everything to do with special-interest politics. Unable to add new federal programs as deficit spending reached prohibitive levels, they seek to use protectionist legislation as an &quot;off-budget&quot; way to buy votes, with the exorbitant costs falling like massive new taxes on the consumers and working families of America.    In the protectionist farce, the trade deficit is being used as a stage prop. Opening markets for our goods is essential. But not all, or even most, of our trade deficit is due to unfair trading practices. Much of it is because our economy has grown more rapidly than most other countries; it was also caused by our having had some of the highest real interest rates in the world, which affected exchange rates. From 1982 to 1986, the U.S. economy grew 43% faster than that of Japan or West Germany, and during that time America's trade deficit quadrupled. In fact, America created jobs three times as fast as Japan and 20 times as fast as West Germany, though both have large trade surpluses with the U.S.    Strong as the U.S. economy -- including the manufacturing sector -- has been over the past five years, eight million Americans unemployed and 20% idle capacity is still too much. Yet the simple truth is that the trade deficit didn't cause it, and it will take sound budget and monetary policies to do better, not protectionism. It is the height of irony that even as mainland China -- which barricaded its economy for decades behind an ideological Great Wall -- is realizing that trade is the answer, many congressional Democrats are now claiming that trade is the problem.    ---   Sen. Gramm (R., Texas) is vice chairman of the official U.S.-Mexico Interparliamentary Conference. Rep. Kemp (R., N.Y.) this week opened his bid for the presidency in 1988. </TEXT></DOC>