<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880310-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Suspect Opinions: If an Investment Bank Says the Deal Is Fair, It May or May Not Be --- Advisers Clear Many Plans That Benefit Everybody Except the Shareholders --- The Lure of a Looming Fee </HL><AUTHOR> Richard B. Schmitt (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR TNM </IN><TEXT>   Before RepublicBank of Dallas could buy a sick rival it had its eye on last year, it needed outside assurance that the deal would be fair to shareholders. Might RepublicBank's investment banker, Morgan Stanley, provide such a statement?    Actually, yes. Morgan took a look and said the plan to take over the rival, InterFirst Corp., would be &quot;fair . . . from a financial point of view.&quot; The deal went through, and Morgan earned $3.1 million from it, plus underwriting fees.    And the shareholders? They saw their dividends vanish and the stock price plunge 90%, as the depth of the target bank's problems became clear. Now the merged company, First RepublicBank, is itself on the verge of insolvency.    Investment bankers, supposedly astute and unbiased, have played a vital role in the takeover boom by supplying fairness opinions. But as many of the opinions prove wide of the mark, questions are arising about how they get issued and whether they may do more harm than good.    Some of them have assured stockholders that a friendly offer was a fair one, only to have it far exceeded by a bid from a raider. Other fairness opinions have supported leveraged buy-outs that brought big windfalls to management. In other cases, managements have used their investment banks' fairness opinions to justify rejecting a takeover offer that later looked quite lucrative for shareholders.    The problem is that investment banks that are asked for a fairness opinion have incentives to deliver the one management wants. Most obvious is the prospect of a fat fee. The banks also may have a long relationship with the client, one they would just as soon keep. In any case, there usually is protection if their judgment proves faulty. Morgan Stanley, for instance, had a pledge of indemnification by RepublicBank in case an unhappy shareholder sued (none has). Morgan won't discuss the case.    Certainly, not all fairness opinions are rubber stamps. At the last minute, Robertson Colman andamp; Stephens, a San Francisco investment banker, rescinded an opinion supporting 3Com Corp.'s plan to buy Convergent Technologies Inc. in 1986, spiking the deal. Salomon kills plenty of proposals before they surface, says William Strong, a Salomon Brothers managing director.    But the process discourages nay-saying. Spoilsports often end up on the street. When 3Com planned another acquisition in 1987, it went to a different investment bank for an opinion.    &quot;Fairness opinions,&quot; says Harvey Kronfeld, a Philadelphia securities lawyer, &quot;especially the way they are now constructed and solicited, are virtually worthless.&quot;    The fuss over the opinions comes because managements -- unlike suitors in hostile takeovers -- are generally obliged by securities laws to treat shareholders fairly. But fairness can be subjective. In mergers, investment bankers usually divine fairness by considering liquidation value, the current value of a company's future cash flow and its financial ranking against others in the industry as well as roughly comparable mergers. By using various interest rates and earnings projections, however, the approach can be massaged so it supports the desired result.    Despite such problems, fairness opinions are becoming more important, not less. The Securities and Exchange Commission recently required fuller disclosure of the opinions in going-private cases. A 1985 Delaware court case held that fairness opinions provide evidence of responsible management behavior. And shareholder suits growing out of takeover offers and buy-outs have increased.    Last April, in a precedent involving the 1984 leveraged buy-out of Metromedia Inc., led by its chairman, John Kluge, a New York appeals court ruled that shareholders could sue investment banks over fairness opinions. After the buy-out, which Metromedia's investment banks had termed fair to shareholders, Mr. Kluge and others reaped an estimated $3.4 billion pretax gain by selling assets. The investment banks -- Bear Stearns andamp; Co. and what is now Shearson Lehman Hutton -- argued that shareholders couldn't sue them because they were advising the directors and not the shareholders, a contention the court found &quot;untenable.&quot; The ruling is on appeal.    Investment bankers' main defense when windfalls or debacles ensue is that such outcomes merely reflect unexpected developments, not any problem with the fairness opinion. Morgan Stanley's defenders blame the collapse of Texas real estate for the current troubles at First RepublicBank. In the case of Metromedia, Mr. Kluge made a windfall after the buy-out partly because he managed to sell its TV stations for 17 times earnings when 10 was the norm, says a Bear Stearns official, Gilbert Matthews. The 1982-87 bull market is credited for some other windfalls that shareholders missed out on.    Undermining investment bankers' &quot;unexpected developments&quot; defense is the frequency with which they seem to undervalue companies being taken private by managers and overvalue those trying to fend off raiders. Less partial parties seem a lot better at predicting future value.    For example, well before Morgan Stanley said RepublicBank shareholders were well served by the bank's plan to give $544 million in stock for InterFirst, federal regulators privately concluded the government would have to pay another bank many millions to rescue InterFirst. They held talks with Los Angeles-based Security Pacific Corp., which wanted aid that might have cost the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. $500 million. Two former regulators were surprised that RepublicBank would tackle InterFirst without federal help. (The merged firm, First RepublicBank, isn't related to First Republic Bancorp of San Francisco.)    Criticism of how fairness opinions are reached isn't new. Ten years ago, a Delaware judge excoriated partners of a major Wall Street firm for supervising a fairness opinion from a Vermont ski resort, then carting the finding to a crucial board meeting -- with the price left blank.    But concern has widened in the takeover era. The size of an investment bank's fee is frequently dependent on the outcome of a takeover or buy-out proposal -- and the fairness opinion clearly can influence that outcome. For instance, CTS Corp., facing a hostile takeover bid in 1986, made plans to pay its investment bank a cash bonus if the offer failed. A federal appeals judge, assailing the arrangement, questioned how the investment bank could make an independent judgment about the offer's fairness in such circumstances.    Bear Stearns, in preparing a fairness opinion for the proposed 1986 leveraged buy-out of Foodarama Supermarkets Inc., considered five-year-old grocery-store merger data. Bear says the information was only part of its analysis and added historical perspective to it. But a shareholder, Marc Franklin of Palm Desert, Calif., charges that the &quot;ancient history&quot; helped make a depressed offering price seem fair. He led a proxy fight and filed suit to block the buy-out, which Foodarama officials eventually dropped. Not long after, Foodarama's stock was trading above the proposed buy-out price.    Sometimes, shareholders have found it hard to square &quot;fair&quot; offers with other information they are being given. A year ago, Morgan Stanley found fair CSX Corp.'s $124-a-share offer for the remaining shares of its Baltimore andamp; Ohio Railroad subsidiary, even though CSX had been carrying other Bandamp;O shares on its books at $365.    Shareholders of Bandamp;O sued, contending the offer price was too low. They also alleged that CSX had asked its investment bank to ignore the book price; CSX denies that but says that peculiar accounting rules caused the book price to be misleading. Morgan Stanley won't comment on the case, which now is in the hands of a court-appointed appraiser.    Morgan did comply with a CSX request not to seek other bidders for Bandamp;O, proxy materials indicate. And such obeisance is common; after all, an investment banker can hardly be expected to put its client company &quot;in play&quot; simply to determine what price is fair. But the situation suggests a gnawing difficulty with the whole process. &quot;How do you know the price is fair if you haven't tested the market?&quot; asks Bevis Longstreth, a New York lawyer and former SEC commissioner.    Fairness opinions also are something a client can hide behind. When Amsted Industries Inc. officials were seeking support for a proposed 1986 leveraged buy-out, they trotted out a Salomon Brothers fairness opinion in proxy materials. What shareholders didn't see, however, was a Goldman Sachs estimate putting the value of the company as much as $100 million more than the management offer. Amsted says the Goldman study was too informal to be disclosed, but shareholders have sued.    Sometimes, even corporate officials have found fairness opinions less than fair. Salomon Brothers says GAF Corp. Chairman Samuel Heyman's pending $1.4 billion buy-out offer for the company is fair. But GAF's outside directors, who are paying for Salomon's advice, disagree. They have told Salomon to scout other bidders. Absent any takers, the directors may let the shareholders decide for themselves what's fair. </TEXT></DOC>