<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870311-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   WALSH ASKED Congress to delay granting immunity to Iran-Contra witnesses.    The independent counsel urged the House select committee to wait at least 90 days before granting limited immunity to witnesses, including Poindexter and North. He said such a move may jeopardize his criminal probe. Walsh, who threatened court action to block such moves, said he would make a similar appeal to Senate investigators today. The action comes as the panels moved toward granting immunity to Albert Hakim, an Iranian-born businessman involved in the arms sales to Iran.    Reagan pledged to veto a move to block aid to Nicaragua's rebels, and accused Democratic leaders of trying to renege on last year's Contra aid pact.    ---   The Vatican released a document warning against &quot;unforeseeable and damaging&quot; consequences of artificial procreation. The 40-page document, issued at the request of Pope John Paul II, condemned surrogate motherhood, test-tube births, cloning and experiments on living embryos.    ---   Honduras said a DC-3 transport shot down Monday by Honduran fighters apparently was carrying drugs from Colombia. The pilot, an American, and two others aboard died in the crash. Officials in Tegucigalpa said the plane ignored requests to land after entering Honduran airspace.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union convened a special session of the Geneva arms-control talks aimed at eliminating medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe. The State Department, meanwhile, said the U.S. was prepared to make specific proposals to the Soviets for verifying the proposed treaty.    ---   Maritime officials in Belgium said it probably would take salvage crews at least three weeks to right a capsized British ferry and recover the bodies of 81 people missing and believed trapped in the vessel. The boat fell to its port side Friday after sailing from the Belgian port of Zeebrugge.    ---   A Senate panel approved legislation requiring random drug and alcohol tests for transportation workers, including airline pilots, train operators, air traffic controllers and bus and truck drivers. The 19-1 vote by the Commerce Committee came despite concern over the constitutionality, cost and reliability of the tests.    ---   The White House announced proposed changes in FDA rules that would allow experimental drugs to be made available more quickly to terminally ill patients, including those with AIDS.    ---   Bruce Babbitt declared his candidacy for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. The former governor of Arizona, speaking in Manchester, N.H., called for new initiatives to reward workers for greater productivity.    ---   Czechoslovakia opened a trial against five members of the Jazz Section of the Musicians Union, who are charged with conducting illegal commercial activities. The defendants, who entered the Prague court amid applause from about 200 supporters, face as long as eight years in jail.    ---   The U.S. Sentencing Commission voted to omit the death penalty when it makes its criminal sentencing recommendations to Congress next month. The panel's 4-3 vote also rebuffed the Justice Department, which has urged that capital-punishment guidelines be included for treason, espionage and assassination.    ---   Charles Haughey was elected prime minister of Ireland for the third time after the speaker of the parliament cast a tie-breaking vote. Haughey's victory comes amid record Irish unemployment, rising emigration and a huge national debt.    ---   A bomb exploded at a Soviet cultural center in Vientiane, Laos, about 12 hours before Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze was to visit the building. One Laotian was killed and another wounded in the blast.    ---   South Africa's Supreme Court barred police from seizing copies of the nation's largest daily newspaper, the Johannesburg Star, which defied a government ban and published an advertisement protesting the detention of about 25,000 people without trial. The court ruled that the ad didn't violate Pretoria's emergency censorship laws.    ---   Israel's government defeated four no-confidence motions in Parliament over the coalition's handling of the case involving American spy Jonathan Pollard. The affair has strained U.S.-Israeli ties. Pollard was given a life prison term last week for passing classified U.S. military data to Israel.    ---   A U.N. mediator said Afghanistan and Pakistan have narrowed their differences toward setting a timetable for the withdrawal of about 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Western diplomats close to the talks in Geneva said some of Moscow's occupation forces could leave as early as next week.    ---   Syrian troops stormed the dormitories of the American University of Beirut and arrested at least 15 students suspected of belonging to Moslem militia groups, witnesses said. In southern Beirut, gunfire prevented a Saudi Arabian relief convoy from reaching a besieged Palestinian refugee camp.    ---   U.S. authorities said federal agents smashed a ring of 19 current or former Pan Am workers who allegedly smuggled $1.5 billion in cocaine into New York's Kennedy International Airport during the past six years. The officials said members of the ring used their positions with the airline to bypass customs in Brazil and the U.S. </TEXT></DOC>