<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Bruised U.S. Olympic Committee Looks Beyond This Year to 1992 </HL><AUTHOR> Hal Lancaster and Marj Charlier (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MKT TEL </IN><TEXT>   Barring a miracle, U.S. athletes will probably mine much less gold than usual at the Winter Olympics, starting tomorrow in Calgary, Alberta, and at the Summer Games in South Korea.    If so, the blame inevitably will fall on the U.S. Olympic Committee, which is responsible for fielding the nation's Olympic teams. The continuing erosion of U.S. dominance in amateur sports has focused a harsh spotlight on the committee's problems of late. And those problems are extensive:   --Athletes lack financial support. This year, for example, training camp for the water-polo team opened two months late. &quot;For the want of $30,000 or $40,000, we reduced our chances of winning a medal,&quot; says Robert Helmick, USOC president.    --A byzantine organizational structure often pits the committee's interests against those of its constituency, the 38 federations that govern individual Olympic sports.    --A glut of sports on television has reduced what networks are willing to pay for broadcast rights.    --An ever-growing number of sporting events unrelated to the Olympics have increased competition for corporate sponsorship money.    Moreover, the USOC recently dismissed its executive director for squabbling with Mr. Helmick. The next executive director, however, left after just 19 days amid reports that he had grown disenchanted with internal bickering.    As a result, not much can be done at this point to change U.S. fortunes in 1988. So the USOC is already looking to 1992. Sweeping changes are planned, including the addition of better coaches and training facilities, improved public-relations efforts and increased aid to athletes. That will require more cooperation than ever among the sports federations. And it will require more money.    Given these plans, people close to the U.S. Olympic effort are surprisingly bullish on the committee's current administration headed by Mr. Helmick, a Des Moines, Iowa, lawyer and former Olympic water-polo player; Baaron Pittenger, the current executive director, and John Krimsky, the committee's new marketing executive.    &quot;Even if you think it's a mess, it's so much better than it was,&quot; says sports commentator Donna DeVarona, a former swimming champion who serves on the committee's executive board.    Indeed, the USOC has come a long way since 1972, when its budget was $9 million and it served primarily as a &quot;travel bureau,&quot; shuttling athletes to the Games, says Ms. DeVarona. The committee has spent about $140 million in the past four years preparing for the 1988 Games and expects to spend $200 million for 1992.    But the U.S. struggles to compete with nations that spend as much as $1 billion on their sports programs and that provide sophisticated club systems to develop athletes practically from the cradle.    By contrast, U.S. athletes rely primarily on privately raised funds and are subject to an alphabet soup of conflicting governing bodies. Olympic sports in this country have also suffered at the collegiate level as schools have shifted resources to revenue-producing sports like football. The USOC hasn't been able to fill the gap.    &quot;We're still operating on the basis where the great athlete falls out of a tree and the USOC picks him up,&quot; says Jay Flood, chairman of the committee's long-range planning committee.    Conflicting interests are also reflected in the committee's membership, which includes groups as diverse as the U.S. Figure Skating Federation, the Boy Scouts of America and the National Rifle Association.    As costs have increased, so have the frictions between these groups. Federations for less-popular sports have grown dependent on USOC handouts, while more powerful sports, like track and field and gymnastics, have fashioned their own TV and corporate sponsorship packages and asserted their independence.    When, for example, New York state offered to build free housing at the USOC's Lake Placid winter-training center, a debate between factions on the 106-member executive board lasted a year before the project was approved. Getting consensus within the committee, says Mr. Flood, &quot;is like trying to nail jelly to the wall.&quot;    Such indecision could hamper the committee's ambitious plans. The USOC hopes, for example, to build four training centers in large metropolitan areas so athletes can devote more time to training and still be close to job, educational and social opportunities.    The committee also hopes to establish offices in every state and promote individual state Olympic Games as part of a campaign to lure more young athletes to Olympic sports. And it wants to open an office in Washington to increase its presence in Eastern political and media circles.    To pay for all that, the committee wants to squeeze more money out of TV programming and corporate sponsorship programs. But fund raising has been hampered by the misperception that the USOC was flush with funds from the profitable 1984 Games in Los Angeles, says Mr. Pittenger, the executive director. Those profits were placed in a trust that isn't controlled by the USOC and that serves a large number of sports organizations. Indeed, the USOC began the quadrennium deep in debt.    The committee will get help for 1992 from two new sources: A 10% cut of the International Olympic Committee's TV revenues from U.S. broadcasters and a commemorative coin program recently approved by Congress. Conservatively, that will produce $100 million in revenue, Mr. Pittenger projects.    Mr. Krimsky, the marketing specialist recruited from Pan Am, thinks that corporate sponsorships, licensing and donations can produce another $100 million, up from $65 million in the latest four-year period.    To reach that goal, Messrs. Helmick and Pittenger have instituted long-range planning, a first for the USOC. Mr. Krimsky has held marketing seminars for Olympic sponsors, another first. He has also initiated a direct-mail plea for donations. More than 60 million pieces of mail will go out this year, he says, compared with none in 1984.    The committee also plans to package events that would appeal to television and corporate sponsors. Some possibilities: a weekly anthology for television, featuring competition in Olympic events; a mini-Olympics in which each sports federation would invite three rival countries in its event; and a winter sports festival to parallel the committee's successful summer festival.    All those plans are fraught with peril, however. The International Olympic Committee frowns on events that might diminish the quadrennial Games. Even Mr. Krimsky concedes that current sponsors aren't likely to increase their sponsorship payments, which means added revenues must come from new sponsors.    And the USOC faces stiff competition for sponsors from its own federations, which have gained added marketing expertise in recent years and which offer an Olympic connection at lower prices. &quot;Even tiny rowing has started talking about holding breakfasts for potential sponsors and agencies and setting up corporate hospitality suites,&quot; says Lesa Ukman, who publishes a newsletter that tracks sponsorships.    Mr. Helmick contends that the most powerful federations, such as track and field and gymnastics, have endorsed a more coordinated marketing approach that would give the USOC more leverage with TV programmers and corporations. But conflicts continue. At the committee's annual meeting last year, says a sports marketer who gained admission, the USOC demanded that its automobile sponsor get preference at the Olympic gymnastics trials over the gymnastics federation's car sponsor. &quot;There's been no communication,&quot; says Mike Jacki, the federation's executive director. &quot;They don't say to me, 'Is there a way we can work together on this?'&quot;    Concludes Mr. Flood, the long-range planner: &quot;The USOC is a pain in the butt, and the turmoil ain't over yet.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>