<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880823-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   QUAYLE TOLD the VFW he used no influence to win a National Guard post.    The GOP vice presidential nominee, dogged by disclosures last week that he used family connections to win assignment to the Guard and avoid the draft during Vietnam, told the veterans' convention in Chicago that his unit had vacancies at the time he applied. The Indiana senator abruptly broke away from scheduled meetings with advisers in Washington to attend the gathering after Bush got a warm reception from the same crowd earlier in the day. Both won standing ovations.    In a television interview early yesterday, Quayle said he didn't think it was hypocritical for him to strongly back the war but decide to join the Guard.    ---   POLAND ORDERED troops to secure industrial plants as more strikes broke out.    In announcing the move, Interior Minister Czeslaw Kiszczak said the recent wave of strikes raised a &quot;specter of anarchy&quot; over Poland. The government also imposed curfews in three provinces affected by the strikes, and riot police in Szczecin stormed strikebound bus and trolley depots. Earlier in the day, 400 workers chanting &quot;Solidarity&quot; seized the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk, birthplace of the outlawed trade union.    Government-run media are stressing the strikes' cost to the economy. Silesian coal mines, which provide Poland's primary export, are the most affected.    ---   The State Department said the Soviet-backed regime in Afghanistan was responsible for the vast majority of state-sponsored terrorist acts in 1987 because of its anti-Pakistan campaign. Separately, a commentary in Pravda rejected suggestions that Moscow or Kabul was involved in the plane explosion that killed Pakistani President Zia.    ---   Thousands of demonstrators marched in Rangoon and other cities in Burma, and a general strike shut down transportation in Mandalay, diplomats and news reports said. The protesters demanded that new President Maung Maung, who Friday became Burma's first civilian ruler in 26 years, end one-party rule and institute democracy.    ---   Monsoon rains hampered rescue efforts for victims of an earthquake that struck eastern India and Nepal, with the death toll now exceeding 650 and some officials estimating that more than 900 people died. More than 3,000 people were injured and tens of thousands are homeless. The quake was the worst since 1950 in the Himalayan region.    ---   Israeli troops shot and wounded 13 Palestinians during a West Bank strike called to protest government tax raids. The army also imposed a curfew on the West Bank city of Nablus. Separately, Abu Nidal's Fatah-Revolutionary Council claimed responsibility for the bombing of a Haifa cafe in which 25 Israelis were injured.    ---   South Africa's government withdrew a bill that would have forced the evictions of tens of thousands of blacks living in areas designated for whites. A government minister said the bill will be reintroduced with amendments specifying that such evictions not be mandatory. Critics of the bill said it would provoke international outrage.    ---   Korean delegates broke off talks in Panmunjom with no indication on whether a new round will be held. The North and South Korean representatives have been meeting since last week on issues of peace and sharing the Olympics. A South Korean official said it was unlikely new talks would be held before the Sept. 17-Oct. 2 Seoul Games.    ---   Britain's Thatcher refused to rule out the reintroduction of internment without trial for suspected rebels in Northern Ireland, saying she wanted to keep the IRA leaders guessing following a weekend bombing attack that killed eight British soldiers. Separately, an IRA bomb killed a man believed to be a Royal Navy officer in Belfast.    ---   Philippine Vice President Laurel said he intends to lead the opposition to President Aquino's government. Laurel had written a letter to Aquino Aug. 13 urging her to resign and call for new elections, but she refused. In a news conference yesterday, Laurel likened Aquino to deposed dictator Marcos.    ---   Morton Thiokol officials said last week's test of a redesigned space shuttle booster rocket showed the deliberately flawed rocket's safety features performed adequately. If the evaluation holds, NASA is expected to set a launch date for Discovery in late September or early October.    ---   Cypriot leaders arrived in Geneva for U.N.-sponsored talks aimed at ending the division of the Mediterranean island, which was split between Turkish and Greek factions in 1974. The two days of talks, over which General Secretary Perez de Cuellar is to preside, are to open tomorrow.    ---   Died: Edward W. Duffy, 68, former chairman of USG Corp., in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>