<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880707-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Dissecting Disaster: How Union Carbide Fleshed Out Its Theory Of Sabotage at Bhopal --- Its Investigators Scoured India Hunting for Ex-Workers, Ruled Out Any 'Mistake' --- But Indians Don't Buy Idea </HL><AUTHOR> Laurie Hays and Richard Koenig (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> UK FREST </CO><IN> CHM </IN><TEXT>   On a chilly winter night, a disgruntled worker at Union Carbide India Ltd. sneaks into a deserted area of its Bhopal pesticide plant where storage tanks hold thousands of gallons of a toxic chemical.    He removes a pressure gauge on one tank, attaches a water hose to the opening and turns on the faucet. Two hours after he steals away, a calamity he never foresaw begins unfolding. The tank rumbles. Vapors pass into a vent tower. A large cloud of poison gas drifts out into the night.    Such a chain of events, Union Carbide Corp. believes, explains the gas leak that killed 2,500 people and injured thousands more in Bhopal on Dec. 2 and 3, 1984. The company insists that sabotage -- not sloppy corporate practices in the Third World -- caused what has been called the worst industrial disaster in history.    But Union Carbide is having a hard time selling its sabotage theory. Sabotage is tough to prove, and much of the public world-wide has already accepted the Indian government's insistent view that the gas leak was Carbide's fault. The company has changed few minds despite spending $24 million on legal fees and on its own three-year investigation of the incident, completed early this year, and despite a concerted yearlong effort to push its version of events.    In the investigation, Carbide's lawyers and consultants have trekked across the hot subcontinent, compiling evidence and tracking down workers on duty that night. They have met plenty of frustrations and dead ends. One long search led to the right name but the wrong man. To corner a former plant worker who had been eluding them, they concocted a bogus marriage proposal. They even journeyed to Nepal, at high cost, to interview one of the plant's tea boys.    After workers were tracked down, few proved helpful. Some crucial witnesses, Carbide believes, have been covering up the alleged sabotage from the outset, hoping to absolve everyone on duty that night. Employees have repeatedly denied Carbide's account and have said they don't know how the gas leak began.    Carbide may never get a chance to make its case in court anyway. Out of frustration, it is trying to sway world opinion. It has printed 60,000 brochures called &quot;Setting the Record Straight on Employee Sabotage.&quot; It made a videotape to &quot;illustrate&quot; what allegedly happened. Its officials frequently lecture on the subject to professional, university and trade groups.    &quot;All we want is for the truth to be known,&quot; says Ashok Kalelkar, a senior vice president at Arthur D. Little Inc., a consulting firm hired by Carbide in the case. But, adds Paul Doyle, a New York lawyer deeply involved in the company's investigation, &quot;we can't get anywhere with the government.&quot;    The Bhopal tragedy has become a focal point for Indian politicians who portray Carbide as a negligent U.S. multinational with little regard for India's impoverished citizens. The government has enacted a law making it the sole representative of the gas-leak victims and has filed in a court in Bhopal a $3 billion suit against the company. The litigation has been bogged down in procedural disputes since settlement talks with the government broke off late last year, and the victims have received little financial aid. The settlement talks nearly succeeded, according to the company, but then some government factions raised objections.    &quot;Our institutions can't be pushed around by American imperialists,&quot; says Ram K. Iyengar of India's Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, replying to questions for this article. And the Times of India, one of the country's largest English-language newspapers, calls the sabotage theory &quot;wholly preposterous.&quot;    Reflecting the conventional wisdom about what happened, the government blames the disaster on worker error. It also argues that there were so many shortcomings in plant design, worker training and equipment maintenance that a disaster was inevitable, and it says Carbide, as the 50.9% owner of the Indian subsidiary that operated the plant, is responsible for all those flaws.    Carbide has met with setbacks in Indian courts. An appellate-court judge, for instance, has held that any company engaging in hazardous activities, such as operating a chemical plant, is &quot;absolutely liable&quot; in any accident.    Carbide's sabotage theory is weakened partly because it hasn't disclosed all its evidence. Though its attorneys say they have interviewed the alleged saboteur &quot;extensively,&quot; they won't disclose his name or whereabouts or describe him. They also decline to say whether they understand his motives or have any witnesses.    &quot;I don't think the guy who did it had any idea what he was doing,&quot; one Carbide investigator says. &quot;I think he thought he was just going to create trouble for management -- spoil a batch&quot; of methyl isocyanate, the chemical in the storage tank. &quot;What he didn't realize was, he was playing with a bomb.&quot;    Carbide says it hasn't sought criminal charges against the suspect because it doesn't think that the government would pursue them. The company also doesn't want to risk legal complications by naming him before the trial. &quot;The government has the same information we have,&quot; a company spokesman says.    Bruce Finzen, a Minneapolis attorney for the Indian government, replies: &quot;I don't know who they are talking about. Our criminal investigation has found no evidence of sabotage. If they have more information, they best come forward with it. I have every confidence the government would investigate.&quot;    At times, the Carbide team's search took on the aura of a detective story. The investigators say agents of India's Central Bureau of Investigation followed them around India and eavesdropped on their phone conversations. One of the company's witnesses, a man who once worked at the Bhopal plant, alleges that he was treated roughly by agents who tried to get him to change his story. The witness, S. Sunder Rajan, was summoned by the agency after he told company investigators that he noticed that a pressure gauge was missing from the storage tank the morning after the disaster -- an observation that fits in with the sabotage theory.    &quot;Don't you have any national pride!&quot; the agent yelled, according to a Sunder Rajan affidavit filed in an Indian court. &quot;Will you sell yourself for money, American stooge?&quot;    A CBI spokesman says the agency had &quot;no reason to obstruct Union Carbide.&quot; He calls the company's allegations of tapping phone lines and following officials around &quot;totally incorrect and baseless.&quot; He adds that Mr. Sunder Rajan's allegations are &quot;totally untrue.&quot;    When Carbide started its investigation, sabotage didn't figure prominently in its thinking. Officials at company headquarters in Danbury, Conn., say that in their initial shock and confusion, many possibilities swirled about in their minds. A company team, including engineers, scientists and then-Chairman Warren Anderson, flew to Bhopal within hours of the disaster.    The section of the Bhopal plant that made methyl isocyanate, which was used to produce Sevin pesticide, looked like a petroleum refinery. Within this maze of pipelines and stairways sat three tanks where the lethal chemical was stored, each buried underground for protection and surmounted by a concrete slab. A thick cylindrical neck projected from each tank above the concrete and served as a connection point to various pipes.    Everyone, including the Indian government, now agrees that the disaster began when water -- as much as a couple of hundred gallons -- entered one of the tanks, tank 610. A chain of chemical reactions ensued, and pressure inside the tank began to build. The poison, mostly vaporized in the heat, pushed past a relief valve, through the pipelines and out the vent tower.    But where did the water come from?    The first explanation to emerge, which was quickly embraced by the government, was the &quot;water-washing theory.&quot; It held that water being used to clean a pipe backed up and then traveled along an 815-foot network of pipelines to tank 610. The water backed up, it is argued, because a worker had failed to seal a valve near the point of the cleaning.    The theory seemed plausible. No one disputed that a worker flushed the pipe that night or that he failed to place a metal disk, called a slip blind, by the nearest valve in case it was leaking. Moreover, there had been no other routine use of water in the hours before the disaster.    Yet Carbide and the Arthur D. Little engineers say the more they studied the water-washing theory, the shakier it looked. Although the government still stands by it, Carbide argues against it like this:   Four valves separated tank 610 from the pipe that was washed. All were supposed to be closed, but if just one was closed and leak-proof, it alone would have blocked the water. The valve nearest the water-washing, though lacking a slip blind, was recorded as having been closed before the washing began. A later test found that the valve wasn't leaky.    Even with every valve wide open, the drainage system for water-washing would have so lowered the hydraulic pressure that water couldn't have surged 10 feet through vertical pipes forming part of the link to tank 610.    The clincher, Carbide maintains, came when Indian authorities drilled a hole in a long pipeline that they thought had carried the water. Several 55-gallon drums were rolled onto the site to catch the expected torrent. The Carbide team watched anxiously. The pipeline was bone dry.    Again, the Carbide investigators had to ask themselves how water got into the tank. Along with engineers from Little, Carbide officials considered more than 30 possible routes and ruled them all out after examining diagrams, operating records and the plant site.    &quot;It came down to two things,&quot; says Warren Woomer, a former Bhopal plant manager. &quot;Either somebody made a really bad mistake, hooking up a water hose when he thought it was something else. Or it was something done deliberately.&quot;    Mr. Woomer says he long considered the possibility of an honest but colossal mistake: Perhaps somebody hooked up a water line rather than one of the nitrogen lines used to keep the tanks under steady pressure. But eventually, he and others at Carbide concluded that a mistake was too far-fetched. The water and nitrogen lines differed in color and construction. Besides, the water line wouldn't even connect to the tank opening for nitrogen without a special fitting. Pouring water into the tank, one company official says, would be like putting gasoline into a car radiator.    To the Carbide investigators, only one other possibility remained: sabotage.    Shortly after the accident, Mr. Woomer says, some workers told him that they had heard that someone had intentionally hooked up a water hose. And Mr. Woomer recalls an episode of sabotage during a labor dispute several years before, when someone cast nuts and bolts into a chemical reactor.    But coming up with more than just rumors proved difficult. Immediately after the disaster, Indian authorities seized important plant records and, Carbide contends, restricted access to plant employees. As a result, Carbide couldn't begin interviews in earnest until early 1986. By then, many of the workers had scattered among India's multitudes because the plant never reopened.    The CBI says Union Carbide was never restricted from looking at plant records. The company visited the plant soon after the incident and the agency &quot;supplied copies of the plant records whenever they needed them,&quot; it adds.    In the company's investigation, Mr. Doyle, the New York attorney, was aided by others from his law firm, Kelley Drye andamp; Warren, and the consultants from Little. A valuable ally was Nawser Parakh, an Indian engineer who once worked at the Bhopal plant. He was well liked by most of the workers and acted as liaison for the less-popular Carbide officials.    As the team went about lining up interviews, it was hampered by often-outdated employee records and poor telephone service. Frequently, the only way to find people was to figure out where they lived and stake out their homes.    Typically, Mr. Parakh would approach the house and leave the conspicuous Mr. Doyle, tall, blond and fair-complexioned, slumped down in the car out of sight. After getting in the door, Mr. Parakh would ask whether an associate could join him, and Mr. Doyle would rise into view.    For Mr. Doyle, the case became a marathon. He has made 17 trips to India. And the excursions often brought frustration. One time, Messrs. Doyle and Parakh flew to Bombay and then drove in 90-degree heat to the suburb of Vashi to find V. Mani, a former plant operator. Mr. Mani's wife said he would be returning soon. But when he finally appeared, he turned out to be the wrong V. Mani. The right Mr. Mani hasn't been found.    Another time, the team tracked down a former operator named M.K. Jain, who had taken a job at a power plant in Korba, about 11 hours by train from Calcutta. Carbide sent an emissary to visit him and offer to pay his way to Bhopal for an interview, but Mr. Jain declined to make the trip. So, the team went to visit him. From the end of the railroad line in Champa, where a cow roamed the flea-infested station, the team drove two hours to Korba.    The upshot of the interview, which lasted two to three hours, was that Mr. Jain couldn't remember anything.    The most prolonged of these cat-and-mouse games involved a former employee suspected of rewriting plant logs the morning after the disaster. He eluded the investigators in Bhopal, allegedly failing to show up for scheduled interviews at his home and then slipping away from his office even though the investigators watched the elevators. Then, he left the city.    About a year after the investigators first tried to find him, they heard that he had moved to his father's house in Calcutta. To confirm his new residence without tipping off him or his family, the investigators cooked up a fake marriage proposal. A third party carried it to the father. The ploy worked, establishing not only that the former employee lived there but also when he was expected home. When interviewed, he offered no explanation for the rewritten logs.    &quot;That alone confirmed we were right,&quot; Mr. Doyle says triumphantly. &quot;If he had had some explanation, we would have had to deal with it.&quot;    During 70 interviews, the investigators got some other breaks. Mr. Sunder Rajan, the witness who says he was bothered by CBI agents, mentioned that he replaced one of the pressure gauges on tank 610 because it was missing the morning after the gas release, leaving an opening into the tank. He also said he had seen a water hose, still running, near the tank.    Talk about a gauge and a hose had circulated before, according to the investigators. But Mr. Sunder Rajan was the first person to report his own observation supporting the possibility that someone had removed the gauge and then had fitted a hose over the opening.    Later, investigators say, another worker informed them that a plant operator had told him the water entered the tank through a pressure gauge. &quot;That was 'bingo!' for us -- a real moment,&quot; Mr. Doyle says.    As the investigation wore on, Carbide also gained access to more of the plant's operating logs and other papers once kept as evidence by the CBI. One find by the investigators: a sketch on the back of a record sheet from the control room. The sketch may depict a connection between a hose and a valve opening, though that requires some imagination. The team doesn't fully agree on its significance.    Records that seem to have been altered provided better clues, Mr. Doyle says. The team took copies of the logs to Danbury and spent several days poring over them before someone noticed the changes.    One change altered the timing of a transfer of methyl isocyanate from storage to the Sevin production unit. The change made it appear as though the transfer occurred on the evening shift rather than the night shift, when the disaster struck.    Mr. Doyle terms the transfer unusual because it was made from tank 610, which wasn't the tank being used in production that night. He links the transfer to a desperate effort to drain away water. Yet, he says, the workers wouldn't have suspected that water was causing the runaway reaction confronting them unless someone had seen water entering the tank directly.    Having made a peculiar transfer without success, and possibly thinking they had made things worse, the workers tried to avoid blame by distancing the timing of the transfer from the gas release by altering the records, he contends.    In summary, Carbide's theory goes like this: On that quiet Sunday night, sometime around the 10:45 p.m. shift change, a disgruntled worker -- the only person involved in the sabotage -- sneaked into the storage area. He unscrewed the pressure gauge on tank 610, hooked up the water hose, turned on the faucet and left. Around midnight, some of the workers began smelling methyl isocyanate gas. They went to the storage area to hunt for a leak, and they found the hose.    Realizing that water was in the tank, they tried to siphon it off by transferring it to the Sevin production unit. Only 10 minutes later, the gas began leaking. That night, chaos. The next morning, the workers returned and altered the logs.    Even if a trial is held, the question of sabotage may never be fully resolved, given all the other issues bearing on liability. Another question is how Carbide would prepare for such a trial. Taking depositions and lining up witnesses could prove impossible. Says one of the investigators, &quot;It's going to be a mammoth task to do it all over again.&quot;    ---   Sudeep Chakravarti contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>