<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Ariane Rocket's Success May Give EuropeLead Over U.S. Firms in Satellite Market---By Philip RevzinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP ML GD MDAEROSPACE (ARO)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The successful launch of a European-built rocket carrying two satellites late Tuesday could give Europe a lead of two to three years on U.S. companies hoping to regain part of the $1 billion-a-year commercial-satellite launching market.    If the success of the launch by Arianespace S.A. can be repeated in the course of the European consortium's ambitious schedule -- 29 launches with 44 satellites in the next three and a half years -- hopes for closer scientific cooperation among European nations could take off. It also could bolster European hopes of putting one of their citizens in space on a European rocket.    An Ariane 3 rocket launched from French Guyana placed in orbit European and Australian telecommunications satellites, restarting the consortium's launch program, which had been halted since the failure of a launch in May 1986.    With McDonnell Douglas Corp., Martin Marietta Corp. and General Dynamics Corp. unlikely to be able to use their rockets for commercial launches before the end of next year at the earliest, Arianespace should have a virtual monopoly on Western launches until at least 1989.    The U.S. space shuttle program, which was halted after the Challenger explosion in January 1986, may return to action as early as next June. When the U.S. shuttle is relaunched by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, however, it will be used principally for putting military and scientific satellites into orbit.    Arianespace Chief Executive Officer Frederic d'Allest said the launch was &quot;of utmost importance for all commercial satellite operators in the Western world.&quot; Arianespace is a group of aerospace companies from 11 European countries.    France's industry minister, Alain Madelin, said Arianespace's latest success &quot;reinforces the French government's determination to unite European efforts to put a man into space ourselves within 10 years.&quot; Reimar Lust, head of the European Space Agency, said the Ariane launch &quot;gives us confidence&quot; just before a crucial ministerial meeting in The Hague in November that will try to decide how much money European governments -- West Germany in particular -- will invest in a joint space program.    On the commercial side, the Arianespace consortium said its order books are full until 1991, with anticipated revenue of more than $2.5 billion. Arianespace had profit of $35 million last year on revenue of $215 million, but only expects to break even this year because of the disrupted launch schedule.    In November, Arianespace plans to launch a West German direct broadcasting television satellite. In December, it plans to launch the GTE Spacenet Corp. telecommunications satellite G-STAR III/Geostar RO1 and a French telecommunications satellite on one rocket. Arianespace plans eight launches next year and nine in 1989, though it might add one or two launches in each of those years. The consortium said it has reservations for the launching of 24 more satellites that it hasn't been able to schedule yet.    Industry analysts said Arianespace now controls more than 50% of the world's commercial satellite launching business. Its future orders include nine U.S. satellites, 10 satellites for international organizations, and a total of six from Canada, Australia, India and Japan.    Since the explosion of the Challenger -- the predominant U.S. vehicle for launching commercial satellites -- three U.S. companies have renewed their efforts in the commercial market, but haven't yet launched a satellite. The U.S. concerns -- McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics and Martin Marietta -- have signed contracts with customers, however.    Spokesmen for McDonnell Douglas and General Dynamics, both based in St. Louis, acknowledged that the successful launch is a big step forward for Arianespace. &quot;We've all had trouble with our different launches,&quot; said a spokesman for McDonnell Douglas's Astronautics division. &quot;It means they're active again.&quot; Bethesda, Md.-based Martin Marietta said it welcomes the Ariane success as a reassuring signal to potential customers that the commercial satellite-launching market is healthy and will grow.    The McDonnell Douglas spokesman said the company's division has contracts for four commercial satellite launches on its Delta rockets, the first of which is scheduled for the second quarter of 1989. He said the company, which also has five non-binding reservations for launches, hopes to have three to five commercial launches a year beginning in 1989.    Roger Chamberlain, Martin Marietta's vice president in charge of commercial launches on Titan rockets, conceded that Arianespace will capture the largest share of the international market. He said Martin Marietta plans to be launching five commercial satellites a year by 1990. The company has contracts for three launches and tentative agreements with six other customers, Mr. Chamberlain said. He estimated that the world-wide market would be 15 to 25 satellites launched annually, beginning in 1989.    The General Dynamics spokesman said that his company has &quot;several&quot; launch reservations, and that a firm decision one way or the other is expected next week from Eutelsat, a European company that has reservations for two launches. In June, General Dynamics said it will build 18 rockets during the next five years to launch communications satellites.    The spokesman said a market analysis by General Dynamics shows a potential between 1989 and 1995 of about 50 satellites of the type that could be launched by the company's Atlas-Centaur rockets. The company expects its first commercial satellite launch in mid-1989.    Ariane's success Tuesday -- its 15th since December 1979 -- comes after failures in two of its previous four launches, both caused by failure of the rocket's third-stage engine, which has been redesigned. Two other Ariane launches also have failed.    Arianespace's main competition, apart from the U.S. companies, could come from the Soviet Union's Proton rocket and the Chinese Long March, both of which could launch commercial satellites less expensively than either the U.S. or European rockets. U.S. companies wouldn't be able to use either rocket, however, and European companies so far have declined to do so despite the lower launch costs, usually citing reasons of security. The Soviets are scheduled soon to launch an Indian Earth-mapping satellite, however. The Japanese also are preparing a competitive rocket, which is to begin commercial launches in 1992.    ---   Robert L. Rose in Chicago and Paul M. Barrett in Philadelphia contributed to this article.    ---   Martin Marietta Signs Pact   BETHESDA, Md. -- Martin Marietta Corp. said it signed a preliminary agreement with West Germany's Federal Ministry of Post andamp; Telecommunications to launch a 4,580-pound, direct-broadcast satellite on a commercial Titan rocket.    The aerospace and defense contractor is one of two companies remaining in competition to launch the satellite. If the West German agency chooses the Titan vehicle, the launch will be made from Cape Canaveral, Fla., Martin Marietta said. </TEXT></DOC>