<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire: A Special Weekly Report From The Wall Street Journal's Capital Bureau --- Compiled by Rich Jaroslovsky </HL><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT LATAM EUROP </CO><IN> MON FRX TEL </IN><G> EXE CNG TRE FCC </G><TEXT>   NORIEGA'S CIA TIES complicate U.S. efforts to oust him.    Administration officials say that only the Panamanian strong man's fellow military officers can overthrow him. But Noriega, who shrewdly made himself the CIA's primary contact, was responsible for picking the other officers who acted as liaisons with the U.S. As a result, intelligence sources say, the U.S. has no independent &quot;assets.&quot;    &quot;It's amazing how little we know about a country with which we've had such an intimate relationship,&quot; complains a U.S. official. Analysts discount the likelihood that civil opposition will overthrow Noriega. He manipulates nationalistic fervor and anti-American feeling to maintain the support of the country's rural class.    A U.S. official complains that the opposition delayed a general strike because of Carnival celebrations.    CANDIDATES FACE potential pitfalls in coming contests.    Closing on Bush in the New Hampshire polls, Dole hopes to build momentum going into the South by taking South Dakota and Minnesota on Feb. 23; Bush puts TV money into South Dakota in hopes of stopping Dole there. But Robertson could be a spoiler: He gains on Dole in Minnesota and threatens Bush's hopes for a showcase win in South Carolina three days before Super Tuesday.    Dukakis counts on a Minnesota victory to show he isn't just a regional candidate; he is also locked in a tight battle with Gephardt in South Dakota, despite Sen. Daschle's expected Gephardt endorsement next week. Gore bides his time but considers TV ads in South Dakota and quietly hopes for a good showing in Wyoming March 5.    GATHERING FORCES could start to push the dollar down again.    Treasury chief Baker and visiting German Finance Minister Stoltenberg hail the currency's stability so far this year; today's trade report could raise the dollar even more in the short run if it meets or exceeds market expectations. But other factors could combine to put the currency back on a downward course.    Nervous traders could begin selling dollars again if the Fed's interest-rate easing makes U.S. investments more unattractive. Stoltenberg resists U.S. pressure for matching German rate cuts. The Germans also predict privately that foreign central banks won't want to spend as much to prop up the dollar as they did in 1987.    U.S. officials' worst nightmare is that the balky trade-deficit figures will surge wildly, as they did in December.    SHADES OF NANCY: After Dole answers a question in New Hampshire on his support for an oil-import fee, wife Elizabeth whispers to him to add that he would provide a rebate on home heating oil. Dole dutifully complies with her instructions.    IOWA'S TURNOUT casts doubt on the theory that Robertson's strong showing came largely from Democratic crossovers. The state GOP says that its caucus turnout was about 110,000, only slightly more than in the last contested race in 1980, while the Democrats' 120,000 was up sharply from last time out. Another possibility: Robertson's presence may have attracted Democrats but turned off Republicans.    LAWMAKERS VOW to block actions favorable to broadcasters and the FCC until legislation restoring the Fairness Doctrine becomes law. A bill requiring cable systems to carry over-the-air stations is held up; so are two GOP nominees to the FCC. Broadcasters also face tough fights against moves to tax the sale of stations and to require owners to keep stations for three years before selling them.    JACKSON PREPARES for a burst of attention as the campaign swings south after New Hampshire. Iowa results show that he can get support beyond his black base; Democratic analyst Peter Hart suggests that accolades heaped on Super Bowl quarterback Doug Williams may make some whites less apprehensive about Jackson.    REPUBLICAN INFIGHTING delays the deficit-reduction commission.    Though the Democrats made their appointments weeks ago, GOP action lags. White House officials say that Bush, who views the commission as a Dole ploy, suggested that Reagan not make his two appointments to the 14-member panel. Though miffed at being given so few seats, Reagan apparently will participate. Likely GOP appointees include former Transportation chief Lewis and Sen. Domenici.    A Reagan official predicts that the commission will have little impact, but others think it could yield a post-election proposal that would serve as political cover for the next president and Congress. One sign: increasing competition to claim credit for the idea. Felix Rohatyn wrote about it as early as 1980; Cuomo wrote Congress backing it last April; Dole pushed it in the Senate.    And former Democratic Chairman Strauss says, &quot;I've been pushing this commission for a couple of years.&quot;    MINOR MEMOS: Joking about Dukakis's allegedly passionless approach to politics, a Gephardt aide describes his message as: &quot;Ich Bin ein Technocrat.&quot; . . . Nixon will begin writing a political column for Rupert Murdoch's Sunday Times of London. . . . Iran holds a dinner party at a suburban church to celebrate the ninth anniversary of Khomeini's takeover. Invitations ban handshaking between men and women. . . . As Bush tried to get order during a contentious Senate vote, Sen. Leahy passed him a note reading: &quot;They're acting like a bunch of Dan Rathers!&quot; </TEXT></DOC>