<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880204-0104 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Crash Studies </HL><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> FED CNG SEC CFT </G><TEXT>   Five major studies of the October stock-market crash now are complete. The SEC study, released Tuesday, is thickest, outweighing the Brady, NYSE, GAO and CFTC reports. But most readers probably want to know whether such devout study will help avoid future stock-market debacles.    The only danger in this profusion of studies is that it will misdirect our attentions. The market crash was not caused by computers or program traders. The market crash was caused by boneheaded tax proposals in the Ways and Means Committee and the breakup of the Louvre accord to stabilize the dollar. Markets all over the world crashed, after all, whether or not they featured program trading. The most important thing to understand about these studies is that they were not set up to second-guess the Treasury or the Ways and Means Committee, as helpful as that might be in avoiding future debacles. The studies were set up to look at how well the market mechanisms coped and what changes might help them work better in the future -- a narrower but certainly useful purpose.    Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, thankfully, rejected the most publicized single proposal: the Brady commission notion that the Fed be given overall supervision of securities markets. The Fed doesn't want a job, Mr. Greenspan told the Senate Banking Committee Tuesday, that would imply new lender-of-last-resort responsibilities for the securities industry. The less sense the markets have of a safety net the better. Risk is vital if securities trading is to be a responsible and sober process.    Indeed, he blamed the crash in part on an insufficient sense of risk last summer. As the Brady report also concluded, portfolio insurance and other modern trading strategies had convinced big traders of downside protection, but they learned the market didn't and probably can't have the liquidity to get them all out at the same time. As Mr. Greenspan said, there will continue to be market strategies but faith has been much diminished, as reflected in a sharp decline in portfolio insurance accounts. Markets are safer when traders learn such lessons.    Exchanges began making their own fixes well before the first study went to the printers. They have to open their doors every day and if investors lose confidence, the exchanges lose too. According to a report in this newspaper, the New York Stock Exchange today is expected to make further refinements in its earlier restrictions on use of its electronic order distribution system during periods of sharp price movements. Such restrictions, first employed in the crisis week itself, slow down market activity during periods of price volatility.    Leo Melamed of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange also responded yesterday, proposing a private-sector committee, with regulatory representation, to facilitate greater exchange of information among spot, futures and options markets. He indicated as well that the Merc is willing to raise its &quot;margin&quot; requirements, which are actually security deposits on the stock index futures contracts traded on that exchange. There had been general agreement on crash study commissions that raising the cost of futures hedging in Chicago would reduce the arbitraging widely blamed for the October meltdown. Index futures contracts sold in Chicago fed back into heavy and concentrated selling of certain securities in New York.    Yesterday as well, SEC Chairman David Ruder urged Senate Banking to give the SEC regulatory responsibility for all &quot;securities-related&quot; markets. That, of course, means taking over the role of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) in regulating the securities futures markets that developed mainly out of the Chicago commodity exchanges. Give Mr. Ruder credit for boldness. Chicago's friends in Congress have made mincemeat of such proposals in the past. But it is a reasonable request.    There is a great deal to be learned from the five studies. There's wide agreement that the exchanges and clearing houses need more efficient mechanisms for clearing and settling trades. The SEC gave Big Board specialists relatively good marks, but suggested that the exchange further reorder specialist responsibilities on the basis of their Black Monday performances. Everyone seems to be in favor of improved capitalization of the securities industry.    In short, all the effort expended has had some worthwhile results. Members of Senate Banking are approaching the financial markets in a gentlemanly and cautious way, as legislators considering the future status of a major national asset certainly should. Regulators are demonstrating a similar degree of caution. As for the markets themselves, they seem to be functioning reasonably well at a more modest price level. If no harm comes from the studies, we can count them a success. </TEXT></DOC>