<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881010-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Volume Business: Waldenbooks Peddles Books a Bit Like Soap, Transforming Market --- Chief Officer Harry Hoffman Puts Emphasis on Profits; A Threat to Little Stores --- How to Create a Best Seller </HL><AUTHOR> Cynthia Crossen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> KM </CO><IN> RET PUB </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Should books be sold like soap or toothpaste?    Harry Hoffman thinks they should. And that upsets a lot of people because Mr. Hoffman, who learned to sell at Procter andamp; Gamble Co., is now the most powerful man in American book publishing. The man who has profoundly and irrevocably changed the way books are created, marketed and bought in this country considers them a commodity whose success can be driven by packaging and promotion.    In nine years as the chief executive of Waldenbooks, Mr. Hoffman has transformed the K mart Corp. subsidiary from a dull giant into the most innovative book retailer in the U.S. When he took over in 1979, Waldenbooks, then part of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., had 542 stores and sold 20 million books annually. This year, its 1,319 book outlets will sell some 100 million books.    That rapid growth has put Waldenbooks' sales neck and neck with closely held B. Dalton/Barnes andamp; Noble, which once had a comfortable lead. Since Mr. Hoffman entered the game, Waldenbooks has gained a reputation for creativity and aggressiveness that Dalton, which has 795 stores, has lost. &quot;Waldenbooks is more responsive to the marketplace and more willing to quickly change directions,&quot; says Allan Lang, who has been active in book sales and marketing for 25 years.    In 1987, Waldenbooks' sales reached about $800 million, according to BP Report, an industry newsletter. Mr. Hoffman estimates that this year same-store sales will rise 11% and overall volume 25%. BP Report puts Dalton's 1987 sales at $950 million, but if textbooks -- which Waldenbooks doesn't sell -- are excluded, Dalton's sales would have matched or slightly trailed Waldenbooks'.    As Waldenbooks' sales grow, so does Mr. Hoffman's influence over the publishing industry. Mr. Hoffman, an aficionado of mysteries, thrillers and business books, credits himself with almost single-handedly putting on national best-seller lists Nelson DeMille's &quot;Charm School,&quot; a thriller favorably reviewed by the New York Times and the Washington Post.    Mr. Hoffman tells publishers what he thinks of the design, timing and marketing of their books. He scans manuscripts sent to him by unknown authors seeking advice. He grants audiences to well-known writers, such as Harvey Mackay, the author of &quot;Swim With the Sharks,&quot; who make pilgrimages to his Stamford, Conn., office.    In an industry that boasts of being the last bastion of civilized commerce, Mr. Hoffman doesn't believe selling books is a gentleman's game. He is riveted on the bottom line. He squeezes out literary works to make room for blockbusters, and he squeezes out books in general to stock higher-margin items such as greeting cards and audiocassettes; 20% of Waldenbooks' sales aren't books. And he doesn't subscribe to the industry's conceit that it's all one big happy family. &quot;I look on my competitors as the enemy,&quot; he says.    To members of the literary crowd that still dominates much of American publishing, Mr. Hoffman's growing power is unnerving. They sneer at him for including among the great authors of the 20th century Tom Clancy, Jackie Collins and Louis L'Amour -- all better known for big sales. But Mr. Hoffman, a brawny 60-year-old with a guileless manner, isn't embarrassed by his preference for the commercial over the literary. Let the publishing highbrows sell esoterica to cliques; Mr. Hoffman believes he can push product where it has never been pushed before.    To independent booksellers, Mr. Hoffman is a grim reaper constantly threatening to cut them down. When a Waldenbooks outlet opened recently in Westport, Conn., a local bookstore manager quickly felt the impact.    &quot;Sales have been dropping,&quot; says Erik Semmelmeyer, who manages the Remarkable Book Shop. &quot;They can discount more freely, and we can't match them discount for discount because we're such a small operation. . . . They have enough stores to be able to take a loss on some of them while they wait out the competition.&quot;    Waldenbooks' growth feeds on itself, with publishers offering steeper discounts to chains than to independent stores. &quot;The publishers say we need the chains to sell our best sellers, and we need the independents to provide customer service,&quot; says Andy Ross, who owns Cody's Books, an independent bookstore in Berkeley, Calif. &quot;Well, best sellers are where you make your money. No one has ever made money providing customer service.&quot;    Although Waldenbooks has never been more powerful, it is facing new challenges. Even Mr. Hoffman concedes that the basic Waldenbooks outlet is a mature business. In the 1970s, Waldenbooks capitalized on the proliferation of malls, which offered armies of foot traffic. But mall construction has slowed, and the leases that Waldenbooks signed 10 or 15 years ago are expiring, rents are rising sharply, and the stores can't easily expand to make room for higher-margin products.    As a result, Mr. Hoffman has been pushing the company into new ventures. It is opening new chains: of upscale bookstores called Brentano's, of book and gift stores called Waldenbooks andamp; More, of children's stores called Waldenkids, and of software stores called Waldensoftware. It recently entered the lucrative book-fair business and, to promote brand loyalty, has started five book clubs, which offer discounts in its stores to regular buyers. It also is testing a direct-mail business to compete with the big book clubs.    Waldenbooks stores are increasingly becoming places to buy entertainment rather than just books. Unlike most Dalton stores, which tend to be more sedate, Walden stores are a cluttered collection of cardboard display boxes, pyramids of best sellers, spinning racks of audiotapes and huge expanses of primarily mass-market paperbacks. Waldenbooks stores also devote more space to non-book items, such as tapes, calendars and posters.    But both chains aggressively promote the latest mass-market hard-cover best sellers, putting them in the front of each store or along the main thoroughfare, the &quot;power aisle.&quot; Both carry only a limited selection of highbrow books.    Especially worrisome to publishers is Waldenbooks' decision to publish some of its own books. Four years ago, the company, under the name Longmeadow Press, published five &quot;no-nonsense&quot; financial guides. Today, Longmeadow publishes about 60 such guides on subjects ranging from health to real estate. This year, it will publish 36 children's titles in a venture with Jim Henson of Muppet fame, and it plans at least 20 more titles next year. Longmeadow publishes more than 25 calendars a year. And, in conjunction with Crown Publishing Group, which is now part of S.I. Newhouse Jr.'s Random House, Longmeadow recently launched the Pageant series -- some 12 paperback titles a month in such categories as romance, mystery and science fiction.    &quot;Within the next two or three years, we'll be one of the top 10 publishers in the country,&quot; Mr. Hoffman predicts.    Waldenbooks stores display Longmeadow's books lavishly and keep Pageant books on their shelves more than twice as long as other paperbacks. &quot;We've given Pageant more space because we're trying to prove some points, to show that you can create a publishing line by promoting it properly,&quot; Mr. Hoffman says. &quot;We're trying to set an example for the industry.&quot;    Longmeadow's books are available to any bookseller, but the idea that one retailer could completely control distribution of a book frightens many in the industry. Last year, when Allen Neuharth, the chairman of Gannett Co., wrote a book called &quot;BusCapade,&quot; Waldenbooks received the exclusive right to sell it for a few months. Because of protests from independent booksellers, &quot;BusCapade&quot; was made available to other retailers through two wholesalers. It sold poorly, but the industry was duly warned.    Although publishers appreciate the enormous boost that Waldenbooks can give a book simply with good display and marketing, they are dismayed by the way the chain can blight a book's prospects. Mr. Hoffman acknowledges that Waldenbooks' buyers, who are so young that one senior executive calls them &quot;the kids,&quot; are as interested in a book's numbers as in its literary merit. &quot;I know it's blasphemy,&quot; Mr. Hoffman says, &quot;but they should find out what the print run is, what they're going to do with advertising and a few other things -- who the author is -- and then they can pretty well make a decision.&quot; A big print run is viewed as a crucial indicator that the publisher expects big sales.    Similarly, even if a book qualifies by such standards for Waldenbooks' shelves, its longevity is determined by a computer. Until recently, individual store managers had some control over books' shelf life in their stores. Now, every month, they get lists of books to be returned. &quot;We're saying when the returns list goes out, I don't care how many of those books you're selling every week, you've got to send them back,&quot; Mr. Hoffman says. &quot;Because the overall trend for that book is down, and rarely does a book come back.&quot;    As Mr. Hoffman has accumulated power, he has increased the pressure on publishers to offer him better deals. He constantly seeks ways to push publishers to share costs with him, and he says he is trying to train his buyers to &quot;make sure terms are adequate.&quot; Although he says he would never reject a book because of the terms, he notes that in an industry producing some 45,000 new products a year, a certain amount of triage is inevitable. &quot;Here's one book on Mediterranean cooking, and here's another book on Mediterranean cooking,&quot; he says hypothetically. &quot;They're pretty equal. So, we'll try to do the one that can give us something.&quot;    Publishers have little choice but to respond to his wishes -- and, for the record, they praise his marketing genius. In the small pond of publishing, he is a big fish. &quot;Nobody wants to aggravate Harry Hoffman,&quot; one publishing executive says.    Mr. Hoffman is aware that his position has earned him a certain immunity from criticism, and he doesn't mind one bit. &quot;I find that whenever someone has something negative to say about this company, it's usually David Godine, whom we don't do any business with, or someone who's small or insignificant to us,&quot; he says.    Mr. Godine, who says his David R. Godine Publisher Inc. does limited business with Waldenbooks, is among the few publishers who have publicly criticized Waldenbooks. &quot;I think they cater to mediocrity,&quot; Mr. Godine says. &quot;When a company makes book selections based on ad budget and printing size, they're cutting off the main responsibility of people in publishing, which is to find and nurture new talent. Waldenbooks says, 'We'll only take the tried and true.' It's one massive, monolithic mind.&quot; The Godine company publishes both fiction and nonfiction books and has sales of about $3 million a year.    Mr. Hoffman vehemently denies not caring about developing new authors and he argues that blockbuster writers benefit everyone in the book business. &quot;More and more of our business is becoming a fashion business,&quot; he says. &quot;When {Tom} Clancy writes a book, our total business just takes off. We sell an awful lot of Clancy, but all our categories get a terrific lift. If we could find a Clancy 12 times a year, our business would be exceptional.&quot;    With G.P. Putnam's Sons, Mr. Hoffman is trying to turn a relatively unknown mystery writer named Bernard Cornwell, whose book &quot;Wildtrack&quot; was published in July, into a brand-name author. He acted after Putnam's president, Phyllis Grann, sent him an early copy; he read it and liked it.    To stimulate sales of &quot;Wildtrack&quot; and Mr. DeMille's &quot;Charm School,&quot; Mr. Hoffman put them into a special incentive program, in which each copy that his stores sold would add a dollar to a pool that would later be split among their staffs. Such books also are in the &quot;hot new release&quot; program, which ensures prominent placement in the stores.    But Mr. Hoffman found the cover of &quot;Charm School&quot; bland -- it had a simple picture of a soldier and the title -- and he urged the publisher, the Warner Books unit of Warner Communications Inc., to change it. Although Warner stuck with the original cover in the hardback edition, the paperback cover conveys a much stronger feeling of a thriller about Soviet espionage; it shows dog tags emblazoned with a hammer and sickle and includes some blurbs calling it &quot;chilling, compelling . . . Cold War fiction.&quot; Mr. Hoffman recently received a copy of the paperback cover with a note from Laurence Kirshbaum, Warner Books' president, saying, &quot;As you can see, we took your advice on the cover.&quot;    Despite all the efforts to sell &quot;Charm School,&quot; Mr. Hoffman concedes that so far Waldenbooks' hard-cover sales of the book have totaled only 9,000. (Warner won't disclose overall sales but says it printed just under 100,000 hard-cover copies and plans 1.2 million in paperback.) &quot;I'm not deflated,&quot; Mr. Hoffman says, &quot;because I think we can still help in the breakout process, but not as easily as I thought.&quot;    Despite occasional setbacks, Waldenbooks, together with Dalton, has shown the power of the chains in getting people to buy books. Before Mr. Hoffman entered the business a decade ago, a hard-cover fiction best seller sold 150,000 copies. Today, such a book may sell as many as a million. And if it is a pulpy romance rather than a literary work, that suits Mr. Hoffman and his supporters just fine. &quot;Some publishers are always going to want to go back to the Bennett Cerf and Alfred Knopf era,&quot; Mr. Kirshbaum says. &quot;But this is the mass-merchandising era. Books are a tough sell, and anyone who makes it easier has my complete approval.&quot;    As long as Mr. Hoffman heads Waldenbooks -- and he intends to stay until forced to retire -- he clearly will try to increase its presence in the book business.    &quot;We've done a lot of innovative things that I don't think people really give us credit for, or they do it begrudgingly,&quot; he says. &quot;I think people think wrongly about us that we're overbearing. My philosophy has always been that any time we do anything of major consequence, we try to share the cost and benefit with publishers. But I don't think it's an overbearing, demanding-type situation.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>