<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0009 </DOCNO><HL> North's Strong Appeal to Public Cuts Two Ways:Pro-Contra Testimony Casts Doubt About Reagan--By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Lt. Col. Oliver North's saga of the Iran-Contra affair will be tested this week as lawmakers cross-examine the Marine officer and hear testimony from the chief witness to his covert activities from the White House -- Rear Adm. John Poindexter.    Four days of testimony by Col. North have placed the operation at the highest levels of U.S. and Israeli intelligence and indicate President Reagan knew that profits from the arms sales to Iran were generating funds at least for covert initiatives with the Jerusalem government.    While refusing to criticize his commander in chief, the officer drew Mr. Reagan's cabinet deeper into the controversy and said William Casey, the late director of the Central Intelligence Agency, sought to build a permanent structure outside legal curbs imposed on the CIA.    The joint House-Senate hearings last week were devoted largely to bringing out Col. North's account of events, and only late Friday did lawmakers begin their questioning. This cross-examination will run through today, and Adm. Poindexter, the former national security adviser and Col. North's superior at the White House, will take the stand tomorrow.    For the administration and Congress, Col. North's testimony and personal, almost evangelical appeal to a national audience are double-edged. Conservatives rushed to ride the swell of support for the young officer, but the same public that believes Col. North's account thinks Mr. Reagan is lying about his own role.    The president denies he was told that profits from U.S. weapons sales to Iran were being diverted to aid Nicaraguan insurgents. But White House documents indicate Mr. Reagan was briefed last September on parallel plans to tap some of these funds to support secret initiatives with Israel.    The Sept. 15 memorandum was prepared by Col. North and is among hundreds of papers released by investigators Friday. Under questioning by Arthur Liman, chief counsel of the Senate panel, the former White House aide acknowledged that secret U.S.-Israeli initiatives described in a still-classified portion of the same memo were to be financed with &quot;residual&quot; funds from the arms sales.    The document recommends that Adm. Poindexter brief Mr. Reagan after meeting with Mr. Casey and Amiram Nir, a counterterrorism expert to former Prime Minister Shimon Peres. A hand-written notation by the admiral reads &quot;approved . . . done.&quot;    Committee members, who have been put on the defensive by the emotional reaction to Col. North, face a greater problem in their role as investigators. Many are attracted to the Marine's account precisely because it bolsters their own suspicions about the affair, but the number of conflicts make it hard to reach conclusions based solely on a man who admits to using deception so often in the past.    These conflicts fall into two categories. The first appear to arise in Col. North himself as he attempted to achieve sometimes conflicting goals and serve -- some would say manipulate -- a variety of bosses. The second set of conflicts is external, as when his recollection of events is at odds with prior witnesses, including his old friend, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane.    Adm. Poindexter, who succeeded Mr. McFarlane in late 1985, is expected to corroborate that Mr. Casey had an important role in the Iran-Contra operation. But because the director died in May, it is hard to determine his full relationship with Col. North. Among those who knew both men, there are serious questions over how close the two were, and according to one intelligence source, Col. North spoke of the need to replace the director after the 1984 elections.    Like Mr. Casey, former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan was closer to the president than either Col. North or Adm. Poindexter, and current and former White House officials question whether Adm. Poindexter would have taken any major actions without at least informing the chief of staff. Col. North hasn't implicated Mr. Regan in the attempt last November to doctor the White House history of the Iran arms sales, but both he and Adm. Poindexter are likely to be questioned about it this week.    Col. North has testified that he respected the chain of command putting him under Adm. Poindexter, but his own memos indicate that he sometimes played Mr. Casey, the admiral and Mr. McFarlane against one another. Early in 1986, he sought the help of Mr. McFarlane, whom he called &quot;boss&quot; even after the former adviser had left the NSC, to convince Mr. Casey and Adm. Poindexter of a proposal Col. North wanted adopted. Months later, in September 1986, he outlined a strategy where Mr. Casey had been prepared to bring up a point Col. North wants with Adm. Poindexter.    &quot;This lieutenant colonel&quot; would follow &quot;that admiral&quot; up any hill, Col. North testified. But only hours later, under the prodding of Rep. Edgar Jenkins (D., Ga.), the Marine officer showed another side. &quot;On some issues, I was probably the only voice,&quot; he said.    Among Col. North's revelations about Mr. Casey, none is more important than his disclosure of the director's interest in setting up a permanent structure to perform covert operations outside the CIA. Retired Air Force Gen. Richard Secord, who ran the private network that delivered arms to Iran and the Contras, has said the Marine officer wanted to move beyond Nicaragua to aid rebels in Marxist Angola, but it isn't clear whether Col. North was speaking then for Mr. Casey. The late director bridled under congressional restrictions, yet the very clumsiness of the private operation made it a high-risk venture he might have shunned. &quot;Casey was a schemer,&quot; said one investigator, &quot;but this seems to be a stupid scheme.&quot;    The stated goal that the structure become self-sustaining conflicts with a record of dependence on arms deals generated by U.S. government action. For example, a proposed contract, allowing the CIA to use a Danish freighter that Col. North said he bought to fulfill a request by Mr. Casey, was designed to use U.S. appropriations in order to make a profit for the Iran-Contra operation. And financial records show that when funds for the Contra operations were running short last fall, the CIA paid $1.2 million for weapons from one of Gen. Secord's companies even as a Poindexter memo to Col. North said Mr. Casey should &quot;make things right for Secord.&quot; Gen. Secord helped run a private network of shell companies.    Col. North's knowledge of the controversial finances on the private network remains unclear. The Marine officer testified he was surprised that so much money remained in foreign accounts last November. But a May 1986 memo reflects a close understanding of deposits from the arms sales, and another last September estimates the dollar value of assets in a Panamanian corporation closed down after disclosures in Costa Rica. Similarly, Col. North testified that Mr. Casey had urged that Gen. Secord be brought in to run the operation, but the general's own comments reflect he was closer to the NSC than the CIA.    For investigators, the most difficult question left by the North-Casey relationship is whether the &quot;fall guy&quot; plan envisioned by the late director is happening before them. Col. North said Mr. Casey urged that Adm. Poindexter take the &quot;hit&quot; with the young Marine officer in order to protect Mr. Reagan, and this testimony will color whatever the admiral says about what the president was told about the diversion. &quot;The question that arises,&quot; said one investigator, &quot;is are we still following the Casey plan?&quot;    The conflicts between Col. North and prior witnesses have generated bitter recriminations in some cases and divisions among men once united in support of Nicaraguan insurgents. The former NSC aide said only two living officials -- Adm. Poindexter and Mr. McFarlane -- knew of the diversion of funds to the Contras along with Mr. Casey and the late Adm. Arthur Moreau, a top aide to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. More sweeping, however, was the impression Col. North left that many of his former colleagues, including cabinet members, knew what he was doing and remained silent.    For example, Col. North said Secretary of State George Shultz once congratulated him for his work with the Contras. He also testified that he presented a detailed list of his efforts to arm the Nicaraguan insurgents at a Pentagon meeting last Aug. 28, and that Mr. McFarlane directed him to &quot;fix&quot; memos about his work for the Nicaraguans.    Mr. Shultz has responded that while Col. North's account is technically accurate, it is completely misleading. According to State Department spokesman Charles Redman, Mr. Shultz didn't know about Col. North's secret arms network and was congratulating him only for helping maintain the Contras' morale while official U.S. aid to them was suspended.    Similarly, three officials present at the Aug. 28 Pentagon meeting deny that Col. North briefed the group on his efforts to arm the Contras during the period when American military aid was prohibited. One official said he recalled a discussion of the need for air drops to the insurgents and other activities, but only after the resumption of an official CIA-run aid program, which had been approved separately by the House and Senate earlier that summer. &quot;My recollection is that we discussed what to do, not what Ollie had been doing,&quot; said a participant in the meeting.    Moreover, although Col. North said Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams attended the Aug. 28 meeting, the record of the meeting shows Mr. Abrams wasn't there.    Some of Col. North's sharpest conflicts are with Mr. McFarlane, his former boss and mentor, and friends of the former national security adviser describe him as both puzzled and outraged by some of his former aide's claims.    Col. North testified that Mr. McFarlane in mid-1985 identified memos revealing the secret Contra aid network and told Col. North to &quot;go fix them.&quot; Mr. McFarlane continues to insist, as he previously testified, that Col. North proposed altering the memos and presented him with two pages of suggested changes, which according to Mr. McFarlane were never approved.    The fact that the gung-ho Col. North didn't get around to altering the sensitive memoranda for more than a year, until the secret Contra aid program was about to be exposed last November, lends some credence to Mr. McFarlane's argument although it doesn't settle the dispute.    A second question surrounds a chronology prepared last fall to guide statements by the president and administration testimony on the Iran-Contra affair. Mr. McFarlane has admitted that he tried to distance President Reagan from two Israeli arms shipments to Iran in 1985, but he denies Col. North's allegation that he proposed falsifying the account to say that the U.S. believed a November 1985 shipment of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles contained oil-drilling equipment.    In a television interview last Nov. 13, Mr. McFarlane alternately used the terms &quot;arms&quot; and &quot;equipment&quot; to describe the shipment. According to Mr. McFarlane's recollections and records, he was out of town a week later when that deliberately vague construction was replaced in the White House chronology by a false assertion that the Israelis had assured the U.S. that they were &quot;going to try oil-drilling parts as an incentive.&quot;    Mr. McFarlane recalls that he had trouble remembering the details of the incident, but that last Nov. 18, Col. North told him the Israelis initially claimed the shipment contained oil-drilling equipment and U.S. officials didn't learn for more than a month that it had contained arms. </TEXT></DOC>