<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870714-0092 </DOCNO><HL> 'Who Will Investigate the Congress?'</HL><DD> 07/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   These are excerpts from the testimony of Lt. Col. Oliver North before the Iran-Contra committee. A related editorial appears today {see REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK -- (Editorial): High Noon for the Constitution}.    Lt. Col. North's opening statement: This is a strange process you are putting me and others through. Apparently the president has not asserted his prerogatives and you have been permitted to make the rules. You call before you the officials of the executive branch. You put them under oath for what must be collectively thousands of hours of testimony. You dissect their testimony to find inconsistencies.    From where I sit, it is not the fairest process. One thing is for sure: You will never investigate yourself in this matter. There is not much chance that you will conclude at the end of these hearings that the Boland amendments and your frequent policy changes were unwise, or that your restrictions should not have been imposed on the executive branch.    You are not likely to conclude that the administration acted properly by trying to sustain the freedom fighters in Nicaragua when you abandoned them, and you are not likely to conclude by commending the president of the United States who tried valiantly to recover our hostages and achieve an opening with strategically located Iran.    It is also difficult to comprehend that my work at the NSC -- all of which was approved and carried out in the best interests of our country -- has led to two massive parallel investigations staffed by more than 200 people. It is mind-boggling to me that one of those investigations is criminal and that you have attempted to criminalize policy differences between co-equal branches of government and the executive's conduct of foreign affairs.    It is inevitable that the Congress will, in the end, blame the executive branch. But I suggest to you that it is the Congress which must accept the blame in the Nicaraguan freedom fighter matter. Plain and simple, you are to blame because of the fickle, vacillating, unpredictable, on-again, off-again policy toward the Nicaraguan democratic resistance -- the Contras.    When the executive branch did everything possible within the law to prevent them from being wiped out by Moscow's surrogates in Havana, in Managua, you then have this investigation to blame the problem on the executive branch.    It doesn't make sense to me. Who will investigate the Congress?    Counsel George Van Cleve: You knew that there were restrictions being imposed on the government by the Boland amendment, but what was your understanding of the restrictions that applied to your activities as a member of the NSC staff?    Lt. Col. North: My understanding was that first of all we were to work to comply with Boland and that we were to keep alive the Nicaraguan resistance. Second, I did not view, nor did my superiors view, that the NSC staff was covered by Boland. There were people who were concerned about that, and we sought and obtained legal advice to the effect that it was not.    Certainly we had many newspaper articles at the time that no U.S. government support whatsoever, of any kind, etc. could be provided. There were lots of so-called legal scholars who provided that kind of advice to the media.    I had discussions with John Norton Moore of the American Bar Association on a number of occasions about this. He did not believe Boland to be constitutional and he did not think it applied to the NSC. There were several other lawyers who felt the same way. The bottom line is that we looked at it as saying that very clearly the CIA could not use expropriated money for this and couldn't use DoD moneys for these purposes. But very clearly Boland did not proscribe the NSC from being the point of contact, the coordinator.    Mr. Van Cleve: The Boland amendment is not a criminal statute, is it?    Lt. Col. North: Certainly not.    Mr. Van Cleve: The reason I ask is that it is a statute that is intended to control the relations between the executive branch and Congress where the spending of taxpayer funds is concerned, right?    Lt. Col. North: I understood Boland to be an appropriations measure. Here's money and here's what you can and can't do with these moneys.    Mr. Van Cleve: If you were directly carrying out the foreign policy of the president in working with the Contras, it would be necessary to show that Congress intended to interfere with the president's carrying out of his foreign policy before it could be shown that you violated the Boland amendment, wouldn't it?    Lt. Col. North: Yes.   Mr. Van Cleve: It's clear isn't it that when Congress wants to control the president's conduct in a statute like this, especially in foreign policy, it usually says so explicitly. . . . It's also clear that if Congress told the president that he could not ask foreign countries or private individuals for financial or other official assistance for the Contras, there would be serious doubt about whether Congress had exceeded its constitutional power, correct?    Lt. Col. North: I think there is no doubt that if Congress had passed such a measure it would clearly in my opinion be unconstitutional.    Mr. Van Cleve: You are basing that at least in part on your conversations with John Norton Moore of the University of Virginia Law School?    Lt. Col. North: And others. Marines can read. I'm just telling you that we went to some lengths to look at these things. . . . We scrupulously avoided breaking any law.    Mr. Van Cleve: If you weren't violating the Boland amendment, why was it necessary to {mislead Congress}?    Lt. Col. North: We had lives at risk. We had a program at great risk. I do not believe that there ought to be circumstances in which people like myself have to make judgments over lives or lies.    What I am suggesting, gentlemen, is that the process has not worked. It has been indiscreet on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. If I had divulged what I was doing, many, many lives were at stake.    Counsel Arthur Liman: Can you explain how you thought lives would be endangered . . . when Congress said, &quot;Are you giving support to the Contras?&quot; by saying, &quot;We sure are, notwithstanding Boland.&quot;    Lt. Col. North: Quite simply that the exposure of the operation would have caused it to be terminated. . . . The Sandinistas would then know, for example, the origin of the supplies, the schedules of the flights, the place where things were landing, put such enormous, enormous pressure on the local governments that they would be unable to support . . .    Mr. Liman: You've missed the point . . .    Lt. Col. North: No, I haven't missed it at all. . . . Because of things like these hearings, there will be governments that will be less willing to assist our country in the conduct of operations even with findings and congressional approval and the rest of it.    Mr. Liman: Wasn't the problem that the Congress had decided that they did not want the Contras supported and so you couldn't work with the Congress?    Lt. Col. North: Counsel, if the Congress had decided nobody in the U.S. should render any support whatsoever to the Nicaraguan democratic resistance, then it should have passed a law saying that. The law that was passed, a part of an appropriations bill, didn't prohibit what we did.    Rep. Edgar Jenkins (D., Ga.): I think it is unfair to the panel . . . or to the Congress to say that nations that aren't even democracies themselves have more interest in democracy in Nicaragua than the Congress of the U.S.    Lt. Col. North: What I said was that those countries demonstrated an awareness of the consequences of a communist takeover in Central America that made them want to contribute to a democratic outcome in Nicaragua.    The fact is that if we were to have been proscribed from doing that kind of activity and the Congress sought to proscribe the executive from their doing that, then it should have passed a law that forbade it. And there should have been the ultimate constitutional confrontation. . . .    I think it's necessary that the administration and the Congress come to an accord as to what will be told, when and how, and to whom and have absolute confidence that if it's done it won't be revealed beforehand and if the decision is taken not to do it, that won't be bandied about town, either. Because those are things that create an even more dangerous world.    Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah): Do you think these hearings may achieve some success . . . I may be on a moonshot with this one, if they result in Congress recognizing that the president needs to be given some latitude to carry out his foreign policy objectives without 535 members of Congress, mini-secretaries of state, second-guessing everything the president's trying to do?    Lt. Col. North: Yes, sir. </TEXT></DOC>