<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880817-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH SELECTED Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana to be his running mate.    The choice of the telegenic but relatively obscure Quayle represents a big gamble for Bush. He has strong conservative credentials, experience on high-profile Senate panels and, at 41, the advantage of youth. But he is not viewed as a heavyweight choice and is credited with few accomplishments after 12 years in the House and Senate. It is also uncertain how he will stand up to the media scrutiny that will begin now. Bush wasn't due to disclose his vice presidential choice until tomorrow but unexpectedly announced it after he arrived in New Orleans and met briefly with Reagan.    Republicans approved a 40,000-word platform that calls for no tax increase, a child-care tax credit and rapid Strategic Defense Initiative deployment.    ---   Moscow said that because of a worsening military situation, it won't speed the withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan. A U.N.-sponsored accord set a deadline of Feb. 15, but Moscow had indicated it wanted the troops home this year. The Kremlin also denied U.S. charges that its troops are leaving as many as 30 million mines behind.    ---   Israeli troops fired on hundreds of rioting Palestinians at a Negev Desert prison camp, killing two and wounding a third, the army said. Hospital officials in the West Bank and Gaza Strip said six Palestinians were wounded by soldiers in violent protests as a military curfew affecting 650,000 Gazans continued through its second day.    ---   Authorities in Burma released 51 people arrested during last week's anti-government demonstrations, in which at least 95 were killed. Troops backed by light tanks took up positions in Rangoon in advance of Friday's emergency legislative session to select a successor to Sein Lwin, who resigned as president following the protests last week.    ---   A U.N. panel recommended assessing member nations $35.7 million to support the 350 armed observers and 1,100 support personnel needed to monitor a cease-fire between Iran and Iraq for three months. The U.S., which owes the financially troubled world body a total of $537 million, would be assessed about $10.9 million.    The Pentagon said four warships have left U.S. ports for the Persian Gulf as part of a routine rotation. Defense officials said the deployment was an indication the U.S. is not ready to cut its gulf forces, despite the Iran-Iraq cease-fire due to start Saturday.    ---   Polish miners began an occupation strike at a coal mine in the southern town of Jastrzebie, demanding recognition for the outlawed Solidarity trade union, opposition sources said. The strike, involving 2,000 miners, came on the eighth anniversary of the formation of Solidarity. A mine official said all output of coal had ceased.    ---   A Syrian-backed Christian declared his candidacy for president of Lebanon, creating a crisis as the country's parliament prepared to choose a successor to Amin Gemayel tomorrow. The announcement by Suleiman Franjieh, who was president in the early 70s, brought an immediate warning of renewed civil war from a rival militia.    ---   Nelson Mandela was diagnosed as having tuberculosis, and a family lawyer said, &quot;Suddenly he looks very old.&quot; South African doctors disagreed on whether the condition is life-threatening and the part played by conditions in prison, where the 70-year-old African National Congress leader has been serving a life sentence since 1964.    ---   The State Department said six tons of U.S.-supplied food, clothing and tents have been shipped to southern Honduras to assist groups of Contras and civilians who have fled there from Nicaragua. Contras have been withdrawing from Nicaragua, saying a lack of U.S. supplies is hampering their fight against the Sandinista government.    ---   Pretoria said South Africa, Cuba and Angola have established a joint military commission to monitor the week-old truce in the 13-year-old Angolan war. The three countries, which have agreed to withdrawal of troops and are expected to agree on Namibian independence, are to meet next week with U.S. mediators to set a timetable.    ---   A bomb exploded in Trincomalee in eastern Sri Lanka, killing seven and injuring 20, military authorities said. All the dead were Sinhalese, mostly government workers, and authorities said they believe the time bomb was set by Tamil rebels. Tamils have refused to work for the government since a Sinhalese mob killed three last month.    ---   The Nile is approaching record levels and threatens to inundate Khartoum, where torrential rains have left up to 1.5 million Sudanese homeless. Officials said Monday's level was a record for that date and was less than a meter short of breaking all records. Cartographers are trying to pinpoint which areas of the city are most vulnerable. </TEXT></DOC>