<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890804-0111 </DOCNO><DD> = 890804 </DD><AN> 890804-0111. </AN><HL> The Money Chase:@  How Lewis Ranierie@  Is Battling 'Zombies'@  In Texas Sandamp;L Jungle@  ---@  Buyer of an Ailing Institution@  Tries to Protect Deposits@  From FDIC-Run Rivals@  ---@  'It Was Like a Gasoline War'@  ----@  By Andy Zipser@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/04/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   From the deceptively secure perch of his office, Lewis Ranieri peers out at a treacherous financial jungle teeming with the walking dead of this city's devastated savings and loan industry.    They are known as zombies -- brain-dead thrift institutions kept in motion by federal regulators. Bled dry by years of avarice, incompetence, fraud and a plummeting economy, the zombies have long since run out of the life-sustaining capital. But until the federal government can gear up its huge Sandamp;L-rescue plan -- which could take months -- and provide enough money to give the zombies a decent burial, they will continue to roam through the jungle. They will continue to bid ferociously for the consumer deposits that keep them going. And they will continue to make life a living hell for Lew Ranieri.    The hefty, gregarious New Yorker heads a group that in December acquired United Savings of Texas as part of the much-maligned Southwest Plan to consolidate the region's failed thrift institutions. As incoming chairman and chief executive officer of a mangled institution in a devastated economy, he knew that he would need all his New York street smarts to survive.    But he didn't know that Houston was about to become one of the toughest banking environments in the country. He didn't know that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which insures bank deposits, would storm into the jungle and make things even tougher. And, he says, &quot;I didn't realize that when we bought into this Southwest Plan, we were also volunteering for an emotional roller coaster.&quot;    By now, the downward spiral of Texas Sandamp;Ls is well documented: They were pushed into an abyss by collapsing oil prices, grossly overbuilt real-estate markets, plummeting property values, defaulted loans, foreclosures and heavy losses. The Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., the Sandamp;L-deposit insurer with just $10 billion to plug a hole at least 10 times larger and growing, responded last year by peddling packages of insolvent institutions that were sweetened with liberal tax breaks and subsidies.    Despite growing criticism of regulatory largess, the Southwest Plan returned a semblance of sanity to the marketplace. It brought in some fresh capital, such as the $200 million Mr. Ranieri and his investors injected into United. It reduced the so-called Texas premium, which financial institutions in the state had to pay to overcome public skepticism and attract deposits. As 1988 ended, it had repackaged and sold most insolvent Dallas-area institutions, ending in that market the cutthroat competition for deposits.    But in Houston, the zombies still roamed, desperately seeking liquidity at any cost. &quot;They're savaging the earnings of the healthy institutions,&quot; Mr. Ranieri complained at a recent industry conference. He added that the zombies would raise the eventual cost of reconstructing the industry.    They were only one of his problems.    In buying United after failed runs at other Southwest Plan packages, Mr. Ranieri settled for what is, by most accounts, the leanest deal the FSLIC negotiated. The subsidized yield that he got on United's real-estate portfolio averaged 2.2% above the cost of funds; the FSLIC gave some other buyers as much as 2.6% or 2.7%. His protection from losses on much of that portfolio was guaranteed by the FSLIC for only one year; the agency shielded other buyers for as long as a decade. And the company through which Mr. Ranieri and his partners bought United, Hyperion Partners Ltd., was so new -- and therefore without earnings -- that it couldn't take advantage of the lavish tax benefits being handed out like candy to others.    There also was an internal mess. In a cannibalistic effort to raise cash, the previous management had sold branch offices with such abandon as to slash United's network of more than 100 offices to just 19. In the process, United had quit the potentially lucrative Dallas-Fort Worth market and left only solitary outposts in Austin and San Antonio. The cutbacks, paradoxically, crimped the institution's ability to round up deposits.    Although it hadn't made a mortgage loan in almost three years, United Savings owned a hodgepodge of money-losing assets, including acres of foreclosed real estate, a huge junk-bond portfolio and two South American companies whose businesses no one in the organization could even describe. Its $5 billion portfolio was &quot;80% baloney,&quot; Mr. Ranieri marvels. &quot;It was as if they wanted to have one of everything.&quot;    Because the FSLIC had tossed out virtually all of United's top management, the new owners had the dual burden of developing new leadership while untangling United's assets and liabilities. Meanwhile, the FSLIC had imposed such burdensome reporting requirements -- one recent report fills 12 feet of shelf space -- that employees were slaving 70 to 80 hours a week in a desperate effort to meet both business and regulatory obligations.    Nevertheless, all that didn't worry Mr. Ranieri, a Wall Street wizard who had invented mortgage-backed securities during his highflying days at Salomon Bros. If he didn't have enough branches to increase deposits, he would buy more. New management could be trained. The reporting requirements would become less onerous with time and standardization. And Mr. Ranieri had an aggressive game plan that included new investment vehicles and fresh approaches to underwriting home loans -- loans in which United would share equity, for example.    Enter the FDIC. Subjected to a drumroll of criticism of the FSLIC, the incoming Bush administration shoved it aside, suspended the Southwest Plan and sent in the FDIC. More than 60 Texas thrift institutions got FDIC conservators, watchdogs who didn't have receivership powers but nevertheless were supposed to stanch the bleeding until Congress acted on President Bush's $164 billion rescue package. But there was no magic wand to change the hard reality: To continue operating, Houston's zombie thrifts had to find cash. And the quickest, surest way of getting that cash was to jack up interest rates.    In mid-1988, before most of the Southwest Plan deals were completed, Texas thrift institutions were paying, on average, a full percentage point above the national average; by year end, the difference had all but disappeared. But in February, the premium bounced back to roughly half a percentage point. Most of the nation's highest rates on jumbo certificates of deposit are being offered by Texas thrift institutions.    With the combined woes of banks and thrift institutions in the region straining resources, the FDIC also found itself short of experienced personnel. In some cases, says a Hyperion partner, conservators who hadn't overseen an institution larger than $200 million were thrown into $2 billion institutions, &quot;so of course they couldn't control the situation.&quot; The manager assigned to one Houston Sandamp;L, a former claims adjuster, gleefully proclaimed on his first day that deposits were up sharply. Small wonder, Mr. Ranieri snorts. The insolvent institution had just raised its rates a full percentage point -- sucking deposits out of other institutions and increasing its own losses to boot.    Rates continued to soar. &quot;It was like a gasoline war,&quot; says James N. Jackson, United's executive vice president for retail banking and funding. Some days, he says, interest rates were bumped up every few hours, a quarter of a percentage point at a clip. Moreover, the insolvent institutions weren't shy about trumpeting their aggressive pricing. &quot;Under the government's program as administered by the FDIC,&quot; a University Savings newspaper ad boasted, &quot;our services include some of the highest CD rates available.&quot;    An FDIC spokesman regrets the ad but not the action. &quot;I wish they wouldn't say that,&quot; he said recently, before the FDIC placed University in receivership (which involves an actual takeover). &quot;But we can't change the facts, the financial facts of life. We'll continue to pay whatever we have to pay to keep those institutions operating.&quot;    Most zombies had few alternatives. The Federal Reserve, one possible source of funds, was no more eager to lend to them than commercial lenders were; only a handful of FDIC-administered institutions have been allowed to belly up to its window. And the FDIC wouldn't dip into its own funds, which are provided by member banks, not taxpayers or Sandamp;Ls. &quot;Until monies are given to implement a solution, there's very little that can be done,&quot; admitted Frank Norris, the FDIC conservator at Commonwealth Federal Savings Association before it, too, tumbled into receivership.    The zombies' solvent competitors could either raise rates or see cash reserves and deposit bases erode. First Gibraltar Savings, the only other large Houston institution to be recapitalized last year, decided that its rich FSLIC deal, including an estimated $900 million in tax credits, would allow it to hold the line on rates paid on deposits. But after $600 million of deposits drained away, Gerald Ford, its chief executive, decided early this year to &quot;become competitive again.&quot;    Mr. Ranieri, on the other hand, decided &quot;to hunker down under the table and wait for the cavalry.&quot; The policy, to which he is still adhering, is costly. As United stuck to its game plan, often offering a full percentage point less than the zombies, its deposits ran off like rain down a gutter.    Almost half of United's jumbo CDs have vanished since the year began. So-called hot money, controlled by brokers who keep shifting the pot to find the highest rates, shriveled from $1.2 billion at year-end 1988 to about $730 million today.    At a recent lunch with depositors, Mr. Ranieri was asked why anyone should bank with United when an FDIC-administered institution down the street was offering significantly higher interest rates. &quot;I was sitting there like a dummy,&quot; he recalls. &quot;What was I going to say? There's a cancer in the system.&quot;    Meanwhile, Mr. Ranieri scrambled deftly to keep funds flowing in. Thanks to its recapitalization, United could borrow needed cash instead of chasing the zombies' rates. It also could attract short-term cash on the repo market, in which financial institutions sell securities or loans with an agreement to buy them back. Even that was touch-and-go for a while, he says, as cash-hungry institutions poured into the market and strained its capacity. In addition, Mr. Ranieri astutely hedged against rising interest rates, which otherwise would have eaten into United's margins.    With the deposit side of the balance sheet hemorrhaging, Mr. Ranieri also had to shrink the asset side. He sold whatever he could to stay liquid. United slashed its junk-bond holdings to $215 million from $670 million. It also unloaded almost all its $2.4 billion portfolio of mortgage-backed securities at a time when that market had all but dried up.    Within months, its total assets plummeted to $3.7 billion from $5 billion, far from the orderly, value-maximizing disposition of assets that Mr. Ranieri had planned. Without pressure from the zombies, he acknowledges, &quot;we never would have shrunk that radically.&quot;    The bobbing and weaving paid off in a deceptively strong first quarter; earnings topped $36 million. But the FSLIC got more than half of that, under incentive and equity-sharing provisions in the purchase agreement. Core earnings -- net interest income plus fees minus operating expenses -- were a mere $1.6 million. United expects another profit in the second quarter.    Now, as though caught in the passing eye of a hurricane, the Houston Sandamp;L jungle is momentarily quiet. Interest rates have declined in recent weeks, although rates here remain among the nation's highest. United's first-quarter profit has created an aura of stability; thrift-industry officials say they have retained 85% of core deposits and, lately, are luring more new deposits than they are losing.    United's management also is being stabilized. Decision making, once restricted to a few wheeler-dealers, has been spread among a dozen or more executives who debate rates, asset mix and investment policy. Kenneth H. Thorn was appointed the president and chief operating officer; he was the consumer banking whiz dispatched by Chemical Banking Corp. to create new retail products for its Texas Commerce Bancshares unit.    Yet many pitfalls remain. Although the Houston economy is rebounding, its real-estate market is still mainly the domain of bargain hunters. &quot;We've had buyers coming in here, offering 50 cents on the dollar and being insulted when we wouldn't take it,&quot; laments Raymond L. Chilton, senior vice president for commercial real estate. He says United completed only two property sales in the first six months of 1989.    Although hopes run high that Congress will soon approve the Bush package, the elaborate regulatory structure it envisions would take months to build and months more to deal with all the brain-dead thrift institutions. Meanwhile, the threat posed by any resurgence in interest rates lingers. Congressmen periodically threaten to scrap the Southwest Plan deals. And Mr. Ranieri needs to rebuild his branch network, generate new deposits and unload property quickly; he hasn't much government aid cushioning him.    Mr. Ranieri's jungle, in other words, remains an unsettling place. At his desk one recent day, he reaches into a drawer and pulls out a bottle of Maalox. &quot;See,&quot; he says with a rueful chuckle, &quot;what Texas has done to me?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>