<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   WRIGHT ACCUSED Reagan of treating Central Americans as &quot;inferiors.&quot;    The House speaker, after a stormy White House meeting with the president and secretary of state, accused members of the administration of trying to freeze Nicaragua out of the diplomatic process and scuttle a regional peace plan. Wright had asked to see Reagan after administration criticism of his meetings last week with Ortega and Cardinal Obando, a cease-fire mediator under the five-nation peace plan. Reagan had refused to meet with them and accused Wright of usurping diplomatic prerogatives.    A Salvadoran military judge ordered a delay in the release of three men who confessed to the 1985 slayings of four U.S. Marines and eight civilians.    ---   Investigators are looking into factors other than weather in the Denver crash of a Continental Airlines jet Sunday in which 27 were killed and 55 hurt. Witnesses said the jet veered before a wing hit the ground. Separately, hearings began into the Aug. 16 crash of a Northwest Airlines jet that killed 156 near Detroit.    A twin-engine plane crashed on a wooded hillside in Wisconsin, killing all aboard. Authorities said a flight plan showed eight people were aboard, but emergency crews said only seven bodies have been found so far.    ---   U.S. and Soviet negotiators extended talks in Geneva aimed at resolving obstacles to a treaty eliminating superpower arsenals of medium-range nuclear missiles. In Washington, a State Department official hinted that a U.S.-Soviet summit may be delayed if the differences, chiefly over verification procedures, aren't worked out soon.    Gorbachev will address Congress during his U.S. visit next month under a tentative accord reached between White House, Kremlin and Capitol Hill officials, congressional sources said. He would be the first Soviet leader accorded such an honor.    ---   The Supreme Court upheld a ruling forcing seven chemical companies to release documents pertaining to Agent Orange, a herbicide suspected of causing cancer among Vietnam veterans. The documents were ordered unsealed in a $180 million 1984 settlement, but the companies argued that their release would divulge trade secrets.    ---   Bahrain and Saudi Arabia renewed diplomatic ties with Egypt, bringing to seven the number of Arab nations restoring relations with Cairo in the wake of last week's Arab League summit. Ties were broken after the 1979 Egypt-Israel peace pact. Separately, a U.S. official said the administration plans to sell Bahrain anti-aircraft Stinger missiles.    ---   Tehran radio said President Khamenei has ordered one-fifth of all Iran government employees to enlist in the military, bolstering speculation by Western officials that a new offensive against Iraq is being planned. Meanwhile, Iranian gunboats attacked two oil tankers, including one owned by Exxon Corp., in the Persian Gulf.    ---   South Korea's Chun formally set Dec. 16 as the date for the nation's first free presidential elections in 16 years. The declaration opened a 30-day campaign period, and the 120,000-man police force was put on alert. Incidents of violence have multiplied, most recently with disruptions at three weekend rallies.    ---   Massachusetts said it will propose rules to force oil firms to reformulate gasoline to reduce ozone. State environmental regulators said they will make the proposals today at a meeting of the Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management, and that seven other Northeast states are expected to take similar steps.    ---   Opening arguments began in the Jacksonville, Fla., trial of Carlos Lehder Rivas, charged in a 1981 indictment with smuggling 3.3 tons of cocaine from Colombia to the U.S. Lehder is accused in a separate federal indictment in Miami of being a leader of a smuggling cartel that accounted for 80% of the cocaine traffic into the U.S.    ---   Fiji said former Governor-General Ganilau has agreed to be the first president of the new republic. Col. Rabuka, who led two coups in the South Pacific nation, said military rule would end &quot;shortly&quot; with the selection of a president and prime minister.    ---   Authorities in Kenya ordered Nairobi University closed after weekend anti-government riots in which police beat students and foreign journalists. The U.S., West Germany and Britain have filed protests.    ---   The Iran-Contra report will be released tomorrow. Congressional aides preparing the report said minor editing chores forced the one-day delay in its release.    ---   Indian troops stepped up a drive to crush resistance by Tamil separatists in eastern Sri Lanka, killing 15 and wounding 25, military sources said. About 5,000 Indian troops, backed by helicopters and a naval blockade, are taking part in the sweep through Batticaloa and Ampara in the eastern districts of the island nation, the sources said. </TEXT></DOC>