<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880304-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE HOUSE REJECTED a $30.6 million aid package for the Nicaraguan Contras.    Voting 216-208, the chamber defeated the plan, pushed by the Democratic leadership, which would have provided for food, clothing, shelter and medicine for the U.S.-backed rebels. The bill also included funds for children injured in the seven-year-old conflict. The rejection of the package makes it unlikely that U.S. assistance to the rebels will resume soon. Previously approved U.S. aid ended Monday.    The Contras agreed to Ortega's plan to hold direct peace talks inside Nicaragua, but insisted that Cardinal Obando participate in the negotiations.    ---   THE U.S. ORDERED American banks to withhold Panamanian funds from Noriega.    The State Department said that under U.S. law, only Panama's envoy to Washington, a Delvalle supporter, had authority over Panamanian assets in the U.S. Following the move, federal courts issued temporary restraining orders on Panamanian funds held at four U.S. banks. Meanwhile, a bill was introduced in Congress to impose a trade, travel and currency embargo against Panama.    As strike leaders in Panama called a halt to a four-day general work stoppage, Noriega faulted the U.S. for a &quot;show of North American aggression.&quot;    ---   NATO leaders ended a two-day summit in Brussels. The alliance issued a communique that stressed its determination to decide on a &quot;comprehensive&quot; approach to further arms-control treaties. But it sidestepped decisions on divisive issues, such as modernizing the short-range nuclear weapons based in West Germany.    ---   Shultz renewed a U.S. initiative to arrange Arab-Israeli peace talks as violence continued in the occupied territories. The secretary of state met in London with Jordan's King Hussein and urged Palestinians to form a joint delegation with Amman for negotiations. Shultz later returned to Israel and is to travel to Syria and Egypt.    ---   A U.S. judge in Boston declared unconstitutional new Reagan administration regulations that would withhold federal funds to family planning clinics that perform abortions or offer abortion counseling. The judge issued a permanent injunction barring the HHS from enforcing the rules.    ---   The Senate passed a bill to bar most employer use of lie detectors to test workers, allowing the use of polygraphs mainly during inquiries of workplace theft or accidents. The House passed a similar bill in November, and differences must be resolved in conference.    ---   A Chicago gynecologist was indicted on perjury and obstruction of justice charges over his testimony on behalf of A.H. Robins Co. concerning the firm's Dalkon Shield birth-control device, the Justice Department said. The indictment said that contrary to his testimony, the doctor didn't design or conduct tests on the device.    ---   Pakistan and Afghanistan agreed to a nine-month timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan, and said half the Red Army soldiers should be out of the country within 90 days. The accord was reached at U.N.-mediated peace talks in Geneva. The issue of an interim government to oversee the pull-out hasn't been resolved.    ---   Syrian troops escorted a West German hostage to Damascus after he was released in Beirut by kidnappers pressing the Bonn government to free two jailed Lebanese Shiite Moslems. The 30-year-old engineer, abducted in January, was described as being in good condition. The kidnappers still hold another West German businessman.    ---   Rival political supporters clashed in Bangladesh, fighting running street battles in several cities during parliamentary and municipal elections. At least 13 people were reported killed, and voting was suspended in scores of polling places. Despite the violence, election officials said partial returns showed President Ershad's party leading.    ---   Sikh gunmen opened fire with automatic rifles and machine guns on a holiday gathering in Punjab state, killing at least 32 people and injuring 40 others, police said. The attack in Hoshiarpur district was one of the bloodiest since Sikh extremists launched their guerrilla war for an independent homeland in the northern India state in 1982.    ---   Local militiamen were patrolling a second city in the Soviet republic of Azerbaijan, where recent ethnic riots erupted in the town of Sumgait. A Communist Party official said &quot;small groups of hooligan youth&quot; demonstrated Monday in Kirovabad, near the border with Soviet Armenia. The unrest was sparked by a territorial dispute.    ---   Soldier of Fortune magazine was found negligent in publishing a classified advertisement that led to the slaying of a Texas woman. A federal jury in Houston ordered the magazine to pay $9.4 million to the woman's family. The victim's husband contacted the killer through the ad, and later hired him to kill his wife.    ---   Iran and Iraq traded missile strikes for the fourth consecutive day as civilian casualties mounted in Tehran and Baghdad. Iraq said it had &quot;abundant&quot; supplies for continuing the exchange. Western diplomats in the Persian Gulf region said the Iraqi missile blitz could undermine efforts to impose a U.N. arms embargo against Iran.    ---   Researchers in New York City found that the risk of suicide among men afflicted with AIDS is 66 times higher than among the general population. Based on an investigation of all 1985 suicides in the city, the study found a suicide rate of 9.3 per 100,000 people among the general population, but 680 per 100,000 among men with the disease.    ---   Tamil rebels attacked a village in eastern Sri Lanka, killing at least 16 people in the assault on homes of the majority Sinhalese. A military aide said most of those slain by the guerrillas, who were disguised as soldiers, were women and children.    ---   Died: Louis G. Seaton, 81, former vice president, personnel, of General Motors, in Sarasota, Fla., following a stroke. </TEXT></DOC>