<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0106 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Why a New Sieve is ExcitingThe Oil, Chemical Industries---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DOWCHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   IN THESE DAYS of high-tech breakthroughs, such as engineered genes and electrical superconductors, an advance in sieves would seem pretty mundane. After all, a sieve is nothing more than a mesh or perforated material that separates coarse particles from fine ones, or solids from liquids. Cheesecloth makes a good sieve in the kitchen, for example.    Nevertheless, a report describing a new sieve, delivered to a scientific meeting in Belgium earlier this week, is sending waves of excitement through the petroleum and chemical industries.    Developed by chemical engineers at Virginia Polytechnic Institute andamp; State University in Blacksburg and Dow Chemical Co. in Midland, Mich., the new sieve is a man-made crystal laced with holes so small it can separate small molecules from large ones. Paradoxically, the excitement surrounding the new sieve stems not from the smallness of its pores but from the fact that the pores are large enough to deal with the molecules of heavy crude petroleum. The sieve, say the chemical engineers, should make it possible to extract more gasoline from every barrel of crude petroleum as well as open the way to entirely new kinds of chemical reactions in the chemical industry.    MAN-MADE MOLECULAR SIEVES are a technological advance that has revolutionized the oil and chemical industries since the 1950s. The sieves look and feel like clay, but they are really microscopic crystals. Their atomic latticeworks form uniform channels that allow only molecules below a certain size to pass through and cages that can trap molecules above a certain size.    It also is possible to splice into the atomic latticework of a sieve elements that can trigger, or catalyze, chemical reactions. In these catalytic sieves, the pores allow molecules of a certain size to pass into an atomic cage where they are forced to undergo a chemical reaction, creating new molecules. The new molecules have to conform to the size and shape of the cage and, to escape, they must conform to the channels. By altering the size and shape of the sieves' atomic cages, chemists can use molecular sieves to trigger and control novel chemical reactions. One of Mobil Corp.'s new molecular sieves can convert methyl alcohol into gasoline or, in another variation, convert it into diesel or jet fuel, for example.    But the biggest use of molecular sieves is in cracking apart and reforming the heavy molecules of crude petroleum into the smaller, lighter molecules of gasoline, furnace oil, and other &quot;light&quot; fuels. Such petroleum-cracking sieves account for the major portion of the estimated $500 million that oil and chemical companies spend each year for molecular sieves, which help oil refiners to convert 55% to 60% of each barrel of oil to gasoline.    THIS YIELD PER BARREL of oil could be increased further with the molecular sieves were it not for one problem: Many of the petroleum molecules are too big to fit into the pores of the sieves. So chemists for several years have been trying to make sieves with bigger pores. The search is growing more urgent as refiners have to turn increasingly to heavier crude oils -- those rich in the large, difficult-to-crack petroleum molecules.    The discovery announced Monday in Belgium by Virginia Polytech and Dow researchers may be the break the refiners have been looking for. The new molecular sieve has pores about 13 to 14 angstroms in diameter, reported Mark Davis, associate professor of chemical engineering at Virginia Polytech and Juan Garces of Dow's catalysis laboratory. Since an angstrom is only about four billionths of an inch, this seems an incredibly small pore. But, says Mr. Davis, this is the first time chemists have been able to make such a sieve with pores larger than eight to 10 angstroms in diameter. And the pores of the new sieve are, in theory at least, large enough to accommodate many of the bulkier petroleum molecules.    &quot;I think it's a very significant scientific discovery,&quot; says Stanley Spangenberg, director of Dow's catalysis laboratory.    AT THE MOMENT, only a few grams of the new sieve are available, enough to determine its atomic structure and pore size, which Messrs. Davis and Garces revealed in Belgium. Because of pending patents, which will be assigned to Dow, the researchers aren't yet revealing the sieve's chemical composition other than to say it is made of aluminum, phosphoric acid and an organic material.    &quot;Once there is enough material available, we'll study its commercial prospects,&quot; Dow's Mr. Spangenberg says. Polytech's Mr. Davis, for one, is confident that catalytic properties can be incorporated in the new sieve. It also has to be determined if the sieve is stable enough to withstand the rigors of oil refining. Already, however, Mr. Spangenberg says, &quot;There are implications for the chemical industry. We can consider certain reactions that wouldn't otherwise be possible . . . and we do have a couple of specific ideas.&quot; For competitive reasons, he declines to elaborate.    The sieve was developed under a federal program in which the National Science Foundation funds a promising young university scientist's work -- Mr. Davis's in this case -- provided an industrial company puts up matching funds, as Dow did. &quot;It's been a really good example of collaborative research between industry and university scientists,&quot; Mr. Spangenberg says. </TEXT></DOC>