<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AUTHORIZED the CIA to kidnap suspected terrorists abroad.    The president, in January 1986, approved a directive empowering agents to abduct the suspects and bring them to the U.S. to stand trial, according to administration, law-enforcement and intelligence officials. The &quot;finding&quot; also authorized covert operations to preempt terrorist plots, in some cases by attacking the terrorists before they could strike, the officials said. The operation came under the supervision of a group headed by Lt. Col. North.    McFarlane was questioned by Reagan's special commission probing the Iran-Contra affair in an attempt to sort out conflicting accounts of when Reagan approved the first sale of U.S. arms to Iran. Details of the three-hour meeting weren't disclosed.    The White House refused to comment on reports that Reagan gave the special review panel two versions about when he first authorized the weapons sales.    ---   Shiite Moslem militiamen battled Druse and leftist gunmen for control of West Beirut as a string of cease-fire calls failed to end five days of fighting in the mainly Moslem section of the Lebanese capital. At least 100 people have been killed and 375 injured, and police said the Druse alliance had control of about 75% of the district.    ---   New York Gov. Cuomo said he wouldn't be a candidate for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. Recent polls had placed Cuomo as a strong second to former Sen. Hart among Democrats. Cuomo, 54, on a radio program, said he didn't want &quot;to increase the speculation&quot; about a possible run for the White House.    ---   Moscow's Foreign Ministry said Jewish activist Iosif Begun would be freed from prison today, nearly a week after his release was first announced. Kremlin officials also said psychiatrist Anatoly Koryagin had returned to his home in the Ukraine after five years in a labor camp in Kiev.    ---   Gorbachev said he would resign if resistance blocked his campaign for political and economic change in the Soviet Union, the official weekly Moscow News reported. The Kremlin leader, who has called for electoral changes to buttress his program to improve economic productivity, made his remarks to a group of Soviet reporters last week.    ---   The State Department said in its annual report to Congress that human-rights abuses by Nicaragua's government increased last year, but was skeptical of reports of similar offenses by the U.S.-backed rebels. A department official also cited a &quot;sharp deterioration&quot; of conditions in South Africa.    ---   The White House issued drug-testing guidelines for federal agencies that require screening for marijuana and cocaine. Testing for other drugs is optional. The guidelines order restroom monitors, prompt urine-temperature tests and blue dye in toilet water to prevent tampering with samples.    ---   A Nicaraguan rebel leader withdrew his threat to resign from the United Nicaraguan Opposition because of an accord that meets his demand for changes within the insurgency. While Arturo Cruz's decision doesn't solve the Contras' problems, it will buy some time for UNO to unify the movement under civilian control.    ---   The Warsaw government welcomed Reagan's decision to lift remaining sanctions against Poland. The move by Reagan restores Most Favored Nation trading status to Poland and lifts a ban on U.S.-backed loans. The sanctions were imposed in 1981 after Warsaw declared martial law in a crackdown on the Solidarity trade union.    ---   Britain said it expected to proceed with the Anglo-Irish accord on Northern Ireland following the election of Charles Haughey as Ireland's prime minister. The 1985 accord gives Dublin a role in Ulster's affairs. Haughey's party, however, failed to win a majority in the 166-seat Parliament, results from Tuesday's national election showed.    ---   A Senate panel cleared a pair of longpending nuclear test-ban treaties. The Senate Foreign Relations panel approved the pacts by voice vote. The treaties, which include verification language sought by Reagan, would limit the explosive force of all underground U.S. and Soviet nuclear tests.    ---   A bomb exploded outside the office of an Afghan guerrilla group in Peshawar, Pakistan, killing 10 people and wounding 62 others. While there wasn't any claim of responsibility for the blast, a group of Pakistanis later attacked Afghan refugees and as many as four people were reported killed.    ---   Iran accepted an Iraqi offer to halt attacks on civilian targets for two weeks, but said the move was a &quot;plot&quot; to enable Baghdad &quot;to reorganize&quot; its military. Thousands of civilians on both sides have been killed since early January in cross-border raids.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir proposed a conference on Mideast peace efforts, possibly at Camp David. The planned forum, advanced at the end of Shamir's four-day visit to the U.S., would include Egypt, Jordan, Palestinian Arabs and the U.S. as well as Israel. The Soviet Union was excluded.    ---   A retired U.S. Army general denied recruiting Vietnam veterans to train Philippine troops to fight communist rebels waging an 18-year-old insurgency against the Manila government. Maj. Gen. John Singlaub also dismissed reports linking him to a recent coup attempt by Marcos loyalists against President Aquino.    ---   EPA chief Lee Thomas said he &quot;probably&quot; will have to impose curbs on industrial growth in several areas that haven't shown they can meet the federal ozone standard. Thomas told a House panel that he will decide in the next few months whether to impose sanctions on cities that fail to meet the air pollution standard.    ---   Washington and Moscow are discussing the possibility of holding ministerial-level talks outside of the Geneva arms-control framework in an effort to make progress on a weapons agreement, U.S. officials said. The inclusion of members of the formal U.S. negotiating team in Geneva is undecided.    ---   Died: J. Truman Bidwell, 83, former chairman of the New York Stock Exchange, Tuesday, in Naples, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>