<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870930-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:A Spanish Conservative Mounts the Political 'Trampoline'---By Nicholas Bray</HL><DD> 09/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> MADRID  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Antonio Hernandez Mancha was elected in February as chairman of Spain's main conservative party, Alianza Popular, the event marked the coming of age of Spain's 10-year-old democracy. For the first time, a major Spanish party was to be run by a leader who had entered politics only after the death of Spain's dictator, Gen. Francisco Franco. For the first time recently, too, a major party had chosen its leader in a contested election, rather than merely by coalescence around a charismatic figurehead.    The burden put on the slim shoulders of this 36-year-old lawyer from Andalusia was enormous. Alianza Popular, riven by a three-month leadership crisis, seemed to many to be on the verge of collapse. Mr. Hernandez Mancha's task was twofold: to pull the party out of its electoral doldrums ahead of important local, regional and European Parliament elections and to convert it into a serious conservative alternative to the Socialist government of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez.    Seven months later, Alianza Popular's future remains uncertain and Mr. Hernandez Mancha's leadership, though uncontested for the moment, is by no means secure. In Galicia, one of Alianza Popular's strongholds, the party has just been ousted from the regional government by an alliance of Socialists and conservative dissidents. A recent opinion poll showed Mr. Hernandez Mancha trailing both Mr. Gonzalez and the man widely regarded as Mr. Gonzalez's principal rival, Centro Democratico y Social leader Adolfo Suarez, a charismatic former prime minister. Though Mr. Hernandez Mancha is trying to regain the offensive, he has some tough fighting ahead.    For the moment, this brilliant member of Spain's prestigious corps of civil-service lawyers puts a brave face on adversity. Though Alianza Popular lost ground slightly in the June elections, he points out, it succeeded in avoiding a full-scale rout. In two regions, Rioja and Castilla-Leon, it actually wrested control of regional government from the Socialists.    &quot;We were fighting these elections under the worst conditions possible,&quot; he observed in a recent interview. &quot;In spite of this we managed to consolidate our 22% to 25% share of the vote. That's a good trampoline from which to advance further.&quot;    But his party is hampered by its relative electoral weakness and by a lack of allies. Attempts to counterattack elsewhere in Spain following the Socialists' seizure of Galicia have fallen flat. Mr. Hernandez Mancha is seeking links with regional parties with which his party formerly competed for votes. But his overtures have been received coolly, and there are doubts as to how successful he is likely to be.    Receiving a visitor in his seventh-floor office at Alianza Popular headquarters in downtown Madrid, the shirt-sleeved Mr. Hernandez Mancha combines personal charm with formality. Lighting one cigarette after another, he talks rapidly with a strong Andalusian accent, larding his speech with Latin expressions and gesticulating vigorously. His fingernails are bitten down to the quick, the result of a habit carried over from childhood. Though acknowledging that some may see this as a sign of tension, he insists: &quot;I don't feel tense.&quot;    A member of a family with a strong legal tradition, he is married and has two young children. He was mainly involved in Andalusian regional politics until his emergence last winter in the race for the party leadership. Following the resignation of Manuel Fraga, the party's founder and former chairman, supporters were looking for someone with a younger, more dynamic image. Mr. Hernandez Mancha's schoolboy appearance -- straight dark hair, rimless spectacles and a narrow, rather frail face -- was a boost in a contest with an older rival with more parliamentary experience.    Encouraged by the successes of conservative parties elsewhere in Europe, Mr. Hernandez Mancha says he wants to bring new inspiration and motivation to Spain. His party stands for less bureaucracy and more competition, particularly in the economy. &quot;Spain has much more intervention in its economy than other European countries, as a legacy of the Franco regime,&quot; he says. &quot;Our labor laws {which restrict employers' ability to shed unneeded workers} date from Franco. Many of our entrepreneurs have got used to the idea that, if they run into difficulties, they'll be protected by the state.&quot;    Specifically, he promises, an Alianza Popular government would privatize state-owned companies, reduce taxes and lower the public-sector deficit by cutting spending and putting a freeze on the number of civil servants. A recent party manifesto specifies that the party would allow taxpayers to deduct some expenses, as well as reduce taxes on pensions and reform capital taxes. But the Socialist government has already taken some of the wind out of Alianza Popular's sails by announcing its own plans to reduce income taxes. &quot;We have to reduce the level of state intervention,&quot; he says. &quot;{Economic} liberalization is vital.&quot;    Within his party, he has made a point of organizing a more collegial style of management. &quot;From being dependent on charismatic leaders, Spanish political parties are coming closer to the great European parties which depend less on individual leaders and more on teamwork,&quot; he says. &quot;In Alianza Popular, rather than the charismatic leadership of the initial years of democracy, I prefer to talk of a democratic leadership integrated into well-coordinated teams.&quot;    Despite the apparent clarity of his policies, the difficulties ahead are considerable. In sociological terms, a majority of Spanish voters still incline to the left. With the resignation last November of Mr. Fraga, a former minister under Gen. Franco, Alianza Popular cut a link with the past that had proved to be an electoral handicap. But the party is still widely viewed as the party of businessmen and landowners, reducing its electoral appeal to a wider range of voters. Regional parties, meanwhile, are growing stronger, creating further competition.    Because he's a member of the Senate rather than the Chamber of Deputies, or lower house of parliament, Mr. Hernandez Mancha, too, is limited in the extent to which he can lead any parliamentary renaissance. Though he did orchestrate a parliamentary censure debate against Mr. Gonzalez recently, the initiative fell flat.    With the approach of parliamentary elections, due at the latest in 1990, there is speculation that other contenders for the conservative leadership may emerge. Abel Matutes, an Alianza Popular politician who is one of two Spanish commissioners at European Community headquarters in Brussels, and Marcelino Oreja, a former conservative foreign minister who's secretary-general of the Council of Europe, are two frequently mentioned names.    Mr. Hernandez Mancha, in keeping with his commitment to internal party democracy, remains cautious about predicting his own future. If elections were to be held now, he remarks, he would be his party's candidate. For the future, &quot;it will be for my party to decide.&quot;    ---   Mr. Bray is Madrid correspondent of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>