<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN OFFERED Congress a role in releasing arms for Nicaraguan rebels.    The president, in an Oval Office address aimed at winning approval for $36 million in assistance for the Contras, pledged to withhold a $3.6 million portion of the aid package, consisting of weapons and ammunition, if Congress concludes that Managua is complying with a five-nation Central America peace plan signed last August. Under Reagan's plan, the administration would start shipping &quot;nonlethal&quot; assistance to the insurgents March 1. The House is to vote on the plan today.    Congressional Democrats, in a response to the speech, expressed opposition to renewed Contra aid and urged the U.S. to &quot;take risks for peace.&quot;    ---   Israeli soldiers clashed with Palestinian protesters in the West Bank, and more than 20 Arabs were reported injured. The violence erupted despite torrential rains, Israel's closing of Palestinian schools and universities and the imposition of curfews throughout the Israeli-occupied territories.    Shultz said he is pursuing with Israel and Arab states ways to end the unrest in the occupied lands. The secretary of state told the House Foreign Affairs panel that he might send Mideast expert Richard Murphy to the region to negotiate a settlement.    ---   Meese testified at the influence-peddling trial of former presidential aide Lyn Nofziger, and indicated that he talked several times to at least two subordinates about Wedtech Corp. in 1981 and 1982, while serving as White House counselor. Meese previously suggested there were only one or two such contacts.    ---   FBI Director Sessions said the bureau's investigation of a group opposing the Reagan administration's policies in Central America &quot;wasn't properly directed&quot; in all instances. Documents released by the FBI also show that the inquiry branched out to include more than 100 organizations, including the U.S. Roman Catholic Church.    ---   State troopers in Montgomery arrested Alabama's NAACP president, Thomas Reed, and 11 other black leaders when they attempted to take down a Confederate battle flag flying over the state's Capitol building. Reed contends the flag is a symbol of racism and oppression. The governor said the flag is viewed as a historic emblem.    ---   A House panel asked the Justice Department to investigate potential criminal violations by past associates of Kansas Sen. Dole in the award of an Army contract. The Small Business Committee didn't see evidence of personal involvement by the GOP presidential candidate.    ---   A gunman was taken into custody and 26 children and one teacher held hostage were freed following a daylong siege at a private school in Tuscaloosa, Ala. The man, who had held as many as 60 captives, was demanding aid for the homeless. A second gunman had surrendered earlier, after negotiations with officials.    ---   Assailants in Beirut killed a Frenchman in the city's mainly Christian eastern sector. Lebanese security sources said the victim was the deputy chief of the Lebanon desk of the French secret service. He was the fifth French citizen slain in Beirut in 16 months. Responsibility wasn't claimed.    ---   Carlucci endorsed a Pentagon task force's report urging more job opportunities for women in the military. The defense secretary ordered that over 3,000 jobs formerly reserved for men be opened to women.    ---   A federal judge refused to dismiss a product liability suit against G.D. Searle andamp; Co. in connection with the firm's Copper-7 intrauterine device. The judge in St. Paul, Minn., said a lawsuit alleging that use of the birth-control device resulted in a woman's infertility can proceed to trial.    ---   East Berlin sent four dissidents to West Germany as a Communist official said all 22 dissidents detained since a thwarted protest last month would be freed. The four, including members of a human-rights movement, had faced possible treason charges.    ---   Iran launched an aerial attack on commercial shipping in the Persian Gulf for the first time in two years, regional shipping executives said. They said an Iranian jet, believed to be a U.S.-made Phantom, fired two missiles at a Liberian-registered tanker. Both missiles missed the vessel.    ---   Commonwealth foreign ministers met in Zambia with exiled leaders of the African National Congress, who urged stricter economic sanctions against South Africa. Separately, black schools were closed and workers boycotted their jobs in Pietermartizburg, a southeastern city that has been the scene of continuing factional fighting.    ---   Massachusetts filed a lawsuit challenging as unconstitutional new federal rules prohibiting abortion counseling at federally funded clinics. A similar suit was filed by several national and local family planning groups. The HHS rules bar abortion referrals at clinics receiving U.S. funds.    ---   Died: G. Mennen &quot;Soapy&quot; Williams, 76, former governor of Michigan, in Detroit, following a massive cerebral hemorrhage. . . . James A. Linen III, 75, former president of Time Inc., in Greenwich, Conn. </TEXT></DOC>