<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880406-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Japan's Prime Minister Presses Ahead With Tax Reform --- Takeshita Takes Risky Stance Despite Strong Opposition, Public's Doubts </HL><AUTHOR> Urban C. Lehner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN TAXES </CO><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Once again, tax reform dominates Japan's political debate.    In 1979 and again last year, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party's standard bearer went down in flames trying to reconfigure Japan's loophole-ridden tax system. But Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita seems intent on pushing tax reform through parliament this year.    Finance Ministry bureaucrats and some LDP politicians have convinced themselves that it is this year or never. None of Mr. Takeshita's possible successors can match his mastery of parliamentary maneuvering, and this is a year with no national elections at stake, possibly the only such year Mr. Takeshita will have as prime minister. Most of Japan's recent prime ministers have managed only two-year terms. The exception was Mr. Takeshita's predecessor, Yasuhiro Nakasone, who stepped down in October after five years.    Achieving tax reform is likely to take all of Mr. Takeshita's legislative acumen. Opinion polls say 60% of the public rejects the centerpiece of the package, a new value-added tax on sales of most goods and services. Opposition parties, smelling a chance to make gains in next year's legislative elections, are resisting the tax program so vigorously they have stymied other issues in parliament.    If Mr. Takeshita succeeds, he could assure himself a long tenure. If he fails? &quot;If the great LBJ of Japanese politics can't get tax reform, he's through,&quot; says a U.S. official who follows the debate.    Many Japanese agree reform is needed. A lot has happened to Japan's tax system since American economist Carl Shoup drafted it 38 years ago during the U.S. occupation. His central idea was a tax on income of all sorts. But as their counterparts did in the U.S., Japanese legislators chiseled out exceptions for interest groups.    Thus, dividends and capital gains on stock are almost tax-free, and capital gains on land transactions receive preferential treatment, as do interest payments. Moreover, underreporting of income is rampant among doctors, farmers, shopkeepers and other self-employed people who aren't subject to withholding. &quot;We call it an 'income tax,' but what we have in reality is a withholding tax on salary and wage income only,&quot; says Masakazu Hayashi, a Finance Ministry official.    Thus began a vicious circle: Because the tax base is so narrow, tax rates must be high to compensate. And because the Japanese like the idea of income equality, the rates are steeply progressive. Combining local and national taxes, the marginal tax rate for a taxpayer in the highest bracket (income of 50 million yen, or $400,000 a year) exceeds 75%. The corporate tax rate exceeds 50%, a rate some say has encouraged overseas manufacturing by Japanese companies.    Though inflation and economic growth have pushed up wage earners' incomes, the government has left the rates unchanged, so wage earners pay bigger portions of their incomes in taxes. &quot;It's outrageous,&quot; says Kenichi Takemura, a television commentator and author. &quot;Even a thief wouldn't take 80% of your property if he broke into your home.&quot;    The government could have addressed the problem by reviving the notion of a broader definition of income but decided this would be politically impossible. And it liked the idea of joining Europe and the U.S., which tax consumption by value-added taxes in Europe and local sales taxes in the U.S. (A value-added tax, or VAT, is imposed on the added value at each stage of a product's progress from raw materials to consumption.)    But while the government is trying to sell tax reform as a way of addressing the inequalities, many taxpayers see it simply as a sneaky way to increase government revenue. They note that in 1979, when the government first tried to revamp the tax system, Japan was sagging under a towering government budget deficit; tax reform was clearly aimed at providing new revenues to narrow the deficit.    In the years since then, the government has talked a lot about how rapidly Japan's society is aging and how the country must prepare for the time 20 or 30 years from now when a large proportion of the population will be drawing government pensions. Many Japanese suspect that the frugal bureaucrats at the Finance Ministry want new tax instruments in place for the day the demographics turn against them.    &quot;I keep saying we shouldn't be so prepared,&quot; says Shoichi Watanabe, a professor at Sophia University in Tokyo and a member of a government advisory commission studying tax reform. &quot;The bureaucrats tend to spend as much money as they collect. We should wait until the aged society has arrived.&quot;    Aware of these suspicions, the government no longer talks much about the aging society. It justifies the value-added tax as a step to reduce unfairness; as a wide-scale tax on goods and services it would capture at least some tax from citizens currently escaping the tax collector's net, while enabling income-tax rates to be lowered for those who have shouldered the tax load.    The government is also sugarcoating tax reform by promising that before a value-added tax takes effect, income taxes will be cut between three trillion yen and 4.5 trillion yen ($24 billion to $36 billion) a year. Mr. Takeshita is gambling that a tax cut will force the opposition to consider an indirect tax as a way to pay for it.    Meanwhile, overseas critics complain that a value-added tax would hinder increased consumption at a time when the government is supposedly trying to encourage it in the name of increasing imports. But Haruo Maekawa, author of the famous report that set the course toward increased consumption and imports, says he favors a value-added tax. And Yutaka Kosai, president of the Japan Economic Research Institute, says: &quot;It may seem funny to introduce a consumption tax when you're trying to encourage consumption, but we're reducing income taxes on the middle classes, who are suffering the most {from higher taxes}. That's what will encourage consumption.&quot;    Opinions differ on whether Mr. Takeshita will prevail. But the debate on tax reform has shifted from whether to when: If Mr. Takeshita makes his move too early this year, he risks getting ahead of public opinion; if he waits too long, he gets dangerously near the nationwide election for the upper house of parliament that must be held by June 1989. Conventional wisdom says that even if tax reform is timed perfectly, that election will cost the LDP 25 seats -- more if it calls a lower-house election at the same time.    Whether or not Mr. Takeshita succeeds, it is clear that despite Japan's love of income equality, steeply progressive tax rates are on the way out. &quot;To make rich people poor hasn't made poor people rich,&quot; says Mr. Watanabe of Sophia. &quot;That is a very bitter discovery.&quot;    ---   Provisional Budget Cleared   Special to The Wall Street Journal   TOKYO -- The upper house of Japan's parliament approved a provisional budget of 3.091 trillion yen ($24.8 billion) to cover government expenses during the first eight days of the fiscal year that began last Friday.    As previously reported, the lower house approved the provisional budget on Monday. The government introduced the measure because consideration of the full, 56.7 trillion-yen budget for the fiscal year stalled in the upper house over tax reform. </TEXT></DOC>