<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890818-0101 </DOCNO><DD> = 890818 </DD><AN> 890818-0101. </AN><HL> Abrupt Confession:@  Why Robert Freeman,@  Previously Defiant,@  Agreed to Admit Guilt@  ---@  Goldman Sachs Arbitrager@  Resigns Post, Describes@  How He Traded Illegally@  ---@  What It Means for Goldman@  ----@  By James B. Stewart and Steve Swartz@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/18/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> WNEWS </CO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><GV> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </GV><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Jan. 8, 1986, in the midst of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co.'s $6.2 billion bid for Beatrice Cos., the stress in the arbitrage department of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. was intense.    As the day began, Robert Freeman, Goldman Sachs's powerful head of arbitrage, had bet about $66 million of its capital on the success of the proposed leveraged buy-out -- way over the firm's pre-established limit of $50 million. He had even bet millions of his own family's money on the deal -- a whopping 40% of the assets he traded in those accounts.    As one of the country's most powerful arbitragers, Mr. Freeman's risks in buying so much Beatrice stock and options were not what they would have been for anyone else. With his Rolodex, reassurance was usually just a phone call away. The day before, when heavy trading in Beatrice stock triggered a twinge of anxiety about the deal, Mr. Freeman had called Henry Kravis of KKR. But Mr. Kravis &quot;was very abrupt and appeared anxious to end the conversation quickly,&quot; Mr. Freeman recalls -- a worrisome sign.    Then, by virtue of his position at a firm such as Goldman Sachs, Mr. Freeman learned that another in the small circle of top arbitragers, Richard Nye, was bailing out of Beatrice; Mr. Nye sold his position through Goldman Sachs. So, Mr. Freeman called Mr. Nye. &quot;He didn't convince me that a problem didn't exist,&quot; Mr. Freeman says. Next, Mr. Freeman received a call from Bernard &quot;Bunny&quot; Lasker, a widely known trader on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange, tipping him to a problem in Beatrice. With mounting anxiety, Mr. Freeman drew on his circle of contacts one more time, placing what would prove to be the most fateful call of his career. He called Martin Siegel, the Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. takeover strategist representing KKR in its ultimately successful bid for Beatrice.    &quot;I told Mr. Siegel that I had heard there was a problem with the Beatrice LBO,&quot; Mr. Freeman says in an account of the day's events he released yesterday. &quot;He asked from whom I had heard that. When I answered Bunny Lasker, Martin Siegel said, 'Your bunny has a good nose.' &quot; Mr. Freeman, who had already begun liquidating his family holdings in Beatrice and reducing Goldman's exposure, promptly capitalized on Mr. Siegel's inside information, plunging into an array of options trades that saved Goldman, an unidentified Goldman client and Mr. Freeman himself a total of about $930,000.    Yesterday, more than three years after the Beatrice trading and more than two years after his arrest on insider-trading charges, Mr. Freeman admitted that his actions with Mr. Siegel amounted to insider trading, agreed to plead guilty to a felony and resigned from Goldman Sachs, the firm that he says has been an &quot;integral part of my life&quot; for 19 years.    Mr. Freeman appeared in federal district court in Manhattan yesterday morning and agreed to plead guilty to one count of mail fraud on Sept. 5 before Judge Pierre Leval. Outside the courtroom, Mr. Freeman appeared calm and showed no emotion as he stood with family members behind his attorneys, who answered questions from the press.    Now, Mr. Freeman faces a possible sentence of as much as five years in prison and a fine of as much as $1.86 million. He also may have to make restitution to anyone harmed by his illegal trading. In addition, he still hasn't settled the civil case against him with the Securities and Exchange Commission.    In a letter to John L. Weinberg, senior partner of Goldman Sachs, Mr. Freeman admitted his guilt in the Beatrice transaction but didn't apologize. He insisted that he wasn't guilty of any other wrongdoing and called the 2 1/2 years since his arrest &quot;a nightmare for me and for my family.&quot;    For Goldman Sachs, the prestigious investment bank that put its reputation on the line with its vigorous defense of Mr. Freeman, the arbitrager's decision to plead guilty is more than an embarrassment and a blot on its reputation for integrity. One of Wall Street's oldest partnerships, it faces possible sanctions or fines by the SEC as well as private civil suits.    The plea agreement was surprising largely because both Mr. Freeman and Goldman Sachs had insisted so long and so vociferously that he was innocent of any wrongdoing. But it confirms what many had long suspected about Wall Street: that a few arbitragers such as Mr. Freeman had extraordinary access to people and information. For example, Mr. Freeman was one of the few arbitragers whose calls Mr. Kravis would take, a lawyer for Mr. Kravis says, because Mr. Kravis learned important market information from him. In many ways, what is most striking about the events of Jan. 8, 1986, is how ordinary they seem in the context of the world of top arbitragers that existed at least until the fall of Ivan Boesky.    Were it not for Mr. Boesky's confessions of insider trading, which implicated Mr. Siegel, who, in turn, implicated Mr. Freeman, investigators probably would never have learned of Mr. Freeman's activities. Even then, if another Goldman Sachs arbitrager, Frank Brosens, hadn't been able to confirm much of what Mr. Siegel said about the Beatrice incident, Mr. Freeman might well have risked a trial in the hope that his word would be believed over Mr. Siegel's.    According to people familiar with the negotiations between lawyers for Mr. Freeman and the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office, it was only several months ago, when prosecutors confronted Mr. Freeman's lawyers with the fact that another Goldman Sachs official was prepared to testify against Mr. Freeman, that serious settlement talks began.    Given that Mr. Freeman's public posture had made him a symbol of Wall Street's determination to stonewall in the face of the government's continuing investigation, his capitulation yesterday was a major victory for prosecutors, especially Rudolph Giuliani, the New York mayoral candidate who was the U.S. attorney at the time of Mr. Freeman's arrest; Bruce Baird, the head of the office's securities unit, and Benito Romano, the acting U.S. attorney who concluded the settlement.    But the plea is likely to be viewed as a favorable move for Mr. Freeman; by contrast, Mr. Siegel was required to plead guilty to two felonies. Nor does Mr. Freeman's agreement explicitly require continued cooperation in the investigation, although any lack of cooperation could become significant when he is sentenced.    In announcing yesterday's plea agreement, Mr. Romano also dropped the government's related investigation into alleged insider trading by two of Mr. Siegel's former colleagues at Kidder Peabody, Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor.    That decision, more than anything related directly to Mr. Freeman, is likely to exacerbate criticism of the prosecution. Mr. Wigton was handcuffed in full view of his colleagues and led in tears from Kidder Peabody at the time of his arrest. Mr. Tabor was arrested and held in jail overnight. When the subsequent indictment against them was dropped in May 1987, prosecutors promised another, broader one and said the initial indictment was just the &quot;tip of an iceberg.&quot;    Stanley Arkin, Mr. Wigton's lawyer, says Mr. Wigton &quot;was publicly humiliated and unjustly accused. He's entitled to a sincere and profuse apology, especially from Mr. Giuliani, who presided over this.&quot; Andrew Lawler, Mr. Tabor's lawyer, complains that the arrest of Mr. Tabor caused him &quot;incalculable personal and professional damage.&quot;    Mr. Giuliani didn't return phone calls from this newspaper yesterday. Mr. Romano acknowledged that the arrest of the men in February 1987 was &quot;hasty.&quot; People familiar with the situation say talks between Goldman Sachs and the SEC haven't begun yet, nor have talks between Mr. Freeman and the SEC. And an attorney for the firm, Lawrence Pedowitz, maintains that Goldman itself was blameless in Mr. Freeman's wrongdoing. &quot;The firm had state-of-the-art compliance policies and procedures in effect&quot; at the time of the incident, Mr. Pedowitz says. &quot;I don't believe they were in any respect inadequate. There are obviously some things no compliance department can pick up.&quot;    Goldman Sachs also faces the prospect of civil lawsuits, including possible class actions, by investors and corporations expected to allege that they were damaged by Mr. Freeman's activities. Investors may sue the firm not only for insider trading with respect to the Beatrice buy-out, but also in other deals previously alleged by the government to have entailed wrongdoing by Mr. Freeman, such as Storer Communications Inc. and Unocal Corp. The burden of proof in such civil suits is lower than that required of the government in a criminal case.    Though acknowledging the likelihood of such suits, people close to the firm say they are confident its liability can be kept to no more than $10 million, about what Goldman Sachs might lose in a bad trading month. The firm earned more than $500 million, before taxes on partners' incomes, last year and has more than $2 billion in equity capital.    The people close to Goldman Sachs say that many of its employees seemed astounded when they learned of Mr. Freeman's decision to plead guilty, even as they expressed relief that the firm would now be spared a lengthy and potentially embarrassing trial. They also say some Goldman Sachs partners were concerned about Mr. Freeman's admission yesterday that he had acted to protect his family accounts from a decline in Beatrice shares before doing so in Goldman Sachs's own accounts. Even so, they note wide respect at the firm for his abilities and tremendous sympathy for his plight.    In a statement distributed to everyone at the firm yesterday, Goldman Sachs said that &quot;we do not condone even a single act of wrongdoing.&quot; But it otherwise attempted to minimize Mr. Freeman's crime and said that &quot;over the past 30 months, Bob has been subjected to an arrest that the prosecutors have since characterized as a mistake, a withdrawn indictment, the promise of new charges in record time followed by a grueling two-year investigation, and a series of highly publicized formal allegations and innuendoes that far exceed anything he actually did.&quot;    At least in respect to the Beatrice transaction, Mr. Freeman's plea corroborates in significant respects testimony provided prosecutors by Mr. Siegel. Both Mr. Freeman and Goldman Sachs have attacked Mr. Siegel's credibility and continue to deny that any conspiracy existed between the two men and that any insider trading occurred other than in Beatrice stock. They emphasize that Mr. Freeman passed a lie-detector test on these matters.    However, Mr. Romano says, &quot;We are quite satisfied with the cooperation we've obtained from Marty Siegel.&quot; An SEC spokeswoman wouldn't say whether the agency will delve into any allegations beyond the one involving Beatrice stock as it pursues civil charges against Mr. Freeman.    Jed Rakoff, Mr. Siegel's lawyer, says: &quot;Mr. Siegel is pleased that matters have now come to a sufficient resolution that he can try to get on with his life. He does feel vindicated. For several years now, he has been in a lonely position of not being able to respond to the massive attacks that have been made on him, simply because he told the truth. But his desire now is simply to move forward to sentencing and, hopefully, to a well-justified resumption of normal activity.&quot; Mr. Siegel, now living in Florida, has been waiting to be sentenced until the Freeman case was resolved.    According to people familiar with the case, prosecutors had nearly despaired of obtaining a guilty plea from Mr. Freeman, especially after his close friend and former classmate, Jay Regan, the head of Princeton/Newport Partners, refused to cooperate with prosecutors after being charged with numerous securities-law violations.    However, in investigating the Princeton/Newport case, prosecutors developed leads into other alleged wrongdoing by Mr. Freeman unrelated to Mr. Siegel. Then, several months ago, prosecutors confronted lawyers for Mr. Freeman with the fact that testimony by another member of Goldman Sachs's arbitrage department, Mr. Brosens, corroborated key aspects of Mr. Siegel's account of the Beatrice dealings, people familiar with the case say. They say that only then did serious settlement talks begin, talks that accelerated after the Princeton/Newport defendants were convicted of 26 felonies.    Mr. Pedowitz, the lawyer for Goldman Sachs, declines comment on behalf of Mr. Brosens. People close to Mr. Freeman say that numerous Goldman Sachs officials besides Mr. Brosens testified before the grand jury and that they don't consider Mr. Brosens's testimony to be a turning point in Mr. Freeman's defense. They also say they never viewed the evidence related to Princeton/Newport as particularly significant. But they concede that the Princeton/Newport verdict was a blow to the Freeman camp, suggesting the willingness of a jury to convict defendants in a complicated financial case where the defendants are rich. &quot;The fight just went out of him,&quot; says one lawyer of Mr. Freeman after he received news that Mr. Regan, his good friend, had been found guilty.    ---   Wade Lambert contributed to this story.    ---@ The Freeman Case    February 1987 -- Three top Wall Street figures, Robert Freeman, Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor, are arrested -- Mr. Wigton in handcuffs. They are charged with an information-swapping conspiracy that allegedly made Kidder millions of dollars in illegal profits. Goldman Sachs's Mr. Freeman is also charged with trading for his own account on the information. The three are implicated by Martin Siegel, a former takeover specialist at Kidder.    Mr. Siegel pleads guilty to two felony counts for his role in the insider-trading case.    April 1987 -- Freeman, Tabor and Wigton are indicted on federal charges of conspiracy to violate securities laws, securities fraud, mail fraud and wire fraud.    May 1987 -- U.S. District Judge Louis L. Stanton dismisses insider-trading charges against Freeman, Tabor and Wigton, after the government says it isn't ready to proceed.    August 1988 -- James Sutton Regan, managing general partner of Princeton/Newport and a close friend of Mr. Freeman; Bruce Lee Newberg, a former Drexel junk-bond trader; a Princeton/Newport comptroller and three general partners are charged with conspiring to create illegitimate tax losses through a series of prearranged securities transactions.    July 1989 -- The five Princeton/Newport officials and Mr. Newberg are convicted of 63 of 64 counts against them, including racketeering and securities, wire and mail fraud.    August 1989 -- Mr. Freeman agrees to plead guilty to one count of mail fraud. </TEXT></DOC>