<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870408-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Lost Innocence:Top Developer's FilingFor Bankruptcy RocksKansas City's Society---Kroh Brothers' Action LeavesOld-Money Pals Bereft;Taking Fifth Amendment---Effect of a Moving Experience---By Dennis FarneyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CBSHBANKRUPTCIES (BCY)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> KANSAS CITY, Mo.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The sleek, curving headquarters of Kroh Brothers Development Co. sits beside Ward Parkway in the southwest part of town like some great ocean liner run aground.    It is the symbol of a spectacular business setback, and of an end to innocence in the clubby world of Kansas City's financial elite. Privately held Kroh Brothers Development lists $200 million of liabilities in its Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding, the largest such case in Kansas City history.    John A. Kroh Jr. and his brother, George P. Kroh, with liabilities estimated at $26 million, are also beset by creditors. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is looking for fraud. And a third-generation firm that in its lifetime reshaped 170 square miles of Sun Belt real estate, an area eight times the size of Manhattan Island, now is struggling to survive.    &quot;It's pieces of shattered glass,&quot; says a family friend.    On one level, the February tumble of 77-year-old Kroh Brothers is a case study of mismanagement and a disastrous collision with the new tax code, which has turned real-estate investing rules inside out.    But something more than a company appears to have been shattered here: It is the classic Midwestern sense of trust, more characteristic of a small town than a city, that drew Kansas City's &quot;old money&quot; to Kroh Brothers and its projects throughout the Sun Belt.    This city's old families -- inhabitants of a world bounded by the Kansas City Country Club and the annual Jewel Ball -- may never again back their own quite as trustingly as they backed brothers John and George Kroh. &quot;What's happened is tantamount to a loss of innocence,&quot; observes Sheldon Stahl, a respected economist and college dean here. &quot;People are saying, 'Holy smoke, maybe we were naive.' And clearly there was a great deal of naivete involved.&quot;    What gives the collapse its particular poignancy is that the lenders and investors who knew the Kroh family longest are among those hurt the most: Commerce Bancshares Inc., whose chairman, James M. Kemper Jr., is a fellow member of the exclusive Kansas City Country Club; the Halls of Hallmark Cards Inc., who stand to lose $4 million on a single abortive real-estate venture; and limited-partnership investors who knew the brothers from school days at Pembroke Hill, the city's elite prep school, and who had vacationed with them and dined at their homes.    &quot;I'm still trying to sort this out,&quot; says a social friend whose potential losses could run into the hundreds of thousands of dollars. &quot;I mean, how could they do this to their friends?&quot;    Far more than friendships are riding on the proceedings in U.S. Bankruptcy Court here. Two big banks, First National Bank of Chicago and Citicorp.'s Citibank of New York, are listed as holding nearly $40 million in loans to the company, for example.    Meanwhile, the FBI confirms it is investigating whether the brothers misstated financial data to lenders in their attempt to get more capital to hold the firm together, or possibly used loan money earmarked for certain projects to shore up others. Civil suits filed in federal and state courts here charged them with both.    Amid a roomful of dark-suited lawyers yesterday at the federal bankruptcy court here, the two brothers repeatedly declined to answer questions, invoking the Fifth Amendment. They listened impassively as lawyers for creditors asked whether they had overstated assets and understated liabilities as they desperately sought loans last fall. The informal hearing, without a judge, broke up in 45 minutes -- one more episode in legal proceedings many think could continue for a year or more.    Yesterday's hearing involved proceedings against the brothers personally. On Friday, the bankruptcy judge, Karen See, is scheduled to hear creditors' motions that she name a trustee to dispose of the Krohs' personal assets, ranging from George Kroh's 1,000 uncirculated silver dollars to John Kroh's Sun Valley, Idaho, vacation home. Eventually, she is expected to rule on whether the brothers may continue to invoke the Fifth Amendment.    In the proceedings involving the firm itself, an informal meeting with creditors is set for May 11.    Outwardly, Kroh Brothers seemed as classy and invulnerable as the upscale shopping centers, homes and office parks it built. In truth, it was dangerously dependent upon the old tax code. The cash-flow problems of completed projects could always be covered by starting new ones. Typically, a year-end infusion of new limited partners -- often wealthy local figures like Ewing Kauffman, the chairman of Marion Laboratories Inc. and co-owner of the Royals baseball team -- would bring in about $20 million.    This snowballing process pushed debt inexorably higher. But with the tax changes enacted by Congress last year, Kroh Brothers could no longer find those year-end investors to paper over its problems. Freighted with more than $750 million in liabilities, the company took a dive.    Urgent retrenching pared those liabilities to $200.9 million by the mid-February bankruptcy filing. The firm abandoned some projects to lenders and asked limited partners to take over others. Even so, bankruptcy documents today contain more than 2,000 creditors, from Chase Manhattan Bank to Larry Flack Wallcoverings. The firm's assets are listed, perhaps optimistically, at $193.8 million.    The last months of frantic maneuvering left the Kroh Brothers books almost hopelessly snarled, evidence of a complete management breakdown. &quot;The accounting system was not perfected, the information was erroneous, and it was also not timely,&quot; summarizes Donald Jones, a veteran employee who has taken over the firm during the bankruptcy proceedings.    The case may be a remote unpleasantness to distant money-center banks; here in Kansas City, it is painfully personal. This is a city of quiet wealth, more akin to proper Boston than flamboyant Dallas. &quot;In this town, you don't drive a Rolls-Royce,&quot; says entrepreneur Michael Russell. &quot;But a Mercedes is not only perfectly OK, it's expected.&quot; Discreet and circumspect, the local establishment prefers to settle its disputes in private.    John Kroh Jr., 46, and his wife, Mary Lou, were known for their elegant parties and their influential friends, among them George Price, the U.S. ambassador to Great Britain. Even as the crisis deepened last year, they flew to London for an embassy party whose honored guests were Prince Charles and Princess Diana.    In late January, though, they jolted creditors by quietly moving across State Line Road to the Kansas side of the metropolitan area. Kansas' more lenient debtor-credit laws may allow them to shelter their $495,000 residence there.    One member of a limited partnership, noticing the moving van in the driveway, raced to his lawyer. The lawyer advised him there was no way to block the move -- not even by throwing himself in front of the van. But the move helped trigger lawsuits by other angry creditors, and those suits pushed the two brothers into personal bankruptcy.    George Kroh, 49, and his wife, Carolyn, have contracted to sell their stately stone mansion on the Kansas side, a home where many decades ago a young Kansas City Star reporter named Ernest Hemingway is reputed to have tried his hand at fiction. Long a respected civic leader, George Kroh has resigned as chairman of the Kansas City Art Institute.    The city's financial establishment, its whole web of relationships jarred, is reacting as a small town might -- privately, with mingled compassion and bitterness.    Much of the compassion is reserved for John Kroh Sr., 81, who sold the firm to his sons 15 years ago. &quot;John Kroh Sr. was the earliest mentor that I had, a man of the highest integrity,&quot; says Gil Bourke, who once worked for the firm and is now the president of Centerre Bank of Kansas City, which lent Kroh Brothers Development $1.5 million.    He describes the sons as poor managers, &quot;just caught up in a rolling, onrushing freight.&quot;    Mr. Bourke was far from the only banker lulled by the Kroh name. Commerce Bank, a unit of Commerce Bancshares and the city's third-largest bank, last October made one of the last big loans to Kroh Brothers Development before the roof began to fall in -- $7 million, initially unsecured.    Bankruptcy-court documents indicate that Commerce, which is controlled by the locally prominent Kemper family, holds $11.6 million of secured Kroh Brothers Development debt and $1 million of unsecured debt. (After more than a decade as a member of the Commerce Bank board, George Kroh quietly volunteered his resignation late last year.)    Heightening Commerce's chagrin is the fact that its archrival across the street, United Missouri Bank, is one of the few that didn't get burned. United Missouri is headed by R. Crosby Kemper Jr., of another branch of the Kemper family, a man known both for his conservative lending practices and for his zest for competition with cousin James.    &quot;Many of those loans were made without doing the homework,&quot; Crosby Kemper says of the lenders in general. &quot;We loan on character, too. But we always get collateral.&quot; (John Kroh Jr. recently resigned from the United Missouri board.)    Commerce won't discuss the magnitude of any potential losses, but Vice Chairman John Brown confirms that bank examiners have questioned it about its Kroh-related loans. And he offers a concession:    &quot;If you ask me if banks in general could have done a better job, the answer is yes.&quot;    Mr. Kauffman, the Marion Laboratories chairman, says he faces potential losses of $3 million to $5 million on some limited partnerships affected, as he puts it, when &quot;money was borrowed and misapplied&quot; to shore up other properties. But he says he recently invited George Kroh to his office and &quot;assured him not to worry about me.&quot;    &quot;The Kroh brothers mismanaged, but it was not for the purpose of lining their own pockets,&quot; he says. &quot;There are a lot of people in Kansas City who have turned their backs on them. But if you're a friend, you're a friend in bad times as well as good.&quot;    In the short run, the bankruptcy filing has unquestionably had a chilling effect on some lenders here. In the longer term, it may be one of those benchmark events that come to symbolize the changing of the guard. Entrepreneur Michael Russell, an assertive symbol of &quot;new money&quot; here, argues that it occurred at a point in history when &quot;old money&quot; had already ceased being the dominant force in Kansas City's economic life.    &quot;The old money needs the new money now, not the other way around,&quot; he says. He and others note that the dominant force behind Kansas City's building boom has been banker and developer Frank Morgan, a canny, almost reclusive figure who controls a network of area banks through Dreiseszun andamp; Morgan, a partnership with an uncle, and a web of family trusts. Mr. Morgan, the son of a traveling salesman, is practically everything the typical member of the Kansas City Country Club is not -- Jewish, uninvolved in charity balls and practically invisible in the social and civic life of the city.    Meanwhile, Donald Jones and a corporal's guard of Kroh Brothers employees struggle to bring at least a remnant of the company through bankruptcy proceedings that are likely to last a year or more. Mr. Jones sits in George Kroh's old office as he outlines his strategy: less construction and more reliance on income from management and other services. Four-fifths of the 388 former employees are gone, many potted plants are gone, and the company itself may soon be gone -- to cheaper quarters elsewhere. Its post-Chapter 11 construction dreams are modest: two or three small shopping centers a year.    &quot;Smaller is better,&quot; he says with conviction. </TEXT></DOC>