<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Sharing the Wealth:Democrats Latch OnTo Bonus Pay SystemIn Search for New Ideas---They Praise Lincoln ElectricFor Raising ProductivityAnd Minimizing Layoffs---Why Unions Like Fixed Pay---By Alan MurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> EUCLID, Ohio  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Lincoln Electric Co., housed in a brick and gray-metal building here near the buckle of the rust belt, looks more like a relic of the past than a prototype for the future. But some Democratic office-seekers see it as perhaps showing the way toward a new age of economic -- and political -- prosperity.    The company, which manufactures welding machines, has long been a popular case study in business schools for its innovative management and compensation policies. Since 1934, Lincoln workers have received roughly half of their annual pay in the form of year-end bonuses that vary with the company's profits and with each worker's performance.    Now, many Democratic politicians are studying Lincoln, too. In a desperate search for new ideas, they have latched on to its 50-year-old pay system as a possible cure-all for the nation's most serious economic ills -- weak productivity, low savings, unemployment and inflation.    &quot;Ideas which provoke basic economic change are really few and far between; I think this is one,&quot; says former Arizona Gov. Bruce Babbitt, a Democratic presidential candidate. &quot;It's one of those very infrequent, large, large concepts that I intend to develop.&quot;    Former Virginia Gov. Charles Robb, who hasn't entered the presidential sweepstakes but who heads a think tank for moderate Democrats called the Democratic Leadership Council, has also trumpeted a &quot;pay for performance&quot; system as central to his plan for &quot;Democratic capitalism.&quot; And other Democratic presidential hopefuls, including former Sen. Gary Hart, Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt and Delaware Sen. Joseph Biden, have expressed interest in the idea. Sen. Dale Bumpers of Arkansas has even introduced a bill to offer a new tax incentive encouraging cash profit-sharing bonuses.    &quot;This is an idea that needs to be taken very seriously,&quot; says Mark Steitz, the Hart campaign's director of policy analysis.    The idea doesn't charm all Democratic constituencies, however. Many union leaders oppose moving away from steady, predictable wages set by contract.    Nevertheless, many Democrats are seeking to replace their party's shopworn fare of jobs programs and industrial policy, even though those proposals have long been high on labor's legislative agenda.    &quot;We're trying to recapture for the Democrats the economic issue,&quot; says Alvin Fromm, the executive director of the Democratic Leadership Council. &quot;We need a way to have a good, solid economic-equity, social-justice agenda without being the taxers and spenders again.&quot;    The Democrats' new attention to performance-linked pay plans comes at a time when such practices are already on the rise. A recent study by the American Productivity Center in Houston, for instance, found sharp growth in the number of companies using such plans as profit-sharing, gain-sharing and lump-sum bonuses and various other individual and small-group incentives. About 32% of the companies surveyed had profit-sharing plans, and 30% of those plans had been started in the past five years. An additional 13% of companies had gain-sharing programs, which, unlike profit-sharing plans, generally apply to specific groups of workers in a plant; the vast majority of gain-sharing programs have been instituted in the past five years.    At companies such as Steelcase Inc., an office-furniture maker in Grand Rapids, Mich., workers receive annual profit-sharing bonuses that account for as much as 38% of their annual compensation. And General Motors Corp.'s proposed Saturn automobile plant in Tennessee has a contract with the United Auto Workers that provides for 20% of pay to be in the form of performance bonuses.    The Democrats hope to encourage that trend, through new tax incentives or regulations or by using the presidency as a &quot;bully pulpit&quot; to push change.    Linking pay to a person's or a company's performance is scarcely a new idea. Businessmen and management consultants have long argued that such plans improve morale and may increase productivity. More recently, two of the Democrats' favorite idea men, Lester Thurow of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Pat Choate of TRW Inc., have promoted bonus or incentive-pay plans as a key to improving the nation's industrial competitiveness.    The newest twist to this old idea, however, comes from Martin Weitzman, an academic economist affiliated with MIT. In &quot;The Share Economy,&quot; a book published in 1984, he argued that nationwide use of pay plans such as Lincoln Electric's could sharply reduce unemployment and ease the risk of inflation.    Mr. Weitzman's theory is grounded in the idea, widely held among economists, that unemployment is due to inflexible real wages. Faced with a slump in demand for their products, companies often find that they can't cut wages; instead, they lay off workers. Unemployment surges, and the economy falls into a recession.    Widespread use of profit-sharing bonuses would change that, Mr. Weitzman argues. If demand drops suddenly, profits would drop as well. Workers' pay would be reduced automatically, and companies would be able to cut prices rather than lay off workers. Under this system, Mr. Weitzman believes, unemployment could fall as low as 4% from the current 6.7%.    &quot;The major macroeconomic problems of our day can be traced back ultimately to the wage system of paying labor,&quot; Mr. Weitzman insisted during a forum sponsored by Mr. Hart's Center for a New Democracy. &quot;We try to award every worker a predetermined piece of the income pie before it's out of the oven, before the size of the pie is even known.&quot;    Lincoln Electric, at first glance, seems to be proof of Mr. Weitzman's theory. The company hasn't laid off a worker in more than three decades, according to Richard Sabo, assistant to the chief executive officer. Even during the severe recession of 1982, when the company's sales plummeted 40%, employment stayed steady. Workers reduced their hours, and bonus payments fell from a total of $59 million in 1981 to $26.5 million in 1983. The combined result: The average production worker's pay fell from $44,000 in 1981 to $22,500 in 1983. But without the flexible-bonus plan, &quot;we couldn't have maintained guaranteed employment,&quot; Mr. Sabo says.    Mr. Weitzman, Mr. Thurow and Mr. Choate all argue that a bonus-pay system helps explain Japan's success as well. On the average, more than a quarter of Japanese industrial workers' pay comes in year-end bonuses that vary with profits. That could help account for Japanese unemployment rates under 3%, high productivity and, to some extent, a savings rate more than triple the U.S. rate.    Despite the purported economic benefits of Mr. Weitzman's plan, it faces enormous political problems, especially with organized labor. Workers are glad to share in the profits when business is booming but aren't as eager to shoulder the burden when business slows. Why should workers suffer, labor leaders ask, for a profit drop that is due to management decisions or a change in economic conditions that they can't control?    Rudy Oswald, the AFL-CIO's chief economist, sums up labor sentiment succinctly. &quot;Marty Weitzman's proposition of cutting wages by 50% and having 50% profit sharing is bull,&quot; Mr. Oswald says. Noting that home mortgages and auto loans are based on base salaries, he says that under the Weitzman plan, &quot;nobody would be able to buy a car or a house.&quot;    Mr. Weitzman responds that workers inevitably shoulder some of the cost of management blunders and economic changes. Currently, he says, that cost is paid only by the unfortunate workers who are laid off. His system would spread the pain.    &quot;Look, labor as a whole doesn't have a stable income,&quot; Mr. Weitzman says. &quot;Now, it all falls on one group -- the last hired, first fired.&quot;    Former Gov. Robb finds that argument persuasive. Addressing the Detroit Economic Council recently, he said workers should &quot;all share the rewards if their company fares well . . . and all share the pain if profits fall.&quot;    Other politicians, however, are more responsive to the labor argument. &quot;Hart is very concerned that labor not be asked to subsidize the inefficiencies of management,&quot; Mr. Steitz says. Instead, Mr. Hart sees the new compensation plans as part of a more comprehensive package of reforms that would also give workers greater say in management decisions.    Lincoln's officials also argue that bonus-pay plans alone don't do much. &quot;There is much more to our incentive-management system than pay,&quot; Mr. Sabo says. &quot;Simply having a bonus system does not create the profit to produce the bonus. You must have a productive work environment created by management.&quot;    Another sticky problem is how to enact such a plan. Workers' compensation is principally the domain of the private sector, and efforts to interfere raise the unpalatable specter of &quot;big government.&quot;    Messrs. Robb and Babbitt believe that new tax incentives might help, and MIT's Mr. Thurow suggests that bonuses be exempt from the payroll tax. That, however, could drain the Social Security trust fund. Recognizing there is &quot;no free lunch,&quot; Mr. Robb says the revenue might have to be recouped by raising payroll taxes on nonbonus pay -- hardly a popular notion.    Sen. Bumper's plan would provide an incentive for cash profit-sharing bonuses by excluding 25% of those bonuses from taxation. And Montana Democratic Sen. Max Baucus, a founding member of the Democratic Leadership Council, has his staff looking at the possibility of providing an income-tax credit for a portion of the payroll taxes paid on bonuses. All of these plans, however, would slash federal revenue, which would have to be made up elsewhere to avoid swelling the deficit.    Mr. Hart, Sen. Biden and Rep. Gephardt are warier of such solutions. Veterans of the long congressional battle over tax overhaul, they are reluctant to propose new tax breaks. Rep. Gephardt's staff talks instead of possibly using regulatory measures; Mr. Hart's considers direct spending programs; and Sen. Biden's emphasizes the power of the president to encourage and bully business to change.    Whether such ideas can be sold to the public isn't clear. Mr. Robb acknowledges that Mr. Weitzman's argument &quot;is an argument to make in the abstract and impresses economists, but there are limitations to making that argument in the marketplace. It requires a whole lot more complexity than most political issues are capable of transmitting to the population.&quot;    Gov. Babbitt also concedes that the proposal &quot;will, I suspect, draw skeptical responses from both labor and management,&quot; but, he adds, &quot;I think it is one of those issues that is there coming at us.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>