<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0040 </DOCNO><HL> Boesky Admits to Conspiracy ChargeLinked, Sources Say, to Drexel Inquiry---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ivan F. Boesky, the former arbitrager at the center of Wall Street's biggest insider-trading scandal, pleaded guilty to a felony charge of conspiring to file false documents with the federal government.    According to people familiar with the investigation, the charge is linked to the government's ongoing criminal probe of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Michael M. Milken, the head of Drexel's West Coast bond operations.    The conspiracy to which Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty involved Securities and Exchange Commission filings disclosing Mr. Boesky's holdings in Fischbach Corp., a New York-based electrical contractor.    Mr. Boesky, who is scheduled to be sentenced Aug. 21, faces a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a $250,000 fine.    Fischbach was taken over in 1985 by financier Victor Posner, who is now Fischbach's chairman. Mr. Posner and Fred Carr, chairman of First Executive Corp., a Los Angeles-based insurance holding company that earlier held a 10% stake in Fischbach, are also being investigated by the government, according to people familiar with the investigation.    In December, this newspaper reported that the government was investigating Drexel's role in Mr. Posner's takeover of Fischbach. People familiar with the investigation say that if Drexel and Messrs. Milken, Boesky, Posner and Carr -- or some combination of them -- were acting in concert to gain control of Fischbach for Mr. Posner, then there might be numerous criminal violations of the securities laws, including the disclosure violations that Mr. Boesky has now admitted.    The Wall Street Journal also reported in January that a $5.3 million payment from Mr. Boesky to Drexel was under investigation as part of a suspected scheme involving Messrs. Boesky and Milken to unlawfully profit from corporate takeovers. Yesterday's charge, however, was the first indication that the Fischbach takeover and the payment to Drexel are linked.    While the government's investigation of the Fischbach transactions clearly goes well beyond conventional insider trading, that too might be involved if conspirators profited from the exchange of confidential information about Mr. Posner's plans and strategies, lawyers said. As an investment banker, Drexel helped provide financing for the Posner takeover of Fischbach.    The government's charge against Mr. Boesky alleges that in 1984 he entered into a secret agreement, under which Boesky-controlled entities accumulated, at the behest of certain unidentified co-conspirators, a position in Fischbach that eventually reached 13.4%.    Under the agreement, the co-conspirators guaranteed him against loss in his Fischbach holdings. That agreement wasn't disclosed when Mr. Boesky filed with the SEC documents showing that he held more than 5% of Fischbach shares, the government charged.    The co-conspirators later purchased the stake from the Boesky entities on the London stock exchange at an above-market price of $18.4 million, the government said. It was also alleged that the co-conspirators further reimbursed the Boesky entities as part of a scheme to reconcile other &quot;money differences&quot; outstanding between Mr. Boesky and one of the conspirators.    The government declined to provide further details or to identify the alleged coconspirators. But people familiar with the government's investigation said the government believes that Mr. Milken, head of Drexel's Beverly Hills, Calif.-based bond operations, is one of the co-conspirators.    The government didn't identify the possible motive for the alleged agreement.    An attorney for Mr. Milken, Martin Flumenbaum, a partner at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton andamp; Garrison, declined comment.    Mr. Carr said, &quot;We started our purchases in January 1982 and we sold our entire Fischbach position to the company on Jan. 9, 1984, which is substantially before the April 1, 1984, date that the government says the conspiracy involving Mr. Boesky began.&quot; He declined further comment.    A spokesman for Pennsylvania Engineering Corp., the Posner-controlled company involved in the Fischbach takeover, said, &quot;No individual in our company or any of our companies has been charged with or accused of anything. Therefore, we have nothing to say regarding Mr. Boesky or his plea.&quot;    Steven Anreder, a Drexel spokesman, said, &quot;We don't know of any arrangement of the type described involving Boesky's Fischbach shares,&quot; and declined further comment.    Until yesterday, prosecutors had refused to identify the felony to which Mr. Boesky, last November, had agreed to plead guilty. This was an indication that the subject of the charge remained under investigation, lawyers said.    They noted that the government's identification of the Fischbach transaction yesterday is likely to increase the pressure on the co-conspirators who haven't yet been publicly named, and is a dramatic indication of the value to the government of Mr. Boesky's cooperation, involving as it does some of the major names in American finance.    &quot;This is intended to send a message that the government now has a very strong case,&quot; said one person familiar with the investigation.    The Fischbach transactions began three years ago. According to SEC documents and other evidence obtained by this newspaper, Mr. Boesky began acquiring Fischbach stock in April 1984. At that time, Mr. Posner had reached a standstill agreement with Fischbach that limited his holdings in the company to 25% unless someone else acquired more than 10% of the company. He was freed from that restriction, Mr. Posner later argued, when Mr. Carr's First Executive Corp. acquired its position.    During the summer of 1984, Mr. Posner increased his stake in Fischbach to 28% and sought antitrust clearance to acquire more than 50%. Just before that announcement, Mr. Boesky disclosed that he had raised his Fischbach stake to 13.4%.    On Feb. 28, 1985, Mr. Boesky sold all of his Fischbach stock for $45 a share in London, when Fischbach shares were trading in the high 30s in New York. He also sold $5.7 million in Fischbach convertible debentures in the over-the-counter market at a price that represented a premium over their face value, SEC filings show.    The same day, a company controlled by Mr. Posner purchased an identical number of shares for $45 each in the over-the-counter market, according to SEC filings by the Posner-controlled entity, Pennsylvania Engineering. It also bought precisely the same amount of convertible debentures that Mr. Boesky sold.    Pennsylvania Engineering disclosed that part of the funds for the purchases came from a debenture offering handled by Drexel. Mr. Posner ultimately bought more than 50% of Fischbach's stock and was named its chairman in October 1985.    People familiar with the government's investigation have previously disclosed that the $5.3 million Mr. Boesky paid Drexel in March 1986 resulted from a balancing of gains and losses from stock positions allegedly parked by Mr. Boesky for Mr. Milken and vice versa. These people added yesterday that Mr. Boesky sustained a loss on his Fischbach dealings. That loss was applied against other trading-related debts Mr. Boesky owed Drexel, those people said.    Parking occurs when one investor holds stock for another to conceal true ownership of the stock, and is usually guaranteed against losses.    The $5.3 million payment was made at the time Mr. Boesky dissolved his Ivan F. Boesky Corp. investment concern before launching a new limited partnership using funds raised by Drexel. The payment was questioned by Mr. Boesky's auditors, after Mr. Boesky could produce no documentation to support the payment.    Drexel's West Coast office then hurriedly prepared an invoice for &quot;consulting and advisory services.&quot; Drexel has said repeatedly that the payment was for investment banking services and doesn't involve any wrongdoing or collusion.    Mr. Boesky, 50 years old, appeared calm but gaunt as he entered his plea before Judge Morris E. Lasker in a packed federal courtroom. Judge Lasker, alluding to published reports that he has a reputation for leniency in sentencing, said he wanted &quot;to talk turkey&quot; and asked if Mr. Boesky understood that the judge is free to impose the maximum sentence. Mr. Boesky answered that he did.    Mr. Boesky made no statement after the proceedings. He was mobbed by waiting reporters and television crews as he emerged from a side door at the courthouse and entered a waiting Lincoln Continental.    At a news conference afterward, U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani sought to fend off criticism that the government was too lenient in allowing Mr. Boesky to plead guilty to a single felony that didn't directly involve insider trading. Mr. Giuliani emphasized that Mr. Boesky faces the possibility of a five-year prison term, which is longer than any insider-trading sentence that has been meted out. He said the government will bring the full range of Mr. Boesky's crimes to the judge's attention before sentencing.    Mr. Giuliani also praised Mr. Boesky's continuing cooperation in the government's investigation, noting that Mr. Boesky has already &quot;opened up a whole area&quot; of Wall Street crime. Mr. Boesky earlier settled SEC charges of insider trading by paying a record $100 million in fines and in disgorged profits.    Boesky was accompanied in court yesterday by Leon Silverman, one of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver andamp; Jacobson's leading partners and a former U.S. special prosecutor. One of Mr. Boesky's principal lawyers, Harvey Pitt, another partner at Fried Frank, said Mr. Boesky &quot;has made his plea and there isn't much one can say beyond that.&quot;    ---   William Power contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>