<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880111-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL SENT reinforcements to the Gaza Strip as violent protests continued.    Hospital officials said a Palestinian man was killed in a violent demonstration in the Sajaiyeh area of Gaza City and at least nine were wounded as troops backed by armored personnel carriers began reinforcing the area. The official death toll, which didn't include the reported Gaza City killing, rose to 28 in recent unrest after a Palestinian died Saturday of wounds received last month. A Palestinian news agency also said a woman suffered a miscarriage and suffocated after being overcome by tear gas.    Leaders of the Palestine Liberation Organization ended two days of talks in Baghdad Saturday, but failed to agree on setting up a government in exile.    ---   HAITI'S JUNTA DISQUALIFIED 11 candidates in next Sunday's presidential vote.    Eight candidates with ties to the former Duvalier dictatorship were among those disqualified by the military-appointed electoral council late Saturday. Eleven candidates remain in the race. Haiti's military-led government canceled presidential balloting Nov. 29 after election-day violence in which 34 were killed. Opposition leaders branded the disqualifications as an attempt to make next Sunday's vote appear legitimate.    Many Haitians feared violence by Duvalierists following the disqualification announcement, and troops set up checkpoints in Port-au-Prince.    ---   Gorbachev proposed a summit meeting with Chinese leaders, Tass said. The Soviet leader, in an interview with a Chinese weekly, said progress in relations between Moscow and Beijing, strained since the 1960s, was an &quot;objective necessity.&quot; Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping last month rebuffed a previous summit offer by Gorbachev.    ---   West German police are seeking a West Berlin woman working for Palestinian terrorists in connection with a 1986 discotheque bombing that killed two U.S. soldiers. An official said a warrant has been issued for the woman's arrest. The U.S. blamed Libya for the incident and ordered Tripoli and Benghazi bombed in retaliation 10 days later.    ---   U.S. government scientists traveled to Semipalatinsk to tour the main Soviet nuclear test facility. The visit, the first ever by a U.S. delegation, is to be followed by a reciprocal Soviet tour of the U.S. test site in Nevada later this month. The aim of the visits is ratification of two 1970s treaties limiting underground nuclear explosions.    ---   Arizona's attorney general said a grand jury is continuing its investigation into alleged improprieties by Gov. Evan Mecham, indicted Friday on six counts of willful concealment, perjury and filing a false report in connection with a $350,000 campaign loan. The attorney general didn't say what specific items the grand jury would consider.    ---   Carlucci ended a tour of Persian Gulf states during which Western diplomats said the defense secretary sought to assure gulf states of U.S. support while preparing them for a modest cutback in Navy forces in the region. Separately, President Mubarak continued a gulf tour, the first by an Egyptian leader since the 1979 accord with Israel.    ---   South Korea's President Chun called for talks this week with three top opposition leaders in an attempt at national reconciliation. An aide said the president sought a frank exchange of views with Kim Dae Jung, Kim Young Sam and Kim Jong Pil before he leaves office next month. All three opposition leaders have accepted the offer.    ---   Bush is expected to be questioned under oath today by representatives of independent counsel Walsh about his role in the Iran-Contra affair. Neither the vice president nor his press secretary have acknowledged that the session will take place, but an official familiar with Walsh's inquiry said Bush is to answer oral questions.    ---   A House report said problems continue with the MX missile's guidance system. According to the Armed Services panel report, only 18 of the 30 missiles deployed so far are ready to fire. Rep. Aspin (D., Wis.), panel chairman, said Northrop Corp. has not kept promises of a stepped-up delivery schedule, but the company disputed the claim.    ---   A bomb aboard a Burmese train killed eight and wounded 38 as the train approached the capital of Rangoon, Burma's state radio said. There was no claim of responsibility, but officials suspect the bomb was planted by ethnic Karen separatists.    ---   Nicaraguan opposition groups marched in Managua on the 10th anniversary of the assassination of Pedro Chamorro, editor of the newspaper La Prensa. Reuter said as many as 10,000 people took part.    ---   Panama's military said Gen. Noriega has returned from a surprise one-day visit to the Dominican Republic during which about 1,000 people, who thought the military ruler had left the country for good, demonstrated joyfully in Panama City. Noriega said that he has set &quot;a trap&quot; for his opponents by leaving Panama unexpectedly.    ---   Manila said its troops killed 25 communist rebels in a battle in the northern Philippine town of Balbalan. The military said three soldiers also were killed when about 300 rebels attempted to overrun a 30-man government outpost. Separately, a mayoral candidate was killed, bringing the official death toll in pre-election violence to 56.    ---   Died: Frank Pace Jr., 75, former chairman of General Dynamics Corp., Friday, in Greenwich, Conn., of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>