<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0119 </DOCNO><HL> NATO Edges Toward the Moment of Truth---By Irving Kristol</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK) </IN><TEXT>   The trouble with cleverness in foreign policy is that one is likely to end up being too clever by half. This is the situation in which America's European allies now find themselves.    For many years now, they have been piously and disingenuously stressing the importance of arms-control negotiations as one alternative to an expensive and politically unpopular buildup of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's conventional military forces. They have even felt free to criticize the U.S. for dragging its feet on this issue. Now, however, they are dismayed at the public revelation that the alternative was always a false one. The price of a successful arms-control agreement is larger military budgets, not smaller ones.    As the prospect of an agreement between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. on intermediate-range nuclear missiles grows brighter, Western European nations have been nervously shifting the focus to the Soviet's short-range missiles. They have also indicated clearly that if an agreement on this matter is negotiated -- which is by no means out of the question -- then the focus will shift to a negotiated reduction of Soviet conventional superiority.    But they know beforehand that this is a nonstarter. The negotiations on conventional forces have been going on for 15 years now in Geneva, and there has not even been agreement on an agenda. The Soviets are not simply going to negotiate away their superiority vis-a-vis NATO on this level. They see themselves as a world power, not a middling power, which is what America's NATO allies are resigned to being. The Soviets' conception of an ideal military &quot;balance&quot; is one in which their conventional forces are equal to those of Western Europe plus those of the U.S. If this ideal is to be frustrated, it will not be by negotiation but by a very substantial increase in NATO's conventional military power-substantial enough so that the Soviets would be hard put to match the pace. Any such buildup, however, is what our NATO partners wish so desperately, for internal political reasons, to avoid.    So a rift is developing within NATO on arms control, and ironically it is now Western Europe that is trying to repudiate its past rhetoric. It is indeed a surprise that the rift should be developing on this issue, in this way -- as a result of Soviet accommodation rather than Soviet intimidation. But it ought not surprise anyone that there is a rift. The present structure of NATO is such that rifts are bound to emerge, and to become ever more serious with each passing year.    The keystone of NATO is the American commitment to defend Western Europe, with nuclear weapons if necessary, against Soviet aggression -- even if it is nonnuclear aggression that is involved. This commitment was made at a time when the nations of Western Europe were economically and militarily weak. It was also made at a time when the U.S. had a clear nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union. This is no longer the case, to put it mildly, and many analysts have been saying -- some candidly, some sotto voce -- that NATO should begin to recognize that the American &quot;nuclear umbrella&quot; is more fictitious than real.    On the surface, their arguments seem to have had little effect. The State Department and the Pentagon are resolutely dedicated to the status quo. U.S. politicians are fearful of disrupting an alliance that has &quot;kept the peace&quot; in Europe for more than four decades. And public-opinion polls show widespread and habitual public acceptance of NATO. True, these polls never ask, &quot;Are you in favor of the U.S. engaging in mutual nuclear annihilation with the Soviet Union in order to preserve the integrity of Western Europe?&quot; This question is never raised in public discourse, lest the answer be disconcerting.    Beneath this surface of seemingly solid commitment, however, a subtle and important change is taking place. Politicians who are loath publicly to advocate the withdrawal of American troops from Europe -- the supposed guarantor of that nuclear umbrella -- for reasons of foreign policy are beginning to look with favor on the idea for budgetary reasons. More and more one hears invidious comments about the level of European military expenditures as compared with that of the U.S. And more and more one hears rough calculations of how much the deficit would be reduced if NATO were more &quot;European,&quot; less American. This is not the most sensible reason for rethinking NATO, but welfare-state politics within the U.S. are not all that different from welfare-state politics in Britain or West Germany.    What it comes down to is that the very idea of NATO is now edging into incoherence, and the status quo is becoming more and more anachronistic. The defense of Western Europe at the conventional level will be, in the future, primarily a European responsibility. The British and French nuclear forces will have to become the nuclear deterrent for all of Western Europe. It will be a deterrent against Soviet nuclear aggression -- as it already has been in fact, as distinct from theory.    It is preposterous to believe, as official NATO theory prescribes, that the governments of Western Europe would ever resort to a first-use of nuclear weapons against conventional Soviet aggression, therewith ensuring their own annihilation. The European dream -- unstated, for obvious reasons -- is that any such nuclear exchange would primarily involve the two superpowers, with the missiles flying over West European heads, as it were. But with or without American troops in Europe, this is an unlikely scenario, since neither the Soviet Union nor the U.S. is really interested in committing national suicide in a conflict over Western Europe, dearly as they may cherish that portion of the globe.    This does not mean that the U.S. will simply &quot;decouple&quot; itself from Western Europe. It cannot and should not. Since the costs of a West European conventional defense will be high -- nuclear weapons are attractive precisely because they are so relatively cheap -- the U.S. should be (and surely will be) ready to help, with sophisticated weaponry, with its Navy and Air Force, even with some troops where necessary and feasible. But Europe will have to become more self-reliant if &quot;containment&quot; of the Soviets is to be successful.    This possibility tends to be dismissed much too casually. Yes, the Soviets now have 27,000 tanks vs. NATO's 14,000. But the nations of Western Europe know how to build tanks -- very good ones, actually -- and have the resources to do so. They also have the human resources to man them. Especially with American assistance, they should be able to close much of this gap, if not all of it. And what is true for tanks is no less true for airplanes. The key question is: Do they have the political will to move in this direction?    The State Department and the Pentagon are convinced that they do not -- that the political will for such self-reliance is nonexistent. This is why they prohibit, in effect, any speculation about the future of NATO. Nevertheless, that future is now an open question. It will be up to the Europeans to prove the State Department and the Pentagon wrong.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>