<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Uneven Risks:If a Recession Comes,Various Areas of U.S.May Feel It Differently---Economies of New York City,Southwest Already Shaky;Midwest Could Do Better---Source of Strength: Diversity---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   The stock-market crash has stirred talk of another recession, even though the New York metropolitan area is, so far, the only region suffering much damage. But if the national economy does turn down, how would various regions of the U.S. fare?    A variety of industries, important in more than one region, are clearly vulnerable. For example, a slump in financial services -- the Achilles' heel of New York -- might hurt New England's much smaller sector as well.    Another vulnerable industry is real estate, especially in Texas but also in New York, New England and elsewhere. Benjamin Chinitz, the director of research at the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy in Cambridge, Mass., says some condominium developers are seeing &quot;almost a screeching halt in early commitments&quot; by buyers.    Travel also could be curtailed. &quot;When people hunker down during a recession, one of the first things to go is travel,&quot; says David Birch, the president of Cognetics Inc., a Cambridge consulting firm. Among areas at risk: New England, Florida and California. But the weak dollar may help tourism. &quot;I think that instead of Americans flying to exotic locations, they'll be getting into the station wagon and heading for Disney World,&quot; says Ed Cabrera of Raymond James andamp; Associates, a St. Petersburg, Fla., brokerage firm. On the other hand, both California and Hawaii have already seen a surge in Japanese tourists spending their high-value yen.    And there are other areas of new strength. The Rust Belt has emerged from a six-year slump in better shape to weather any new storms, and the Farm Belt is seeing the seeds of a revival.    Here's how various regions of the U.S. stand as a possible recession looms.    NEW YORK   Though practically unaffected by the last two recessions, New York City could be battered by the next one. Richard Ravitch, Bowery Savings Bank's chairman, cites three worries: a shrinkage in the financial-services industry &quot;even if the economy doesn't go into a recession&quot;; New York's sensitivity to real-estate development, which &quot;is clearly going to slow down&quot;; and the city's &quot;budget difficulties.&quot;    Hurt by the stock-market crash, New York already is in something of a recession. Mayor Edward Koch says the city &quot;could well lose 20,000 jobs&quot; in financial services. Finance Commissioner Abraham Biderman says, &quot;We're going to feel {any recession} in lower corporate profits or, in some cases, no corporate profits.&quot; Anticipating lower revenues next year, New York has ordered a temporary job freeze and deferred raises for city managers.    With financial services generating one out of four new jobs in New York in the past 10 years, &quot;The fortunes of the city are more closely tied to the fortunes of one volatile industry,&quot; says Samuel Ehrenhalt, an official of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. &quot;New York's portfolio of growth industries is much less diverse than 20 years ago.&quot; In any recession, &quot;that loss of diversity spells heightened risk.&quot;    New York's strength now lies in its international trade, and Howard Stein, the chairman of Dreyfus Corp., calls the low dollar &quot;the main thing&quot; in the city's favor. Even in a recession, he adds, &quot;New York will benefit from a continuing movement of foreign investment into the city.&quot;    THE INDUSTRIAL MIDWEST   The industrial Midwest would fare better in a new recession than in the 1981-82 slump. The region still produces a lot of steel, autos, trucks and machinery, but rigorous streamlining has put many of those industries in far stronger condition.    In addition, the region's economy has become more diversified. In Ohio, for instance, 24% of workers are in manufacturing, down from 30% in 1981. The manufacturing mix has changed, too. For example, highly cyclical steel mills and foundries employed 256,500 people in Ohio and Pennsylvania in 1981; now, they employ 133,100. And the weak dollar is beginning to help. Exports of machinery and other products are rising, import competition is easing, and more foreign companies are manufacturing here instead of importing.    The Rust Belt's basic industrial products are more price-sensitive than high-tech and aerospace products produced on both coasts, but that could be an advantage in the next recession. The dollar is likely to remain weak, and Midwest manufacturers will continue to make inroads against foreign competitors.    In the early 1980s, the Midwest had a tough time adjusting to the sudden slowdown in inflation. Moreover, a lot of obsolete capacity that should have been closed gradually in the 1960s and 1970s was junked almost all at once. Now, most manufacturers have cut back office staffs, supervisors and other workers who don't make products. Large U.S. mills today typically employ less than seven hours of labor to ship a ton of steel, down from 10 hours in 1981, says John B. Corey, Armco's director of strategy and development. Gains in quality and costs, combined with the strong yen, may force Japanese imports as well as U.S. products to absorb some of the sales decline in the next recession.    Much would depend, of course, on the type and the duration of any recession. &quot;The primary problem next time might be financial, hurting Manhattan more than Ohio,&quot; says Robert J. Stalla, an economist at McDonald andamp; Co., a Cleveland-based securities firm. But a prolonged, deep slump all over the industrialized world would batter the industrial Midwest again because there still is excess capacity world-wide for many heavy-industry products.    NEW ENGLAND   Shielded by diversity, New England probably would suffer less than most regions in a recession. &quot;Our economy is driven largely by many small, diversified companies,&quot; Cognetics' Mr. Birch says. &quot;We aren't dependent on autos like Detroit or on oil like Houston. That kind of diversity counteracts cyclical forces.&quot;    Moreover, New England is prosperous, with less than 4% unemployment, and so has a &quot;good starting point&quot; to weather hard times, says Lynn Browne, a vice president at the Boston Fed. She adds that consumer durables make up a smaller percentage of manufactured products in New England than in other regions. Thus, a short, mild recession that mainly crimps consumer spending might not hit New England very hard. And it wouldn't hurt high-tech industries much.    However, New England's manufactured goods include many producer durables, such as machine tools, Ms. Browne says. Thus, a prolonged recession that saps investor confidence and capital spending might damage the area significantly.    And even New England's prosperity may be setting it up for a fall. Low unemployment has pushed up wages; even at $5 to $6 an hour, fast-food outlets have trouble filling jobs. &quot;Looking down the road, that could put us at a disadvantage compared with other regions,&quot; says Wayne Ayers, a financial economist at Bank of Boston.    THE SOUTHEAST   The Sun Belt forecast: &quot;partly cloudy.&quot; Economists expect the Southeast, buffered by its big service economy, to continue to outperform the nation. But some overbuilt real-estate markets could get bashed, and Florida's influx of retirees, job seekers and tourists could dwindle.    Some healthy areas are already slowing down. Last January, construction employment in Atlanta was running 15% ahead of January 1986. But by October, it was off about 6% from a year earlier.    Yet that slowdown isn't all bad. &quot;A high-growth region tends to attract an awful lot of construction,&quot; says W. Bethel Minter, chief economist of SunTrust Banks Inc. Atlanta and some Florida markets, in particular, were horribly overbuilt when the 1973-75 recession hit. Mr. Minter sees more prudence this time around. Nonetheless, according to a Coldwell Banker survey, rates of suburban office vacancies top 20% in such Florida cities as Miami, Orlando and Tampa, as well as in Nashville, Tenn., and Charlotte, N.C.    In addition, a lot of new shopping centers could suffer if consumers throttle back. And in Florida, consumer spending is causing broader concerns. &quot;There's a lot of retirement and investment income there, and that's where the major impact {of the stock-market crash} in our region might be,&quot; says Gene D. Sullivan, a Fed economist in Atlanta. Florida's galloping population growth also could be hobbled.    In addition, much of the South's manufacturing is auto-related, ranging from the big Nissan plant in Smyrna, Tenn., to little parts makers scattered through Alabama. Such plants could be belted by a drop in consumer spending.    MIDDLE ATLANTIC STATES   Thomas J. Stanton, the chairman of First Jersey National Bank, says New Jersey's robust economy should ride out a recession fairly well. The state's last three governors, he notes, have followed a &quot;no-smokestack policy.&quot; Manufacturing has lost ground to services and research facilities, and he says the latter, especially, shouldn't be vulnerable.    However, he worries about New Jersey's real-estate market. Much of its strength is a spill-over from New York, and, in a recession, it might be hurt. However, Herman Volk, a state official, says that if a recession forces New York companies to cut costs by seeking cheaper quarters, &quot;it could be beneficial to us.&quot;    In the Pennsylvania/New Jersey/Delaware region, says Theodore Crone, a Federal Reserve research officer in Philadelphia, the potential weak points probably are in manufacturing: pharmaceuticals, chemicals, plastics, auto assemblies and steel. But all are being helped by the declining dollar. Manufacturers' foreign trade, Mr. Crone says, &quot;has been doing much better than their business in domestic markets in terms of year-to-year increases. A recession would hurt those industries.&quot;    The region's strong points are financial services and the fast-growing high-tech and research corridor in the Princeton, N.J., area. Mr. Crone says the region's financial services, such as insurance, aren't closely tied to the stock market. Philadelphia's financial companies, he says, &quot;haven't experienced anything like the layoffs in New York.&quot;    THE FARM BELT   The Midwest Farm Belt also would fare better than it did in the last recession -- and perhaps better than the nation as a whole. Why? It doesn't have many gains to give up. While nonfarm employment throughout the U.S. expanded 13.4% between January 1980 and October 1987, it grew only 4.6% in seven upper-Midwest states, says Larry J. Wipf, an economist at Norwest Corp., a Minneapolis banking company. &quot;The farm economy hasn't been as strong as the consumer-oriented sectors, but it can't fall as much, either,&quot; he adds.    But that's true only if the next recession is sparked by a drop in consumer spending. Highly capitalized industries such as agriculture are more sensitive to the 198182 variety of slump: a high dollar, high interest rates and high energy costs. The consumer-led expansion since 1982 didn't refloat agriculture, and, most economists say, a consumer-led retraction wouldn't scuttle it.    The dollar's drop, combined with hefty export subsidies, pushed up U.S. farm-export volume 18% in the year ended Sept. 30. That gain, the first since 1980, could help cushion the Farm Belt from any recession. Although the Agriculture Department expects net farm income to drop about 5% next year as some subsidies are trimmed, it also sees U.S. farm exports rising 9%.    Aided by federal cash, many farmers are also in better shape to handle a recession. In some Midwest states, farm debt has dropped one-third from peak levels.    The Farm Belt would react unevenly to a recession. If the dollar remains weak, U.S. soybean sales may be helped in Western Europe, a major market. But a weak dollar might not do much for wheat; so far, the dollar has fallen less against the currencies of many developing countries, the biggest wheat export market.    THE SOUTHWEST   Southwesterners aren't trying to predict when a national recession will begin. They wonder when their own long recession will end. The agriculture, energy and real-estate industries in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana and New Mexico collapsed in the early 1980s. In Texas, bankruptcy filings, bank foreclosures and failures are at levels exceeded only in the 1930s.    Now, economists see the first signs of a broad recovery; jobs and personal income are up. But the region's leading industry, oil and natural gas, is still ailing. And the recent inability of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to reach a firm oil-production agreement has raised new fears that the region's economy will deteriorate further. The weak OPEC accord pushed down crude-oil futures prices and contributed to Phillips Petroleum's decision to lay off as much as 10% of its work force over the next two years.    In any event, a Southwest rebound will be very gradual. One reason: Texas this year will attract only 19,000 more newcomers than it loses in departures, according to Southern Methodist University's Center for Enterprising. That's down from the 106,000 net in-migration of 1986.    Real-estate values are likely to remain depressed because of a glut of vacant office and retail space. Of the nation's cities with the most vacant office space, four are in the region: Austin, Dallas, Houston and Oklahoma City. Several studies indicate that not until 1992, if then, will real-estate prices in some Sun Belt cities start rising again. Stephen Roulac of Roulac Real Estate Consulting Group, a Deloitte Haskins andamp; Sells unit, believes some of the space won't be filled until the next century.    One silver lining: Overbuilt real-estate markets make them attractive to businesses seeking cheaper quarters. A recession &quot;could stimulate a high degree of cost concern,&quot; making these markets even more attractive, Mr. Roulac says.    THE FAR WEST   The outlook is mixed, but economists agree that California, with the world's eighth-largest economy and wide diversity, would weather a recession best.    On the plus side, much of the West, including California, would benefit from prolonged weakness of the dollar. Many of the nine states' exports -- ranging from computer chips to lumber to agricultural products -- have already begun to climb. &quot;Wine exports to Japan, as an example, were up 130% through the first four months of 1987,&quot; says Phillip E. Vincent, senior economist at First Interstate Bancorp.    However, Oregon's lumber industry could be cut down by a recession-related slump in single-family housing, Mr. Vincent says. California's computer industry, which is expecting 10% growth in 1988, could see that slowed to &quot;a 4% to 5% rate&quot; if a recession holds down capital spending, says Jeanette Garretty, senior economist at BankAmerica Corp. And semiconductor makers, which have struggled out of a long slump, could be similarly hurt.    In Washington, a state whose economic health is linked to the fortunes of giant Boeing Co., a continued weak dollar could fuel exports of airplanes. But a deep recession -- and cutbacks in travel -- could shoot down orders by domestic airlines. </TEXT></DOC>