<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871110-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Prices for U.S. Crude-Oil Futures FallTo Lowest Levels Since Late August---By William PowerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><TEXT>   Prices for U.S. crude-oil futures dropped for the ninth session in a row in light trading.    Although many big traders and analysts were away at the American Petroleum Institute's annual convention in Chicago, they left behind continuing negative feelings that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries won't be able to contain production.    &quot;What you've got here is a market that's still entrenched in a downward spiral,&quot; said Robert F. Murphy, an oil analyst at E.F. Hutton andamp; Co.    Analysts said the market wasn't helped by an Energy Department estimate yesterday that 1988 domestic oil demand will be 16.51 million barrels a day, or 0.2% lower than in 1987. Also fueling the feeling that there's too much oil around, analysts said, was a Middle East Economic Survey newsletter report in Nicosia that Iran is trying to &quot;unload&quot; at cut-rate prices about 13 million barrels of &quot;homeless crude&quot; available because of U.S. and French boycotts.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude-oil contracts for December delivery slipped 17 cents, to $18.63 a barrel, the lowest price since late August. On the spot, or non-contract, market, the price of the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate fell 15 cents, to $18.65 a barrel. &quot;The overall feeling is that the market wants to test the $18 level,&quot; Mr. Murphy said.    Led by crude, heating-oil futures on the Merc fell 0.53 cent a gallon, to 54.83 cents, and unleaded-gasoline futures fell 0.66 cent a gallon, to 50.08 cents.    James Ritterbusch, vice president for energy futures at PaineWebber Inc. in Chicago, said heating-oil prices held up better than crude or gasoline yesterday.    &quot;There could still be tight supplies&quot; of heating oil, Mr. Ritterbusch said. He said heating-oil prices will be affected by this week's American Petroleum Institute statistics, which will show whether there is a further seasonal buildup.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    SUGAR: Futures prices rose on reports of potential buying by Russia, China and India, analysts said. March-delivery sugar rose 0.34 cent to 7.93 cents a pound, settling one point below the day's high. The rally was significant, one analyst said, because of a breakthrough above the 7.65-cent level, where other rallies had been stymied. Debora Tropp, analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities, said that according to wire service reports, the Soviet Union may buy as much as three million tons of raw sugar this year, up from one million tons last year. That nation is expected to have about a 500,000-ton shortage because of adverse weather problems and increased internal usage, according to trade sources. Miss Tropp said the reports say India is expected to purchase as much as 400,000 tons of refined sugar. That's down from about a million tons it bought last year, she said. Trade sources and analysts had expected India to buy a larger quantity, but a recent report by the U.S. agricultural attache from India revised upward India's harvest estimate. Reports indicate that China may have bought between 750,000 tons and a million tons of sugar, Miss Tropp said. If recent indications that China may need about 1.3 million tons are correct, that nation may be close to fulfilling its needs with modest additional purchases, she said.    COPPER: Futures prices swung over a range of almost 3 1/2 cents as profit-taking was followed by renewed demand. The December contract settled at 94.70 cents a pound, down 0.80. After easing to 93 cents initially, prices rose as high as 96.40 cents before tapering off at the close. The supply picture continued to tighten, as stocks in London Metal Exchange warehouses Friday fell 5,975 tons for the week, to 62,500 tons, while those in Commodity Exchange of New York warehouses as of Friday declined 2,010 tons from Thursday, to 54,790 tons. The production situation brightened somewhat as workers at Southern Peru Copper Co.'s Cuajone mine returned to work after a dispute over wages. However, workers at the company's other two mines, Toquepala and Ilo, were still out, according to an analyst.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Prices for wheat and soybean futures are expected to rise at the open of trading today in the wake of several Agriculture Department reports released after yesterday's close. The department agreed to subsidize the sale of 2.4 million metric tons of U.S. wheat to the Soviet Union. The move had been widely anticipated, but not so soon. The department subsidizes wheat exporters who sell to the Soviets at world prices, which are much lower than U.S. market prices. The move is designed to get the Soviets to satisfy its obligation under a trade pact to buy at least nine million metric tons of U.S. grain annually. Another boost could come from the department's new estimate of a 1.46 billion bushel stockpile from next year's wheat harvest, about 50 million bushels less than expected by analysts. The department's move to trim its estimate for the recently completed soybean harvest by eight million bushels is seen buoying prices today. Most traders had expected the department to raise its estimate by about 10 million bushels from its October report. &quot;This is slightly bullish,&quot; said Jerry Gidel, an analyst at G.H. Miller andamp; Co., Chicago. Based on Nov. 1 crop conditions, the department estimated a 1987 soybean harvest of 1.96 billion bushels. Yesterday's reports were mostly neutral for corn-futures prices, analysts said. The department put its Nov. 1 corn-harvest estimate at 7.17 billion bushels, which was in line with trade expectations. The department didn't change its month-old forecast that the Soviet Union would produce 210 million metric tons of grain for the 1987-1988 crop year and import 28 million tons of grain. </TEXT></DOC>