<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880315-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Borrowing Binge: Takeover Trend Helps Push Corporate Debt And Defaults Upward --- Analysts Worry That Load Will Worsen Downturn In the Next U.S. Recession --- Reaping the Reagan Harvest? </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. and Alfred L. Malabre Jr. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TNM BBK ECO BON </IN><TEXT>   Corporate restructuring left many American companies leaner in their operations but more heavily in debt. And now, a wave of stock buy-backs, corporate takeovers and sales of companies to their managements is pushing them even further -- perhaps dangerously -- into hock.    Already, the corporate debt in default is climbing rapidly. The 1981-82 recession raised it, just as you would expect: Annual corporate defaults climbed to more than $840 million from $60 million. But now, despite an economic rebound for more than five years, defaults have, perversely, soared. Last year alone, they reached a towering sum of nearly $9 billion.    To many analysts' surprise, even the Oct. 19 stock-market crash hasn't discouraged companies from increasing their borrowings. Right after the crash, many companies, despite fears of an impending recession, launched extensive programs to borrow funds and buy back their shares to try to shore up stock prices.    And in recent months, the merger-and-acquisition mania has broken out again; on Feb. 29 alone, more than $12 billion of takeover plans, mostly involving debt, were announced. Companies may be rushing to buy while the Reagan administration still keeps the antitrust watchdogs on a short leash.    The borrowing binge has many economists worrying about what may happen in the next recession, which most analysts surveyed by Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a newsletter, expect next year.    &quot;Once the economy begins to weaken, as it sooner or later will, the high levels of corporate debt will exacerbate the downturn,&quot; warns Mickey D. Levy, the chief economist of First Fidelity Bancorp. in Philadelphia. &quot;A company in trouble can simply cut or suspend dividend payments on stock but will go bankrupt if it can't service its debt.&quot;    And companies do have a lot of debt to service. Nonfinancial corporations' debt last year hit $1.8 trillion, triple the $586.2 billion in 1976. Since the mid-1970s, it has grown much faster than their revenues.    The debt buildup worries many corporate executives as well as economists. In a speech in New York City yesterday, Rand Araskog, the chairman of ITT Corp., warned that the recent high volume of low-quality debt is helping to finance the resumption of takeover activity, which, in turn, is fueling stock-market speculation. He said he had thought that last fall's stock-market crash would end such activity, but now, he said, &quot;I think we're headed for another Oct. 19.&quot;    Some corporate chieftains, however, remain unworried about debt levels -- at least at their own companies.    &quot;We're very comfortable,&quot; says Joseph Neubauer, the chairman of ARA Services Inc., which went private in 1984 in a management-led buy-out that entailed heavy borrowing at rates as high as 16.5%. He takes comfort in ARA's traditionally recession-resistant businesses; the company is a diversified supplier of services ranging from food distribution to health and family care. He also cites its cash flow -- its profit after taxes but before depreciation.    &quot;Whether a company has a highly leveraged balance sheet or not, the real issue is whether it can sustain cash flow in a downturn, and we think we can,&quot; Mr. Neubauer declares. &quot;Banks are looking much more at cash flow and, as a result, will underwrite risks they wouldn't have touched 10 years ago.&quot;    Some general measures of the debt burden have improved a bit. As corporate profits increased last year, the share of earnings soaked up by interest payments fell to an estimated 49.2% from 56.8% in 1986. But most analysts aren't impressed. As recently as 1984, that ratio was about 40%, and it was far lower before the last recession. Analysts complain that after an economic expansion, the debt load should have eased.    They also cite other statistical forebodings. Corporate debt ran close to 40% of gross national product last year, up from 31.8% in 1976. And a so-called liquidity ratio -- companies' cash-type assets plus receivables as a percentage of debt due within one year -- has recently dropped below 83%. That trails even its 1981-82 recession level, when it fell to about 85% from nearly 90%.    From a longer-range perspective, corporate liquidity looks even worse. Long deeply worried about debt levels, T.J. Holt, an investment analyst in Westport, Conn., estimates that &quot;America's corporate giants,&quot; including such eminent names as Exxon, General Motors and General Electric, &quot;have less than one-tenth the liquidity of their 1929 counterparts.&quot;    Given the liquidity problems, many companies' initial response to the market's crash last Oct. 19 -- the stock buy-backs -- dismays Mr. Levy. He regards the buy-backs as &quot;very untimely since companies are using up cash or going into debt to make the purchases.&quot; He says &quot;these corporations are increasing their exposure&quot; if the economy sours.    Although the stock market's subsequent rebound has helped a bit, corporate debt has already become more burdensome.    &quot;The crash was like an increase in the cost of capital and in the cost of equity capital in particular,&quot; remarks James Tobin, Yale's Nobel-laureate economist. &quot;You now have to sell more of your firm if you want to raise funds for investment projects. There's also a smaller equity base for bond financing.&quot;    Newmont Mining Corp. has felt the pinch. Once a major copper producer whose focus now has turned to gold mining, it borrowed nearly $2 billion last September to pay a special $33-a-share dividend designed to fend off a takeover group led by T. Boone Pickens Jr. Newmont had hoped to pay off much of the debt by selling only non-gold assets, but the crash reduced their market value.    By selling 4,150,000 Du Pont shares as well as an 82% interest in Foote Mineral Co., Newmont managed to pare its debt to about $1.6 billion from $2.1 billion, according to Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. But that reduction was less than anticipated. Now, despite its original plans, Newmont is trying to sell all or part of its interest in Newmont Australia, a gold-mining unit. In December, credit ratings on Newmont's senior debt were lowered. Meanwhile, the Pickens group, with a substantial loss on its Newmont stock, is suing for damages.    And the crash may be deterring some restructured corporations from reducing debt by selling stock. R.H. Macy andamp; Co. was purchased in a highly leveraged deal by its management in 1986. A recent congressional study of buy-outs notes that the big retailer was &quot;generally expected&quot; to &quot;go public again&quot; soon through stock sales. But it hasn't. In fact, Macy, which is still privately held, has entered a bidding contest for Federated Department Stores, and a victory apparently would force it to borrow billions of dollars more.    Apart from the market crash, so-called leveraged buy-outs account for much of the continuing surge in debt. Typically, a company's management, institutional investors and investment bankers take it private through huge borrowings, with the proceeds of the new debt issues being used to retire equity capital.    The leveraged buy-out of Burlington Industries Inc. by a group headed by the New York investment banking firm of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. shows how profoundly a company's balance sheet can suffer. In early October, just after the buyout (initiated by management to ward off a takeover), the big textile maker's ratio of debt to common shareholders' equity was 29.8 to 1, up from only 0.4 to 1 about a year earlier.    As a result, a Burlington prospectus issued in early February warns that &quot;given the company's substantial level of indebtedness, adverse developments affecting its business and operations will have a greater impact&quot; than they would have had before the buy-out.    The report notes that Burlington's new indebtedness &quot;bears interest at higher average rates&quot; than before. And it cautions that based on &quot;anticipated levels of operations,&quot; the company &quot;does not expect that it would be able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations&quot; to service its debt without selling &quot;certain assets.&quot; In the 1987 fourth quarter, Burlington incurred a $25.3 million loss despite increased earnings from operations; it mainly blamed $66.1 million in interest expense.    Such buy-outs aren't the only boardroom maneuver that adds debt. Often, debt is ballooned by well-intentioned efforts to reshape a company's business.    Allegheny International Inc., once primarily a steel producer, set out a decade ago to strengthen its consumer-products lines, mainly through acquisitions. Thus, in 1981, it acquired Sunbeam Corp. However, the home-appliance maker's profits haven't been big enough to enable Allegheny to reduce sufficiently the debt stemming from the $543 million acquisition. Strapped for cash, Allegheny recently filed for protection from creditors under the federal Bankruptcy Code.    Higher debt can hobble a company in many ways. &quot;Equity gives management the maximum freedom of choice in decision-making, while debt entails all sorts of obligations and limits,&quot; remarks Henry Kaufman, a managing director of Salomon Brothers who is leaving the firm next month to start his own consulting company. A case in point is Burlington, whose capital spending will be strictly limited under the buy-out agreement. Until 1991, annual outlays can't exceed $75 million, compared with $1.8 billion in a recent 10-year period.    Not surprisingly, far more companies' credit ratings have dropped than risen in recent years (as an accompanying chart shows). More surprising, perhaps, is that many managers seem less bothered by a lowered rating than they once would have been. Mr. Kaufman largely attributes this &quot;liberalization of standards&quot; to the fact that &quot;we haven't had a depression since the 1930s, and the intervening recessions have hurt relatively few firms; so, an attitude has developed where people say, 'Why should we be worried if our credit rating goes from single-A to triple-B?' Nobody's been hurt.&quot;    Mr. Kaufman also notes that the tax code still encourages the use of debt; corporations can deduct interest paid on debt but not dividends. And he suggests that the higher capital-gains tax rate, enacted in 1986, tilts the balance further toward debt because a major reason to buy stocks is the hope of capital gains. </TEXT></DOC>