<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0193 </DOCNO><HL> Why Did Lee Testify in Wang Case? --- He Didn't Have To Respond To SEC Queries </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen J. Adler (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MS </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><TEXT>   For Fred C. Lee, it all happened quickly.    In May, the Securities and Exchange Commission first asked the Taiwanese businessman to explain trades he had made in the securities of U.S. companies. By the end of June, Mr. Lee was accused of reaping $19 million from an insider-trading scheme, many of his assets had been frozen, and he was maneuvering to avoid possible perjury charges.    As the details of the SEC investigation emerge, it's becoming clear that Mr. Lee played an inordinately large role in his own downfall. He volunteered to talk to the SEC even though he didn't have to. Then he lied under oath. When his lawyer learned he was lying, Mr. Lee recanted his testimony. But even his recantation may have turned out to be damaging to him.    Mr. Lee's story is more than just a tale of how one businessman mishandled his dealings with the SEC. It's also a story that raises questions about how hard a lawyer should try to find out if his client is telling the truth, and what the lawyer should do if he discovers too late that his client has been lying.    Mr. Lee's troubles with the SEC began when the commission asked him about trades he had made in the securities of U.S. companies that were clients of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. Many of these companies were potential takeover targets, according to the SEC.    Mr. Lee, who was living in Hong Kong at the time, contacted his U.S. law firm, San Francisco-based Pettit andamp; Martin, which referred him to one of its partners, Michael Perlis, a former assistant enforcement director of the SEC.    The 38-year-old Mr. Lee hadn't been subpoenaed by the SEC, and it appeared unlikely that the agency could compel his testimony. He wasn't a United States citizen, and because he was living in Hong Kong, he apparently was beyond the subpoena power of the commission.    So it seemed that Mr. Lee was free to decline the SEC's request to explain his trading. Or he could come forward voluntarily and tell his story.    Typically, potential targets of SEC investigations take the former approach: They keep quiet. &quot;Especially when someone isn't under any compulsion to testify, the conservative wisdom is not to testify in these situations,&quot; says Gary Naftalis, a prominent defense lawyer.    But Mr. Lee, who has a reputation in his native Taipei as a bon vivant, apparently wasn't in a conservative mood. After a number of consultations with Mr. Perlis, he agreed to speak about his trades.    Mr. Lee's June 23 testimony began well enough. He told SEC lawyers who had flown to Hong Kong that he didn't know Morgan Stanley analyst Stephen Sui-Kuan Wang, Jr., about whom they were questioning him, and he insisted that he didn't possess material nonpublic information.    But something went wrong on the morning of the second day of testimony, June 24. Apparently, Mr. Lee's trades weren't standing up to scrutiny as well as Mr. Perlis had expected. Concerned, Mr. Perlis made a call to Morgan Stanley, according to someone familiar with the conversation, and discovered that Mr. Wang, the 24-year-old Morgan analyst, had just been subpoenaed.    Mr. Perlis declines to comment on the phone call and says only that he became suspicious as a result of &quot;a combination of Mr. Lee's testimony and information from a third party.&quot;    Mr. Perlis confronted Mr. Lee during the lunch break. Mr. Perlis declines to comment on what was said, and Mr. Lee, whose current whereabouts are unknown, couldn't be reached. But when Mr. Perlis returned from lunch, he says, he had been authorized by his client to recant the testimony.    Mr. Perlis went to speak with SEC lawyer L. Hilton Foster III, who had been taking Mr. Lee's testimony. According to the SEC motion to freeze Mr. Lee's assets, filed in New York federal court three days later, Mr. Perlis acknowledged that Mr. Lee was &quot;guilty of insider trading and that Wang was Lee's source of information.&quot;    The SEC filing said that Mr. Perlis also revealed to Mr. Foster that approximately $200,000 had been paid to Wang for this information. Mr. Perlis disputes the SEC's version of his off-the-record conversation, which was not recorded, but he declines to elaborate.    When the lawyers went back on the record, Mr. Perlis said that &quot;Mr. Lee has determined to withdraw his prior testimony given during these past two days and to advise the staff that it cannot rely on the accuracy of the testimony provided by him in the investigation.&quot;    Mr. Foster, the SEC lawyer, attempted to get Mr. Perlis to state on the record that Mr. Lee was guilty of insider trading, but Mr. Perlis agreed to say only that &quot;Mr. Lee purchased securities while in possession of certain material nonpublic information.&quot; Mr. Perlis then informed the SEC attorneys that Mr. Lee would testify no further.    The same day, according to a declaration by SEC attorney Gary Kaminsky filed in connection with the asset freeze, Mr. Perlis told SEC officials that Mr. Lee was currently trying to transfer assets out of the U.S. to Hong Kong, that Mr. Lee would continue those efforts, and that he would continue to trade in U.S. securities markets. Mr. Perlis disputes Mr. Kaminsky's version of this conversation but again won't elaborate.    On June 27, the SEC charged Mr. Wang and Mr. Lee with insider trading. Citing Mr. Perlis's alleged assertions about the actions of his client, the SEC also succeeded in getting a federal court to freeze Mr. Lee's assets.    From the client's -- and the lawyer's -- point of view, clearly something had gone terribly wrong. Not only was Mr. Lee facing SEC charges, but his own lawyer seemed to be providing information that helped the SEC's case.    Mr. Lee's big mistake, defense lawyers agree, was to testify in the first place when he was under no legal obligation to do so. There should have been no excuse for a witness to lie, they say, because he didn't have to testify. Some lawyers suggest that Mr. Perlis should have challenged Mr. Lee's story aggressively -- and even conducted his own investigation -- before letting his client talk.    &quot;You've got to be really careful and really grill a client and cross-examine him and make sure it's right before you let him testify,&quot; says Mr. Naftalis.    Stanley Arkin, another defense attorney, adds: &quot;What it comes down to is why let him testify in the first place? You say, 'Look, my friend, (the SEC) didn't just pick you out of a hat. The best thing to do if you have some exposure is to assert the privilege against self-incrimination.'&quot; And in this case, since Mr. Lee hadn't been subpoenaed, he could have avoided testifying even without asserting the Fifth Amendment privilege.    Informed of these comments, Mr. Perlis declines to say why Mr. Lee agreed to testify, citing lawyer-client confidentiality. But Mr. Perlis says that he met with Mr. Lee repeatedly before his testimony.    &quot;In a general sense, if the SEC is operating under a presumption that they have a major case, and you are operating on the presumption that there are rational explanations for (the trades), it seems to me it makes sense to cooperate with the SEC, because then they will go away and your client can conduct his affairs as normal,&quot; Mr. Perlis says.    Once Mr. Lee had gone on the record with false testimony, Mr. Perlis's options were limited, lawyers say. Ethics rules prohibit a lawyer from being a party to false testimony. So Mr. Perlis could either have removed himself from the case at that point or insisted that his client withdraw the false statements. &quot;As a matter of practice, I would not sit through sworn testimony that I knew to be inaccurate,&quot; Mr Perlis says.    Mr. Perlis, however, decided to go even further and, with his client's authorization, made statements that appeared to aid the SEC's investigation. Mr. Perlis won't comment on his motivation except to say, &quot;In terms of what I did in Hong Kong, I believe that to be consistent with my ethical obligations and consistent with the interest of Mr. Lee in the long term.&quot;    Other lawyers say that what Mr. Perlis appeared to be doing was protecting his client from a perjury indictment. The usual rule is that a witness who withdraws false testimony before the government has detected the falsehoods, and then goes further to correct the record, will not be indicted for perjury.    Still, there's a risk in such an effort to correct the record. &quot;The recantation obviates the perjury, but it puts you in the soup potentially for insider trading,&quot; says Mr. Arkin.    What's next for Mr. Lee? Apparently, he has no intention of helping the SEC any further -- or showing up on the SEC's home turf. &quot;We are going to resist the (SEC) complaint,&quot; says Mr. Perlis, who adds that Mr. Lee may not be able to come to the U.S. to answer any charges against him. &quot;He has a heart condition, as I understand it,&quot; says Mr. Perlis. &quot;The import of it is that under doctors' instructions he is not permitted to fly for periods in excess of four hours.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>