<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0025 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev's Pal:Dwayne Andreas GainsAn Apparent PositionAs Kremlin Favorite---Archer-Daniels Chief OffersAdvice on Farm Matters,May Edge Out Hammer---Chicken Feed and Politicians---By Mark D'AnastasioStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST ADMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   Mikhail S. Gorbachev was born into a peasant family in southern Russia and, as a teen-ager, worked summers harvesting grain. His agronomy degree helped him become party boss of Stavropol, a major farm region. He rose to the Kremlin's top job after eight years as the national party secretary in charge of agriculture.    Dwayne O. Andreas was born on a Mennonite farm in Iowa. In his 20s, he turned around an ailing grain business. After running the nation's largest farm cooperative, he joined Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. Now, ADM is the world's largest processor of farm commodities, and Mr. Andreas is its chairman and chief executive.    So, when these two farm boys first met in a birch-paneled Kremlin chamber two years ago, their rapport -- grounded in corn, soybeans and fertilizer -- was instantaneous. People are wondering whether Mr. Andreas is beginning to edge out Armand Hammer, the chairman of Occidental Petroleum Co., as Moscow's favorite American businessman.    &quot;When we met, it was clear we could talk about agriculture for two hours or 20 hours,&quot; says Mr. Andreas, seated in his Decatur, Ill., office beneath a Kremlin etching inscribed by Mr. Gorbachev &quot;in memory of our meeting.&quot; Adds the ADM chairman, a short, sprightly 68-year-old with a tanned, square face, &quot;Dr. Hammer is a great man, but he couldn't do that.&quot;    &quot;This is a unique and critical relationship that bears watching,&quot; says Robert W. Back, a securities analyst with Rodman andamp; Renshaw in Chicago and a Soviet expert. &quot;Agriculture is central to both men and both nations, whatever the political differences. Andreas helps bridge the gap.&quot;    Mr. Andreas, adds Harvard lecturer Joseph Finder, &quot;has exactly the huge wealth, influence and knowledge in an American businessman that attracts Soviet leaders.&quot; Mr. Finder should know. His book, &quot;Red Carpet,&quot; describes the succession of U.S. businessmen -- Dr. Hammer, Cyrus Eaton, W. Averell Harriman, Donald Kendall and David Rockefeller -- who &quot;have courted and been courted by the leaders of Soviet communism.&quot;    Mr. Andreas's rise into their ranks was sped by two facts: The Soviet Union is one of the world's biggest buyers of farm products, and Mr. Andreas is a prominent merchant from the world's largest producer of farm surpluses. His position was confirmed on Dec. 3, 1984, when he had his first private meeting with Mr. Gorbachev, who then held the top agricultural job in the U.S.S.R. and was three months from succeeding the ailing Konstantin Chernenko as the Soviet leader.    When that first invitation to the Kremlin came, Mr. Andreas had just met with a slew of top Soviet officials and was about to check out of the pre-revolutionary National Hotel near Red Square. His room was the second-floor suite, adorned with 18th-century paintings and an ebony grand piano, where Lenin once lived and where the Kremlin houses its most prized foreign business guests.    Recalling that first 80-minute encounter with Mr. Gorbachev, Mr. Andreas says, &quot;Other officials told me this guy was the big comer, so, of course, I decided to stay.&quot; Mr. Andreas adds:    &quot;My feeling is Gorbachev's main interest as a human being is agriculture. He lights up like a Christmas tree when he talks about how to produce more bushels per acre, store it, fumigate it, transport it. And how to raise chickens? When he talks about how to raise more chickens, he's on the edge of his chair, he's excited.&quot;    At the time of that 1984 meeting, Mr. Andreas was in Moscow as the chairman of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade and Economic Council, which was set up by the two governments in 1973 to aid bilateral trade and which comprises 260 U.S. companies and 120 Soviet foreign-trade concerns. The elevation of Mr. Andreas to the chairmanship in 1983 reflected the fact that 75% of Soviet-American trade is agricultural.    At the time, Mr. Andreas was continuing his crusade to increase America's farm exports, which were slumping to $37.8 billion in 1985 from $43.3 billion in 1981. He considers this his duty to the 200,000 farmers who, through their cooperatives, are ADM shareholders.    &quot;Gorbachev and I go hand and hand since I believe one of his main thrusts is to put more food on the Russian table,&quot; Mr. Andreas says. In particular, the Soviet leader is promising more chickens in every pot. &quot;He asked my advice on his plan to boost chicken production from 500 million to three billion a year,&quot; Mr. Andreas says, adding: &quot;I told him high-protein soybean meal for livestock feed is the key and explained the technology we use to produce it.&quot; Mr. Andreas also offered ADM's help, proposing to build $100 million of soybean-processing plants in the Soviet Union in a joint venture.    That proposal, to which the Soviet Union hasn't yet responded, and Mr. Gorbachev's poultry push were at the center of the discussion when the two met again last December. The setting was the Faceted Palace, a majestic, chandeliered Kremlin banquet hall hung with 14th-century icons. Mr. Gorbachev was giving a reception for 400 of America's corporate elite during the trade council's annual meeting, and the heads of more than 20 multinationals were mingling around the tables and feasting on lobster and black caviar. The moment Mr. Gorbachev spied Mr. Andreas, he sped across the polished agate jasper floor, past Dr. Hammer and the others, and asked the grain and oil-seed magnate to sit with him at dinner.    At the narrow table, Soviet Foreign Trade Minister Boris Aristov was on Mr. Gorbachev's right and Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov on his left, with Mr. Andreas seated opposite. &quot;We sat there for an hour and a half, and all he did was talk about how to increase grain and food production,&quot; Mr. Andreas recalls. &quot;He said he tried three times to push through a reform to give farmers more acreage for private farming, but the Politburo vetoed him.    &quot;He said he had had a study done of our proposal and scribbled some details on his napkin,&quot; Mr. Andreas adds. &quot;I showed him how American poultry production has soared with improvements in livestock feed. He turned to Ryzhkov and Aristov and said, 'You take notes. That's the kind of thing we've got to do here. Let's get going with this.'&quot;    But what attracts the leader of Soviet communism to this pillar of American capitalism is more than just chicken feed. Besides offering agribusiness expertise, Mr. Andreas has bales of influence in Washington. He knows congressional politics as well as he knows Iowa wheat.    He has been an adviser to every U.S. president since Harry Truman. One source close to Mr. Andreas says he meets with President Reagan as often as twice a month, quietly at social affairs &quot;rather than ostentatiously&quot; in the Oval Office. Mr. Andreas headed the President's Commission on International Private Enterprise and is heading his Foundation for the Bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution.    Having poured hundreds of thousands of dollars into the campaign coffers of candidates from both political parties, Mr. Andreas has become a power broker. He was the principal benefactor of Vice President and Democratic presidential candidate Hubert H. Humphrey and also contributed to Richard Nixon's campaign fund. Only half-jesting, one confidant says, &quot;I've seen senators genuflect in front of him.&quot;    Thus, when the ADM chairman and Mr. Gorbachev talk, it is bound to add up to more than just a hill of soybeans. Says Mr. Andreas, &quot;He wanted me to tell him what he could do to satisfy the conservatives and wanted to know who the really powerful members of Congress were.&quot;    Mr. Andreas mentioned recently retired House Speaker Thomas P. &quot;Tip&quot; O'Neill, with whom Mr. Andreas plays golf, and outgoing Senate Majority Leader Robert Dole, with whom he vacations in Florida. When Mr. O'Neill met Mr. Gorbachev in Moscow four months later, the Soviet leader welcomed him with, &quot;I hear you know my friend Dwayne Andreas.&quot;    Mr. Andreas's Washington ties and his frequent visits with foreign leaders, such as West Germany's Helmut Kohl and China's Deng Xiaoping, have earned him a reputation as an international political operative. But that label is rejected by the ADM chairman, who has at one end of his office at ADM's Decatur headquarters a Grant Wood painting of a dozen farmers at Sunday dinner and at the other a big illuminated globe.    Says he, &quot;I spend 70% of my time right in this office, and I've never carried messages to Soviet leaders from our presidents&quot; -- an allusion to the 88-year-old Dr. Hammer, who has eagerly acted as a presidential go-between. Being too cozy with the Soviets can give people the wrong idea, an image that Mr. Andreas shuns when he says ADM's Soviet business accounts for &quot;considerably less&quot; than 1% of its total sales ($5.3 billion in fiscal 1986).    James Giffen, a New York merchant banker and president of the trade council, says, &quot;The whole reason he fascinates Gorbachev is that he's so totally true-blue. He's the American ideal incarnate.&quot;    But Mr. Andreas, whose Soviet ties began long before the Gorbachev era, has known the feeling of running against the political wind. After his first trip to Moscow in 1952, he tried to persuade the U.S. Commerce Department to approve a sale of government surplus butter to the Soviets in return for Russian gold.    &quot;I was heavily in the vegetable-oil business, and all that cheap butter was costing me money,&quot; recalls Mr. Andreas, whom President Eisenhower had advised to &quot;sell the Russians anything they can't shoot back.&quot; But the deal flopped, Mr. Andreas says, because of &quot;the climate of the McCarthy era.&quot;    In 1959, Nikita Khrushchev toured the American farm belt as the guest of Roswell Garst, a prominent Iowa agribusinessman. The Soviet leader was interested in buying U.S. corn; so he was introduced to Mr. Andreas, then executive vice president of the Farmers Union Grain Terminal, the country's largest farmer-owned cooperative. But feeding the Russians was still off the American political agenda.    &quot;Mr. Andreas's view was when food goes across the border, bombs don't, but that was still not accepted,&quot; says John Crystal, Mr. Garst's nephew and the president of Bankers Trust Co. in Coon Rapids, Iowa.    Mr. Andreas was also helpless against the grain embargo that President Carter imposed in January 1980 after the Russians invaded Afghanistan. But later, President Reagan declared grain sales to the Soviets in the U.S. interest and approved the five-year U.S.-U.S.S.R. Long-Term Grain Agreement in 1983.    But for two years running, the Soviet Union, for some years the second-largest buyer of U.S. farm products, has reneged on that agreement, refusing to purchase even the minimum specified volumes. And with its own anticipated harvest up and foreign-exchange earnings down, the U.S.S.R. has vanished from the American market. To spur sales, Sen. Dole persuaded President Reagan to offer the Soviets a $15-a-ton subsidy on wheat selling for $100 a ton, but the Soviets passed over the offer, which expired Sept. 30.    The grain issue was on the top of Mr. Andreas's agenda during a short visit to Moscow in June. He didn't see Mr. Gorbachev then, but his personal stock clearly had risen. He was permitted to fly into Moscow on ADM's Falcon 500 corporate jet, a privilege granted to only a few Western businessmen.    The next time he sees Mr. Gorbachev may be in Decatur. The Russian has asked to visit ADM's main operations whenever he comes to the U.S. for the proposed summit meeting. &quot;He saw a newspaper picture of President Reagan visiting our corn wet-milling plant,&quot; Mr. Andreas says. &quot;It's the biggest in the world, and Gorbachev says he'd like to see it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>