<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Congress, Let the Railroads Get Back on Track </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Voytko </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> TRA </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>      Common sense, an essential requirement for workable agreements between labor and management, is normally found in reasonable quantity in an economy as flexible as that of the U.S. A big exception, however, is the rail industry, where Alice-in-Wonderland &quot;logic&quot; pervades labor agreements that contain provisions:   --Paying a full day's wage if a worker takes a train 108 miles, even if that requires no more than a few hours of work.    --Providing lifetime employment -- or equivalent earnings -- for some employees.    --Granting &quot;lonesome pay&quot; to some engineers. This daily cash bonus is earned largely in exchange for forgoing the company of a fireman, a position still not eliminated decades after the diesel engine made his work obsolete.    --Requiring four and often five employees to ride the train on a regular basis when on most runs there is work for only two.    --Paying some trainmen an extra day's wages if they start a run on a train pulling a caboose with a burned-out light bulb.    --Maintaining hundreds of different daily pay rates for rail clerks.    These and a host of other such provisions in rail labor agreements may seem anachronistic and amusing but rarely cause for outrage. Think again. These agreements and the extraordinary costs they impose on the rail industry are a major reason -- perhaps the major reason -- for the ills that plague the railroads. There is nothing amusing about agreements that result in more than $1 billion each year in additional labor expense.    And there are some bitter ironies here, as well. The intransigence of the union representing laid-off freight-train conductors, firemen and brakemen (the bulk of job categories made obsolete by new technology) has almost certainly resulted in job losses for the engineers union as railroads lengthen trains and reduce service to cope with the excessive crew size imposed on them. The maintenance-of-way union also has had employment prospects for its members reduced by the costs of the featherbedding in the trainmen's agreements.    How can such woefully inefficient and costly labor agreements stand in an era when U.S. industry is under great pressure to meet the economic challenge posed by its global competitors? First, rail shippers -- those who, along with consumers, ultimately must pay for these expensive agreements -- have failed to voice any appreciable opposition. Instead, some prefer to carp at the rail industry and the government in a misguided attempt to &quot;re-regulate&quot; the railroads, a step that would only make matters worse.    But looming even larger is Congress, which directly and indirectly has fostered the growth of rail labor inefficiency.    It was Congress that granted rail labor unions (virtually alone among unions in the U.S.) the right of &quot;secondary boycott,&quot; which allows them to strike and economically cripple railroads that are not parties to a local labor dispute. This and the negotiation procedures Congress mandated have largely emasculated rail management at the bargaining table while arming the rail unions with powers so extraordinary they are expressly forbidden to most other unions. It was also Congress that directed the Interstate Commerce Commission nearly a decade ago to impose on the rail industry the infamous &quot;New York Dock&quot; provision, which guarantees six years of job protection (or earnings) to many rail workers hurt by mergers, sales or abandonments.    The government's involvement makes rail labor reform a public-policy concern as well as one of labor-management relations. Behind each of the expensive provisions in rail labor agreements lies the fear on management's part that its choice is between acquiescence and Congress legislating or arbitrating a similar result.    One need look no further than Congress for the exception to this sorry picture. Confronted with the seemingly endless need to use federal revenues to prop up Conrail, Congress in 1981 in the Northeast Rail Services Act mandated a reduction in the number of employees working for that railroad and removed lifetime job guarantees -- and it worked wonders.    However, given the lack of congressional interest shown thus far in reforming rail labor agreements industry-wide, it would seem Congress feels it is appropriate for shippers and consumers to pay for excessive rail labor costs as long as the railroads so burdened are owned by ordinary shareholders and not the government.    That's not to say the taxpayers can rest easy. The final irony for the public is the Rail Retirement System, the federally created and operated pension plan for rail workers. Now suffering from a three-to-one imbalance of retired to active workers, the plan is likely to run short of funds, perhaps within 15 to 20 years. The aggregate funding deficit could be as much as $10 billion to $20 billion. Federal policies and rail labor agreements that force managements to reduce rail service and the economically sustainable employment base promise only to make matters worse. And when the retirement-funding crunch arrives, taxpayers should beware the inevitable proposals to bail out the system using public funds.    There are some straightforward prescriptions for reform. Many railroads are willing to give a full year's pay to displaced workers -- a generous adjustment allowance by any standard, and probably deserved in the sense that it is the strategy of the rail unions, rather than the behavior of individual employees, that is at issue. If the rat's nest of restrictive work rules were swept away, what would be left would be a sustainable work force with a real measure of job security that is now, and would remain, among the very highest paid in industrial America. On average, rail workers earn as much as $15,000 a year more than manufacturing workers.    The cost savings from labor reform could be used to lower shipping rates, to the benefit of shippers and consumers; to improve returns in the industry and halt the contraction of the rail system's physical plant; to create a sound economic foundation for future railroad job growth and to shore up the rail retirement fund.    The hard part is getting the job done. With several precedent-setting rail labor disputes, as well as the national rail contracts, likely to reach the White House and Congress within the year, Congress and the administration have an opportunity to make a stunning contribution to efficient transportation in the U.S.    The process could begin as early as this summer, when a dispute over more than 1,000 unneeded employees at the Chicago Northwestern Railroad may force officials in Washington to confront head on the issue of rail work rules. A strong stand for rail labor reform by the federal government will do more to improve U.S. productivity than a multitude of speeches on &quot;competitiveness&quot; and more for the job security of rail employees in the future than any of the job-protection schemes currently imbedded in the industry's agreements.    ---   Mr. Voytko, a securities analyst covering transportation industries at PaineWebber, worked at the Interstate Commerce Commission, 1979-81. </TEXT></DOC>