<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870316-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Airbus Unveils Its Battle Plan for Long-Range Market---Consortium Has CommitmentsFrom Nine Airlines for A-330 or A-340---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 03/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP BA MDAEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   A new front in the battle for dominance in the commercial airplane market of the 1990s was opened Friday with the announcement by Airbus Industrie that nine airlines have made commitments to buy 104 of its proposed long-range A-330 and A-340 jetliners.    The commitments, although Airbus didn't provide a mix of models or a breakdown of firm orders and options, give a big boost to the consortium's efforts to persuade its four member European nations to provide $4 billion in subsidies and marks the latest skirmish line in the brewing industry shakeout involving Airbus, Seattle-based Boeing Co. and St. Louis-based McDonnell Douglas Corp.    Earlier, Airbus said it needed at least five airline customers to get the planes off the drawing board and give the Europeans their first shot at the long-range market, dominated by Boeing. Consortium officials now say their goal is to conclude negotiations with the governments in time to launch the program next month.    Airbus declined to identify its nine likely customers for the four-engine A-340, which will be able to carry 260 passengers 7,000 miles and the two-engine A-330, which will be able to carry 330 passengers 6,000 miles. But it is understood that the customer list includes Air France and Lufthansa, which had publicly announced their support. And Los Angeles-based International Lease Finance Co., a major aircraft leasing company, recently said it agreed to buy three A-330s for delivery in the early 1990s.    Though there has been some concern in European capitals recently over the $4 billion price tag for the A-330/A-340 program, many believe Airbus will get all or most of the funds it is seeking. Despite budget constraints, state subsidies continue to be a central theme in European industrial policy.    The U.S. government has been grumbling for years about European government subsidies for Airbus. Though last month it backed down from threats to retaliate, it does intend to take up the matter before the aeronautical affairs committee of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade this Thursday and Friday.    The Reagan administration reacted calmly to the Airbus announcement, noting that it wasn't accompanied by commitments of specific levels of support by the four sponsoring governments -- West Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Spain. This could be a sign that those governments intend to live up to the Trade in Civil Aviation accord that governs this type of official financing, an administration spokeswoman said.    Under the accord, which was forged under the auspices of GATT, a signatory government can't provide funds for civil aircraft development unless it has a reasonable expectation of recovering its investment.    &quot;We assume that any support provided will take into account the probability of success or failure of these aircraft,&quot; a U.S. trade negotiator said.    Even though it hasn't ever made money and doesn't expect to break even before 1994, Airbus is billing this request for funds as its last. Its perceived success is as an internationally known high-technology, all-European venture, which may justify the enormous cost. As Airbus's president, Jean Pierson, said in an interview last year: &quot;The future of Europe is not in perfume or suits. It's in technology.&quot;    But if Airbus succeeds in luring to the A-340 airlines that have already ordered McDonnell's new MD-11, U.S. trade officials say, Washington may decide that taking its case to the committee isn't enough. It could then launch an investigation that could lead to imposition of sanctions.    The improved prospects of the A-330/A-340 project come on the heels of American Airlines' agreement last week to acquire $1.5 billion of Airbus's older A-300 models. And the new medium-range A-320, which still faces a year of airworthiness certification before it goes into commercial service, has already piled up firm orders, options and lease agreements totaling more than 400 planes.    That &quot;has caused a lot of people to say, 'Golly, we're real. We're not on the periphery any more,'&quot; says Alan Boyd, chairman of Airbus Industrie of North America Inc., the consortium's North American marketing and product-support unit.    Indeed, &quot;10 years ago, you'd mention Airbus and everyone -- Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed -- would say, 'Oh, they're not going to cut into our market,'&quot; recalls Barbara Beyer, chairman of Avmark International Ltd., an aircraft appraiser.    But Calabasas, Calif.-based Lockheed Corp. has since abandoned the civil aircraft business as too costly and too competitive. McDonnell Douglas has recognized the Airbus challenge and is quietly trying to revive negotiations on teaming up with Airbus on noncompetitive aircraft projects.    In Long Beach, Calif., a spokesman for McDonnell's Douglas Aircraft Co. division declined to comment on Airbus's A-330/A-340 project, a competitor for its own proposed MD-11 model. McDonnell has 121 orders or options from 17 customers for the MD-11, a company spokesman said.    Boeing is responding by offering a plethora of different versions of existing and new aircraft aimed at matching Airbus. In Seattle, a Boeing spokesman Friday complained that in pushing ahead with the A-330/A-340 project Airbus is &quot;splitting the long-range market.&quot;    The Boeing spokesman said his company believes the total market for planes of the size and range of the A-330, the A-340, and the MD-11 to be &quot;rather small.&quot;    One of Boeing's principal entries in the long-range, low-density market is the two-engine 767-300ER, an extended-range aircraft that carries about 260 passengers, and was recently approved for over-water flights. The company has a total of 85 orders for that model and the 767-200ER. It also has 773 orders for all 747 models and an additional number of options for its long-range aircraft.    Airbus's order book has been fattening. In 1985, it obtained orders for 92 jetliners, representing 18% of the world market. Last year, its orders rose to 170 planes, almost a quarter of the world total. And so far in 1987 the company has chalked up orders for 79 aircraft -- excluding any firm orders for the A-330 and A-340.    Its three existing models have sold more than 725 copies to 64 customers from Brazil to China. The company is considering setting up a second assembly line, possibly in the U.S. Its Toulouse, France, headquarters have been expanded to accommodate growth.    Founded in 1970, the European aerospace effort didn't really start taking off until 1984. It was then that Airbus clinched a $1 billion sale to Pan American World Airways and proved that its sole prior U.S. sale -- to Eastern Airlines in 1977 -- wasn't a fluke. Then in 1985, Airbus snatched two huge orders -- from Thai Airways International and Indian Airlines -- away from a shaken Boeing.    Winning these new clients required extensive concessions, including price cuts, financing and certain other arrangements. In the American Airlines transaction, for example, Airbus agreed to provide 25 planes on &quot;walk-away&quot; leases, under which American has the option to buy the planes but can return them to Airbus on short notice.    But Airbus &quot;can afford to take risks a purely economic entity could not,&quot; asserts Paul Nisbet, an aerospace analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities in New York. Without extensive government subsidies, Mr. Nisbet contends, Airbus's big sales in the U.S. &quot;couldn't have happened.&quot;    Airbus disagrees. &quot;Certainly we're attempting to develop market share,&quot; says Mr. Boyd, chairman of the North American unit, but &quot;we're not in the business of throwing away money.&quot;    At the moment, all eyes are on Swissair, which early this year indicated interest in buying six MD-11s and apparently later received a new offer from Airbus. Swissair's directors are scheduled to meet Wednesday in Zurich to choose between the A-340 and the MD-11.    A similar decision is due soon in Stockholm. Scandinavian Airlines System, which in December ordered 12 MD-11s, later received a &quot;very aggressive&quot; counteroffer from Airbus for A-340s. The carrier faces a March 31 deadline on both offers. But both could lose on this second look -- SAS reopened its file on yet another contender, Boeing's long-range 767 twin-jet. </TEXT></DOC>