<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890828-0075 </DOCNO><DD> = 890828 </DD><AN> 890828-0075. </AN><HL> Commodities:@  Adequate U.S. Coal Supply Could Shrink Quickly,@  Analysts Watching Labor Disputes at Mines Say@  ----@  By Neil Behrmann@  Special to The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/28/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY MARKETS FOR METALS (MIN)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A widespread long strike in U.S. coal mines would create an acute international shortage of coking coal, dealers and analysts say. But steam coal, which is sometimes used as a substitute for coking coal, is in ample supply.    Coal mine labor disputes in the eastern U.S. haven't caused much consternation in Europe and elsewhere so far, but some analysts are worried that the strike will extend around the U.S.    The United Mine Workers union has been on strike against Greenwich, Conn.-based Pittston Co. for about five months as a result of a dispute between the UMW and Pittston that began last year when the company refused to sign the union's industrywide contract.    So far the union hasn't officially sanctioned a wider strike, although some other coal miners have gone on sympathy strikes that lasted a few days or weeks. In addition, several mines closed for vacations in July. Although many miners are back at work, dealers say, the mood is volatile and strikes could spread quickly.    &quot;The coking coal market has become very tight, given a surge in demand from the steel industry, the U.S. miners' strike and a disruption of Chinese exports,&quot; says Philip Rogers, head of research at the brokerage concern of Simpson, Spence andamp; Young here. Adding to the difficulties, he says, coking coal supplies at U.S., Canadian and Australian ports are very low.    U.S. coking or metallurgical coal, a raw material for the steel industry, plays a significant part in international coal trade, dealers say. At 56 million metric tons, U.S. exports account for about 30% of total world sales, second only to Australia's share. The next biggest exporters are Canada, Poland, the Soviet Union, South Africa and China. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds.    Exacerbating coal merchants' worries about supplies, recent strikes in the Soviet Union are bound to reduce shipments in the months ahead, Mr. Rogers of Simpson Spence says.    Prices of metallurgical coal were already rising because of the world-wide steel boom, analysts say.    Average contract prices rose $3 or $4 in the past year to between $47 and $52 a ton, says William Fischer, a consultant and compiler of a book on international coal statistics.    Spot prices of coking coal surged to $55 a metric ton, a U.S. trader says, although the quantities shipped at that price were relatively insignificant.    For the time being, however, the market isn't in crisis. Consumers covered at least some of their prospective needs by increasing their purchases of U.S. coking coal this year, dealers say. Coking coal exports from the U.S. jumped 24% to 25.7 million metric tons in the first five months of this year compared with a year earlier, according to Mr. Fischer, the coal consultant.    Although the coking coal market is &quot;tight, it isn't desperate,&quot; Mr. Fischer says. The steel industry in Europe and the Far East have adequate stocks, he says.    Moreover, steel factories' output is beginning to slow down, he says, and demand for coking coal will fall if the U.S. and other industrial economies falter next year.    Once the present world-wide construction boom ends, the steel industry could slump, says David Price, a coal analyst at Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates.    More downward pressure could be put on demand for coking coal as cheaper steam coals are substituted for it in an application known as pulverized coal injection, Mr. Price says.    Still, mines' stocks of coking coal are low, a U.S. coal trader says. He says only 5% to 10% of U.S. production is being affected by the labor dispute so far, but if the dispute worsens, the international coal market will become increasingly nervous.    &quot;The U.S. is a swing supplier of coking coal, so merchants are scrambling for supplies,&quot; a London trader says.    Steam coal, on the other hand, hasn't felt the impact of the strike because there is a surplus, dealers say. There is likely to be an excess of steam coal supplies overhanging the market for some time, which will work against significant price rises, Mr. Rogers of Simpson Spence says. Environmental pressures against burning steam coal also will reduce growth in demand in the next few years, said Malcolm Edwards, commercial director of British Coal.    Looking ahead to other commodity markets this week:    Energy    Oil trading probably will remain thin this week as traders finish their summer vacations and London takes a holiday today. But that doesn't necessarily signal a dull market. Prices could be volatile as petroleum inventories again figure prominently.    Some analysts recently have noticed what they say is a change in pricing psychology among oil-market participants. Previously, the focus was on how much oil the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries produced. OPEC's production still is important, and it will be in the spotlight again as the Sept. 23 OPEC meeting in Vienna approaches. But some of the market's emphasis has shifted from what OPEC can produce to what the market can absorb.    That's why oil inventories are being closely watched now. It is assumed that if inventories don't build up too quickly in times of high OPEC output, demand is growing at a healthy pace. But a rapid rise in inventories would suggest supplies aren't being readily absorbed.    U.S. petroleum prices ended last week on a weak note largely because of a buildup of crude oil supplies. In futures trading, West Texas Intermediate crude for October delivery fell 10 cents Friday to end at $18.51 a barrel. Meanwhile, leading refiners were reducing their field postings for this benchmark crude by 25 cents to $17.50 a barrel.    Last week's slide in prices was triggered by a Wednesday report from the Department of Energy showing a big increase in U.S. stocks of crude oil. The report came one day after the American Petroleum Institute's weekly report, which showed a much smaller rise. Traders will be watching closely this week to see whether the discrepancy between the government and industry figures is resolved.    Grains and Soybeans    Today, traders will study the weekly state crop condition reports for signs that last week's widespread rains slowed the deterioration of corn and soybeans in Iowa and Nebraska.    The reports are released by states after the close of futures contract trading. Traders expect Illinois and Indiana to report the best corn and soybean crop conditions.    Last week, the market's projection of the soybean harvest shifted daily on weather projections. Much of the crop was moving through the pod-filling stage, during which time rainfall has its biggest influence on eventual yields.    A spell of dry weather a week ago prompted many private crop analysts to trim their soybean harvest estimates to as low as 1.83 billion bushels. By Friday, most estimates had edged up to between 1.85 billion and 1.87 billion bushels.    Based on an Aug. 1 survey, the U.S. Agriculture Department recently projected a fall harvest of 1.91 billion bushels, up 24% from the drought-stunted harvest of 1988. The Agriculture Department is due to revise its monthly forecast in early September.    As the fall harvest approaches, speculation usually builds over the potential for major grain purchases by the Soviet Union. The Soviets tend to buy U.S. grain in the fall because U.S. prices then are often at their lowest, driven down by farmers selling some of their newly harvested crops.    The Soviets also make many of their purchases in the fall because that is when agricultural officials in Moscow have a reliable estimate of the size of Soviet crop production and thus of Soviet needs.    Cotton Futures prices have been quietly rising to life-of-contract highs in recent sessions, and nothing is in sight to change this trend.    International and U.S. demand is strong, and supplies at the end of the current season are expected to be well below those of last year.    China, the world's major producer, may have a smaller crop than it has indicated, which will increase its needs to import, according to Ernest Simon, cotton specialist for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. China estimated that it will produce about 20 million bales of cotton in the 1989-90 season, but Mr. Simon says the total will be closer to 17.5 million or 18 million bales.    &quot;There is a cotton shortage in China; the mills aren't getting enough,&quot; Mr. Simon said. Last week's U.S. export report listed South Korea, Japan and China as major buyers in the week ended Aug. 17, Mr. Simon said.    U.S. cotton-mill use is surging, while production is expected to be down from last year, Mr. Simon said. As a result, stocks of cotton in the U.S. on July 31, 1990, are expected to drop to 3.9 million bales, according to the August estimate of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, compared with a month-earlier estimate of 4.6 million bales. </TEXT></DOC>