<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0121 </DOCNO><HL> 'Let's Put on a Show': Radio City's SuccessReflects Boom in Special-Events Business---By Meg CoxStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PRD DIS </IN><TEXT>   Polaroid Corp. hired Radio City Music Hall to help celebrate its 50th anniversary. Surprisingly, the party didn't include a single leggy Rockette, and it wasn't even held in New York's landmark art deco auditorium.    Instead, 25,000 Polaroid employees, retirees and their families assembled one Saturday night in August at a stadium in Boston. The evening featured 15 acts of entertainment as well as three giant video screens, which at one point showed Polaroid employees in six countries singing &quot;Happy Birthday.&quot; For the grand finale, the Pointer Sisters performed their high-energy music act, ending with their hit song &quot;Jump&quot; as torch-waving sky-divers jumped from an airplane.    Now Polaroid just has to write the check: nearly $1 million to Radio City Music Hall Productions, which pieced together the one-night extravaganza.    Radio City, owned by the Rockefeller Group, nearly closed in 1978 after losing money for more than 20 years. But it danced back into the black in 1985 after the hall's managers began reaching beyond Radio City's original film-and-Rockettes format to book entertainers from Bill Cosby to Twisted Sister, a rock band.    More recently, Radio City has begun to produce huge one-of-a-kind celebrations and corporate programs, often far from New York. Already Radio City Music Hall Productions is one of the biggest producers in the country of such extravaganzas. The music hall's well-known name, large staff and extensive theatrical-production experience have placed it at the forefront of a mushrooming special-events industry.    &quot;With the Olympics, the Statue of Liberty, Hands Across America, Live Aid, and so on, it has been one mega-event after another, brought to you by this corporation or that,&quot; says Lesa Ukman, editor of Special Events Report, a newsletter published in Chicago. &quot;There are a lot of (producers) out there offering to put on special events, but only a handful on a national scale. This industry attracts a lot of sleazy promoters, and Radio City has legitimacy.&quot;    In the past several years, Radio City has produced such major events as the 350th anniversary celebration for Harvard University and the finale in Atlanta for Coca-Cola Co.'s centennial bash. In 1985, Radio City entertained 1,300 Electrolux salesmen in Hawaii and Bermuda with a Broadway-style musical spoof called &quot;Grime City.&quot;    Later this month at Los Angeles's Dodger Stadium, the music hall will produce a pre-liturgy celebration for Pope John Paul II, a song-and-dance pageant titled &quot;Witness to His Love,&quot; hosted by Ricardo Montalban. On the next day, Sept. 17, the production company is responsible for an enormous &quot;We the People&quot; parade in Philadelphia, which will cap the celebration of the Constitution's bicentennial. Producers have spent months pulling together 25,000 performers and dozens of floats.    The Polaroid anniversary is a good example of the kind of mega-project that Radio City pursues, as well as the complex preparation required to pull it off.    Polaroid, which spent two years planning an anniversary that includes scientific and artistic programs and giving Polaroid cameras to every elementary school in the country, told Radio City that it just wanted employees to leave the stadium thinking: &quot;Good time, good company.&quot; The producers' challenge was to entertain an audience mixed in age, education and background and to pay homage to Polaroid's history without getting boring.    &quot;Our style is to do things with great subtlety, and (Radio City) convinced us that subtlety doesn't work in a stadium,&quot; says Samuel Yanes, Polaroid's director of corporate communications.    Barnett Lipton, a 35-year-old hyperkinetic Radio City producer who began designing the Polaroid project in March, decided to cover the company history in a video. &quot;After all, this is a high-tech, visual company,&quot; says Mr. Lipton. He hired filmmakers who normally make rock-music videos, and they pieced together old Polaroid commercials, with a soundtrack song called &quot;Shoot!&quot; that parodied an Isley Brothers' song 1&quot;Shout!&quot;    Radio City's experience and manpower came in handy. Though the production staff swelled to 53 in Boston for three days leading to the performance, the supervision and planning was done by 15 stage managers, technicians and purchasing experts who are veterans of the music hall in New York. They had to deal quickly with disaster, as when the lighting cues were wiped out of the computer memory in a power outage the night before the show. Technicians labored much of the night reprogramming.    Mr. Lipton, who is creative director of Radio City's special-events division, is the perfect high-strung impresario to come up with entertainment ideas and hold the madness together. Having opened his own concert hall in Morristown, N.J., when he was 23 years old, Mr. Lipton went on to work on two world's fairs, the 1984 Republican national convention and the Olympics in Los Angeles.    But for the Polaroid job as well as others, Radio City is finding it must bid against a growing number of competitors. Just this year, a new industry trade group -- the International Special Events Society -- was formed in San Diego, Calif. Members pay annual dues of $300 and must have been in the special-events business at least three years. There are 100 members so far.    Many people credit Walt Disney with the birth of the special event, and many of the kingpins of the event business today started at Walt Disney Co. Robert F. Jani, for example, helped produce the festivities for Disneyland's 1955 opening, and then engineered entertainment at Walt Disney World and EPCOT. He was later president of Radio City Music Hall. These days, Mr. Jani runs a special-events production company based in Palos Verdes, Calif.    Disney remains a major special-events producer, whose credits include President Reagan's second inaugural parade and the opening ceremonies at the recent Pan American games. But most Disney-produced events include Disney characters. The company, which charges only its costs, considers the projects promotional vehicles rather than a business venture.    Lesser-known special-events entrepreneurs abound. Wendy Moss of Dallas saw her party business, &quot;An Affair to Remember,&quot; slump with the oil business, so she started doing lavish corporate parties, often out of Texas. In Washington, Wonder Co. staged 200 events last year, the biggest being the opening of the Nashville, Tenn., convention center. Chicago's Creative Establishment grosses about $12 million a year doing mostly corporate events, says Joan Beugen, president.    Radio City, which tends to take on fewer but bigger projects, says it will gross about $6.5 million from corporate and special events this year. But that might be just the beginning. Boasts Mr. Lipton: &quot;We're big, we work hard and our shows are different. I want to achieve events on a world scale. I want to get four billion people to get up and dance.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>