<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0024 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   FOUR SENATORS JOINED the opposition to Bork's Supreme Court nomination.    The announcements by Sen. Specter (R., Pa.) and three Southern Democrats threw the U.S. Appeals Court judge's nomination into jeopardy. The four represent groups whose support is pivotal to the nomination's success, and the trend threatens Reagan with a severe political setback. The president insisted he wouldn't withdraw Bork's name and that the nomination wasn't lost, but Senate Republicans began beating a retreat.    The Supreme Court opens its new term Monday missing one justice. It will take up antitrust, disclosure of merger negotiations and other business issues.    ---   AN EARTHQUAKE SHOOK Southern California, killing at least five people.    The quake, the most serious in the state since 1971, was centered about 10 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles and registered between 5.8 and 6.1 on the Richter scale, scientists at California Institute of Technology in Pasadena said. The first shock occurred at 7:42 a.m. local time and was followed by at least 15 less-severe shocks. It caused widespread but relatively minor damage to homes and businesses and injured about 100.    Insurance industry executives don't expect a large volume of claims. &quot;This one was not the big one,&quot; said a U.S. Geological Survey official.    ---   La Prensa resumed publication under the headline &quot;Triumph For The People.&quot; Nicaragua's only opposition newspaper, closed by the Sandinistas for 15 months, reopened under a five-nation Central American peace plan. The Catholic radio station is to reopen today. Ortega announced a one-month cease-fire, but Contra leaders rejected it.    ---   Gorbachev said he saw &quot;rays of hope&quot; in Geneva talks on reducing superpower arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles. A foreign ministry spokesman said there were signs of movement in the U.S. position. Gorbachev also proposed a diplomatic initiative for the Arctic region that includes a call for a nuclear-free zone in Northern Europe.    The Soviet Union conducted two tests of a new long-range nuclear missile this week, firing them into an area about 500 miles north of Hawaii, the Pentagon said. Moscow originally said it intended to &quot;bracket&quot; the islands with the two test shots, but didn't after a strong U.S. protest.    ---   Iran staged attacks on four Persian Gulf oil tankers, shipping sources said. Australia said an Iraqi missile struck an Australian shrimp trawler in the gulf, killing its captain. Separately, Shultz, after meeting with Arab ministers, said the U.N. Security Council would begin drafting an Iranian arms embargo resolution next week.    ---   Pat Robertson declared himself a candidate for the 1988 Republican presidential nomination in a New York speech that was nearly drowned out by hecklers. Robertson founded the Christian Broadcasting Network but resigned his Southern Baptist ordination this week.    ---   Sessions collapsed aboard a Washington-bound airliner and his swearing-in ceremony as FBI chief was postponed indefinitely. The former U.S. judge was hospitalized in good condition with a bleeding stomach ulcer.    ---   Little progress was made in high-level talks in Washington on a U.S.-Canadian free-trade pact. Prime Minister Mulroney said Canada will know by today whether an accord is possible. U.S. aides said a Canadian demand to continue subsidies that the U.S. sees as protectionist was discussed.    ---   The FDA plans a restructuring shortly in an effort to streamline its often-criticized drug-approval procedures. The move will split the agency's Center for Drugs andamp; Biologics. A Pentagon physician who will head one of the new units said the split will also provide a special focus on AIDS-related drug components.    ---   The House approved spending $28.6 billion for improving airports and air traffic control over the next five years. The spending measure, passed unanimously, authorizes $1.7 billion a year for airport improvements, $1.4 to $2.2 billion a year for air traffic control equipment and spending on salaries and research.    ---   Recent experiments indicate that superconductors can transmit data at the very high rates needed for building a new generation of faster communications and computer technology. One experiment indicates that the materials eventually will be able to transmit data about 100 times faster than optical fibers.    ---   Haiti's electoral council scheduled a presidential election for Nov. 29, the first free vote on the Caribbean island nation in three decades. Inauguration was set for Feb. 7.    ---   Harvard scientists said mandatory nationwide premarital AIDS testing would cost $100 million a year and pinpoint fewer than one out of every thousand people now carrying the virus in the U.S.    ---   Israel has turned down a Soviet offer to open diplomatic &quot;interest sections&quot; in Moscow and Tel Aviv, the Associated Press reported. The Soviet foreign minister made the offer to his Israeli counterpart in New York last week, according to the report. </TEXT></DOC>