<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0039 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Making Paper on Vacation in the Blue Ridge </HL><AUTHOR> Roxane Orgill </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Penland, N.C.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Making paper by hand in the mountains of North Carolina is the kind of dream vacation they don't offer on Hollywood Squares. At Penland, the Blue Ridge craft school 75 miles out of Asheville, even the plates we ate off were paper. That was because of a water shortage. But it was a fitting part of two weeks of total immersion in a world devoted to paper.    I've always liked paper. As a kid I liked drawing on paper with colored pencils and making paper dolls with wardrobes full of paper clothes. I always felt a weird attraction to the cardboard from my father's laundered shirts, leftover wrapping paper, postcards, typing paper, the tissue paper wrapped around the pears in holiday fruit baskets, Green Stamps, junk mail.    So it wasn't really that odd that I would choose to spend my vacation standing in dirty water, clothes dripping and spattered with clots of dried paper, wet globs clinging to the hairs on my arms, making me look like some kind of artist's rendering of a beast, dipping a screen into a vat of pulp all day and most evenings, too.    Why make paper when you can buy it? everybody asks. Because handmade paper has a completely different look and feel from machine-made paper, and because making sheets on which to write, type, paint and print is only one aspect of paper making by hand. More interesting is what one does with handmade paper, as an artistic medium. The possibilities are endless, paper makers are fond of saying.    Paper begins with pulp: beaten, moistened fibers of cotton, flax, linen, abaca or just about any living plant. The pulp is dispersed in a vat of water to which coloring agents may be added. The paper maker dips a mold, or screen stretched over a wooden frame, into the vat and lifts up some of the pulp. The intertwined mat of fibers on the screen surface is the sheet of paper. The sheet is transferred or couched (pronounced cooched) onto a wet blanket, pressed in a hydraulic press or similar device to remove excess water, and allowed to dry. As the water departs, hydrogen bonding takes place among the cellulose molecules -- making paper.    But that's only the half of it. When the sheet is still lying wet on the blanket, you can draw on it with colored pulp, using a turkey baster filled with finely beaten pulp as a brush. For further decoration, it's possible to add fabric, string, printed paper, dried flowers, you name-it. Paper also can be cast in or around molds, or over bamboo or wire structures to make three-dimensional pieces.    I've seen handmade paper fashioned into people-sized pea pods, and mock eyeglass frames in the shape of dogs. Peter Sowiski, our teacher at Penland and a paper maker in Buffalo, N.Y., once filled a gallery with paper &quot;candy&quot;: oversized jujubes, gumdrops and other familiar temptations.    You can't eat these confections, but paper making satisfies the senses all the same. The water feels good, and so do the fibers: silky cotton, wispy abaca (from the banana plant), slippery kozo (from the mulberry plant). To a paper maker, there is nothing quite like the thrill of the deckled edge, the uneven feathered edge on all four sides of a handmade sheet. The jargon's a pleasure too: linters (short-fibered cotton), mold and deckle (two parts of a frame), to couch, to pull a sheet (out of the water), to press a post (pressing the water out of a stack of newly formed paper).    At first it's fun and primordially satisfying to squirt colored pulp all over a sheet and see how it looks when it dries. It's amazing how good &quot;mistakes&quot; can look when the medium is handmade paper. But once that's done, the task becomes one of control: How to exert some control over the medium without destroying its fluid qualities or its wonderful spontaneity. Also, since it is easy to make paper look like clay or leather or some other material, one has to decide how to exploit the medium to the fullest and yet keep paper looking like paper.    In the meantime, there are other, more practical questions. How can you get a true black when coloring pulp? How do you dry paper without cockling (curling)? Which type of sizing is best, unflavored gelatin, methyl cellulose, synthetic polymer or egg white? To make paper out of cabbage, should you use washing soda or lye to break down the fibers?    Paper makers have to solve masses of technical problems before they can even think about making a sheet of paper. That's because there is no one way to break down the fiber, to size the paper so it can take ink or paint, to make a mold, or to dry a sheet.    Take the pulp, for instance. Paper makers like to say that while sheets are made in the vat, paper is made in the beater -- meaning that how one beats the pulp is key. (Presented with a handmade sheet, paper makers invariably will hold it to the light to look for knots where the fiber was not evenly beaten or distributed.) But no formula exists for how long cotton should be beaten, or even by what means it should be beaten. Vegetable fibers can be beaten with a rock, in a kitchen blender or in a Hollander-style beater, a large vessel designed expressly for paper making that costs several thousand dollars. They also can be cooked in a caustic bath such as lye.    Since well-equipped paper making studios are rare, avid paper makers either have to attend a lot of workshops in studios like Penland's, or set up their own studio, or improvise at home. I've made paper in the kitchen sink, using a blender to chew the pulp and my car to press the sheets. (I put the pile of paper between two boards and drive over it, staying put until all the water has dripped out.) It's a pain, and the results weren't very good.    That's why the field trip to Beverly Plummer's studio was inspiring. She actually earns a living making paper, and although she now has a magnificent two-story studio, she started in her kitchen, making paper in a commercial blender for three years. She lives and works at the end of a windy gravel road and receives mail addressed to &quot;Papermaker, Burnsville, N.C.&quot; After 10 years in the medium, Ms. Plummer isn't bored yet: &quot;There are too many directions you can go.&quot;    Distractions were few during the course. Evenings at Penland were occupied with slide shows in which the teachers presented and discussed their work, followed by a firefly-lit walk back to the studio, then dipping and couching until the eyelids drooped.    I spent most of the session making what my classmates variously called &quot;strange flags&quot; or &quot;weird lollipops.&quot; They're shaped pieces of paper with laminations of different colors and designs, attached to skinny dowels stuck into small blocks of wood. First I had to decide on the strongest shapes, and then how to decorate them without taking away from the simplicity they were asking for. Surrounded by paper makers doing complex laminations, printmakers carving intricate designs into woodblocks, and bookmakers spending what seemed like days on a single book cover, I had to fight the urge to get complicated.    The results are strong and whimsical and a delight to the eye (mine, at least), but they're by no means the limit. I don't know what that is yet, or indeed if there is one.    ---   Ms. Orgill works for a paper, The Record, in Bergen County, N.J., as music critic. </TEXT></DOC>