<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871124-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:The FDIC's Arguments for Bank Deregulation---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 11/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   L. William Seidman has had a lot of interesting jobs, ranging from advising President Ford on economic policy in the mid-1970s to running Arizona State's business school. His reputation as a trouble-shooter landed him two years ago in one of Washington's hottest spots, running the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. at a time when failures of small banks had been rising steadily and even some larger institutions were not entirely healthy.    Since Mr. Seidman's job is to protect depositors when banks crash, it is not surprising that he has some thoughts about how to put banking on a sounder footing. One thought is to further deregulate banking by repealing many of the constraints embodied in the Banking Act of 1933, better known as the Glass-Steagall Act.    Sen. William Proxmire has produced a discussion draft of a reform bill that will be the basis for public hearings before his Senate Banking Committee in early December. It seems unlikely that any such reform will pass this year, but Congress faces a deadline of sorts next March 1, when a stopgap moratorium on further de facto deregulation expires.    One of the most notable features of Glass-Steagall, of course, was the wall it erected between commercial and investment banking. Commercial banks can take deposits and make loans but they can't underwrite securities. Investment banks can underwrite and trade securities but can't take deposits. Commercial bank holding companies have edged into the securities business through affiliates and investment banks have edged into commercial banking through &quot;non-bank&quot; banks that fall just short of the legal description of commercial banks. Neither industry is especially happy with this de facto approach, but there is no uniform view in either industry on deregulation. In general, various big firms in both industries are for it and a good many small ones are against it.    The stock-market crash seemed to offer a good argument for the &quot;anti&quot; side. The antis ask what would have happened if the damage to the securities industry had spread to banking. But the pros countered with the argument that the securities industry would have been on much sounder footing if it had had the capital of banking behind it. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan came down on the side of the pros in testimony to the House subcommittee on financial institutions last week. He largely supported the Proxmire draft, which would allow both banks and securities firms under bank holding company umbrellas. Mr. Seidman would go further, allowing direct links between banks and securities firms.    The FDIC in August released a study forecasting the effects of further deregulation. It launched the study to find out whether bank safety could be maintained, and even improved, after deregulation. Drawing heavily on the views of its own bank supervisors, it concluded it would indeed be possible to protect strictly banking operations at the same time it allowed banks to engage in other activities.    &quot;Fundamentally,&quot; says Mr. Seidman, &quot;the study says we don't need Glass-Steagall and we don't need the bank holding company act.&quot; Mr. Seidman concluded that diversified financial-services companies are inevitably stronger than highly specialized banks. He says the dangers of tight restrictions on banks show up particularly in states that prohibit branch banking through what are euphemistically known as &quot;unit&quot; banking laws.    &quot;Whoever invented unit banking really cost the insurance fund a bundle,&quot; says Mr. Seidman. &quot;I keep saying we ought to raise the premium to every state that maintains unit banking. You look at the FDIC history and it's right there. We have practically no banks failing east of the Mississippi. There's practically no unit banking there. Places like Georgia have recessions but few banks fail. The bank failures we are having are primarily in Texas and Oklahoma, both unit banking states. Both changed their laws when they got into trouble.&quot;    Mr. Seidman doesn't want &quot;big-bang&quot; style deregulation. He prefers a &quot;time-release&quot; bang. &quot;We believe banking always will have to be government regulated or supervised for safety and soundness because you have deposit insurance, and deposit insurance means you are borrowing on somebody else's credit. As long as you are borrowing on somebody else's credit, somebody has to be around to see what you do with the money.&quot;    Deposit insurance obviously is here to stay, so the goal should be to &quot;limit regulation to the narrowest we can and still insure safety of the system.&quot;    As banks are allowed to do more things, the basic problem, in Mr. Seidman's view, is how to prevent conflicts of interest. But his supervisors pointed out to him that there is a potential for conflict of interest even in today's banking industry. &quot;Its directors are by and large its borrowers throughout the system, therefore regulating conflict of interest is fundamental. While there have been instances of abuse, the record shows that this can be handled in an appropriate manner. The reason is that 90% of the people are honest. The job of safety supervision is to make sure that the 5% or 10% don't ruin the system.&quot; He believes the FDIC needs stronger powers to supervise transactions between banks and related parties.    &quot;But whatever is not allowed inside the wall would be allowed outside through a subsidiary. With respect to antitrust, that kind of problem ought to be governed by normal antitrust rules. If this could be accomplished we would eliminate huge layers of regulatory problems, delay and cost-inefficiency.&quot;    Mr. Seidman's study does not deal with the question of which agency should remain the chief bank regulator in a simplified regulatory system. The Fed, as lender of last resort to the banking system, makes a strong claim for a continued regulatory role. But the Fed sometimes has a conflict of interest of its own, as when it urges banks to support the efforts of central banks and multilateral lending agencies to keep debtor countries whole. That sometimes sounds to bankers like asking them to throw good money after bad.    The Comptroller of the Currency is responsible for bank examinations, but comptrollers have complained about their lack of leverage in bringing pressure to bear on bankers with strong political connections. Although Mr. Seidman does not argue the point, a case could be made that the FDIC is the most logical lead regulator, in that its deposit guarantees give it a direct financial stake in bank soundness.    Proponents of bank deregulation argue, in essence, that in a world of globalized financial services, it becomes essential that American banks be allowed to offer the new products and services that their international competitors offer. Securitization -- the widespread replacement of bank borrowing with the issuance of securities -- has lost them a large chunk of what once was their mainstay business, lending to large corporations. Non-bank banks have brought them competition from large firms, such as Sears Roebuck and American Express, that offer a large range of financial services at the retail level.    But now that Messrs. Seidman, Proxmire and Greenspan are on the same wave-length, the future for bank deregulation has brightened. The question that remains is whether what finally passes Congress will represent the kind of clear-cut deregulation Mr. Seidman wants. </TEXT></DOC>