<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Cutting Corners: Secret Dealing Helped Paul Bilzerian Make Takeover Bids Work --- Phony Invoices Were Used To Split Gains; 'Parking' Of Stock Is Also Probed --- Lose a Bid but Win a Bundle </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR STK TNM </IN><G> SEC </G><DATELINE> Paul Bilzerian  </DATELINE><TEXT>   high-school dropout, Vietnam veteran, Harvard Business School misfit, real-estate speculator, multimillionaire raider and now captain of industry -- personifies the rags-to-riches potential in the takeover boom that has remade corporate America in the '80s.    Stories like his make legend: Armed only with wits, energy, a little money and a lot of courage to confront entrenched management, the hero strides onto the corporate battleground and earns a huge fortune taking over, or merely threatening to take over, the decrepit bastions of the industrial establishment.    But a close look at the 37-year-old Mr. Bilzerian's extraordinary career suggests at least one other ingredient in the epic: He has ridden roughshod over the securities laws of the U.S.    Mr. Bilzerian, the chairman of Singer Co., is currently the target of major Securities and Exchange Commission and federal grandjury investigations growing out of the Ivan F. Boesky insider-trading scandal. Just last week, the SEC filed a suit against Edward J. DeBartolo Sr., the Ohio shopping-center magnate, that revealed new details of alleged securities-law violations by Mr. Bilzerian.    They are outlined in documents obtained by The Wall Street Journal -- including many filed by the SEC in federal court in New York -- and interviews with many of Mr. Bilzerian's colleagues and people involved in his takeover raids. The details disclose an even broader pattern of questionable conduct than anything that has heretofore emerged. For all his derring-do, the details of his tactics amount to a catalog of possible securities crimes: insider trading, &quot;parking&quot; of stock in accounts to conceal its true ownership, false public disclosure documents filed with the SEC, aiding and abetting the keeping of false books and records, conspiracy to violate the securities laws, and tax fraud.    While some of these are sometimes dismissed as technical violations, in the hands of Mr. Bilzerian these practices became weapons to force large corporations into unwanted takeovers or liquidations that gained him hundreds of millions of dollars.    &quot;I'd be shocked if we've done anything wrong,&quot; Mr. Bilzerian said last year, when this newspaper first reported he was under investigation. Now, however, he has declined repeated requests for interviews concerning the allegations. Through his lawyers, Arthur F. Matthews and Ted Levine, partners in the Washington, D.C., firm of Wilmer, Cutler andamp; Pickering, he has also declined comment on this article.    Investors close to Mr. Bilzerian say he has recently assured them that he hasn't violated any laws. &quot;He told me he's being unjustly attacked,&quot; says Craig Hall, the Texas real-estate syndicator and a major Bilzerian backer. &quot;He said these leaks in the press are totally inaccurate and he'll fight tooth and nail if there are ever any charges.&quot; Mr. Hall was invited to take part in Mr. Bilzerian's first corporate raid, in 1985. So far as is known, it involved no securities-law shenanigans. It was also a flop.    At the time, Mr. Bilzerian, by his own retrospective account, was already a rich man. He came from a middle-class Massachusetts family and now lives mainly in Tampa. He seemed out of place at Harvard Business School, where his blue jeans and gold chain set him apart, and a Florida radio-station venture he later was involved with went bankrupt. But he claimed to have amassed more than $100 million from real estate between 1979 and 1982 and additional sums in stock-market speculation beginning around 1982.    His father-in-law, Harry Steffen, was a wealthy Minneapolis real-estate man. But the sources of Mr. Bilzerian's putative real-estate riches have defied outsiders' attempts to identify. His antagonists in several lawsuits arising from takeover attempts have tried to do so, but the suits have been dropped or settled before meaningful discovery, or fact-finding, began.    The target of his first attempted raid was Syntex Corp., the California drug maker. It was a feeble effort. Mr. Bilzerian never even managed to bring the raid to the point where he could make a credible bid for Syntex shares.    Despite the wealth he asserted, he tried recruiting rich real-estate investors, such as Mr. Hall, for the raid. Other real-estate investors later were important allies: Arthur Cohen of New York; Bill and Earl Mack of New Jersey; and, most important of all, Mr. DeBartolo and his son, Edward Jr., the shopping-center builders. He also approached Samuel Belzberg, of the powerful Belzberg family of Canada and an old hand at corporate raiding. Others say Mr. Bilzerian, who often voiced contempt for the Eastern establishment he encountered at Harvard, felt comfortable with these wealthy veterans of the rough-and-tumble real-estate world.    Many of them, however, were uninterested in Mr. Bilzerian's plans for Syntex, even though some say they were impressed with his presentation, intelligence and drive. A low-level Syntex official met once with Mr. Bilzerian. Syntex says he identified himself simply as a shareholder, making no allusion to wealthy backers or an impending takeover.    The experience taught him a lesson. As he talked up Syntex with potential investors, its price soared. People close to him at the time say he was infuriated. The fast run-up could have raised the cost of a takeover bid and eroded the bidder's gains.    Mr. Bilzerian wouldn't repeat the mistake. In raids to come, he made sure that the true extent of his involvement remained secret, to the SEC and others.    In April 1985, H.H. Robertson Co., a Pittsburgh construction company, suddenly became an open target of Mr. Bilzerian. He said he would pay $250 million for the company and threatened a hostile tender offer.    Mr. Bilzerian had secretly purchased and parked 58,000 Robertson shares with Jefferies andamp; Co., the Los Angeles securities firm. He sold the shares to Jefferies for $1.7 million, promising to buy them back in 31 days and guaranteeing Jefferies against loss. (The 31-day time period suggests possible tax fraud as a motive for the scheme, since that time period would permit Mr. Bilzerian to realize a tax loss on the &quot;sale&quot; to Jefferies, while retaining control of the stock.)    Mr. Bilzerian's surprise bid looked as if it might rescue the Belzbergs, who were mired with more than 17% of Robertson's stock and stood to lose millions of dollars as conditions worsened in the international construction business and the stock price dropped. A Belzberg proxy fight for control of the company had stalled. And Robertson wouldn't buy back the Belzberg stake at a &quot;greenmail&quot; price above market that suited the Belzbergs.    The Bilzerian bid came as no surprise to the Belzbergs, according to several people familiar with the Robertson situation. One former Belzberg employee says that &quot;ever since Syntex, Bilzerian was badgering us to get into the takeover game.&quot; The Belzbergs encouraged him in Robertson, the former employee says, hoping Mr. Bilzerian's bid would put Robertson in play and flush out a white knight. Another person involved in the matter adds that Mr. Bilzerian called the Belzbergs in advance of the bid, saying that he was &quot;waiting in the wings with a bid.&quot;    Despite Mr. Bilzerian's offer and threats, nothing happened. Mr. Bilzerian never followed through with a formal bid. Securities laws require anyone making a public takeover offer that contains price and terms, as Mr. Bilzerian did, to file disclosure documents with the SEC within five days of the offer or publicly withdraw it. Mr. Bilzerian didn't file any papers with the SEC on Robertson, and there isn't any public record that he formally withdrew his offer. This may simply reflect Mr. Bilzerian's inexperience in takeovers; it also casts doubt on how serious Mr. Bilzerian's offer was.    In any event, Robertson stock continued to decline in price. No white knight appeared. The Belzbergs broke off their dealings with Mr. Bilzerian, refusing to back a Bilzerian plan to exchange their shares for high-yielding junk bonds and refusing to buy out Mr. Bilzerian's Robertson stake. Mr. Bilzerian was furious, alleging the Belzbergs had reneged on commitments they had given him, and he stormed out of a meeting with a Belzberg official after calling him by an obscene name, the official says. The rupture never healed. The aspiring raider &quot;felt totally used&quot; by the Belzbergs, says a friend of Mr. Bilzerian.    Mark Belzberg says the family &quot;had absolutely no arrangements whatsoever&quot; with Mr. Bilzerian, adding that they barely know him. Samuel Belzberg says he never even met Mr. Bilzerian in person.    Not only was Mr. Bilzerian's ego bruised, but he was stuck with the Robertson stock he had parked with Jefferies. When the 31 days passed and no bid for Robertson had emerged, Mr. Bilzerian reneged on the agreement to buy back the stock-sticking Jefferies with a substantial loss on the position, say people familiar with the transaction.    Loud arguments erupted between Mr. Bilzerian and Boyd L. Jefferies, the chairman of the firm, as they had with the Belzberg officials. (Such disputes over the terms of Mr. Bilzerian's agreements seem to have been commonplace throughout his career.) Jefferies finally sold the Robertson shares at a $250,000 loss. A colleague says Mr. Jefferies was &quot;absolutely nuts&quot; over the loss.    Also distressed was John M. LeFrere, a New York money manager and an investor in Robertson, who had introduced Mr. Bilzerian to Jefferies. Mr. LeFrere felt partly responsible for the loss. To ease matters, he agreed to steer enough commission business to Jefferies to make it up. &quot;We felt the broker really got shafted,&quot; says Mr. LeFrere. &quot;We tried to help out.&quot;    Mr. Bilzerian, despite his differences with Jefferies, needed a broker to accommodate his other ventures. He put $250,000 in a personal account at Jefferies as a guarantee that the loss would eventually be made up. Mr. Jefferies's lawyer, Peter Morrison, declines to comment.    In July 1985, just months after the Robertson fiasco, Mr. Bilzerian launched what would become his first huge takeover speculation, a $336 million bid for Cluett, Peabody andamp; Co., the apparel maker. Cluett Peabody, earlier targeted by the Belzbergs, had paid them greenmail to end the threat. Sensing an easy victim, Mr. Bilzerian decided to attack. He and a partner disclosed that they owned 9.9% of the company's stock. Mr. Hall, the Texas developer, also showed up at the head of another group with 9.9%.    This time, Mr. Bilzerian actually made a formal tender offer for Cluett Peabody and filed disclosure documents with the SEC. The disclosures, however, revealed nothing of important financial links between Mr. Bilzerian and the elder Mr. DeBartolo.    Mr. DeBartolo secretly helped finance the Cluett Peabody offer, and he and Mr. Bilzerian consulted on it. It is the subject of several typewritten memos that were either addresssed to or drafted by Mr. DeBartolo. Before and after the Cluett Peabody bid, other documents indicate, Mr. DeBartolo bought large blocks of Cluett Peabody shares and lent money to employees and others to buy more, in some cases after conversations with Mr. Bilzerian.    Whether this constituted insider trading is under investigation by the SEC. On this and other matters Mr. DeBartolo, through his lawyers, declines comment.    Documents indicate that Mr. DeBartolo also lent Mr. Bilzerian millions of dollars for the purchase of Cluett Peabody shares. At one point, Mr. Bilzerian met with an official of Mr. DeBartolo's family-owned company asking for $19 million. Handwritten notes suggest that in return for the loans, Mr. Bilzerian and Mr. DeBartolo entered into a secret profit-sharing agreement involving their Cluett Peabody stock.    Securities law requires the disclosure of takeover financing such as that apparently provided by Mr. DeBartolo, and any profit-sharing arrangements. Takeover specialists observe that Mr. Bilzerian would have seemed a much weaker threat to Cluett Peabody had his reliance on borrowed money and a profit-splitting deal been known. The law also would require disclosure that Mr. Bilzerian and Mr. DeBartolo were acting jointly.    Those weren't the only things Mr. Bilzerian kept secret. The Cluett Peabody deal gave Mr. Bilzerian a chance to mend his fences with Mr. Jefferies. He reimbursed Jefferies for $125,000, about half its loss on Robertson. To conceal that the payment had been part of a legally questionable stock-parking scheme, Mr. Bilzerian sent Jefferies a letter saying the payment was for &quot;financial consulting services&quot; in connection with the Cluett Peabody offer. People familiar with the matter say no such services were rendered. Jefferies collected by taking $125,000 from Mr. Bilzerian's personal account at the firm.    Still, that didn't quite end the matter. Mr. Bilzerian later learned that Mr. LeFrere had steered more than $125,000 in commissions to Jefferies. This meant Jefferies had now recouped more than its $250,000 loss. So Mr. Bilzerian sent Jefferies two phony invoices, each for $75,000, for unspecified &quot;consulting services,&quot; which resulted in false entries in Jefferies's books and other records, according to people who know the details.    Acquaintances of Mr. Bilzerian say his concern over the money was characteristic. The amount, though not insignificant, paled in comparison with the $82 million that he and his investor group got in the Cluett Peabody raid. This time a white knight -- West Point-Pepperell Inc. -- did surface with a $375 million bid.    A losing bid had won a fortune. Mr. Bilzerian was gleeful over the experience, acquaintances say. Even as he gathered the cash, he was eyeing bigger game: Hammermill Paper Co., the Erie, Pa., paper manufacturer.    It attracted him for the same reason that Cluett Peabody had, his acquaintances say: Hammermill had proved it was vulnerable to greenmail, having paid it to make raider Carl Icahn go elsewhere.    Mr. Bilzerian initially insisted he was serious about acquiring the company. But Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. investment bankers he consulted on financing say he resisted setting his bid high enough to be considered seriously. There was an angry confrontation between Mr. Bilzerian and a top Merrill Lynch official. Mr. Bilzerian took his business to Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc.    Boldly ambushing the unsuspecting Hammermill, Mr. Bilzerian made a formal $900 million tender offer for the firm in July 1986. An hour before, his investor group bought a huge, 1.7 million-share block of Hammermill stock and announced its holding of a 19.6% stake. This position was so large that Mr. Bilzerian could practically force the company into sale or liquidation.    But as in the Cluett Peabody raid, Mr. Bilzerian's SEC disclosure documents may be more significant for what they didn't say than for what they did. Even before the 1.7 million-share purchase, Mr. Bilzerian had been accumulating a stake in Hammermill thanks to an undisclosed arrangement with Jefferies, according to people familiar with his purchases. Earlier that year, Mr. Bilzerian asked Mr. Jefferies to buy Hammermill stock, hold it and then sell it to him later, these people say.    Jefferies did so, they say, eventually selling 551,000 shares to Mr. Bilzerian.    At the time he talked to Mr. Jefferies, it appears that Mr. Bilzerian already owned about 4.9% of Hammermill's shares, these people say. Mr. Bilzerian's stock, plus the stock Jefferies was buying for him, apparently amounted to more than 5% of Hammermill's shares. The arrangement therefore could have violated the SEC rule requiring any group of investors to report a stake of 5% or larger.    Mr. Bilzerian again failed to disclose that he was working with Mr. DeBartolo. Mr. DeBartolo bought Hammermill securities in his own name and lent millions of dollars to relatives, employees and Mr. Bilzerian to buy Hammermill stock, documents indicate. The possibility of insider trading in Hammermill shares is also under investigation by the SEC, according to people familiar with the case.    A page of handwritten notes dated May 23, 1986, a copy of which was obtained by this newspaper, appears to detail a proposed financing arrangement between Messrs. Bilzerian and DeBartolo for purchases of Hammermill stock by Mr. Bilzerian. Mr. Bilzerian's public filings in his Hammermill takeover bid didn't disclose any loans from Mr. DeBartolo.    Within three weeks of his Hammermill bid, Mr. Bilzerian drove the company into the arms of a white knight, International Paper Co., which bought Hammermill for $1.1 billion. Mr. Bilzerian and his group, including the Mack family of New Jersey, divided about $54 million in profits. Shearson reaped $6 million in fees. And Mr. Bilzerian already began gunning for another target.    In the fall of 1986, Jefferies, at Mr. Bilzerian's behest, began acquiring at least 800,000 shares of Armco, the New Jersey steel producer. Mr. Bilzerian concealed these purchases by parking the stock with Jefferies, according to people who knew of the trades. While the stock was parked with Jefferies, its total value rose by about $500,000. To realize that gain, Mr. Bilzerian sent Jefferies a $500,000 invoice for consulting services, although no such services were performed, according to people familiar with the transaction.    The scheme didn't stop there. Mr. Bilzerian made the invoice due and payable on Jan. 2, 1987, to defer the $500,000 gain for tax purposes. Jefferies -- which had recently learned it was under investigation -- declined to accommodate Mr. Bilzerian in what seemed to be be a tax fraud, since the profits were clearly earned in 1986.    Mr. Bilzerian never made a bid for Armco; the company says it never heard from him.    During late 1986 Mr. Bilzerian also appears to have reciprocated some of the secret cooperation he had earlier received from Mr. DeBartolo. In October, Mr. Bilzerian joined Mr. DeBartolo in a $3.56 billion bid for Allied Stores Corp. On Nov. 25, Mr. DeBartolo and Limited Inc. made a hostile $1.77 billion bid for Carter Hawley Hale Stores, a Los Angeles-based department store chain that had survived previous takeover threats. The SEC says it has information that Mr. Bilzerian asked Jefferies to accumulate Carter Hawley stock for Mr. DeBartolo in a nominee account to disguise the identity of the true owner.    In another transaction, Mr. Bilzerian arranged to sell about 400,000 Carter Hawley shares through Jefferies. But when the transaction occurred, the shares appear to have been owned by Mr. DeBartolo, according to people familiar with the transaction. While there may be nothing wrong with the sale, it raises questions about any undisclosed relationship between Messrs. Bilzerian and DeBartolo. The SEC has said it is investigating Mr. DeBartolo's Carter Hawley disclosure documents.    The Carter Hawley venture wasn't a success; the company announced a restructuring and Mr. DeBartolo and Limited dropped their bid.    It's unclear why Mr. Bilzerian retreated from Armco and why Mr. DeBartolo capitulated so quickly in Carter Hawley. But several things happened that could have encouraged them to do so. In November 1986, the government's insider-trading investigation moved into high gear when takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky agreed to plead guilty to a felony, settle SEC charges for a record $100 million and cooperate with investigators. The SEC launched a formal investigation on Nov. 12 &quot;in the matter of certain transfers of securities,&quot; a widespread parking probe. Soon after, Mr. Bilzerian severed all relations with Mr. Jefferies and Jefferies andamp; Co.    A few months later, in March 1987, the government announced that Mr. Jefferies had agreed to settle SEC charges, plead guilty to two felonies and cooperate. Less than a month later, the SEC amended its formal order to direct an investigation into possible securities law violations in trading in Cluett Peabody, Hammermill, Carter Hawley and other unnamed issues. While Mr. Bilzerian wasn't named, it must have been clear to Mr. Bilzerian that he was a subject of the investigation. The U.S. attorney in Manhattan began a similar criminal investigation.    None of this deterred Mr. Bilzerian from seeking a fresh target, Singer Co. Last summer he began amassing shares in the company. The Oct. 19 stock-market crash frightened other potential bidders, and Singer, to the surprise of many, succumbed to Mr. Bilzerian's $1.06 billion hostile bid.    Earlier this year, Mr. Bilzerian had himself named chairman of Singer, one of the nation's oldest, best-known corporations and a major defense contractor. In little more than three years of corporate raiding, the high-school dropout had entered the elite ranks of the nation's chief executives. </TEXT></DOC>