<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0134 </DOCNO><HL> FCC Phone Deregulation Plan Hits Snag --- Concern Over an ATandamp;T Advantage Is at Issue </HL><AUTHOR> Janet Guyon and Bob Davis (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> T BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AIT NYN MCIC GTE UT </CO><IN> TEL </IN><G> FCC CNG </G><TEXT>   The Federal Communications Commission's plan to radically alter telephone regulation is in deep trouble over whether it would boost profits of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and regional Bell companies at the expense of consumers and competitors.    The latest sign of opposition came last week, when similar bills were introduced in the House and Senate to quash deregulatory changes until a new administration takes office next year. The bills, which caught ATandamp;T by surprise, were meant to demonstrate growing unhappiness with deregulatory proposals championed by Dennis R. Patrick, the aggressive, young chairman of the FCC.    Under Mr. Patrick, the FCC has supported ATandamp;T suggestions that regulation be changed to cap its prices instead of limiting its profits -- and extended the proposal to the regional Bell concerns, too. ATandamp;T, the FCC and the Baby Bells have argued strenuously that the current method encourages the phone companies to pad their costs and make uneconomic decisions about where they invest in their phone networks. Mr. Patrick and the FCC want to scrap the current method in accordance with the Reagan administration's general deregulatory philosophy.    Last August, the FCC said that it was considering changes along lines favored by ATandamp;T in a proposal that was long on philosophy, but short on specifics. Since that time, a carefully crafted industry consensus has fallen apart over exactly what the FCC should do. Washington, D.C.-based MCI Communications Corp., an important early proponent of reduced regulation for ATandamp;T, now says it will oppose any plan that gives ATandamp;T too much pricing flexibility or that includes the Bells. US Sprint Communications Co. says it will oppose a plan that doesn't include price floors, an element neither ATandamp;T nor the Bells think is necessary -- and which the FCC generally frowns on as price fixing. The Competitive Telecommunications Association, which represents 150 small long-distance carriers, also wants price floors, and this week threw its support behind the newly introduced bills.    The association as well as state regulators and groups representing consumers and big business urged Rep. John Bryant (D., Texas) and Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.) to introduce the two bills, which prevent the FCC from conducting any proceedings affecting ATandamp;T regulation until Jan. 1, 1989. The FCC price cap proposal has given the Bells courage to push deregulation at the state level, says Gene Kimmelman of the Consumer Federation of America, a move Mr. Kimmelman calls &quot;an unprecedented perversion of public policy&quot; because the Bells are still monopolies.    &quot;The FCC doesn't appear to be interested in listening to Congress and there is a feeling it is moving ahead too fast for political reasons,&quot; says Mr. Kimmelman. &quot;I think Congress can get these bills passed. They are little, simple bills.&quot;    Exacerbating the FCC's problems with Congress, of course, is the bitter feelings on the part of the lawmakers over the FCC's scrapping of the fairness doctrine, which required broadcasters to give air time to advocates of opposing viewpoints on controversial issues.    But unveiling a detailed price cap plan would go a long way toward meeting congressional objections. House Telecommunications Subcommittee Chairman Edward Markey (D., Mass.) calls the August FCC notice &quot;unintelligible.&quot; Without a more detailed proposal, Rep. Markey says the subcommittee will forge ahead with the Bryant bill. Rep. Markey's subcommittee, and its counterpart in the Senate, plan to hold hearings on the FCC price cap plan in mid-March.    Despite widespread dissatisfaction with the FCC's plans, Mr. Patrick vows to tough it out. &quot;We're talking about saving real dollars for consumers,&quot; says Mr. Patrick, whose legacy at the agency rests on his ability to push through his price-cap plan.    Senior FCC officials say the agency is now leaning toward unveiling a detailed price-cap proposal, with specific pricing formulas spelled out, as early as next month. Gerald Brock, the chief of the FCC's common carrier bureau, says that once initial price levels are established, the FCC plan may propose allowing prices to rise each year at a rate equal to the consumer price index minus two or three percentage points. Prices also would be adjusted downward to reflect changes in connection charges paid by ATandamp;T and the Bell companies -- the biggest source of long-distance price reductions in recent years.    In addition, the FCC is considering imposing what a Commerce Department official calls a &quot;people's dividend&quot; in order to generate congressional support. Under this plan, ATandamp;T and the Bells would have to cut rates upfront as a kind of admission fee for regulatory reform. The companies, however, might be allowed to make up the difference in later years, Mr. Patrick says.    Whatever concrete plan the FCC unveils is sure to draw fire. At the very least, any proposal will set off a round of haggling over rates, with competing companies trying to recruit lawmakers to press their claims. Rep. Bryant, for instance, has a long friendship with US Sprint, dating to the company's origins as a Dallas-based concern. US Sprint, now based in Kansas City, Mo., is jointly owned by GTE Corp. of Stamford, Conn., and United Telecommunications Inc., Kansas City.    Brian Moir, general counsel of the International Communications Association, which represents large phone users, says his group would oppose allowing prices to rise by the CPI minus a couple of percentage points because historically phone prices have risen by far less than that. MCI says it will oppose any &quot;people's dividend&quot; it can't match because that would hurt emerging competition in the long-distance industry.    ATandamp;T's competitors are most upset about the wide latitude the FCC has already given ATandamp;T in pricing services and equipment to big customers. Under a rate plan called &quot;tariff 12,&quot; the FCC has allowed ATandamp;T to sell long-distance services and equipment to General Electric Co. and Du Pont Co. at a fixed price. Because ATandamp;T hasn't separated out its regulated long-distance prices from its unregulated equipment prices in those contracts, MCI and US Sprint say they can't tell whether ATandamp;T is using profits from its unregulated business to subsidize regulated long-distance service, or vice versa.    ATandamp;T's tariff 12 plans &quot;are a huge loophole to price caps,&quot; says John Hoffman, senior vice president at US Sprint, which supports the general concept of price caps. &quot;Any time ATandamp;T doesn't like the caps for a particular customer, it can just put in a tariff 12&quot; proposal.    The proliferation of pricing plans that ATandamp;T has introduced since the break-up of the Bell System four years ago further complicates a move to price-cap regulation. Competitors say they don't compete against ATandamp;T's average prices, but against specific pricing plans such as WATS or ATandamp;T's Pro America bulk discounts. Competitors fear that ATandamp;T could defeat any price caps by simply changing the structure of its prices. Simpler pricing structures in Britain have made price-cap regulation there easier to apply, according to executives familiar with that system.    A sleeper issue in the whole affair is the possibility that, under price caps, ATandamp;T will eventually charge different rates for calls going the same distance, but to different geographic areas, says James Tobin, senior vice president and general counsel of ALC Communications Corp. of Birmingham, Mich. ATandamp;T says that won't happen as long as connection fees it pays local phone companies are still averaged nationwide. But Mr. Tobin says those fees, which account for about half the long-distance prices consumers and businesses pay, are already being de-averaged across the country.    &quot;The inevitable trend is toward de-averaging of ATandamp;T's rates,&quot; says Mr. Tobin, a pattern that in the past has raised tremendous concern in Congress. Even if ATandamp;T pledges now not to de-average for several years &quot;it's very common in the regulatory world to say 'yes that was then, but since then look at all these unexpected events that have occurred.'&quot;    Whatever happens, it's clear that Mr. Patrick's initiative will take longer to put into effect than either he or ATandamp;T thought when the price cap idea was first aired a year ago. A new, specific FCC proposal couldn't possibly be put into effect until late summer, industry executives say, because of procedural delays. Meanwhile, Mr. Patrick faces some ticklish politics at the FCC as well as in Congress.    The Senate is holding up two Republican nominees to the agency, leaving it with only three commissioners, any of whom effectively have a veto on commission action by simply boycotting a meeting. Commissioner Patricia Diaz Dennis, one of two Democratic commissioners, has expressed concern over ATandamp;T's tariff 12 plans and has dissented from three FCC telecommunications decisions in the past six weeks.    In any event, says Mr. Tobin of ALC, the price cap plan &quot;isn't going to slide right through like people thought. It's beginning to look like people are saying, 'Gee, there's a problem with this.'&quot; </TEXT></DOC>