<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Who Gets the Blame for the French Strikes?---By Philip Revzin</HL><DD> 01/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP LABOR </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The big question arising from the past weeks' French public workers' strikes is: Who will get the blame? The answer could depend on how deeply Prime Minister Jacques Chirac believes in the free market.    The office workers shivering in the dark after walking up six flights of stairs have directed their immediate ire toward the far-left Confederation Generale du Travail and the non-union militants who began a strike against the state-owned railway three weeks ago over obscure, new work rules. The strike then picked up steam, virtually crippling the Paris Metro and leading to periodic, and unpredictable, power cuts throughout the country. The French, never ones to suffer as eagerly as the British, are getting annoyed. A sign on the locked train station in a Paris suburb reads: &quot;Be careful, strikers. There are 2.5 million unemployed who would be glad to have your jobs.&quot;    But the backlash won't stop at the unions. The politicians know this and are currently scrambling for position. President Francois Mitterrand's position is above it all, with an occasional dip into the fray, such as inviting union leaders out to his country place. So far, his Socialist Party has managed to distance itself from the strikers; the CGT is more closely linked to the Communist Party here. And since the strikes stem almost entirely from reforms proposed by the right-wing government, not from policies left over from the previous Socialist regime, the Socialists can attack the new government with impunity.    So can virtually everybody else. Former Prime Minister Raymond Barre, certain to be a right-center candidate for president next year, broke his self-imposed silence last week to criticize the &quot;overdose of reforms&quot; his rival, Mr. Chirac, is implementing. Mr. Barre likened himself to the tortoise who slowly but surely wins the race, implicitly labeling Mr. Chirac and his free-market policies a fast-fading hare.    For his part, Mr. Chirac seems to have dashed into the kind of trap politicians hate most. He has already backed down on the original changes his government had proposed in the railwaymen's working conditions, but the strike has only grown worse. He is now forced to tough it out, pledging no further concessions, as the suffering of his constituents increases. The sniping from rightist rivals like Mr. Barre and former president Valery Giscard d'Estaing will get worse before it gets better.    The longer-term consequences largely depend on Mr. Chirac's courage and patience. With his eye fixed on the 1988 presidential race, he can't afford to take a major economic hit from a prolonged strike, even if he eventually defeats the strikers. Some analysts here are already beginning to wonder how deep Mr. Chirac's commitment will be to the liberal, free-market policies to which, after all, he has come rather late in his political life. Much of the program he has been vigorously implementing since the right's March 16 election victory came from the Republican Party, led by the culture minister, Francois Leotard, and the industry minister, Alain Madelin, not from the heart of Mr. Chirac's neo-Gaullist Rally for the Republic and probably not from the heart of France's countryside or suburbs.    If, as Mr. Barre suggests, France wasn't ready for a quick dose of liberalization, Mr. Chirac may heed the message of his dropping opinion-poll ratings and back off even more. In addition to withdrawing the proposed work rules, he previously blinked in a confrontation with students who objected to his education reforms. Further trimming might raise questions of his government's competence, but it would also bring him back onto the centrist, Gaullist political ground upon which he has always been most comfortable.    The key to Mr. Chirac's presidential chances, and the hopes of the free-marketeers to see the program through despite it all, could well be exactly what Mr. Chirac decides to jettison for political expediency. He probably doesn't have to gut the heart of his economic strategy: Finance Minister Edouard Balladur, a Chirac loyalist, has been moving at a tortoise-like pace to dismantle remaining price and exchange controls, and those reforms will stick. The first sale of a nationalized company to the public was a big success, and the pace of privatizations has been stepped up. But the proposed privatization of state-run television channel TF1 is opposed by many Frenchmen, and any quick sale to an unpopular new patron could run into problems.    Mr. Chirac's current tough line against the wage demands of the strikers is meant to rally the French around an anti-inflation standard. Despite a price-rise rate of about 2%, historically low for France, Mr. Chirac is hammering away at the theme that the West Germans have managed to wipe out inflation entirely, and French products continue to suffer on world markets because they cost too much to make. He has said that any wage settlements with the strikes beyond the 2% to 3% the government has offered eventually would rekindle inflation.    But he is learning that the inflation bogy is a hard one to evoke when the rate is so low anyway, and so many people are out of work. Hardly any of the people trying to shop by candlelight in downtown Paris see inflation as the main issue; instead, most cite political intransigence on both sides, and say they just want the lights back on. Indeed, if Mr. Chirac weren't so hemmed in by the onrushing presidential election, he probably would have been able to duck this confrontation entirely, just as Britain's Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was able to duck a miners' strike in 1981 until she was ready for it three years later. Mr. Chirac, faced by the need to produce vote-winning results almost immediately, doesn't have this luxury.    His problem is that neither does he have the luxury of doing nothing and offending no one. The economy, before the wave of strikes, was expected to grow about 3% this year, a good score for France, but not good enough to create any new jobs. The structural rigidities that abound in Europe -- such as paper work, tangled employment rules and overgenerous farm subsidies -- are firmly entrenched here, and as Mr. Mitterrand found out in 1982, probably preclude jobcreating growth even with budget-busting government spending. His government is already committed to gradual tax cuts, of about 8% this year and 5% in each of the next two years, but as Mr. Chirac is finding to the discomfort of stranded commuters, loosening rigidities is a painful process.    Mr. Chirac's choice of tactics in the next few months could be crucial. If he sticks to unbridled liberalism, he might win a long-term economic battle but lose the short-term electoral war. If he retreats too fast he risks losing his few remaining allies on the right. If Mr. Chirac does manage to pull a rabbit, or maybe a tortoise, out of his hat, he would prove himself a worthy opponent to Mr. Mitterrand, a time-tested political magician. If he doesn't, he can always go back to being the full-time mayor of Paris, and worry about getting the trains to run on time.    ---   Mr. Revzin is the Journal's Paris bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>