<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881027-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SOVIET UNION VOWED to release all political prisoners by year end.    Following three days of talks in Moscow with Kremlin leader Gorbachev, West German Chancellor Kohl said the Soviets would free all people regarded in the West as political detainees this year. A Soviet spokesman refused to confirm that such a release was imminent. But West German officials said the Kremlin hoped the move, which follows a relaxation of Soviet emigration policies, will win support for Moscow's desire to host an international human-rights parley in the early 1990s.    Moscow claims to hold about two dozen political prisoners, but human-rights groups assert that there are as many as 200 such detainees.    ---   Dukakis dismissed new polls showing Republican candidate Bush with a double-digit lead in the presidential race and campaigned among Hispanic voters in Colorado. Bush, speaking in Michigan, renewed his pledge against raising taxes and again contended that his Democratic rival lacked the experience to govern the U.S.    ---   A French company announced that it will suspend distribution of an abortion pill, citing the &quot;outcry of public opinion&quot; against the drug. Some officials said the pharmaceutical firm, Roussel Uclaf, had feared a boycott of its products, especially in the U.S.    ---   South Africans went to the polls in the first same-day voting by all races for segregated municipal councils. Far-right white candidates scored major gains, but black militants also showed political strength by boycotting the elections. Anti-apartheid activists had urged the boycott to deny legitimacy to local government structures.    ---   Israeli warplanes attacked Palestinian guerrilla bases in Sidon and Beirut, killing at least six people, including a man identified as a senior PLO commander. The raids brought to four the number of Israeli air strikes inside Lebanon since Friday.    Shamir inaugurated a Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank and vowed that there would be more of the enclaves if he wins next week's Israeli election. Police, meanwhile, raided Arab villages and destroyed the homes of suspected activists.    ---   Philippine officials said more than 170 people who abandoned a ship sunk during Typhoon Ruby were found on remote islands in the archipelago. About 500 people were aboard the vessel. Rescue workers also recovered the bodies of 32 passengers. The storm killed about 100 people on land, and left more than 100,000 homeless.    ---   A physicians' group issued revised guidelines aimed at reducing the high rate of Caesarean sections in the U.S. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists urged doctors and hospitals to encourage women who have had Caesarean sections to attempt labor and vaginal birth in subsequent pregnancies.    ---   A federal judge in Atlanta dismissed the jury in the perjury trial of Rep. Patrick Swindall, saying the Georgia Republican had sent campaign mailings about the case. The judge indicated he wouldn't grant Swindall's request for a non-jury trial, which would leave the indictment hanging through Election Day.    ---   Polish leader Jaruzelski met with Roman Catholic Primate Cardinal Glemp, a move that coincided with a dispute over the start of government-opposition talks over Poland's future. A meeting between Solidarity leader Walesa and Warsaw's interior minister, proposed by the government as a precondition to the talks, didn't take place.    ---   The Soviet Union said it would launch its space shuttle on an unmanned mission Saturday, following months of delays similar to those that plagued the first U.S. shuttle flight in 1981. The maiden flight of the Soviet orbiter Buran is designed to break the U.S. monopoly on reusable spacecraft.    ---   Reagan has offered the Soviet Union an on-site inspection proposal that the State Department said would make a strategic arms reduction treaty verifiable while protecting &quot;legitimate U.S. secrets and interests.&quot; A spokesman declined to give details.    ---   Sweden has denied asylum to 10 Soviet defectors on the ground that political changes in the Soviet Union make it unlikely that they would be punished on return to that country, officials said. Stockholm once routinely granted refuge to Soviet defectors, citing the danger of reprisals.    ---   The government of Montenegro resigned after a quarter of its members lost a vote of confidence in the Yugoslav republic's parliament. The move came as unrest was reported throughout the communist federation. The collective state presidency scheduled a meeting for tomorrow to discuss recent ethnic and economic protests.    ---   Two trapped whales were freed after rescue teams from the U.S. and Soviet Union broke through the arctic ice that confined the pair near Barrow, Alaska, and cleared a path to the sea. A third gray whale, also trapped, is believed to have died last week. The mammals had been found Oct. 13. </TEXT></DOC>