<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0055 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   This has not been a good week for the dollar. A New York Times article that had anonymous &quot;administration sources&quot; seeking a further dollar decline threw the world's exchange markets into turmoil yesterday morning; matters improved only somewhat after both the Treasury and White House denied any such intent. That came only two days after the damage inflicted by rumors that Fed Chairman Volcker may not be reappointed and by West Germany's upward revaluation of the mark.    With the dollar taking a beating, it is an apt moment to check in with the accompanying chart, depicting trends in the price of gold in dollars, marks and yen just prior to this week's further dollar decline (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Jan. 15, 1987). The point is that if the exchange rate of two currencies is out of line, it means that one central bank has been too easy, the other too tight, or both. To judge which is out of line you need some external constant. Gold, historically a monetary commodity and still held in central-bank reserves, is the easiest choice.    At the Plaza Hotel meeting in September 1985, the U.S. abandoned &quot;benign neglect&quot; of the dollar, affirming that exchange rates do matter. It grows hard to remember that the complaint at the time was that the dollar was overvalued, its exchange rate too high. To correct this, either the Fed had to ease, printing more dollars, or other central banks had to tighten, printing fewer marks, yen and other currencies.    When we first ran this chart last July, the point was that the dollar had been brought down by tighter monetary policies abroad. The price of gold had risen only slightly in dollars, but had plunged in terms of marks and yen. We expressed some doubt that a tighter monetary policy was what the world needed, given economic torpor in many nations.    About that time, the price of gold in dollars started to rise. Evidently the Fed was supplying more dollars compared with the demand for them, though turmoil in South Africa may have increased the demand for gold. (And since central banks rarely bring their reserves to market, much of the world's supply is immobilized.) The rise in the dollar gold price was rapid enough to start us, at least, worrying about new inflation, but it declined in the fall. So far U.S. prices have been stable, though oil is now rising and gold is resuming its climb this week. It certainly is not a time for further easing by the Fed.    The Bank of Japan had more or less agreed last fall to help hold a dollar-yen exchange rate of about 160 and succeeded for some time. But despite some Japanese market interventions, the dollar yesterday was closer to 150 yen. The Bundesbank declined to join in any such arrangement. In terms of gold, both the yen price and the mark price rose in the fall. Reflecting the different degrees of coordination with the dollar, the yen price stabilized at this higher level, while the mark price has returned to its post-Plaza lows. Both the German and Japanese economies have lagged.    We see little reason why the Bundesbank should hesitate to satisfy the growing world demand for marks. For that matter, we see little reason the Bank of Japan shouldn't ease even beyond the 160 rate. Why, after all, should the gold price in both marks and yen remain substantially below the levels that pertained at the time of the Plaza agreement? Why should price levels be allowed to fall and growth be allowed to stagnate?    In the U.S. there's room for disagreement on the outlook for growth, but the booming stock market certainly suggests supply-side tax cuts will succeed again. The falling dollar and rising gold suggest the Federal Reserve has supplied at least as many dollars as markets are demanding. Further easing may have to be postponed, though this would do little harm if the other major players started to carry more of the responsibility for keeping the world economy prosperous and growing. </TEXT></DOC>