<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0036 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Prices Surge Amid Heavy DemandStemming From Bitter Cold in Europe---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN><TEXT>   Oil prices surged to near one-year highs amid heavy demand for heating oil stemming from a bitter cold spell in Europe.    The freezing temperatures, particularly in the Soviet Union, have sparked unusually strong demand for gas oil, the European equivalent of heating oil. The weather has also clogged oil transportation routes. The Soviets, for example, are having difficulty shipping gas oil through their normal winter ports, traders said.    This in turn has led supplies to be diverted to Europe from their destinations in the U.S. In addition, stockpiles from the U.S. Gulf Coast are apparently being sopped up to satisfy European, rather than domestic, needs, analysts and traders said.    The extreme cold, which has pushed European gas oil prices to a significant premium over U.S. prices, &quot;has been the key factor -- it's what got things cranked up,&quot; said James Ritterbusch, vice president, energy futures, at PaineWebber Inc. in Chicago.    Crude oil prices soared above $19 for the first time since last Jan. 30, when they stood at $19.66. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil contracts for February delivery closed at $19.01 a barrel, up 24 cents.    But the crude rally was triggered largely by soaring heating oil prices, which are at their highest level since last February. Yesterday, February heating oil contracts closed at 54.66 cents a gallon, up 1.65 cents. &quot;Heating oil was the leader,&quot; said Nauman Barakat, oil analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., New York. Unleaded gasoline futures prices rose as well.    In Europe, gas oil futures prices for February delivery on the International Petroleum Exchange of London soared more than $9 a ton to $173.60. The 54.66-cent-a-gallon price for U.S. heating oil is equivalent to roughly $169.44 a ton for European gas oil prices, traders said.    The spot, or noncontract, market also rallied. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark U.S. crude oil, rose 25 cents to $19 a barrel. The January delivery price of North Sea Brent, the abundantly traded European crude, rose 45 cents to $18.80 a barrel.    Traders and analysts said some buying was also triggered by an Iranian offensive in the country's seven-year war with Iraq. &quot;There is the feeling that this is the final blow that the Iranians want to deliver,&quot; one trader in New York said.    Moreover, the continuing bullish effects of production cuts and calls for fixed prices by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries lent further background support to prices, analysts said. Three weeks ago, OPEC agreed to slash output more than 7% starting Jan. 1 and set fixed prices of about $18 a barrel beginning Feb. 1.    But for the time being, at least, the oil cartel has been shoved in the background by the weather. Meteorologists are calling for continued brutal temperatures throughout most of Europe and the Soviet Union until later in the week.    By then, some traders and analysts said, crude oil prices could easily surpass $20 a barrel. &quot;We should be knocking on the door (to $20) before the week's out,&quot; Mr. Ritterbusch said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Most futures prices rose sharply and are headed still higher in the wake of a &quot;half-baked&quot; revaluation of European Monetary System currencies over the weekend, said Jill Cotter, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. She said the revaluation, the centerpiece of which was a 3% upward valuation of the mark against the franc, was less than expected. Many traders remained &quot;long&quot; in the mark in anticipation of another revaluation before month's end, she added. Ms. Cotter said that traders were also reacting to comments made by Treasury Secretary James Baker last week indicating that the administration would like to see the dollar continue to fall in an attempt to improve the outlook for exports. On the Chicago Mercantile Exchange's International Monetary Market, mark futures contracts for March delivery closed at 0.5288, exceeding the previous life-of-contract settlement high of 0.5243. &quot;There's literally nothing to stop the dollar from falling further&quot; against the mark as long as the U.S. and West German central banks don't intervene in the foreign exchange market, said Dennis Gartman, president of Gartman Financial Services Inc. of Portsmouth, Va. He added that the mark, Swiss franc and the yen all broke out of technical price patterns, indicating that traders following price trends are likely to drive these currency futures higher over the near term.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices, led by platinum, surged in reaction to the lower dollar, higher oil prices and increased bullion buying, traders said. The metals partly were &quot;playing catch-up with the currencies. You can't ignore the freefall in the dollar,&quot; said Richard Maseri, chief executive officer and senior trader at Private Securities Corp. in Miami. Late in the session, prices retreated from their highs on profit-taking, traders said, but still closed with strong gains. Platinum futures prices for January delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange jumped $9.10 an ounce to $530. &quot;Investors still have the feeling that if a market could explode, it would be platinum,&quot; a gold trader in New York said. On the Commodity Exchange in New York, February gold contracts rose $2.70 an ounce to $410.20 and March silver prices closed at $5.60 an ounce, up 5.5 cents. Most of the action in gold stemmed from floor traders, or those trading for their own accounts, and commission houses. There was little European or Middle Eastern interest, traders said. Many gold traders &quot;were trading tick for tick with platinum,&quot; said Sal Busacca, a bullion trader for Mocatta Metals Corp. in New York.    COFFEE: Traders' perception that Brazil has burdensome supplies of coffee and may become a more active seller sent futures prices tumbling to life-of-contract lows. The March contract settled at $1.274 a pound, a decline of 5.57 cents. The close was only 0.05 cent above the low of the day. Brazil's holding of about 500,000 bags of African Robusta coffee acquired last fall from matured futures contracts in London continued to occupy traders' interest. Speculation continued, as it has since late last year, that Brazil might seek to sell this coffee, which is believed to be stored in Trieste, Italy, rather than pay to ship it to Brazil. A lack of roaster demand for green beans also depressed prices, analysts said. Roasters usually carry a supply of four to six weeks, one analyst said, &quot;but now they're more likely in the lower end of that range. They are going to let the market come to them and they aren't going to do anything to disturb the decline. They believe prices are still too high and aren't going to create any support by buying significant quantities,&quot; the analyst added.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Corn futures prices rallied, as Arctic weather in Europe and the Soviet Union prompted traders who had sold contracts short to buy back contracts to cover their positions. The bitterly cold weather, which tends to boost livestock feeding requirements, touched off rumors that the Soviets are in the market for U.S. corn. Soybean oil futures rose sharply, as talk of flooding in Malaysia boosted palm oil prices. Soybean oil and palm oil compete in world markets. Soybean futures rose, while wheat futures closed mixed.    ORANGE JUICE: Cold weather and reports of scattered frost in the northern section of Florida's citrus belt Sunday night triggered buying of frozen concentrate futures. The March contract price rose almost 3.5 cents a pound to $1.265 before giving up part of the advance to close about 1.5 cents higher. The selling occurred when it became evident that no damage had taken place, but &quot;the concern remains,&quot; said Judy Weissman, analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., New York. But Michael Palmerino, meteorologist for Weather Services Corp., Bedford, Mass., said that &quot;there is really very little threat&quot; to the citrus crop. </TEXT></DOC>