<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880113-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Portable Phones Are Prompting Change in Business and Life Styles </HL><AUTHOR> William M. Bulkeley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEL </IN><TEXT>   William Joy, a vice president at Sun Microsystems Inc., used to get impatient cooling his heels in office lobbies. No more. &quot;Now I can step outside, whip out my portable phone and make calls,&quot; he says. &quot;For people who are truly workaholics, it's a benefit.&quot;    Hand-held cellular telephones like Mr. Joy's are the latest techno-toys starting to spread through the business world. Although they are still rare, the growing number of dedicated users say they make a more profound change in life styles than even car-based mobile phones.    &quot;I think they're the greatest thing to come along since wheels,&quot; says O'Donald Carroll, general manager of CBA Security Services Inc., a Las Vegas company that has given portable cellular phones to all its executives and supervisors. Handling security for prize fights and events like the Jerry Lewis Telethon, &quot;you have celebrities that have to be coordinated,&quot; he says. &quot;You can't stop and walk 20 yards to a pay phone to get in touch.&quot;    Fans say that the increasingly common cellular car phones are just a technological way station en route to personal pocket phones. &quot;Car phones are simply a resting point for this technology,&quot; says Daniel R. Croft, general marketing and sales manager for Centel Cellular Co., a Chicago unit of Centel Corp. &quot;We're headed for people phones -- not car phones or house phones.&quot;    That doesn't mean it's time to junk the wall unit in the kitchen. (Portable cellular phones aren't related to home portables, which work from a base unit.) Even enthusiasts concede that portables have some drawbacks that will prevent them from capturing a substantial portion of the phone market for several years.    The first is price. Even the cheapest models cost about $1,500. (By contrast, car phones cost as little as $500.) And operating charges average about $150 a month.    Reception on a portable phone can be plagued by static or sudden disconnection when the user is on the move. And current models are a bit big for most pockets -- unless you're Kareem Abdul Jabbar. The phones are slightly larger than standard telephone handsets and weigh between 18 ounces and two pounds. Most people carry them in briefcases.    Finally, some users have found that they don't need to be -- or don't want to be -- in touch all the time. Stuart Crump Jr., who edits Cellular Sales andamp; Marketing, an industry newsletter in Oakton, Va., says: &quot;I don't carry my portable phone with me much locally. I leave it in the car or at home. I have a car phone. It's much more convenient to carry a small pager than a two-pound phone. The first year I carried it everywhere. I ruined a belt.&quot;    Damaged clothing aside, most owners say the portable phones' usefulness transcends their limitations. In the Los Angeles area, police are experimenting with them. In hostage situations they make it easier for police on the scene to call a hostage-taker holed out in a building. Florida police have reported that criminals are using portable cellular phones to coordinate drug deals. In the movie &quot;Wall Street,&quot; insider-trader Gordon Gekko uses a cellular phone to place orders for stocks, presumably to foil wiretaps.    A portable phone can also help bring wet and frustrated chief executive officers in from the cold. When John Roach, chairman and chief executive of Tandy Corp., arrived early at a darkened Boston restaurant on a rainy evening, he reached into his raincoat, pulled out a portable phone sold through his company's Radio Shack stores, and dialed the two-button code to reach his secretary in Fort Worth, Texas. She promptly called his local host, Jonathan Rotenberg, president of the Boston Computer Society, who says he called the restaurant and &quot;asked them to go out and admit the angry man with the Texas accent.&quot;    Portable phones have been around as long as cellular car phones. But sales have grown slowly because of high price and performance limitations. Herschel Shosteck, a Silver Spring, Md., market researcher, says his surveys of 300 dealers in major markets indicate that hand-held phones had a 5.7% share of the cellular-phone market as of last June. That would indicate annual sales of about 27,000 units. He adds that sales are rising because of the introduction of some cheaper models. So far, most buyers of portable phones have been small businesses and professionals.    Cellular phones use radio frequencies to transmit to antennas set up around most big American cities. When a user moves from one cell to another, computerized switching equipment passes the call along without interruption.    Battery strength is a major constraint on hand-held models. Most of the weight is in the rechargeable batteries. Even so, they can only transmit for 45 minutes or remain on standby, ready for callers, for up to eight hours. Experienced users carry a couple of backup batteries.    Portable phone batteries typically deliver just one-fifth the three watts of power used by a mobile cellular phone that is hooked to a car battery. The lower power sometimes means static-laden reception. Moreover, calls are more likely to be accidentally disconnected, especially when a user is moving. &quot;The power deficiency becomes profound when you're handed from cell to cell. It just hangs up. It can be very frustrating,&quot; says Darrell Johnson, president of Downey Communications Co., a cellular phone dealer in Downey, Calif.    While portable phones don't work as well in cars as do car phones, they do work. Financier Bernard Cornfeld says that he replaced his old mobile phone with a portable because &quot;I found I was using the car with the phone all the time, even though I have several cars. Now, one phone is applicable to all of my cars.&quot;    They also work, to some degree, on trains and in planes and taxis. Michael Kolowich, a Lotus Development Corp. vice president, says he carries his when he goes to New York on business. When traffic makes him late, he can call his appointments. &quot;The worst thing about being late is the anxiety about the people you're visiting. This eliminates it,&quot; he says.    While the phones often don't work within steel-framed buildings, they usually work near windows or outer walls. Edward Juge, a Tandy Corp. marketing manager, recalls a moment in a federal office building when he was looking for a customer in a maze of corridors. He finally pulled out his phone and called the man, who poked his head out of a nearby cubicle and was astonished to see Mr. Juge.    The phones also let people receive calls when they are away from their own phones. Business people who travel a lot from city to city are among the biggest fans of portable cellular phones. &quot;Frequent fliers are the No. 1 customers,&quot; says Sandy Queen, sales manager for Technophone Corp., the Plainview, N.Y.-based arm of Technophone Ltd., the British maker of an 18-ounce, $2,495 portable. Mr. Queen sometimes leaves messages for people to call him when he is stuck in an airport lounge where incoming calls aren't allowed on pay phones.    Long-distance incoming calls are often impractical, because they require the caller to know what county the phone owner is in, as well as a special &quot;roamer&quot; number. Such calls are also expensive, because the phone owner pays a charge for incoming calls as well as outgoing calls.    Not to mention the potential for embarrassment. Mr. Crump, the editor of Cellular Sales andamp; Marketing, recalls attending a conference in Phoenix, Ariz., when his pocket phone started ringing. &quot;I was sitting in the front row, and everyone in the room kind of looked at me,&quot; he says. Now, Mr. Crump leaves his phone turned off and carries a pocket pager that displays telephone numbers to be called when it's convenient. </TEXT></DOC>