<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0107 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Chip Consortium: Before Congress Antes Up...---By Michael S. Malone</HL><DD> 11/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Anyone having a passing acquaintance with the brief, but lively, history of the U.S. semiconductor industry must have chuckled a few months back at the announcement of Sematech, an industry-wide manufacturing research consortium 50% funded by taxpayers.    After all, these chipster gunslingers had spent the last 20 years using every trick they knew, legitimate and otherwise, to put each other into early graves. Now they were going to join hands around the campfire and sing songs about the glories of teamwork? Come on.    But something extraordinary happened this May. The Semiconductor Industry Association announced that its board had unanimously approved a $250 million-per-year funding and operating plan for Sematech. That meant that IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Harris, National Semiconductor, Motorola, Texas Instruments, Intel and American Micro Devices, to name a few, were willing not only to work together towards a common goal, but even put their own money into it.    What would make U.S. chip makers forget old feuds and become willing to share secrets and currency? Fear.    &quot;It shows you just how frightened the U.S. semiconductor industry really is,&quot; says Lewis M. Branscomb, director of the science, technology and public policy program at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. In the past decade, the Japanese have made devastating inroads into the world's semiconductor markets, once America's private domain. The major Japanese marketing thrust has been in memory chips (they now own 60% of that business), traditionally the entree product and the &quot;cash cow&quot; of the chip business.    This isn't the only squeeze on the established U.S. chip makers. As integrated circuits become more sophisticated -- that is, as they come to more and more resemble complete computers on silicon -- the job of designing the precise landscape of circuitry is increasingly being assumed by the &quot;systems&quot; customer.    Thus, the semiconductor industry is returning to what it once was: a chemical processing business -- albeit with much more complex processes. Shrewd industry players have known this for some time, which is why the '80s have seen the birth of more than one hundred new little U.S. chip companies. These new firms (some of them now up in the hundreds of millions of dollars in annual sales) have been singularly successful at helping customers design custom circuits, then shipping those designs out to be fabricated at one of the numerous &quot;silicon foundries&quot; popping up on the Pacific Rim. While these new chip companies are certainly making money for the U.S. economy, they are not contributing to sustaining long-term U.S. predominance in semiconductor technology.    Hence Sematech. As now planned, this quarter-billion-dollar venture will be funded half by industry (apportioned by company size) and half by local, state and federal government. Its charter will be to strengthen the U.S.'s ability to manufacture semiconductors by conducting research on advanced manufacturing techniques, testing these techniques on a real production line, then adapting those techniques to real-life, high-volume production. Participation is limited to U.S. chips houses with on-shore fabrication (in other words, to the biggest companies) and to U.S. makers of semiconductor manufacturing equipment.    The participating companies are committed to anteing up. A search has begun for a chief executive. And the site-selection process is sufficiently far along to produce the usual interstate squabbling (36 states, 100 sites), and, in the case of California, finger pointing over who was to blame for a second-rate presentation. While in the current volatile economy nothing is guaranteed, and a congressional vote on an appropriations bill for Sematech is due in the next few weeks, it now seems likely that the consortium will actually happen.    Nevertheless, before Congress ponies up its approximately $100 million annual share of the governmental contribution through 1992 and joins in the sing-along, perhaps it might want to take advantage of its last chance to make sure it is investing in a successful venture.    Here are some questions it might ask of Sematech -- and of itself:    Is it the right project? Probably. Some people, notably T.J. Rodgers of new chip maker Cypress Semiconductor, have suggested the money might be better spent by dividing it up into $10 million chunks distributed as venture capital to new startups. A cute idea, but the idea of Sematech is not to create more chip companies, but to support chip making equipment firms. Even there, the idea is to advance existing processes, not come up with new competitors building variations on the same old stuff. Besides, who would distribute this venture capital? Congress? The Pentagon?    Will Sematech address the right subjects? According to Electronics magazine, to lure IBM and Texas Instruments into the fold the consortium had to make some compromises. One was to shift the demonstration project from dynamic RAMs to static RAMs -- a shift that may prove telling in years ahead. The second compromise was to sharply cut back on production volumes. Since cost determinations, as well as many of the &quot;bugs&quot; that hurt yield rates, appear only in full-scale production, Sematech runs the risk of producing uncommercial results.    Congress should be making sure that this shift in technology tracks with Sematech's avowed goals, and that Sematech's new production levels will result in products and processes transferable to real-life applications.    Are the companies really committed? The money would suggest they are. But there are also rumors of company executives muttering that they might not send their best engineers to work on this project. Equally, there is the very real concern that when it comes time for all of the participants to hand over their manufacturing knowledge to the project, some may choose not to reveal some proprietary processing tricks.    How does one defend against this? Perhaps by using fear-driven peer pressure. If it is true, as Harris Semiconductor President Jon Cornell has said, that &quot;our only choice as an industry is to try (Sematech) or die,&quot; then members should have a good reason for self-enforcement.    Is Sematech fair? Not especially. Some have suggested Sematech is merely an elaborate bailout for aging semiconductor companies that can't keep up. There is a lot of truth to that. But these are the only companies we've got. The new custom houses aren't going to help us keep a manufacturing edge on the Japanese. Furthermore, some of the participants in Sematech -- IBM, Hewlett-Packard, etc. -- are among the best companies in U.S. business. It also must be remembered that the U.S. chip companies haven't been playing on a level field against the Japanese.    If the consortium does its job, the biggest winner will be the U.S. semiconductor equipment industry. This hard-working, increasingly beleaguered business is the Willy Loman of the electronics world; always the first into a recession and the last out. If Sematech produces results it will be a boon to the equipment business and build a strong bulwark against a growing overseas threat. Congress should make sure these results are fairly disseminated throughout the semiconductor equipment industry.    Is Sematech too parochial? Yes. Electronics industry marketing guru Regis McKenna argues that Sematech can achieve its goals only if its work is passed on to America's universities. &quot;That's where our future engineers come from,&quot; he says. Adds Mr. Branscomb: &quot;Only two or three universities in this country are currently interested in process technology. This has to be increased.&quot;    Sematech is planning to do some of this through its Semiconductor Research Corp. wing. Congress has turned down two bills in recent years in support of manufacturing education; perhaps it might show its new commitment by targeting some of its Sematech funding for university research grants as well.    Is Sematech secure? The story of the semiconductor industry is one of copying each other's ideas, entering into joint ventures with avowed enemies, and hiring employees of competitors to get the proprietary knowledge in their heads. What's to keep a trusting engineer from sitting in a restaurant and blabbing all of Sematech's secrets? Not much. Congress should demand a serious security program. Otherwise it will find itself subsidizing not only Japan's, but France's, Taiwan's, Israel's and the Soviet Union's semiconductor programs.    Is this the kind of thing the government should be putting its money into? It is on this point that even some true believers in Sematech break from the party line. There is an understandable fear that Congress and the Defense Department, having put up all this money -- all federal money will be passed to Sematech through the Pentagon -- simply won't be able to keep their hands off the project. That, most agree, would be the death of Sematech.    One of the men in the Defense Department most responsible for the Sematech funding is Robert McCormick, deputy assistant secretary for production support and a former investment banker at Morgan Stanley. Says Mr. McCormick: &quot;My view is that if we can accomplish anything it will be to get these people together. The Pentagon supports Sematech on the basis that electronics is crucial to the defense industry. But we don't want to control Sematech, or to set its agenda -- only to make sure that whatever is developed there gets infused into America's industrial base.&quot;    Mr. McCormick understands. But what about all those generals and admirals and crusading congressmen on whom Sematech's future depends? Ultimately, it comes down to this: Does Congress have the wisdom to fund Sematech and then stay out of its way? And is the Defense Department willing to have its money go to basic research for which it will be only a secondary beneficiary?    ---   Mr. Malone has written for the Journal and elsewhere on Silicon Valley. </TEXT></DOC>