<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0005 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Help for the Stranger in a Foreign Land---By John Lenkey III</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The challenge of managing foreign nationals can present itself in three ways: When a U.S. company sets up business abroad; when it hires foreigners in the U.S., and when it is acquired by foreign owners. Of concern to U.S. managers is whether they will be accepted and respected as competent managers either overseas or by foreigners working in the states.    To begin, let's examine how U.S. managers handle subordinates overseas. To understand these subordinates one must look at their motives in working for a non-local company. Play to your employee's interests (trips abroad, for example, can fulfill a desire to travel). But beware the native who bad-mouths his homeland. He may be ready to emigrate. Your unit needs a native manager if it's to be properly integrated into the marketplace. Find a stable manager who will stay put.    Next, there is the nationalism phenomenon. When you place an Englishman in a French operation, or a Swiss in a Korean one, a strange thing can happen: Non-nationals abroad tend to become even more nationalistic than they were at home; your Swedish employee in Belgium may act more &quot;Swedish&quot; than if he were at home in Stockholm. A smart manager will take this into account and use it to his advantage: He will reinforce individual national traits when giving praise.    One must avoid strict stereotyping, but certain national characteristics have been noted more than once and may suggest ways of accomodation. For example, for many Brazilians, direct orders are a slap in the face, to which they respond with the threat of leaving work and &quot;going to the beach.&quot; Thus, never order a Brazilian to do something, suggest instead. Japanese generally respond to short-term assignments better than distant goals. Thus, be specific -- if you think you have loaded in a week of work, separate it into five daily tasks. Koreans, I've found, can be commanded as if they were Americans. Concerning Israelis, Yitzhak Shamir, now the premier, advised me in 1985: &quot;If you have seven Israelis in a meeting, you will have 12 opinions.&quot; Thus, don't ever use a committee for decisions in Israel.    One must always avoid using one's own criteria for success when promoting foreigners. My own blunder occurred in Belgium. I decided to promote Omer, a product engineer who had developed a good flair for customer contact and sales. Applying U.S. procedures, I promoted him to marketing manager. You wouldn't believe the howling reaction! Apparently, Belgians feel engineering has more status than marketing. We found a new title. Kenneth J. Matejka, a behavioral psychologist at the University of Richmond, has a suggestion: &quot;Make sure your reward is not punishment, and vice versa, before applying it, especially cross-culturally.&quot;    Pass this along to an American manager going overseas. The manager -- and his spouse -- will have to learn not to consider &quot;wrong&quot; what is merely different. They must listen, and think a lot before acting. At the same time, they must pledge not to &quot;go native.&quot; I have met American presidents of Japanese subsidiaries who embarrassed both sides by trying to become more Japanese than the Japanese.    When transferring an American overseas, I suggest a contract stipulating a three-year minimum stay to overcome the roller coaster of euphoria on arrival, depression after four months, then stabilization, with rising performance by the end of the first year. Five years should be the maximum, or the transfer becomes permanent. As part of the contract the U.S. company is generally wise to guarantee return to the home office upon completion of the assignment. Unless the manager is promised a job in the U.S. at a level he probably would have earned if he had stayed home, it will be difficult to recruit a good candidate for the job abroad.    Finally, don't pay your U.S. manager via your foreign subsidiary. Local managers, generally paid on a lower level, will get wind of your American manager's salary and want more for themselves. Pay your employee through a U.S. bank, so he can convert only the cash he needs.    When it comes to managing non-Americans in the U.S., the key is maintaining proper respect for your employees' culture. A Chesterfield County, Va., joint venture that makes electrical products provides a good example. Swiss and Germans are the owners, but the employees are almost entirely (legal) Vietnamese. Because management reinforces their nationality and helps them become Americans -- including use of subsidized education -- their productivity is exceptional.    If your U.S. firm is acquired by a foreign company, the international-operations department loses its authority, and research and development may be axed in favor of the new master's priorities. If you survive the almost-inevitable downsizing, it would pay off for you to bone up immediately on the national preferences of the acquiring company and learn all about the work ethics. In the case of a Japanese buy-out, all you have to do is work 10 hours each day, eat lunch quickly, and come in on Saturdays to do follow-up. Don't take sick leave or vacation days, do not complain -- and never have an extramarital affair. Come to think of it, had you worked that hard for your U.S. boss, your company probably would not have been sold.    ---   Mr. Lenkey, a Richmond, Va.-based business consultant, is an adjunct professor at the University of Virginia's McIntire School of Comerce. </TEXT></DOC>