<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881117-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ESTONIA'S PARLIAMENT DECLARED the Baltic republic &quot;sovereign.&quot;    The officials in Tallinn rejected Kremlin plans to modify the Soviet Union's constitution, saying the proposed amendments would restrict the rights of individual Soviet republics. The &quot;declaration of sovereignty,&quot; which includes the right to veto Soviet laws, stops short of total independence. It calls for a treaty to be negotiated with Moscow to &quot;determine the further status of Estonia.&quot; The vote on the declaration came after a day of debate by deputies from the Communist Party and Estonian government.    The passage of the proclamation is considered an unprecedented act of defiance, and it was uncertain how Soviet authorities would react to the move.    ---   Benazir Bhutto claimed victory in Pakistan's first open elections since 1977 as early returns showed her populist party defeating a nine-party conservative alliance in Sind province and leading in Punjab. At stake were 215 of 237 parliamentary seats. Bhutto is seeking to become the first woman elected leader of a Moslem nation.    ---   Israel's army confined nearly 900,000 Palestinians to their homes in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, but Arab youths defied the orders and clashed with troops. In Washington, the State Department said the PLO's statement implicitly recognizing Israel fell short of U.S. conditions for talks with the group.    Labor Party ministers in Israel rejected any secondary role in a government led by Prime Minister Shamir's rightist Likud bloc. The officials, however, didn't rule out joining a left-right coalition on equal terms.    ---   Leftists in Brazil surged ahead for control of major cities as ballots were counted from Tuesday's nationwide municipal voting. A poll showed socialist or center-left parties defeating the governing party in Brazil's central and southern regions, leaving the country facing a year of deep political uncertainty.    ---   Poland's Catholic Church accused the country's Communist leaders of blocking talks with the Solidarity trade union aimed at achieving national reconciliation. In what was considered its harshest attack in years on the Warsaw government, the church also criticized plans to close the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk, birthplace of Solidarity.    ---   Reagan met with British Prime Minister Thatcher at the White House. The British leader, bidding farewell to Reagan after eight years in office, said his presidency was &quot;one of the greatest in America's history.&quot; Thatcher also greeted Bush, saying the Western alliance was &quot;very fortunate&quot; to have him as Reagan's successor.    ---   New research indicates that some people with &quot;safe&quot; blood cholesterol levels still may run a high risk of heart disease, a finding that may overturn cholesterol guidelines released just last year. Four new studies suggest heart disease can strike individuals with especially low amounts of the body's &quot;good&quot; cholesterol.    Birth-control pill users face double the usual chance of heart disease, doctors report in the New England Journal of Medicine. But women who have stopped using oral contraceptives don't have any greater risk than women who never used the pills.    ---   A U.S. bishops group voted to reject a draft Vatican document questioning the authority of associations such as theirs, but only after confrontational language was removed from the rejection statement. The vote by the National Conference of Catholic Bishops came at a meeting in Washington.    ---   Tornadoes churned through the South and Midwest killing at least seven people and injuring dozens. The twisters took their worst toll in Arkansas, where National Guardsmen helped search for those trapped in rubble and to clean up damaged homes and buildings. The same weather system also caused the season's first major snowstorm.    ---   The chief U.S. arms negotiator said the superpowers had made &quot;a tremendous amount of progress&quot; in the latest fourmonth round of talks aimed at a treaty to reduce long-range arms. The talks adjourned Tuesday in Geneva, with many differences between the U.S. and Soviet Union still unresolved, said Max Kampelman.    ---   Sudan's government and rebels signed an agreement that could end the country's civil war, which has left millions of Sudanese homeless and starving. The accord calls for a cease-fire, a freeze on plans to implement Islamic law and a constitutional conference to decide the nation's future.    ---   The Census Bureau estimated that the median age in the U.S. will climb to 39 years by the year 2010, the highest point ever. The bureau said the maturing of the massive post-World War II generation is combining with the group's relatively small production of offspring. The nation's median was 31.7 years, according to a 1986 census. </TEXT></DOC>