<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0082 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:On the Trail of America's Rarest Gamebird---By Michael Pearce</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Ashland, Kan.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The four men moved quickly and quietly, creating a 100-yard line that moved across a seemingly endless expanse of virgin prairie to the south of Dodge City. In front of them a zealous golden retriever bounded over the short, sprawling sagebrush and around the knifelike blades of yucca cactus.    Thirty minutes and a half-mile from their vehicles, the hunters found what they were looking for. The first flock of the gray birds, a quintet that flushed in unison, rose out-of-range along the side of a ridge to the east of guide Mike Smyth and his three gunners.    Changing direction, the hunters worked their way along that same ridge. Another small flock of birds lifted and shots were fired, but the targets, all untouched, were out of sight in seconds.    Farther down the rise a brace of birds flushed cackling between two of the hunters, a pair of shots sounded and both of the fowl tumbled. One was found easily; the other was eventually rousted from a clump of thick sage by the golden.    The hunters stood for several minutes admiring the lesser prairie chickens, carefully running their fingers over the birds' brown-and-gray-barred feathers. Smoothed and preened, the birds were carefully tucked away for a trip to a taxidermist.    Hunters from a century ago would have scoffed at this special treatment. But for prairie chickens, it has been a long hundred years.    There are four types of prairie chickens, all of them members of the grouse family and the genus Tympanuchus (for the drum-like air sacs on their necks), none of them flourishing. The heath hen of the northern Atlantic seaboard followed the path of the passenger pigeon into extinction. Another, the Attwater's prairie chicken of the gulf coast grasslands, once faced a similar fate but has been preserved in very limited numbers.    At their peak, greater prairie chickens occupied a huge tract of land from mid-Texas as far north as central Alberta and as far east as Ohio. Now there are only small, carefully monitored remnant flocks in most states. Oklahoma, Nebraska, South Dakota and Kansas are the only states with huntable numbers of greater prairie chickens.    Lesser prairie chickens once flourished on the sandsage prairies from the southwestern quarter of Kansas well down into Texas and southeastern New Mexico. That once-continuous range currently shelters little more than scattered pockets of birds, often many miles apart.    The history of lesser prairie chickens is full of highs and lows. Surprisingly, it started with an ecological trough. Early explorers made little if any mention of prairie chickens. But with the arrival of civilization came enormous numbers of prairie chickens.    Some think that the increase was due to the advent of agriculture and the resulting creation of a winter food supply. Most believe that once hunters had eliminated the buffalo, the chickens were able to expand their range.    Settlers relied heavily on the dark, moist meat of the prairie chickens rather than eat their own egg-producing domesticated fowl. Market gunning flourished, with prairie chickens bringing as much as 20 cents a pound in eastern markets.    But by the turn of the century, the population began to plummet. Commercial harvesting was stopped and sport hunting curtailed. Still, the slide continued.    Prairie chickens in general are survivors. Nature itself has a hard time doing them in. They easily survive, roosting in snow drifts in the same cold winter weather that leaves bobwhites frozen in clusters. Prairie chickens will fly nonstop 25 miles one way to feed and, if needed, can subsist only on the buds of cottonwood trees.    What prairie chickens can't stand, however, is to be without their native habitat. &quot;The tilling of the soil is really what hurt the lesser prairie chicken population,&quot; said Mr. Smyth, a rancher-guide. &quot;The virgin soil that resulted from breaking the native prairie was excellent for growing grain crops, but once that prairie was gone so were its prairie chickens.&quot;    Now, thanks to a depressed agricultural economy, prairie-chicken habitat and numbers have stabilized, and hunting is good for the few who take advantage of it.    &quot;I worked as a game warden in this area for six years and never checked a prairie chicken hunter,&quot; said Mr. Smyth as he drove through the ranch land surrounding this southwest Kansas town, &quot;and this is some of the premier lesser prairie chicken country in the state or, for that matter, the nation.&quot;    The lack of attention isn't due to a lack of birds. During an average day spent hunting prairie chickens, Mr. Smyth estimates his hunters can see in excess of 200 prairie chickens. Many will be out of range but there are always more than enough to offer good gunning at the sporting targets that can fly at speeds up to 70 m.p.h. when alarmed.    Instead, local hunters opt for the area's fantastic quail or pheasant hunting, which share most of the prairie chicken's three-month season (November through January). Out-of-area gunners, such as those guided by Mr. Smyth that sunny November day, often opt for a combination hunt.    Mr. Smyth and the three hunters continued their ridge-top hunt and within minutes were in the midst of more flushing prairie chickens. The hunter at the left of the line, the one who had yet to bag a bird, was quick to score. All watched happily as the flaxen dog gingerly retrieved the male prairie chicken to hand and sat proudly with the regal gamebird -- America's rarest -- in front of the successful gunner.    ---   Mr. Pearce is a free-lance outdoors writer based in Manhattan, Kan. </TEXT></DOC>