<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:After INF, Review NATO Doctrine---By Michael Stuermer</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><DATELINE> ERLANGEN, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Deterrence, said Frenchphilosopher Andre Glucksmann, is communication between thosewho can't communicate. When the NATO Council of Ministerspresented the Harmel Report in December 1967, their goal wasto overcome this gloomy logic. Now is the time to rethinkthat piece of foreign-policy architecture, and consider how aHarmel Report should look now.   The search for peace begun in 1945 ended with the Cold War. The Western decision was creation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. When Gen. Dwight Eisenhower was asked at the time of NATO's formation how long he expected American troops would stay in Europe, his answer was four to five years. But NATO was more than an episode. The organization became the centerpiece of an international structure of peace and stability in the Western Hemisphere.    By the mid-1960s, the question of NATO's future arose. What role, wondered members, should North Americans, Europeans and the Federal Republic of Germany play in the next decades? Could international security be based entirely on detente? At that point the U.S. was largely preoccupied with the problems of the Vietnam War. On the larger East-West stage, both superpowers, frightened by the Berlin and Cuba crises, sought an accord that would strengthen their shared nuclear monopoly and allow them to embark on a program of effective nuclear-arms control. The West also needed an answer to the ominous Soviet formula of peaceful coexistence in conjunction with continuing ideological attack. Gen. Charles de Gaulle's departure from the military integration of NATO, for all its disruptive repercussions, rested on the assumption that east of Strasbourg friendly troops would continue to guard French security, and west of Le Havre American missiles would cover France from behind.    The Soviets, however, did the most to change the situation. Their new control of the hydrogen bomb, and the arrival of the Sputnik (shot into the air with an intercontinental missile) made NATO's policy of &quot;massive retaliation&quot; questionable. France's &quot;adieu&quot; to NATO troops freed the way for the move toward &quot;flexible response.&quot; NATO made a virtue out of a necessity. The sudden outbreak of the Six-Day War in the Near East raised the stakes by reminding the world of the thin line between peace and war. The overriding question was &quot;what structure after NATO?&quot; Would Bonn's Ostpolitik cause ripples in the heart of Europe and would the internal contradictions of NATO force the allies apart?    It was to the credit of the Belgian foreign minister, Pierre Harmel, that he took initiative in 1966 and led the production of the 1967 report, &quot;The Future Tasks of the Alliance.&quot; Often quoted, rarely read, this first great NATO balance sheet still yields much political wisdom. It was made up of a series of &quot;on-the-one hand&quot;/&quot;on the other hand&quot; arguments: It sought the assurance of defensive capabilities and arms control; fewer weapons, but that reduction with a stable balance; deterrence, modified through a cooperative coexistence. The report took up the Germans' warning that crises would loom as long as the question of Europe's structure -- the structure of Germany in particular -- remained unsolved. The North Atlantic ministers wanted firmness, in order to allow for change. Balance of power was to assure &quot;stability, security and confidence.&quot;    Even if the report wasn't exactly in the language of operative politics, it served for 20 years as a yardstick of reason. It provided a security policy that gave defense legitimacy and East-West negotiations a chance.    Today, as 20 years ago, it is time for a rethinking of NATO policy. There are times when pragmatism is the best guide. And there are times -- like now -- when reflection on principle is important. The nuclear powers are on the move. But which of the two will inherit the earth is undecided. The answer is still -- more than the West Germans tend to like -- to be found in the heart of Europe. However, arms control means, as the Harmel Report pointed out, not the end of the conflict but the continuation of strategy through other means.    The treaty signed recently in Washington on intermediate-range nuclear forces has reduced the West's options more than those of the Soviet Union. The West has to think about the follow-up in political and military terms. In the train of the agreement, painful stock will be taken of the fundamentals of European defense. The most important goal here is clarity in the European-North American dialogue.    The goal now, as was the case of the Harmel Report, is to balance firmness and openness, deterrence and reassurance. The Soviet Union must continue to be measured by her deeds in Central Europe. More important, it is now time to include in the dialogue those new questions capable of uniting -- or dividing -- the world more than ever before -- questions of environmental destruction and energy scarcity, population explosions and the shortage of raw materials.    The Harmel Report showed that leadership doesn't necessarily have to do with the weight or size of a nation, but does have to do with the power of thought and logic. No more time can be lost if the West hopes to find a response to the &quot;new thinking&quot; coming from the Soviet Union. And if we are now entering a strategic &quot;pause&quot; -- as many Soviet experts maintain -- this is a further reason to open the question of the long-term policy within NATO.    A new Harmel Report must address the great questions of the East-West balance. It must also address the relationship of nuclear deterrence and conventional defense. Such a report would have to say, very candidly, that arms control is possible only while sufficient countervailing power to Soviet invasion capability remains in place. A conventional balance alone would not render nuclear deterrence dispensable. Conventional defense and nuclear deterrence can't replace each other. Experience of centuries shows that conventional balance doesn't prevent war.    Experience of the past four decades shows that the existence of nuclear weapons does prevent it. A West European defense without nuclear weapons would put war more into the realm of possible, for it would make war limitable. Dispensing with deterrence, conventional or nuclear, is possible only when conflicts in Europe are first solved. This is a point we are still far from reaching.    A new Harmel Report must not only define a European defense identity. It must also bind North America to that defense. Strategy and arms control must again come into the service of an overriding concept of security. Crisis, stability and detente: you can't have one without the others. For the Federal Republic of Germany, the words of Karl Kaiser, adviser to the chancellor, at the beginning of the missile crisis in 1977 still hold: that fundamental changes in the contents and concerns of international security policy affect the political existence of West Germany. History doesn't repeat herself. But there's nothing to prevent us from learning from her lessons.    ---   Mr. Stuermer, a professor of history, is director designate of the Ebenhausen Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik, a West German think tank. </TEXT></DOC>