<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861231-0001 </DOCNO><HL> McDonnell's Decision to Build New JetTo Create High-Stakes Competitive Fight---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 12/31/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MD BA EUROP UAL AMRAEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   For commercial airplane makers, the war is heating up.    McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s decision to build a new jumbo jet, the MD-11, creates what likely will be a long, high-stakes fight among the three big commercial-aircraft manufacturers in the Western world -- McDonnell Douglas, Boeing Co. and Airbus Industrie, the European consortium. At the least, McDonnell Douglas's decision could trim the high prices that airlines pay for jumbo jets.    But for the three companies, the consequences could be far more drastic. Many analysts, consultants and airline executives doubt that any shakeout would be as bloody as it was in the 1970s, when jumbo-jet competition among Boeing, McDonnell Douglas and Lockheed Corp. hurt Lockheed's financial position and ultimately forced it out of commercial aviation. But they don't think the demand for long-range, jumbo jets -- which in part will come from U.S. carriers replacing their aging wide-body fleets -- profitably will support more than two aircraft makers.    &quot;There has been a good bit of speculation that the world isn't big enough for three,&quot; said Morten Beyer, president of Avmark Inc., an Arlington, Va., consulting firm. &quot;It may well end up with two survivors in the wide-body business.&quot;    The big aircraft makers are turning to wide-body jets (aircraft that have two aisles in the passenger cabin) as the heated competition to sell small jets winds down. Over the past two years, several major airlines placed multibillion-dollar orders for short-range and medium-range planes that gather passengers from small cities and deposit them at major airports. Now, the bigger airlines want to replace the old jumbo jets that fly international routes and between major hubs.    But the demand for new jumbo jets is expected to run below the level of the 1970s, which even then wasn't large enough to profitably support three aircraft makers. Mr. Beyer projects a demand for about 620 long-range, wide-body planes by the year 2000. &quot;That is fairly thin,&quot; he said, noting the industry rule of thumb that aircraft makers have to sell a couple hundred planes before breaking even on a new model.    McDonnell Douglas said it can get its share, though, partly because orders have been good so far. At a news conference yesterday, the St. Louis-based aerospace and defense concern said 12 customers have ordered a total of 52 MD-11s valued at more than $5 billion and have taken options to buy 40 more for more than $4 billion. The company expects to sell 350 MD-11s by the end of the century, based on its own projection that there will be a market for 1,400 long-range, wide-body jets.    &quot;This is probably the strongest launch -- with 92 planes and 12 customers -- of any program,&quot; said Jim Worsham, president of the company's Douglas aircraft division.    In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, McDonnell Douglas closed at $71.50 a share, down $1.125.    McDonnell Douglas has tried to limit its financial risk by signing several partners. Mr. Worsham said the company will make a $500 million nonrecurring investment for the development of the MD-11, which can carry between 276 and 405 passengers as far as 6,600 nautical miles. However, the total development and production cost of the project, which will be shared by the partners, will be far greater.    But McDonnell Douglas faces considerable obstacles. The company doesn't have an order from a U.S. passenger carrier, although it has been trying to secure such an order for 17 months. McDonnell Douglas said it is negotiating with 17 carriers -- four of them domestic carriers, including UAL Inc.'s United Airlines and AMR Corp.'s American Airlines.    But airlines seemed pleased at the prospect of pitting the airplane makers against one another, increasing the airlines' bargaining power. &quot;The more competitors, the more kinds of deals you get,&quot; said Joseph O'Gorman, United's senior vice president for corporate planning.    If McDonnell Douglas gets outbid for orders from U.S. carriers, some industry observers doubt that orders from foreign carriers will be big enough to financially sustain a project the size of the MD-11. Jordan Greene, an airline consultant and editor of a newsletter that follows aircraft orders, said McDonnell Douglas should have built a successor to the DC-10, its old wide-body jet, when the company first started talking about doing so seven years ago.    &quot;If the plane had been committed to production in the early 1980s, it would be strong coming onto the market in the middle 1980s,&quot; Mr. Greene said. By deciding to build the plane so late and in a declining market, McDonnell Douglas executives &quot;have almost proved their ability to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory,&quot; he said.    But if the risks are big for McDonnell Douglas, they are even greater for Airbus. Although the planned Airbus wide-body, the A-340, is heralded as a new, highly advanced plane, it is untried and won't be ready until 1992 -- two years after the first MD-11s are scheduled for delivery. Already, McDonnell Douglas has outmanuevered Airbus for orders from two European airlines.    Airbus was having trouble getting the A-340 built even before McDonnell Douglas entered the market. The four governments that support Airbus have balked at funding the new plane. And the latest developments could increase the political pressure for Airbus to cut its expenses and concentrate more on profits.    Airbus also has had trouble finding a satisfactory engine for the A-340. On Friday, the consortium announced that it will offer a new, propeller-jet hybrid engine with the plane. Airbus said it expects the new engine will give it an edge over McDonnell Douglas.    Nonetheless, Airbus is expected to move ahead with its plans. Airbus said that it assumed McDonnell Douglas would go ahead with the MD-11, and that the market for wide-body, long-range planes is sufficient to support both projects.    &quot;All our planning on . . . already took into account the expectation that MD-11 would be launched,&quot; an Airbus spokesman said. &quot;It isn't something that takes us by surprise.&quot;    Seattle-based Boeing, whose 747 has had the wide-body market virtually to itself in recent years, said it isn't worried by the MD-11. J.C. Longridge, vice president for marketing at Boeing Commercial Airplane Co., said the MD-11 is too large to operate profitably on coast-to-coast routes in the U.S. and doesn't represent a technological advance.    &quot;We recognize there is a market for the MD-11, but we think it is relatively small,&quot; Mr. Longridge said.    Steven Udvar-Hazy, president of International Lease Finance Corp., said the lower cost of the three-engine MD-11 may give McDonnell Douglas an edge in operating cost; the Boeing 747 and the Airbus A-340 have four engines. But Mr. Greene, the airline consultant, said he doesn't expect much effect. &quot;The true competition will come between the MD-11 and the A-340.&quot;    Anticipating the presence of the McDonnell Douglas and Airbus planes, Boeing already is selling an extended-range version of its 767-200, which carries 215 passengers as far as 6,600 nautical miles -- the same distance as the MD-11. Boeing is considering lengthening the plane to accommodate more passengers. It also is building for delivery in 1988 an updated version of the 747, which will be capable of carrying as many as 500 passengers 7,000 nautical miles. </TEXT></DOC>