<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880829-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   JARUZELSKI CALLED for national reconciliation amid Polish strikes.    Poland's Communist leader, in a speech at the close of a two-day Central Committee meeting, criticized the Warsaw government for failing to deal with mounting political and economic tensions that led to the country's strongest wave of strikes since 1981. The strikes continued at ports, shipyards, factories and one mine. Jaruzelski endorsed the idea of a discussion with representatives of workers striking for higher wages and legalization of the Solidarity trade union.    Solidarity founder Lech Walesa was slightly injured in a scuffle as police and troops blocked a march on the strike-bound Lenin shipyard in Gdansk.    ---   THREE JETS CRASHED in West Germany, killing at least 46 people.    Authorities at a U.S. military base in Ramstein said three Italian fighter jets collided during an air show and one crashed into spectators and burst into flames. Hundreds of people were injured, many seriously. The three pilots, members of an aerial stunt team, were among the dead, officials said. Two of the planes crashed away from the crowd, which West German officials estimated at about 200,000 people.    U.S. authorities in Ramstein said that it was unclear what caused the crash, and that investigators were trying to determine the sequence of events.    ---   Quayle predicted that he would &quot;eventually be an asset&quot; to the Republican ticket, despite controversies over his military record and personal life. The vice presidential nominee also told the Associated Press that he hoped to soon release his income-tax returns. Democrat Bentsen, meanwhile, defended Dukakis's views on the military.    ---   Students in Burma formed a union in defiance of the law. The move followed massive student-led protests this month that toppled hard-line leader Sein Lwin. Authorities in Rangoon, meanwhile, freed more than 4,800 prisoners from the Insein jail two days after a riot and mass escape left nearly 60 people dead and about 100 injured.    ---   Soviet and Chinese diplomats opened talks in Beijing on ending Cambodia's civil war. Details weren't disclosed about the discussions, which are expected to last a week. But a Chinese government newspaper accused Vietnam's Moscow-supported regime of maneuvering to maintain control of Cambodia after it ends its 10-year occupation.    ---   Iran and Iraq resumed peace talks in Geneva after a one-day break. Baghdad blamed Tehran for sabotaging the negotiations and said Iraq was prepared to confront any aggression from Iran. In the Persian Gulf, a U.N. cease-fire observer group reported quiet on the war front, despite accusations by both sides of truce violations.    ---   Soviet bloc agents may have obtained access to NATO defense secrets at a U.S. Army base in Bad Kreuznach for decades before a former U.S. sergeant was charged with spying, a West German newspaper reported. Bonn said last week that former Sgt. Clyde Lee Conrad allegedly sold classified military data since the late 1970s.    ---   Pakistani opposition leaders began talks on new strategies for sharing political power after the death of President Zia. In London, several prominent British newspapers reported that the Islamabad government has concluded that sabotage was to blame for the Aug. 17 plane crash that killed Zia, the U.S. envoy to Pakistan and other officials.    ---   Afghan President Najibullah said the Kabul government would establish peace if &quot;intervention from abroad&quot; ceased, Tass reported. The Soviet news agency also said that four people were killed during an attack Saturday by Afghan rebels on Kabul's airport, and Western diplomats said a transport plane may have been destroyed.    ---   Burundi ruled out any prospect of allowing an international team into the central African country to investigate tribal massacres of thousands of people this month. Burundi's foreign minister also asked the U.N. for $15 million in aid for about 100,000 people left homeless by the violence, in which the army took a prominent role.    ---   Firefighters battled a blaze in an an area near Old Faithful geyser, where smoke has reduced access to parts of Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming and prompted the closure of some park lodgings. Oregon activated about 100 National Guardsmen to fight fires. Forests also burned in Idaho, northern California and Washington state.    ---   The Yonkers City Council refused to change its vote against a housing desegregation plan after a U.S. appeals court upheld fines of as much as $1 million a day. The court approved the contempt fines against the New York City suburb, and the threat of jail against four councilmen who defied an order to implement the housing plan.    ---   Romania's President Ceausescu met with Hungarian Premier Grosz in the Romanian town of Arad for the first summit between the two nations in more than a decade. The talks were expected to focus on Romania's plan to raze thousands of ethnic Hungarian villages to make way for state-run farms.    ---   Israeli police closed a federation of 108 Palestinian charities, accusing it of being a front for the PLO. The raid followed the closing last week of Arab professional associations and a trade union's offices. The crackdown apparently is aimed at preventing the PLO from taking over groups that were controlled by Jordan's King Hussein. </TEXT></DOC>