<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870701-0157 </DOCNO><HL> What If It's Trade That Drives Currencies?---By David Ranson and Marc Miles</HL><DD> 07/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Democrat or Republican, most people take it for granted that a sufficiently cheaper dollar will curb the trade deficit -- albeit after a short delay. What economic belief is more widely held in government, academic life, business and the press?    During President Reagan's first term, the notion that the dollar drives the trade balance was used, as in the past, to blame the widening deficit on an appreciating dollar. This seemed to fit the facts at the time. To date, the exchange-rate policy of Mr. Reagan's second term has been just the flip side of the same view. Talk the dollar down, and the U.S. economy will somehow become more &quot;competitive.&quot;    Some have even suggested that special-interest protectionist pressure can be eased by the across-the-board protection achieved by a cheaper dollar. This &quot;devaluationist&quot; mentality has been supported by expert recommendations for, or predictions of, further decline in the dollar -- including those by the new Fed chairman himself, just prior to his being named.    The failure so far of the deficit to abate much in the face of an extraordinary depreciation in the dollar must ultimately raise doubts. But expert opinion continues to call for more of the same medicine. While conceding the lack of progress is puzzling, commentators for the most part ascribe it to longer than usual delays in the adjustment process (the &quot;J-Curve&quot;).    How long could these delays reasonably be? One year? Two? Three? At some point, surely, credulity is strained. Only a belief so tenaciously held as this could ignore the body of evidence that has accumulated to the contrary.    Consider, for example, the country-by-country pattern of trade imbalances and currency changes. Thanks to the dollar's roller-coaster behavior in the past six years, events have given us two revealing back-to-back tests: a sharp increase from 1980 to 1984, a sharp decline since.    If the standard view is correct, the countries with which the U.S. encountered the largest bilateral deficit increases in 1980-84 should have been those against whose currencies the dollar rose the most -- and so on down the line. But as the actual figures for six major countries demonstrate, the truth is almost exactly the opposite.    Since these figures cover a four-year period, it is difficult to see how any reasonable J-curve delay can explain how the relationship could go so badly wrong. Something else must be at work.    The standard view is also off to a bad start for the period of dollar decline since 1984. If it were correct, the countries with which the U.S. made the most progress in reducing its bilateral deficits should have been those against which the dollar fell the most. Again, through the end of 1986, the latest such breakdown available, the opposite is more nearly true. The bar graphs for both time periods challenge the belief that the dollar drives the deficit in the way usually assumed.    (Despite recent optimism generated by monthly figures that we have reached the end of the J-curve, the overall trade gap for first-quarter 1987 was about as wide as for any quarter of 1986.)    How about a completely different way of looking at the figures? Maybe the boot is on the other foot. What if instead it's the trade imbalance that drives the dollar? This idea may appear upside down to some, yet it can explain the patterns shown in these country comparisons. And it makes more understandable the absence of a material reduction in the U.S. trade deficit currently.    The idea is simple enough. Countries tend to depreciate their currencies against those of the trading partners with which they have sustained worrisome deficits. The greater the worry, or the bigger the deficit, the greater the depreciation.    During the 1980-84 period, several countries, notably France and Italy, had trade-deficit concerns. It's no accident that their currencies declined sharply against strong currencies like the dollar. At that time, the U.S. was preoccupied with other matters, and the dollar was allowed to rise.    By 1984, the trade deficit of the U.S. itself had become the focus of worry. Although professing to let the dollar float according to market forces, the U.S. government responded in the classic fashion, and let the dollar fall.    The dollar's recent weakening is often justified as needed to correct the strengthening that improperly occurred a few years earlier. This doesn't fit either. Why, since 1984, has the dollar fallen most against the yen, a currency with which rough stability prevailed during 1980-84? Surely it was America's bilateral trade imbalance with Japan that drove policy on the dollar-yen ratio.    Other evidence is not hard to find. Close historical analysis indicates that changes in the dollar tend to follow, not lead, changes in the U.S. trade imbalance. Over the long haul, trade-deficit increases are usually associated in practice with a weakening, not a strengthening, dollar.    Past experience also fits the upsidedown view. Over the decades, many strong-currency countries have been surplus-prone (Germany, Japan), whereas weak-currency countries have been deficit-prone (Italy, Britain).    In the last analysis mere evidence, however strong, will not completely refute the standard view. But it is clear enough that the power of currency changes to create or to alter trade imbalances has been much exaggerated. While depreciation may temporarily placate some vocal political forces, its ability to achieve its stated objective is, at best, questionable.    Two conclusions follow. First, the link between the dollar and the trade imbalance is better seen as political rather than economic -- a governmental knee-jerk rather than a result of natural economic forces. Ironically, policy responses to trade surpluses and deficits are much more predictable than the effects that those policy responses are supposed to produce.    Second, applying bad medicine is not necessarily harmless. Complacency about the U.S. inflation rate has until recently overridden the healthy intuition that currency depreciations of the present size can be highly inflationary. However ineffective America's cheapened-dollar policy has been in rebalancing its trade, it may yet be effective in bringing inflation back to center stage.    ---   Messrs. Ranson and Miles are with H.C. Wainwright andamp; Co., Economics, Boston. </TEXT></DOC>