<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0135 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   A 40-year-old executive with a very high-pitched voice sounded like a teen-ager over the phone. Whenever an attorney with a very breathy voice answered the phone, new clients, suspecting he was devious and slippery, shied away. Another lawyer's monotone projected indifference -- even about pet cases. And those many executives who cultivate gravelly voices to project authority and power seem, especially on the phone, just truculent and cold.    Millions are spent each year on business dinners, shows and drinks to gain mutual trust, win contracts and close deals. Yet telephone communication, the power tool of our service economy, is abused by voices that squawk, groan, chirp, squeak and mutter. All those books and seminars on how to use body language are useless when talking blind through a phone line. And what you put in comes out at the other end even worse.    The standard telephone transmits only a poor copy of a voice, notwithstanding fiber optics. Even 78s of Caruso vintage captured tonal qualities better. The phone, not meant to be a hi-fi set, mutes shadings in your voice that can change the sense of your words.    And just as tones of voice mirror your soul, a raspy, hoarse, shrill, thin, breathy, throaty, loud or weak voice can misrepresent you. Despite your good mood, your fixed voice quality may make you sound angry, depressed or smug -- spoiling your impact just when you need the power.    The signals these rigid voice qualities give off are usually unintended. One chief executive's pep talk to managers sounded like a threat, while another's video broadcast, designed to improve contact with employees, wasn't credible. On the phone, where you are solely a voice, miscues can be even worse.    But before we go further, let's dispel stubborn myths about how to improve speech skills. For example, if you read aloud from Shakespeare without coaching, you'll only reinforce your bad habits. If you do breathing and relaxation exercises, practice on isolated sounds or words in lists, or learn to speak with a cork between your teeth, nothing good will happen to your speech because you do none of those things in conversation. In fact, some of them will tense your throat, while others will make you overly self-conscious. And what about tongue twisters? Would you speak better if you could say &quot;toy boat&quot; three times fast?    On to specifics. Here then are some tips on how to clearly communicate your true intentions over the phone:    Since the listener's ear is near the heat of your breath, the phone magnifies the gurgling of phlegm and saliva. If you have that problem, swallow often. The listener will wait. And if you have a soft voice, talk into the mouthpiece without kissing it. When you get too close, your words get fuzzy -- like a drifting FM broadcast. Unless it's obvious that you'll need both hands for notes and papers, don't use the speakerphone; that bare-room echo drains expression from your voice and irritates the listener. Also, most speakerphones cut off the receiver while they are transmitting, so no overlapping communication is allowed. This is unnatural and annoying.    If you talk so loudly that the receiver has to be held at arm's length, you're talking too loud. You must remember that your voice travels at the speed of light over the phone; there's no need to compensate for long distances by raising your voice. Moreover, speech becomes blurred when it's too loud -- like loudspeakers at train and plane terminals. The phone will carry your voice. Your job is to be clear.    You may be surprised that the first principle of clarity is not precise diction, but good phrasing. Peter B. Denes and Elliot N. Pinson of the Bell Laboratories state in the book &quot;The Speech Chain&quot;: &quot;When listening to sentences, we have certain expectations of what words we will hear. Since these contextual cues are not available when we listen to unrelated, isolated words, our understanding drops off.&quot;    But phrasing depends a lot on your ability to produce voice without strain. Check your lower back. The lower spine shouldn't be deeply indented. A swayback results in a lot of chest pressure because it prevents the stomach muscles from controlling breath flow. Also, if you overwork your lips and jaw, you'll double your chin and tighten the corners of your mouth, and that will cause excess tension in the throat.    The throat muscles connect with those of the lips, and when you move the lips uselessly, you trigger excess tensions in the throat. Moreover, none of the 38 English sounds require jaw action, and only 7 sounds -- b, p, v, f, m, w, wh -- require lip action. A basic key to a better voice is your tongue. Control it and your speech will be clearer, and your voice more expressive on the phone, because you'll be taking action out of the throat and putting it where it belongs -- in your mouth.    Assuming your throat is fit, how do you get good phrasing? Link words that belong together. You link by saying the last sound of a word as if it's the first sound of the following word, and so on. And learn to almost crowd out &quot;to,&quot; &quot;and,&quot; &quot;from,&quot; &quot;of,&quot; &quot;the,&quot; &quot;was,&quot; etc., by saying them fast. That makes room for the key words -- the ones you would put into a cablegram. Also, the ends of your sentences shouldn't fade. Imagine the frustration if the last word in this sentence weren't . . . audible.    Finally, if you hunch your shoulder to hold the phone, the tensions in your neck and throat will reduce your control of pitch, quality and tonal expression. If you hold the phone in hand, don't lean too heavily on your elbow. That will tense your shoulder, neck and throat. (This assumes you haven't been able to adjust to being strapped into one of the new headsets.) To keep your larynx free of undue stress, flex your thighs and/or push against the floor with the balls of your feet as you run through phrases. That will displace tensions into big muscles well away from the throat. They can take the strain.    ---   Mr. Proodian is a New York-based speech consultant and assistant professor of speech at Brooklyn College. </TEXT></DOC>