<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870511-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Taiwan Funneled $2 Million to Contras,Sources Say; McFarlane Testifies Today---By Edward T. Pound and David RogersStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Taiwan funneled $2 million into Swiss bank accounts used by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and his associates to fund a covert airlift of arms to Nicaraguan insurgents, according to intelligence sources.    In questioning Gen. Secord during the joint House and Senate hearings into the Iran-Contra affair last week, Sen. Paul Sarbanes (D., Md.) referred to a foreign country that twice used the accounts to assist the Contras.    Sen. Sarbanes didn't identify the origin of the funds but intelligence sources confirmed over the weekend that it was Taiwan and that the amounts totaled $2 million. Taiwan long has been reported to have helped the Nicaraguan Contras, though the size of its contribution wasn't known.    Investigators consider it significant that Taiwan used Gen. Secord's financial network to assist the Contras. They indicated that the funds were directed to the Secord-related accounts by Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, who as a White House National Security Council aide helped run the Iran and Contra operations. Col. North was fired from the NSC in November.    During four days of testimony, Gen. Secord portrayed himself as a private operator and not an agent of the U.S. government. But investigators said that the Taiwan help showed that Gen. Secord's enterprise benefited from its ties to the U.S. government.    The Contras received financial assistance from another foreign source, Saudi Arabia. As reported, Saudi Arabia contributed $32 million to the insurgents in 1984 and 1985, according to a former White House official. Former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, who is scheduled to testify today, is expected to be questioned closely about what he told President Reagan about the Saudi donations.    Meanwhile, the New York Times reported yesterday that Mr. McFarlane intends to tell the committees that President Reagan ordered the NSC staff to arrange support for the Contras after Congress restricted aid in 1984. The Times said Mr. McFarlane would testify that the president didn't specify how the support should be arranged.    According to sources familiar with Mr. McFarlane's version of events, Mr. McFarlane recalled that, in morning meetings with the president in 1984, Mr. Reagan stressed his strong feeling that the U.S. shouldn't abandon the Contras. Mr. McFarlane, they said, said the president didn't make it clear whether he was referring only to non-lethal aid.    Mr. McFarlane has told associates that there was a deliberate decision supported by President Reagan that the NSC staff would replace the Central Intelligence Agency as liasion with the Contras.    Administration officials noted that when Congress stopped U.S. military aid to the Contras in October 1984, two secret presidential directives remained in force ordering the U.S. government to provide some support for the Contras. As a result, the administration was justified in seeking ways that hadn't been specifically prohibited by Congress to aid the Contras, according to Reagan administration officials.    Neither the president nor his aides, on a trip yesterday to commencement exercises at Tuskegee University in Alabama, would be drawn into a discussion of what Mr. McFarlane might say in his testimony.    When he takes the witness chair today, Mr. McFarlane is expected to be asked whether the administration deliberately created the Secord-operated arms network to skirt congressional restrictions on Contra aid. He also is expected to be questioned about the U.S. decision to sell arms to Iran in an effort to win the freedom of American hostages in Lebanon, and about his role in falsifying an administration chronology of the Iran arms sales last November after controversy erupted over the secret sales.    Concerning the Saudi donation, sources close to Mr. McFarlane have said that he briefed the president in detail about the contributions. But, they said, Mr. McFarlane contends that he never personally solicited money from the Saudis. According to this account, Saudi Ambassador Prince Bandar bin Sultan volunteered to help the Contras after Mr. McFarlane explained to him the administration's problems with Congress on the issue of U.S. aid to the insurgents.    According to the sources, Mr. McFarlane contends that his former aide, Col. North, never told him all the details of Gen. Secord's airlift project. But administration and congressional officials said that White House records indicate Col. North kept Mr. McFarlane fully briefed on the Contra aid program, including Gen. Secord's operation, until Mr. McFarlane resigned in December 1985. &quot;Bud (Mr. McFarlane) is going to look just awful,&quot; said one congressional investigator.    In his grueling four days of testimony last week, Gen. Secord insisted that he wasn't a government agent in running the Contra airlift operation and in arranging the sale and transportation of U.S. arms to Iran. &quot;I didn't feel I was an agent of the United States,&quot; Gen. Secord said.    But Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) later challenged Gen. Secord's testimony, citing two NSC documents, including one written by Col. North that described Gen. Secord as an agent of the CIA.    Gen. Secord also portrayed himself as a patriot who wanted to help his country. And he repeatedly denied that he intended to profit from his activities -- a statement that wasn't accepted by many committee members, including some Republicans. Almost $8 million from the Secord operation remains in Swiss bank accounts under the control of one of his business partners.    Gen. Secord, who testified without a grant of immunity from prosecution, said he made the decision to funnel about $3.5 million in profits from the Iran arms sales to the Contras.    He said he didn't know whether Mr. Reagan knew of the diversion, but said he believed the president did. &quot;I felt the president had a pretty good flow of knowledge coming in and he would know,&quot; the general testified.    The Senate committee's special counsel, Arthur Liman, who had relentlessly tried to shake Gen. Secord's account during questioning, told reporters later that the general had shown &quot;an enormous amount of courage&quot; in testifying.    In an unusual twist, Sen. William Cohen (R., Maine) disclosed that the Contras had donated funds in 1985 to help finance a private effort to free American hostages in Lebanon. Over the weekend, Adolfo Calero, leader of the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, told reporters that the contribution amounted to about $50,000.    As the first week of congressional hearings was nearing completion Friday, Col. North made a surprise appearance in U.S. District Court here. Col. North is one of those under criminal investigation, and his court appearance apparently was related to a legal dispute with prosecutors over his cooperation with a grand jury.    ---   John Walcott contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>