<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870526-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   DONOVAN WAS ACQUITTED by a state jury in New York of fraud charges.    The former labor secretary, who resigned his cabinet post more than two years ago, was found innocent of charges of larceny and fraud in a New York City subway construction contract. Seven co-defendants, including executives of Schiavone Construction Co., also were found innocent by the jury, which deliberated for 9 1/2 hours. Donovan and the others were indicted in 1984 on charges stemming from an alleged plan to defraud New York City's transit authority of $7.4 million in connection with the subway project.    The verdict followed the selection Saturday of an alternate juror to replace a panelist who was dismissed after being declared mentally unfit.    ---   U.S. INVESTIGATORS LAUNCHED an inquiry into Iraq's attack on a U.S. ship.    An eight-member team from the Pentagon and State Department arrived in Baghdad in an effort to question the fighter-jet pilot that Iraq said carried out the May 17 missile strike on the USS Stark. It was unclear whether they would be able to meet with the flier. In Bahrain, congressional investigators toured the damaged frigate, and a U.S. senator said fires sparked by the assault destroyed the ship's records. Meanwhile, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are trying to calibrate how much new firepower is needed in the Persian Gulf.    Reagan dedicated Memorial Day to the 37 sailors killed in the attack on the Stark. The bodies of 36 of the seamen are to arrive in Delaware today.    ---   CHUN ACCEPTED the resignations of eight high-ranking government officials.    The South Korean president's entire 26-member cabinet had offered to quit amid protests over a police-torture case. Chun, who accepted the resignations of his prime minister and seven cabinet ministers, decided that the 18 other ministers would keep their posts. Aides had urged Chun to fire some ministers to damp public anger over a purported cover-up in the January death of a student during police interrogation.    Thousands of students staged rallies throughout the nation, with many shouting &quot;down with dictatorship.&quot;    ---   Gorbachev traveled to Bucharest for talks with Romanian President Ceausescu, a vocal East bloc opponent of the Soviet leader's economic and political changes. Separately, the U.S. Embassy said Moscow appears to have stopped jamming Voice of America radio broadcasts.    ---   The Bonn government said a West German negotiator met in Tehran with high-ranking Iranian officials in an attempt to win the release of two West Germans held hostage in Lebanon. Sources said Bonn had agreed to reject a U.S. extradition demand for a Lebanese man wanted in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner.    ---   Fiji's caretaker government met for the first time, but the prime minister ousted in a military coup May 14 refused to recognize the regime and threatened to form a separate nation. The South Pacific nation's governor-general has taken charge until new elections are held in about six months.    ---   Brazilian President Sarney moved to strengthen his grip on the government by making all federal appointments, about 10,000 jobs, subject to his personal approval. Separately, Brazil's gold reserves have fallen recently, indicating that it has been forced to sell gold to raise foreign exchange.    ---   Israel has told Norwegian envoys that Israel doesn't want the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect a shipment of heavy water, which is used in certain kinds of nuclear reactors. Norway will probably press Israel again to accept safeguards that would cover the shipment that Norway sold to Israel in 1959.    ---   The U.S. and its allies are narrowing differences over removing all, or nearly all, nuclear arms in Europe. The areas of agreement could smooth discussions on the issue at next month's economic summit in Venice.    ---   Bush opened the bicentennial celebration of the Constitution. The vice president, joined in Philadelphia by former Chief Justice Burger and 10 current and former governors, declared the document &quot;sound.&quot;    ---   Funeral services were held for two of the 29 people killed Friday in a tornado in Saragosa, Texas. More than 120 people were injured in the tornado, which reduced the farming community to rubble. Two mass funerals were planned for today.    ---   Philippine riot police fired tear gas and water cannon to disperse hundreds of right-wing protesters outside a military garrison near Manila. The demonstrators contended that the May 11 congressional elections, won by a majority of candidates backed by President Aquino, were rife with fraud.    ---   PTL Chairman Falwell said the television ministry would go out of business unless it receives at least $3.2 million by Friday. Falwell told viewers of the PTL Club program that a weekend auction at the Heritage USA retreat raised about $200,000, well below the $2 million goal officials had set.    ---   China reported that at least 92 people have been killed and more than 400 injured in widespread flooding in the southern part of the country over the past several days. As many as 20,000 houses collapsed in the rains in Guangdong province. Meanwhile, thousands of people were evacuated from the path of a fire in northeast China.    ---   Died: John D. McPherson, 64, founder and former president of Airborne Freight Corp., Saturday, in Burlingame, Calif. . . . Hermione Gingold, 89, actress, in New York City, Sunday, of pneumonia. </TEXT></DOC>