<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880714-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. SAID progress had been made toward ending Angola's civil war.    Following two days of talks in New York, Assistant Secretary of State Crocker said representatives of Angola, Cuba and South Africa agreed on the outline of a settlement, which calls for the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola in exchange for South Africa ending its 73-year rule over Namibia. The proposals need the approval of the respective governments. Another meeting was scheduled for early August. The military and political negotiators didn't agree on a timetable for the Cuban pullout.    Crocker said that if the peace process &quot;catches fire,&quot; a detailed settlement of the 13-year war could be completed in &quot;two or three more rounds&quot; of talks.    ---   DUKAKIS MET with black leaders in an effort to mend a rift over Bentsen.    In talks with members of the NAACP and the Congressional Black Caucus, the Massachusetts governor sought to reassure the black leaders over his choice of Texas Sen. Bentsen as his running mate, saying he and his partner &quot;hope and expect&quot; Jackson to support the Democratic presidential ticket this fall. But aides said Jackson was &quot;stunned&quot; over the handling of the vice presidential selection, and the civil rights leader halted negotiations on the party's platform.    Bush, whose search for a GOP partner was getting under way in earnest, is to present the U.S. case to the U.N. about the destruction of an Iranian jet.    ---   Nicaragua requested a special session of the Washington-based Organization of American States, apparently to discuss the expulsion from the U.S. of Ambassador Tunnerman, who is also Managua's OAS envoy. Reagan, who Tuesday ordered the ouster of Tunnerman and seven colleagues, warned of a &quot;big surprise&quot; if he doesn't leave.    Prosecutors in Miami unsealed an indictment charging seven people with illegally supplying mercenaries and arms to Nicaragua's rebels. Among those charged was the brother of Contra leader Adolfo Calero.    ---   CIA Director Webster said that while it appears &quot;unlikely&quot; that Iran will retaliate immediately for the downing of an Iran Air jet, Tehran's leaders may decide to attack U.S. targets if the current diplomatic campaign to force the Navy out of the Persian Gulf doesn't succeed.    ---   Athens proceeded with the trial of a Palestinian whose detention may have provoked Monday's attack on a cruise ship. A previously unknown group in Beirut claimed responsibility for the attack, and a telephone caller to a Paris radio station claimed the Islamic Jihad carried out the assault, in which at least nine people were killed.    ---   Azerbaijan annulled Tuesday's decision by Nagorno-Karabakh to secede from the republic and join neighboring Armenia, the news agency Tass reported. As Red Army troops patrolled the capital of the disputed enclave, Azerbaijan's leadership accused officials of the territory of breaking the law and defying Soviet central authorities.    ---   The Senate approved legislation that would provide $59.1 billion in the coming fiscal year for HUD and various other agencies. The measure also would give NASA's space-station program the bare minimum it needs to survive.    ---   Shultz is expected to ask China's leaders to halt sales of missiles to the Mideast because the weapons are destabilizing the region, a senior State Department official said. The secretary of state is to begin a three-day visit to Beijing today that will include talks with senior Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping.    ---   The White House has asked to be consulted before any attempt by the Justice Department to obtain an indictment of former Philippine leader Marcos. A spokesman acknowledged that the White House doesn't have &quot;veto power&quot; over such a decision, but said it was a &quot;matter that has foreign policy implications.&quot; He didn't elaborate.    ---   Gorbachev said socialist leaders must share their experiences to avoid making costly political errors while overhauling their economic systems. The Soviet leader, on a six-day visit to Poland, urged workers at a Baltic port shipyard to support his restructuring proposals. The Warski shipyard is considered the birthplace of Solidarity.    ---   Mohammed Ali Hamadi testified that he smuggled explosives into West Germany. The Lebanese, on trial in Frankfurt for murder and air piracy in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner to Beirut, denied belonging to the pro-Iranian guerrilla group Hezbollah. His remarks were the first he has made since the trial began last week.    ---   Greece formally notified the U.S. that four major American military bases and about 20 smaller installations must be removed from the country by mid-1990. The current base agreement between Washington and Athens expires Dec. 31. The U.S. said a new accord could still be reached.    ---   Two bombs exploded in British army barracks in Duisburg, West Germany, injuring nine soldiers. The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility. The blast was the latest in a series of attacks by the IRA on British targets on the European continent. The group is waging a guerrilla campaign to drive the British out of Ulster.    ---   Israeli helicopters attacked a village in southern Lebanon as Israel's troops and their Lebanese allies battled with Moslem guerrillas. In the occupied West Bank, the Israeli army demolished or sealed six houses to punish Palestinians suspected of setting a bus afire and hurling a firebomb that injured two military officers. </TEXT></DOC>