<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871120-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ WILL HOLD more talks with Shevardnadze, U.S. officials said.    The unexpected meeting, to be held next week in Geneva, was arranged to hammer out final details for next month's summit between Reagan and Gorbachev. U.S. officials said the trip isn't an effort to break a logjam on a treaty banning medium-range nuclear missiles, but a State Department official said Moscow has turned over only part of the data the U.S. deems essential for completing the pact. Meanwhile, opposition grew to an invitation for the Soviet leader to address Congress during the summit.    House Minority Leader Michel joined a Republican revolt against the Gorbachev invitation, saying such an address would be a &quot;terrible mistake.&quot;    ---   Lt. Col. North considered using profits from arms sales to Iran to offer bounties on Sandinista or Cuban officers captured in Nicaragua, according to the congressional Iran-Contra report. The report contains no evidence, however, to indicate that the former White House aide ever carried out the scheme.    ---   U.S. Catholic bishops said U.S. support of the Nicaraguan Contras is a &quot;morally flawed&quot; policy. The declaration was approved in a voice vote on the last day of the bishops' annual meeting, held in Washington. Separately, the Canadian government said it would lend support to the five-nation Central American peace plan.    El Salvador said it will end a unilateral cease-fire and resume fighting leftist rebels. The government said the rebels ignored the cease-fire, and rebels made a similar accusation against the government.    ---   Congress approved a $296 billion defense bill and sent it to the White House for signing. The bill was approved 86-9 in the Senate and 264-158 in the House. It contains a compromise on Pentagon adherence to the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty in space-based weapons research and less funding than Reagan requested for the program.    ---   Italy's Goria will seek a vote of confidence in the senate today on reviving the five-party governing coalition that collapsed in a budget dispute with the Liberal Party last week. The prime minister-designate is expected to seek a similar vote in the Chamber of Deputies early next week.    ---   Philippine police charged 19 members of a communist rebel group with murder in the Oct. 28 slayings of three Americans near the U.S. Clark Air Base. Authorities said they had four of the suspects in custody and expected to make more arrests soon.    ---   The British government said it would mount an investigation into the fatal fire Wednesday at the Kings Cross subway station. Police revised the death toll to 30 and said 80 people were injured in the fire, the worst ever in the London subway system.    ---   A Chinese pilot defected to Taiwan with a MiG-19 and said Beijing's air strength is declining due to corruption and cutbacks. Taipei offers a reward of about $2 million in gold for a MiG-19, but the squadron commander said he didn't defect for money.    ---   Moscow said 13 people were arrested during independence protests in Latvia but denied violent clashes took place. A human rights group, quoting Latvian exile sources in West Germany, said 8,000 people demonstrated in Riga Wednesday, but a U.S. journalist at the scene put the number at 700.    ---   A Senate panel unanimously approved the nomination of James Burnley as transportation secretary. A full Senate vote is expected soon. He would succeed Elizabeth Dole, who resigned last month.    ---   The European Community will begin a two-month airlift of relief supplies to Ethiopia next week to fight a new famine crisis. An official for a Western relief agency said the country has not recovered from the 1984-85 drought and this year's crop failure may bring an even greater famine.    ---   The Commerce Department charged Sara Lee Corp. with violations of a law prohibiting U.S. firms from cooperating with the Arab economic boycott of Israel. The company could be liable for fines totaling as much as $2.4 million.    ---   Space agency engineers test-fired a new solid-fuel space shuttle booster rocket in Alabama. Officials said there appeared to be no leakage of hot gases at the O-ring seals on the new, scaled-down rocket.    ---   Tehran said Iraqi warplanes mounted the third attack this week on an unfinished nuclear power plant at Bushehr, on the Iranian coast. After the earlier attacks, Tehran said there was danger of a Chernobyl-like release of radiation from the plant, but it later backtracked on the claim. Iraq said it attacked two Persian Gulf oil tankers.    ---   Senate committee members voted to cut off aid to Panama unless the government agrees to curb military control and restore democracy. The vote by the Foreign Relations panel follows similar House action last month. The administration suspended aid in July to demonstrate unhappiness with Gen. Noriega's control of the government.    ---   A Protestant politician was shot and critically wounded in Belfast. No one has yet claimed responsibility for the attack on George Seawright, a former member of the Northern Ireland assembly, but police said it resembled previous assassination attempts by the Irish Republican Army.    ---   Died: Lee Byung Chull, 77, founder and chairman of Samsung Group and newspaper publisher, in Seoul, South Korea. </TEXT></DOC>