<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Quebec Charges 7 With Insider TradingIn Memotec Data, Buyer of Teleglobe---By Alan FreemanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDASTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> MONTREAL  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Quebec securities regulators charged seven individuals with insider trading involving Memotec Data Inc., the successful bidder earlier this year for Teleglobe Canada, Canada's overseas telecommunications monopoly.    Among the seven charged are three directors of Montreal-based Memotec and Peter Blaikie, a prominent Montreal lawyer and former president of Canada's national Conservative Party.    The Quebec Securities Commission said that six of those charged used insider information about Memotec's planned bid for Teleglobe to purchase Memotec shares and share-purchase warrants. The seventh is charged with having provided insider information to another of the accused.    The value of Memotec shares has more than tripled since January.    Shortly after the charges were disclosed, the Canadian government announced that Mr. Blaikie had resigned from the board of Canada Development Investment Corp., a federal agency. He was named to the post less than one month ago.    Although the amounts of money involved in the alleged insider-trading charges aren't large, the charges are significant because of the political sensitivity of the Teleglobe sale and the rarity of insider-trading charges in Canada. The possible profits from the trades, if the shares were still being held, could amount to roughly 25,000 dollars in some of the cases.    At least three of those charged denied any wrongdoing.    Memotec, previously a small data communications and data processing concern, was the unexpected winner in February of a bidding contest for Teleglobe that attracted several of Canada's largest concerns. Memotec paid 488.3 million Canadian dollars ($372.2 million) for Teleglobe, Canada's exclusive provider of overseas telephone and telegraph services.    The charges follow a six-month investigation by the Quebec commission in cooperation with the Ontario Securities Commission and federal authorities.    The investigation was prompted by a trading halt ordered by the Toronto Stock Exchange in Memotec shares on Feb. 5, following a rise of 2.375 dollars to 13 dollars in active trading. Memotec then issued a statement that it had submitted a bid to the government to buy Teleglobe. The winning bid was disclosed Feb. 11.    Memotec said at the time that it believed it had complied with all disclosure requirements. It said it had advised both the Toronto and Montreal exchanges of its intention to bid for Teleglobe in December and advised them the day before making the formal bid.    Memotec was constrained from making any public disclosure of its intention to bid by a confidentiality agreement with the government. Quebec securities officials said they weren't critical of Memotec's conduct but said that those charged made illegal use of insider information about the planned bid.    However, the purchases of Memotec securities are alleged to have taken place weeks prior to the selection of the successful bid and prior to the run-up in Memotec stock.    The securities commission alleged that Mr. Blaikie purchased 1,000 Memotec shares on Jan. 16 at 10.50 dollars a share using insider knowledge of Memotec's planned bid for Teleglobe. Mr. Blaikie's law firm of Heenan Blaikie is Memotec's legal counsel.    Memotec shares, which split 2-for-1 in August, closed Friday on the Montreal Exchange at 18.25 dollars, off 25 cents.    Mr. Blaikie wasn't available for comment but a law partner at Heenan Blaikie said the firm had looked into the charges and &quot;is satisfied there wasn't an offense.&quot;    Kenneth Atlas, another Heenan Blaikie lawyer who is alleged to have purchased 300 Memotec shares in January, called the charge &quot;completely unfounded&quot; because he didn't know about Memotec's planned bid.    Also charged are Memotec directors Marc Beauchamp, Frederick H. Berlet and Joseph Szaszkiewicz. Mr. Beauchamp is president of Novacap Investments Inc., a Montreal-based venture capital concern which has an approximately 4% stake in Memotec. Mr. Beauchamp is alleged to have purchased 1,000 Memotec warrants on Dec. 12 at 3.05 dollars to 3.20 dollars. The warrants closed Friday on the Montreal Exchange at 27.625 dollars, off 1.125 dollars. Mr. Beauchamp declined to comment.    Mr. Berlet, vice chairman of Fleck Manufacturing Inc., a Tilsonburg, Ontario-based electrical equipment maker, is alleged to have purchased 1,700 warrants Jan. 9, while Mr. Szaszkiewicz is alleged to have purchased 300 Memotec shares Jan. 13. Both weren't available for comment.    Jacques Tousignant, a Novacap vice president, is charged with having provided insider information on the bid to his common-law wife, Beatrice Brunet, who purchased a total of 1,400 Memotec warrants in December. Mr. Tousignant said Ms. Brunet had purchased the warrants on her own and sold them on his advice without any profit a short time later.    &quot;I preferred that she sell because I was involved with Memotec,&quot; Mr. Tousignant said.    The accused are set to appear before Quebec Sessions Court Nov. 18.    If convicted, the accused are subject to a minimum fine of 5,000 dollars or double the profit realized to a maximum fine of one million dollars or four times their profit. They are also subject to possible jail terms of one month to two years. The charges, which are civil charges, were filed under the Quebec Securities Act.    The commission said that other charges may be filed later. </TEXT></DOC>