<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880708-0190 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: New-City Mania Drives Latin Americans Mad </HL><AUTHOR> Tova Maria Solo </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> REL CON </IN><DATELINE> SAN SALVADOR  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Don Manuel is president of the neighborhood association of Valle de Oro, a settlement of about 50 families within the city limits of this capital city. He has called an emergency meeting to discuss government plans to move the community -- lock, stock and barrel -- to a new city called Apopa, about 15 miles north of San Salvador. But these families have invested a lot in their community and don't want to move. What government planners call miserable slums, the proud families of Valle de Oro call home.    Over the years Valle de Oro's residents have paved the pedestrian walkways, installed storm drains, connected electrical lines and built a communal water tank and public standpipes. The neighborhood association manages water distribution and collects service charges. Valle de Oro is at least 30 years old and families have invested an average of $20,000 in their houses and in their community.    After the earthquake of 1986, the community repaired the cracked retaining walls and a sewer main and raised funds to build a community center. The residents had planned to begin in June 1987, but have been stymied by announcements from city authorities that their community will be bulldozed soon and they will be moved to Apopa. Now, Don Manuel reasons, if they build the community center, they might impress the city enough to let them stay, and to sell them the land that they have been trying to buy for the past 10 years. But if the planners decide otherwise, then they will lose the investment in the community center, as well as their houses and neighborhood.    More than 1,000 slum and squatter settlements scattered throughout San Salvador must be facing the same situation as Valle de Oro. These communities have developed along riverbanks and gorges, generally hidden from sight, but house approximately one-third of the city's population. The slum dwellers have organized themselves into neighborhood associations, have put in walkways, water systems and electric services, and have replaced their original mud wattle huts with houses of brick and block. They have certainly benefited from organizations such as Foster Parents Plan, Catholic Relief Services and the Lutheran Church, as well as local humanitarian groups. But the bulk of their works, estimated at a total worth of $200 million, has been entirely financed by the slum dwellers themselves, at virtually no cost to the state.    So why do the government planners want to tear down the slums and move their inhabitants to Apopa? Why do they consider Apopa so important that they refused to permit international organizations such as the U.S. Agency for International Development and its Italian equivalent to assist in slum reconstruction after the earthquake of 1986, insisting that funding should go instead toward the creation of isolated neighborhoods in the new city? Why have they asked the World Bank for an emergency loan to construct a new highway out to Apopa, instead of using the funds to rebuild tenements and repair damage done in the city? Why are they projecting a population of 700,000 for Apopa by the year 2005, when they have not yet worked out a scheme to supply the new city with water and have no calculations of its construction costs? And, finally, why would El Salvador, racked by an internal war and a miserable economy, choose this moment to build a new city?    The answer lies in the new-city syndrome -- the &quot;Brasilia bug&quot; -- which has infected Latin America since modern city planning was introduced to universities here in the early 1950s. Proponents of new cities argue that shiny new environments will overcome poverty, the implication being that modern buildings indicate development while traditional constructions are a sign of backwardness.    The underlying faith holds that development is merely a question of planning, mainly physical planning. A comparison of any planned South American city with Houston, Texas, which has never had a municipal planning department nor a single master plan, ought to stir some questioning of the faith. But the new-city syndrome casts a powerful spell. In the past few years the governments of Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Guatemala and Belize have announced plans to build, or have already built, new cities. And El Salvador has joined the crowd.    A new city by itself proves very little about a country's state of development. Development can better be measured by a city's ability to maintain itself, to improve and to grow. The model South American new city, Brasilia, provides a case in point. The city proper -- a planner's dream -- depends on appropriations from the central government for the bulk of its income. And while certain sections of 27-year-old Brasilia proper have yet to be completed, other areas -- including some sumptuous gardens, monuments and government buildings -- are already falling into disrepair.    In contrast, the satellite towns, laid out as an afterthought to the planned city to house the construction workers, have developed from shantytowns into fully serviced communities without benefit of master plans. The poor families (that were not supposed to exist in planned Brasilia) came in response to a demand for service jobs and have continued to thrive, creating economic bases independent of Brasilia proper and of the national budget.    The Salvadoran planners have not considered fully how Apopa will be maintained, nor how the population will support itself. These are considered moot points compared with the fact that the poor families will be swaddled in newly built houses, out of the sight of the capital. They also have not considered how the capital will get along with its service workers living 15 miles away.    Most of Valle de Oro's families depend on jobs in the surrounding upper-class neighborhoods. Valle de Oro sits in the shadow of the Hotel Salvador Sheraton, a stone's throw from President Jose Napoleon Duarte's residence. The women work as domestics, and the men as taxi-drivers, handymen or in other service jobs. Families have been able to finance the construction of their own homes and of the neighborhood improvements through hard work. The community itself, nestled into a gully, is hardly visible from the elegant residential streets. But the planners feel that it blemishes their master zoning plan. That may be the real reason they wish to &quot;relocate&quot; it to Apopa.    They miss the point ignored by most city planners in Latin America: People, not planners, make cities.    ---   Ms. Solo is an architect and city planner living in Cartagena, Colombia. </TEXT></DOC>