<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870723-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV SAID he was prepared to dismantle all Soviet midrange missiles.    The Kremlin leader, in an interview with an Indonesian newspaper, said the weapons to be scrapped included 100 intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Asia, which Moscow previously had insisted upon keeping, as well as those in Europe. Gorbachev's remarks appeared to remove a major obstacle to an arms-control agreement with the U.S., ending a monthlong stalemate in negotiations in Geneva. The decision also could ease the way for a meeting between Shultz and Shevardnadze.    U.S. officials speculated that Moscow had been stalling over an arms pact until it was clear that Reagan would survive the Iran-Contra hearings.    ---   U.S. WARSHIPS ESCORTED two Kuwaiti vessels into the Persian Gulf.    Backed by U.S. jet fighters, the Navy ships surrounded the Kuwaiti oil tankers as they passed within range of an Iranian missile battery in the Strait of Hormuz, considered the most perilous part of the three-day, 500-mile journey to Kuwait from the United Arab Emirates. The military escort had been placed on heightened alert for Iran's high-speed gunboats and helicopters in the gulf region, but the Pentagon later said it hadn't detected any &quot;hostile intent&quot; on the sea or in the air toward the convoy.    Iraq said it was prepared to implement a U.N.-backed cease-fire in its seven-year-old war with Iran, but only if the Tehran government did the same.    ---   The House approved health-care legislation for catastrophic illness that would provide expansion of Medicare programs and impose a surtax on the more affluent elderly. The measure, passed 302-127 despite a Reagan veto threat, also would create a prescription-drug benefit to cover 80% of a recipient's medicine bill.    ---   A U.S. judge in Washington issued a ruling that for the first time upholds the constitutionality of the 1978 law creating the system of court-appointed independent counsels. The 13-page ruling didn't indicate which of the six currently operating independent prosecutors is involved in the sealed case.    ---   Researchers in Massachussetts said they have found a type of blood cell that seeks out and destroys the AIDS virus, a finding that may explain why only certain infected people develop the disease. Separately, new reports on AZT suggest the drug is most effective and least toxic in patients with earlier stages of AIDS.    ---   Sgt. Clayton Lonetree pleaded innocent to charges of spying at the start of his courtmartial in Quantico, Va. The former Marine guard at U.S. embassies in Moscow and Vienna is accused in the sex-spy scandal of providing classified information to Soviet KGB agents. He is the first Marine ever to face trial on espionage charges.    ---   Philippine President Aquino signed a decree ordering the redistribution of all farm land in the country. The program, which would compensate landlords for acreage given to landless peasants, leaves lawmakers to decide how much land estate owners can keep and how much money they will receive for property surrendered.    The Manila government sued former Defense Minister Enrile and more than 50 other people for $10.2 billion, accusing them of theft from the government during ousted leader Marcos's 20-year rule.    ---   A tropical storm struck South Korea, dumping record rain and causing floods and landslides that killed at least 92 people and injured about 170, officials said. The storm, the second in a week, also left 31 people missing and feared dead. Thousands of people were evacuated from low-lying areas.    ---   Egypt's foreign minister returned to Cairo after a three-day visit to Israel, where he urged officials to help convene an international parley on Mideast peace. Before his departure, Arab leaders from the Israeli-occupied territories told the foreign minister that only the PLO could represent Palestinians at the proposed conference.    ---   Paris said Tehran has refused to allow French citizens to leave Iran. France's Foreign Ministry said it was attempting to determine how many people weren't allowed to leave for Paris aboard an Iran Air flight Tuesday. France severed ties with Iran last week in a dispute over an Iranian wanted for questioning about terrorist attacks.    ---   The EPA proposed rules to require improved equipment on vehicles to prevent the escape of gasoline fumes. In a related proposal, the agency outlined new controls on gasoline content. The EPA's administrator said the proposals were an effort to reduce smog.    ---   Pakistan has issued an arrest warrant for a Pakistani national implicated in an alleged plot to illegally ship from the U.S. material that could be used to develop a nuclear bomb. The move came as a House panel began debate over aid to Pakistan, which has denied involvement in the plan.    ---   Authorities in Karachi imposed an indefinite curfew to quell four days of rioting that has left at least 12 people dead and about 48 injured. Pakistani army troops were called in to restore order in three neighborhoods near the city's international airport.    ---   Independent counsel Walsh has requested an &quot;extensive&quot; amount of documents gathered by the Justice Department in its Iran-Contra investigation, two administration officials said. The documents relate to both the sale of U.S. arms to Iran and the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels.    ---   Protesters in Bangladesh demanded the resignation of President Ershad and clashed with riot police in the streets of Dhaka at the start of a two-day nationwide general strike. At least 50 people, including about a dozen military personnel, were injured in the anti-government violence. </TEXT></DOC>