<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Justice Department Prepares to RequestProbe of Poindexter's Role in Iran Affair---By Andy Pasztor and Jane MayerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Justice Department is preparing documents to request that a special prosecutor investigate whether former National Security Adviser John Poindexter illegally diverted funds or military equipment in the Iran arms affair, administration officials said.    Senior officials at the department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation were marshalling evidence to back a formal request for a court-appointed independent counsel to look into Mr. Poindexter's role in the clandestine arms shipments.    But while the counsel would focus initially on Mr. Poindexter, some White House aides and senior FBI officials are urging that he also be given a broad mandate to pursue the case -- including the unauthorized transfer of profits from the arms sales to Nicaraguan rebels, potential criminal violations by Lt. Col. Oliver North, Mr. Poindexter's aide, who was fired last week, and other leads that may surface during the probe.    Federal investigators also have been collecting documents and other materials involving the activities of Robert McFarlane, Mr. Poindexter's predecessor as national security adviser; retired Air Force General Richard V. Secord, and a number of other current or former government officials.    United Press International reported that at Attorney General Edwin Meese's request, the Defense Department agreed to locate and save all information relating to potential involvement of several other individuals in secret Iranian arms sales or aid to the Contras. They include Paul Thompson, a top National Security Council aide; Don Fortier, a deceased former aide to Mr. Poindexter; and Adolfo Calero, the leader of one of the major Contra groups.    Senior department aides consider the request for a special counsel a foregone conclusion, and they said it could be announced within the next few days. Many top-level White House aides have favored such a move as a way to defuse the growing scandal and help the White House recapture the political initiative. Yesterday, President Reagan accepted the idea.    &quot;The Department of Justice investigation is continuing with my full support and cooperation,&quot; the president said. &quot;And if they determine that an independent counsel is called for, I would welcome that appointment.&quot;    Administration aides asserted that the FBI, the Justice Department's Public Integrity Section and senior criminal prosecutors, have produced enough &quot;credible evidence&quot; to warrant seeking a special prosecutor. While the appeals court panel has the final say over such requests, it is almost certain to go along with Mr. Meese's recommendations.    Last week, Mr. Meese and President Reagan said that Mr. Poindexter suspected that money from the Iranian arms sales was flowing to the Contras battling the Nicaraguan government but that he failed to do anything about it. Mr. Poindexter declined to comment on any of the allegations stemming from the controversy and the mushrooming investigations. Lt. Col. North also hasn't discussed the case publicly.    The administration's moves came amid these other developments in the escalating political crisis:    --The Senate Intelligence Committee began closed-door hearings, with Mr. McFarlane appearing for lengthy questioning. John McMahon, the former deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, also appeared before the panel. Lt. Col. North also appeared, but apparently didn't testify and may have invoked the Fifth Amendment, according to sources.    As the central figure in the Iran-Contra arms deals, Lt. Col. North is considered the administration figure most vulnerable to any criminal prosecution that might arise from the matter. He is believed to be seeking an arrangement whereby any testimony he gives the committee won't be used to incriminate him. But according to sources, the panel so far has resisted any such arrangement. Other administration officials are slated to appear later in the week.    --President Reagan ordered the National Security Council to halt its involvement in the kind of special operations involved in the controversial arms deals with Iran, at least until a three-member presidential review board has finished its investigation of the agency's practices.    Members of the panel stressed yesterday that it wasn't their job to determine individual culpability in the arms-sale matter. But one member, former National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, suggested that he found it difficult to believe that Lt. Col. North acted alone. &quot;I think Col. North would have had to have had some kind of charter under which he operated,&quot; Mr. Scowcroft said.    Asked if the panel would investigate how that charter might have been issued, he answered: &quot;You can be sure we will.&quot;    --Senate Republican leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) indicated that he is moving to set up a special Watergate-style investigative committee in the Senate this month. &quot;It took the (Republican) party 10 years to recover from Watergate,&quot; Sen. Dole asserted, reflecting the fears of Republicans.    Sen. Dole said he also will urge President Reagan today to call a special session of Congress to establish a joint House-Senate panel to investigate the Iran arms affair. He said establishing such a panel now would allow lawmakers to hire staff and &quot;do all the spadework&quot; needed to begin the investigation in earnest when Congress reconvenes next year.    --FBI director William Webster met with Mr. Meese at the Justice Department for a briefing on the findings of the government's investigation so far. Administration officials said Mr. Webster supports appointment of a special prosecutor, but department officials declined to comment on the session.    White House officials said the president hopes to choose a new national security adviser this week. High among those names under consideration, said White House sources, was Frank Carlucci, former deputy director of defense in the Reagan administration. Sources said Mr. Carlucci is a favorite of Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, but is also popular with Secretary of State George Shultz and CIA director William Casey.    Donald Regan, White House chief of staff, has suggested former deputy CIA director William Hyland, while some of his aides have promoted David Abshire, U.S. ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.    Meanwhile, Sen. Rudy Boschwitz (R., Minn.), the new chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, told reporters that he fears it will be more difficult to recruit Republican candidates and elect them to the Senate in 1988 if the Iran crisis is allowed to fester. &quot;If this continues and drags on and drags on, I think the Reagan Revolution may be prematurely and regretfully ended, and not continued beyond his (Mr. Reagan's) present tenure,&quot; Sen. Boschwitz asserted.    ---   Also contributing to this story was David Rogers of the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>