<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0010 </DOCNO><HL> Politics '88 (A Special Report)---After the Vote:Some Analysts Think We're EnteringA New Political Life Cycle---By James M. Perry</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   &quot;I know nothing grander,&quot; Walt Whitman said, &quot;better exercise, better digestion, more positive proof of the past, the triumphant result of faith in humankind, than a well-contested American national election.&quot;    The 1988 campaign ought to be Walt Whitman's kind of election.    This one is special. For the first time since 1960, the nation is constitutionally required to elect a new president. This means both parties must embark on the long and chancy business of picking a leader and, in the process, define what they are all about. Somehow, amidst all the chaos, voters will try to decide who makes the most sense.    On the surface, it is a little like 1960. Dwight Eisenhower had served two terms and was unable to succeed himself. He was a popular and successful president. This time, Ronald Reagan has served out his two terms, another popular and -- his supporters would argue -- successful president.    The results in 1960 were close, with Democrat John Kennedy edging Republican Richard Nixon. This one, most of the experts say, ought to be well-contested too.    Democrats will take the offensive, pointing to the unraveling of Reaganomics in the great market crash of October. The crash guarantees that a campaign that started out with no single clear theme will have one -- the economy.    Bad economic times are traditionally good political news for Democrats, and in a serious downturn they would be favored to capture the White House. Yet some question whether any of the current Democratic candidates can take advantage of the situation. Republicans, meanwhile, will make the case that they can be better trusted with the economy. Anyway, they will add, Mr. Reagan isn't running again, and at least some candidates -- principally Sen. Robert Dole -- can argue that they warned against policies that led up to the crash.    When Democrats aren't attacking the Republicans for mishandling the economy, they will try to find time to remind voters of the Iran-Contra affair. Time for a change, they will say, in what is one of the most reliable of all political war cries. Republicans will note that Mr. Reagan did restore confidence in the presidency, demonstrating the nation could be governed, even if things began to fall apart late in his second term. He made America strong again, they will point out, too. Anyway, Republicans will say, they are fielding a new team.    In significant ways, though, 1988 won't be anything like 1960.    Back then, there were Republican moderates and old-fashioned Democratic liberals. No more. Ronald Reagan took care of that. Now, all the Republicans running for president are conservatives -- born that way or converted. And the Democrats are all self-proclaimed pragmatists, with the notable exception of Jesse Jackson and, perhaps, Sen. Paul Simon.    It is striking that the Democrats, for the first time in more than 50 years, entered the campaign cycle without a New Deal-Great Society candidate. New York Gov. Mario Cuomo was supposed to fill that role, but he begged off at the start.    Parties in 1960 were important -- especially for the Democrats. Richard Daley ruled Chicago, Bill Green controlled Philadelphia, David Lawrence ran things in Pittsburgh. They are all gone now, and the power of the parties continues its steady decline.    In 1960, John Kennedy defeated Hubert Humphrey for the Democratic nomination essentially by winning two primaries -- Wisconsin and West Virginia. Now, candidates must run a marathon of primaries and caucuses, starting months, even years, before the public at large awakes to the notion that an election actually is under way.    Until the market crash, anyway, &quot;character&quot; was the campaign's buzzword. In 1960, no one thought it necessary to report on Sen. Kennedy's hyperactive personal life or dwell at any length on his medical history. That could not happen today, as Gary Hart and Joe Biden would be the first to attest.    More than ever, the media is the message. Politicians speak to prospective voters through the newspapers, TV, radio and direct mail. Money -- big money -- powers today's highly individualized political engines. Special-interest groups pull both parties to their extreme edges: Forces opposing abortion, for example, influence the Republicans, while militants opposed to aid to the Contras in Nicaragua are tugging at the Democrats.    For all that, some things never change. National elections grapple with democracy's most profound questions: Who are we? Where have we been, and where do we want to go?    This election is especially important, because the nation is approaching another crossroads. The Reagan era -- ideological, controversial, conservative -- is running out. And everyone -- party leaders, candidates, voters -- must decide which road to take.    The answers are easier in the face of some overriding event. If the Republicans take the nation into a depression when Americans are mulling how they will vote, Democrats benefit, and a big victory becomes possible. Nothing unites fractious Democrats like hard times. But things may not be so clear-cut, and in the absence of a political tidal wave, there are various theories attempting to predict what happens next. More than at any time in recent history, though, the soothsayers are uncomfortable.    Consider the possibilities, such as they are.    Historically, there is a pattern. In an election when there is no incumbent in the race, the party out of power usually wins. Two years later, in congressional elections, the party in control of the White House suffers a small setback. But, four years after taking office, the president is returned by a landslide. Two years after that, the president's party suffers a big defeat in congressional elections. And then the cycle starts all over again.    As William Schneider of the American Enterprise Institute explains, &quot;It works when it works.&quot; If it works this time, the Democrats should win a very close election. But it didn't work for Jimmy Carter in 1980, a year when he should have been re-elected by a landslide.    Then there are cycle theories, with some analysts lined up on the side of 30-year cycles, others favoring 60 years. Either way, the nation should be coming to the end of a cycle right about now.    A. James Reichley of the Brookings Institution thinks we are drifting, at the end of one era but still in transition, looking for a leader to move us into the next. &quot;We're running out of steam,&quot; he says.    Republicans, Mr. Reichley figures, have a better chance to become the dominant party in the new era. But in the short run the Democrats are still, on paper, dominant, and there's always the chance the Republicans will kick it away -- especially if the Democrats can capitalize on the economic issue that the current instability has handed them. More fundamentally, though, Mr. Reichley worries that the system itself may be breaking up.    Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., the historian and Democrat, thinks the nation goes through what he calls &quot;public interest&quot; and &quot;private interest&quot; cycles. Private-interest eras, he says, &quot;rest on the principle that the individual in promoting his own interests promotes the general interest.&quot; Public-interest eras, he says, are both compassionate and idealistic. The commonwealth comes first, the individual second.    If a pattern of 30-year cycles swinging between public and private interest holds, &quot;then the 1980s will witness the burnout of the most recent conservative ascendancy, and the age of Reagan, like its earlier versions in the 1950s, 1920s and 1890s, will fade into historical memory.&quot;    At some point, shortly before or just after 1990, &quot;there should come a sharp change in the national mood and direction,&quot; led, Mr. Schlesinger believes, by idealistic men and women who came of political age in the John Kennedy years (to be followed a generation later, in a swing back to private-interest politics, by men and women who came of political age in the Reagan years).    The AEI's Mr. Schneider has his own interesting view. The nation, he says, has gone through a long and divisive ideological era that began in about 1964 for both the Republicans and the Democrats. The Republicans moved right, the Democrats lurched left, and the bulk of the voters stayed about where they are always to be found, somewhere in the middle. The Reagan presidency, he believes, is the end of the ideological era.    So what comes next?    &quot;The hot issues for 1987,&quot; says Mr. Schneider, &quot;are 'management' and 'competence.'&quot; Vice President George Bush and Sen. Dole, on the Republican side, stress their resumes. So, on the Democratic side, do Rep. Richard Gephardt and Gov. Michael Dukakis. &quot;What's missing from all of them,&quot; he says, &quot;is vision. They're just not talking about it.&quot;    Character is a problem for the Democrats, for no one seems to trust them much these days, a feeling reinforced by the Hart and Biden fiascos. Management is a problem for the Republicans, as most Americans, given the Reagan record, may suspect the Grand Old Party doesn't know how to manage things. That issue would loom even larger if the economic situation were to deteriorate: In a time of economic crisis, voters are more impressed by a candidate's ability to get things done than they are by a clean personal record.    But, warns Mr. Schneider, the hot issues of 1987 may not be the hot issues in the year that counts -- 1988. What will those new hot issues be? Mr. Schneider concedes he doesn't know, but he's going to write a book that he hopes will dispel some of the uncertainty.    A key to what may be happening next is the Baby Boom generation. They are out there, in vast numbers -- the 80 million Americans born between 1946 and 1966. But, so far, they've spurned overtures from George McGovern, John Lindsay, John Anderson and Jerry Brown, among others.    In 1960, young people were attracted to the personable John Kennedy and his message that &quot;the torch has passed to a new generation of Americans.&quot; But this time, the Republican frontrunners, Vice President Bush and Sen. Dole, are both combat veterans of World War II. And the only Democrats who made a generational appeal, the Messrs. Hart and Biden, are out of the race. So far, the Baby Boomers haven't been impressed by anybody (with the possible exception of the aging Mr. Reagan, for whom they voted in generous numbers).    Mr. Reichley says new eras in politics begin with great politicians who sense what is happening in the nation and instinctively know where to lead. The nation is drifting now, he says, partly because there are no great leaders.    But it was in 1888 that Lord Bryce wrote a celebrated chapter in his book, &quot;The American Commonwealth,&quot; called, &quot;Why Great Men Are Not Chosen President.&quot; And the book was followed by Teddy and Franklin Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson and Harry Truman, and Dwight Eisenhower.    ---   Mr. Perry reports on politics from The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>