<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870403-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Medicare's Private Option---By William L. Roper</HL><DD> 04/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   When President Reagan asked Congress in February to expand Medicare to include coverage against the high cost of catastrophic illness, some conservatives condemned the president's decision, arguing that private insurers are adequately meeting the needs of senior citizens. By endorsing expansion of Medicare, a pillar of the federal establishment, the president had, according to these critics, sounded the death knell for the Reagan Revolution.    With few exceptions, the press coverage of this story ignored an essential point: Both the president and the secretary of health and human services, Otis Bowen, favor expanding the role of private health plans in meeting the needs of Medicare beneficiaries. The president and the secretary both believe that well-managed private health plans can offer an attractive alternative to traditional Medicare coverage. The administration is committed to giving private health plans a fair opportunity to compete for Medicare enrollees.    Under the administration's Private Health Plan Option (PHPO), the federal government makes lump-sum monthly payments to private health plans enrolling Medicare beneficiaries. All participating health plans must meet certain minimum requirements on benefits, financial solvency, quality and other relevant criteria. In exchange for the monthly payments, the private plan assumes both the financial and medical responsibility for ensuring that its Medicare enrollees receive all medically necessary services. Enrollment is optional; all beneficiaries have the option of remaining in traditional Medicare, or of returning to Medicare on short notice. In the roughly two years since the option was first made available, about 860,000 Medicare beneficiaries have opted to enroll in a private health plan.    The federal government pays private health plans 95% of what it would have cost the government to cover the services in the Medicare benefits package. Since some Medicare beneficiaries use more services than others, the payment is adjusted for key characteristics of the enrollee, including age, sex and place of residence. A fair-payment formula is crucial to the success of the PHPO. If the formula overstates the cost of providing services, federal expenditures will increase. If it understates those costs, private plans will refuse to participate. The administration is therefore investing heavily in the effort to refine the rate-setting adjustments.    Unlike so-called Medigap plans, the plans participating under the PHPO cover the complete package of services now covered by Medicare, plus any additional services they choose to offer. Under the PHPO, in short, private plans do not simply supplement Medicare coverage; they replace it.    The PHPO is an essential element of the administration's Medicare strategy. The policy is designed to achieve five goals:    --Ensure appropriate access to quality care.    --Increase incentives for efficiency.    --Reduce government's role in deciding how much to pay for individual health-care services.    --Reduce government's role in deciding what constitutes appropriate medical practice.    --Expand the range of choices available to both Medicare beneficiaries and health-care providers.    The administration -- albeit reluctantly -- also must continue its &quot;prudent-purchasing&quot; approach. Under this approach, the federal government remains in its traditional role as insurer of health-care services for the 31 million aged and disabled Americans covered by Medicare. As the insurer, it is obliged to set rules on how much it will pay for individual services and to determine what services are covered. Examples of the prudent-purchasing approach include the prospective payment system for paying hospitals and scrutiny by peer review organizations. Such organizations review services to ensure their necessity and quality.    So long as it remains an insurer, the federal government has no choice but to become a more prudent, and aggressive, purchaser. Medicare will spend roughly $80 billion this year. Notwithstanding the considerable publicity given the &quot;budget cuts&quot; imposed on Medicare, Medicare spending has been rising faster than the general rate of inflation or even the rate of increase in nominal gross national product. But whatever its budgetary merits, the prudent-purchasing approach has the unfortunate consequence of inexorably leading to ever-deeper federal involvement in pricing and medical decisions.    Critics of the PHPO often question whether private health plans should be trusted with so important a mission. Their concern is understandable, and the administration does not advocate blind trust in the ability of &quot;the market&quot; to meet the health-care needs of older Americans. Under its PHPO initiative, government polices the market, channeling competition to achieve socially desirable ends. By the same token, however, the proponents of ever-increasing government control over pricing and medical decisions should acknowledge the risks of that approach. The federal government wields so much purchasing power that it can be a destructive force, even when well-intentioned.    Medicare accounts for 40% of the revenue of a typical hospital; for many hospitals, Medicare's share is much larger. Hospital administrators understandably find it difficult to say &quot;no&quot; to such a powerful customer. The administration fears that government may inadvertently coerce health-care providers to take steps jeopardizing the interests of their patients. That is a real risk when so many decisions are made centrally, far removed from the affected providers and patients.    A far better approach is to give both Medicare beneficiaries and health-care providers the option of participating in Medicare through private health plans. Those private plans, within broad constraints set by the federal government, could determine their own methods for paying physicians and hospitals, for controlling utilization, and for ensuring quality. There is no single right answer to these questions. It is therefore entirely appropriate to permit organizations to experiment with different approaches.    Approximately a third of Medicare beneficiaries live in parts of the country where they currently have the option of enrolling in a private health plan. Two types of plans are now eligible: health-maintenance organizations (HMOs) and competitive medical plans (CMPs). Total enrollment in private plans has increased more than 60% during the past 12 months.    The administration does not expect Congress, Medicare beneficiaries or healthcare providers to support the PHPO out of allegiance to the abstract concepts of &quot;the market&quot; or &quot;privatization.&quot; It asks them instead to support it because it will make the U.S. health-care system fairer and more efficient, while simultaneously protecting the quality of care.    To the extent that they can control costs more effectively than Medicare, private plans offer benefits not covered by Medicare. For example, HMOs and CMPs enrolling Medicare beneficiaries often charge lower deductibles and patient co-payments than traditional Medicare, and cover services (such as outpatient prescription drugs) not covered by Medicare.    The administration does not favor requiring older Americans to leave Medicare in favor of private health plans. It only wishes to offer them, and health-care providers, a choice. In other words, it seeks a fair market test for the PHPO. If private plans prove effective in meeting the needs of Medicare beneficiaries and health-care providers, Medicare will be gradually converted into a program based on private plans. If private plans cannot compete effectively with Medicare, the traditional Medicare program will remain the financing mechanism for the vast majority of senior citizens.    ---   Dr. Roper is administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration. </TEXT></DOC>