<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Rule Court-Martial JurisdictionExtends to Actions Unrelated to Military---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled that military courts have jurisdiction over cases of misconduct by military personnel, even when the actions aren't service-related.    The high court abandoned a 1969 precedent, one of the final decisions of the Warren court, that courts-martial have jurisdiction only over conduct that is connected to military service and that other charges against military personnel are subject to state and federal courts.    In an opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the court said defining court-martial authority based on whether an allegation is service-connected has created &quot;confusion&quot; in the civil and military courts. The court returned to what it said was the test for at least 100 years before 1969, simply whether the defendant was in the military at the time of the offense.    The decision is important because there are marked differences in the rights of the accused in military and civilian courts. In military courts, for example, there are no grand jury indictments, unanimous jury verdicts generally aren't required, jurors are selected by commanding officers, and the trial needn't take place in the same general vicinity as the crime. Also, military judges don't have life tenure, thus some critics argue they aren't as independent as federal judges.    Nearly half of the 15-page majority opinion was devoted to refuting the historical basis of the 1969 opinion, which was written by the late Justice William Douglas. Chief Justice Rehnquist said the earlier ruling misinterpreted 18th century English and American military history.    The case involves Richard Solorio, a Coast Guard officer charged with sexual abuse of the young daughters of other officers while stationed in Alaska and later in New York. The Supreme Court appeal involved only which court has jurisdiction over the charges, but while the case was pending he was convicted by a court-martial of a total of 12 charges. The conviction is under review by a military tribunal.    The vote in the Supreme Court to keep the case in the military system was 6-3, but it was 5-4 on overruling the 1969 decision. Justice John Stevens said there was no need to throw out the 1969 precedent because the crimes were sufficiently service-related to be handled in a court-martial.    Justice Thurgood Marshall dissented, joined by Justices William Brennan and Harry Blackmun, accusing the majority of &quot;contempt, both for the members of our armed forces and for the constitutional safeguards intended to protect us all.&quot;    Olympic Trademark   The high court upheld a 1978 federal law that gives the U.S. Olympic Committee the right to control the commercial use of the word &quot;olympic.&quot;    The justices ruled 7-2 that this exclusive control didn't violate the free speech rights of a San Francisco organization that was ordered by a federal judge in 1982 to stop calling its athletic competition the &quot;Gay Olympic Games.&quot;    The majority opinion, written by Justice Lewis Powell, rejected another argument by the nonprofit San Francisco Arts andamp; Athletics Inc. The group contended that the Olympic Committee discriminates unconstitutionally in allowing use of the word for other events, such as the Special Olympics for handicapped individuals. The court said the Constitution only prohibits discrimination by governments, and that no government action was involved in the case.    On the discrimination issue, the vote was 5-4. Justices Blackmun and Sandra O'Connor, who agreed that there was no free speech violation, said the federal government is involved enough in the U.S. Olympic Committee to raise questions about unconstitutional official bias.    Separately, Justice Brennan, joined by Justice Marshall, dissented, arguing that the federal law violates the First Amendment and discriminates against some groups.    Liability of Police   The justices ruled 6-3 that law enforcement officers can't be sued for damages for an illegal, warrantless search, if they can show that it was reasonable for them to believe that a search was legal.    In an opinion written by Justice Antonin Scalia, the court said that &quot;law enforcement officials will in some cases reasonably but mistakenly conclude&quot; that their actions are justified, and &quot;in such cases those officials . . . shouldn't be held personally liable.&quot;    David Goldstein, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer, said: &quot;There's no question this will make it much more difficult to hold officers accountable for damages.&quot; Other lawyers critical of the ruling said the effect may be that when police officers are unsure about whether a warrantless search is legal, they will search anyway because there is no disincentive.    The ruling came in an appeal by an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who was sued by the sister and brother-in-law of a bank robbery suspect in St. Paul, Minn. The sister and her husband charged that their home was searched without a warrant more than five hours after the robbery.    But their case was dismissed before trial on the ground that the FBI agent was immune from lawsuit. A federal appeals court in St. Louis reinstated the lawsuit, ruling that the agent wasn't entitled to immunity because the legal rights he was accused of violating were well established.    The Supreme Court, however, with Justice Stevens dissenting, joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall, ruled that the agent may be entitled to immunity and ordered the appeals court to decide whether his conduct was reasonable and to dismiss the case if it was. </TEXT></DOC>