<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0027 </DOCNO><HL> Financial Planning (A Special Report): Cover---Making Money Work:Ways to Save, Invest orJust Hold Your Own---By Karen Slater</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   Never before have there been so many ways for an individual investor to make, or lose, money and stay on this side of the law.    Sorting out those investment options, however, is another matter. To see how such decisions are being made these days, The Wall Street Journal followed the activities of six investors over a six-month period that ended in September.    The six represent different types of investors in different parts of the country; they also represent different investment goals. And as members of the group won, lost or broke even, one conclusion emerged: Investing is a personal endeavor, linked more to personality than to charts, graphs and multiples.    Meet Peter Reilly of Alexandria, Va., and Larry Matthews of Foster City, Calif., two of the six. Both are about the same age, and both are up-and-coming professionals. But they could hardly be more different when it comes to investing.    Mr. Reilly, a 30-year-old manager with an accounting firm, is like a sailor who relishes exploring new waters. He dabbles in real estate development, plays around with options and scans the sports pages for news of racehorses owned by two limited partnerships in which he invested. Among the more unusual ideas he is toying with: chartering an airplane to market a two-week South American vacation package of skiing in Chile and sunning in Rio de Janiero.    &quot;I try a lot of different things and keep on trying,&quot; Mr. Reilly says. If he had simply put his money in the bank, he says, &quot;I probably would have been better off, but I wouldn't have had as much fun.&quot;    In contrast, Mr. Matthews, 29, is a cautious skipper who sails well-charted routes.    He says his riskiest venture -- and the one with the greatest potential -- is his job as a principal in a fledgling computer software company. He is less optimistic about making big money by investing. So he sticks to the relative safety of mutual funds, with their professional management and built-in diversification.    His natural conservatism was reinforced over the past year by the fact that he and his wife were getting ready to make a down payment on their first house. &quot;I'd just as soon take it a little safer,&quot; he said at one point. &quot;I think people can do just fine with safe investments.&quot;    Several investing temperaments were evident among the six investors: the risk-takers and the risk-averse; the impetuous and the analytical; the fun-seekers and the reluctant financiers; the investors who relish results above all and those who get a bigger thrill out of seeing possibilities.    Experts may make successful investing sound easy -- especially in hindsight. But other people, such as this group of six, more often find it an emotional roller coaster with mixed results. That certainly held true from April through September this year, a time of seesawing stock prices, uncertainty over tax-law changes and more than the usual amount of investor confusion.    Look at the wide swings in Allan Lyons's stock market fortunes. Mr. Lyons, the 45-year-old executive vice president of a Vestal, N.Y., accounting firm, is a stock market junkie and frequent trader who typically devotes two hours of his 14-hour workday to stock market investing.    After years of mediocre results, Mr. Lyons in April thought he was on a roll. A self-described gambler at heart, he had seen his investment portfolio rise about $350,000 in four months to surpass $1 million. The gains were largely from a big and well-timed move into sizzling bank and savings-institution stocks.    &quot;I picked the perfect area to go crazy in,&quot; Mr. Lyons said then. By July, he was saying: &quot;I feel satisfied that I finally conquered the market somewhat -- although it will probably conquer me somewhere down the road.&quot;    A prophetic utterance. A few months after that, the savings-institution stocks that dominated his portfolio were hammered harder than the overall market in September's correction. Mr. Lyons, figuring he had given back about half his gains, proclaimed the stock market &quot;emotionally grinding&quot; and termed his investing experience &quot;three months of real good and three months of terrible.&quot;    Understanding one's own investment personality can be a first step toward better results. Edwin Ounsted, a 60-year-old engineer with Ford Motor Co. in Dearborn, Mich., says he took some big losses in the bear markets of the early 1970s by holding stocks too long. Like many other investors, he had become accustomed to the easy profits of the go-go 1960s. As a result, he says, &quot;When I get a good profit now, I like to take it.&quot;    More often, however, investors find themselves repeating their mistakes or ignoring their own advice. Mr. Reilly chides himself for being haphazard or even negligent in monitoring his investments, such as by going a few weeks without checking the price of a stock he was thinking of selling. &quot;I advise so strongly against that for my clients,&quot; he says.    At the beginning of September, Mr. Lyons was increasingly edgy about the stock market. But he violated one of his basic principles: Always have some money in put options or short sales as a hedge against falling prices.    That was one thing he was chastising himself for a few weeks later; there was also the error of being too heavily invested in one market sector, and the fact that he hadn't followed through on his decision to sell a lot of stock around mid-year and take profits.    &quot;Fundamentally I'm real good at picking stocks. I'm very bad at knowing when you should get into a large cash position,&quot; he says. &quot;I do make the same mistakes as I did before. . . . I like it so much I hate to be out of it.&quot;    In some cases, differing or conflicting impulses shape a person's investing behavior. Alice Murray, the 33-year-old president and co-owner of an interior design company in Dallas, describes herself as frugal, a result of growing up in a large Illinois farm family where &quot;it was pretty much hand to mouth all the time.&quot;    Ms. Murray certainly isn't an avid investor. &quot;I think of it as necessary drudgery because I don't feel comfortable with it,&quot; she says. &quot;I feel like I don't know enough.&quot;    Although the debate didn't cause any radical changes in these six individuals' investing, it did create considerable confusion and a new hesitancy about going into real estate ventures or certain limited partnerships. Ms. Murray's questions about tax changes, for instance, were one reason she didn't buy into a renovation project in Fort Worth.    Mr. Ounsted, the Ford engineer, invested in 1985 in a suite in a Marco Island, Fla., hotel. But its rental occupancy was running below the developer's projections, and he had been considering taking advantage of a one-year money-back guarantee. The new tax law helped clinch that decision. &quot;Now it's not nearly as attractive,&quot; he says of the investment.    Another dilemma for investors this year was, of all things, the booming stock market of the past few years. With prices up so much, they fretted, what was left to buy?    High prices were clearly a frustration for Mr. Ounsted, a native of England who moved to the U.S. in 1953. With an eye toward retirement, Mr. Ounsted in recent years has been emphasizing mutual funds over riskier individual issues. But he clearly missed the challenge of picking stocks and was looking to make some small stock purchases, &quot;more for the fun of it than for anything.&quot;    He found attractive candidates in short supply, however. &quot;Most stocks seem to be awfully highly valued,&quot; he complained in May.    Douglas Tummond, an Orange, Calif., resident who recently switched professions to financial planning from mechancial engineering, was more blunt: &quot;I'd like to see the market drop about 300 points,&quot; he said in July.    Mr. Tummond, 49, overhauled his investing approach after big losses in the 1970s. A member of Mensa, the high-IQ society, he devised a mathematical formula to identify undervalued stocks to buy and calculate target prices at which to sell. &quot;You can't invest emotionally and make money,&quot; he says.    Mr. Tummond says the system has worked well for 10 years. For much of this year, however, he couldn't find any stocks suitable for purchase with the cash that was coming in from his stock sales.    In yet another indication of the individual nature of investing, Mr. Tummond's spirits perked up with the stock-market decline that so distressed Mr. Lyons. &quot;When you have something like that, you get some prices down to where they are reasonable buys,&quot; Mr. Tummond said in September. &quot;It's more fun when there are things to buy and the market's not doing so well. At least you have the potential.&quot;    ---   Ms. Slater is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.    Investor Profiles   Name: Douglas Tummond   Personal data: Age 49, married, two grown children    Profession: Engineer turned financial planner   Residence: Orange, Calif.   Household income: $80,000   Portfolio: $125,000   High stock prices and a job change were the two main factors shaping Douglas Tummond's investing this year.    The California native, a stock market aficionado, uses a calculator and large quantities of financial data to identify undervalued stocks. But to his frustration, the market's recent lofty valuations left him with nothing to buy from last December through July.    Meanwhile, in late April, Mr. Tummond found that the aerospace equipment company for which he worked as a mechanical engineer was being sold and its operations were being transferred to Denver. That speeded a career change he had expected to make in perhaps another year -- developing his sideline financial-planning business into a full-time job.    The job-related financial uncertainty led Mr. Tummond to restrain his buying once stock prices finally declined. &quot;I'm trying to keep more in cash and less in stocks,&quot; he said. He also postponed from May to September a planned venture into commodity futures trading.    The largest item in his portfolio at the end of September was about $52,000 of stock and bond mutual funds. He invests $50 a month in each of six funds, and he says he will hold onto those investments regardless of market conditions.    Putting on his financial-planner hat, Mr. Tummond says mutual funds are the best way for most people to play the stock market. But for himself, he says, mutual funds are nice, but boring. &quot;Picking stocks is so much fun,&quot; he says.    His system for selecting stocks starts with issues whose prices have fallen over a period of years while the companies' earnings have risen. He then looks for stocks he figures will double in price, based on a potential future price he calculates from such factors as earnings, book value and the stock's volatility.    As of Sept. 30, Mr. Tummond had $18,000 invested in about 15 stocks. His most recent purchases at that time included Claire's Stores Inc., Communications Systems Inc. and Storage Technology Corp.    Mr. Tummond does not look at much beyond the numbers. For instance, when he bought shares of the women's clothing retailer Claire's Stores, he didn't know what type of clothing the company sells or what its target market is. &quot;It's all superfluous information,&quot; he says.    Some of Mr. Tummond's other holdings as of Sept. 30 were a $27,000 mortgage he took back on a former home he sold, $16,500 in real estate and equipment-leasing partnerships, and $5,000 in a new commodity futures account.    His job change caused him to postpone his venture into futures trading -- something he had been doing successfully on a dry-run basis for about two years. &quot;It's going to be postponed until I know what is happening,&quot; he said in May, when he was still evaluating a possible move to Denver. By later in the summer, he had decided to go ahead -- &quot;to supplement my income, hopefully.&quot;    ---   Name: Larry Matthews   Personal data: Age 29, married, no children    Profession: Principal, software company   Residence: Foster City, Calif.   Household income: $76,000   Portfolio: $38,000   A changing investment outlook and the approaching purchase of his first home led Larry Matthews to move his money among different types of mutual funds as 1986 progressed.    More than half his holdings were in bond funds as April began; cash-equivalent money-market funds dominated by late September. In between, a shift into common-stock funds proved intermittently worrisome and ultimately unprofitable.    As of early April, Mr. Matthews was convinced that interest rates had fallen about as far as they would go. So the director of systems development for fledgling Project Management Technologies Inc. was getting ready to transfer dollars into stock funds from the bond funds that had performed handsomely for him the past few years.    &quot;I may wait for one more move in the discount rate (the fee the Federal Reserve charges on loans to banks). Then I'm going to start bailing out of bonds,&quot; said the Milwaukee native, who holds a master of business adminstration degree from the University of Michigan. As for the stock market, he said, &quot;I think it's got room to grow; 2000 on the Dow Jones Industrial Average is not outside the realm of possibility.&quot;    A few weeks later, the discount rate was cut to 6 1/2% from 7%, and Mr. Matthews began moving more than half his bond holdings into various stock mutual funds. But the stock market drifted downward, and the economy proved unexpectedly sluggish, kicking off a period in which Mr. Matthews would be frequently uneasy about his increased stock holdings.    &quot;The market isn't doing what I hoped it would be doing,&quot; he said in mid-May. In late June, after the market had rebounded and more than half his money was in stock funds, he described himself as &quot;still nervous.&quot;    Mr. Matthews considered moving to the greater safety of money-market funds in early August, when he and his wife, Ann Shapiro-Matthews, started looking at houses. But he decided to hold on because the funds' low interest rates just weren't enticing.    That decision didn't look so good a few weeks later, when the steep September slide finally led Mr. Matthews to sell the majority of his stock holdings and move into money-market funds. &quot;As it turned out, I probably should have done it a little sooner,&quot; he said. On balance, he figures he lost about $3,000 on his move into stocks.    Like a number of the husbands in the group of six investors, Mr. Matthews handles most of his family's investing chores. However, he says, that's mostly because his wife, a buyer for a department store, doesn't want that responsibility.    He said he was glad to leave the vagaries of the stock market behind in September, as the time of their house purchase approached. &quot;Now I don't have to pay so much attention to it,&quot; he said. &quot;I think we are in for a roller coaster ride. . . . I'd just as soon get out now for a while.&quot;    ---   Name: Alice Murray   Personal data: Age 33, single, no children    Profession: President, design firm   Residence: Dallas, Texas   Household income: N.A.    Portfolio: $100,000   One of Alice Murray's most satisfying moves this year was the transformation of a disappointing investment into an object of pleasure.    A 1.4-carat ruby she bought several years ago as an inflation hedge had declined in value to about $3,600 from $5,000. But once it was set into a ring, with gold and diamonds, she said: &quot;It's gorgeous. . . . I've never enjoyed an investment as much.&quot;    Profit at Murray Interiors Inc., the two-year-old design company she set up, was &quot;way up,&quot; she says, enabling her to increase her staff and to spend money on luxuries such as a slightly used $33,000 Mercedes sports car. (Ms. Murray declines to specify her annual income.)    Her success came against an unsettling background, however. Her real estate clients were bracing to suffer under a revised tax code, possibly a harbinger of harder times for her company as well. And there was a continuing stream of failures in Dallas's depressed real estate and energy sectors.    While the Illinois native worried intermittently about her $25,000, fully leveraged bank-stock holding, she looked at her $29,000 stake in a stock mutual fund as the foundation of her investment plan. Under a contractual arrangement, $210 is transferred each month from her checking account to Fidelity Investments' Destiny Fund.    Ms. Murray compares that regular investment to her getting up each morning at 5:30 to run four miles. &quot;I'm really structured in almost everything I do,&quot; she says. &quot;I have to do it on a regular basis or I fall off the wagon.&quot; Her other holdings as of September included $40,000 in equity in a Dallas condominium she rents out, $12,000 in another stock mutual fund and about $15,000 in a tax-free money-market mutual fund.    Ms. Murray, who also owns the condominium she lives in, did not make many changes in her investment portfolio between April and September.    In part, that's because she was negotiating with the architects who own half of Murray Interiors to try to increase her stake. She was hesitant to make other major investments because she didn't want to tie up cash she might need for that. Those discussions were described as &quot;on hold&quot; at the end of September.    Meanwhile, Ms. Murray, who has lived in Dallas for nine years, was still waiting for a big influx of cash from the proposed sale of her rental condo. The developer of the building, which is next to a major retail and office complex, is negotiating to sell the whole residential property for redevelopment as commercial space. If that goes through, Ms. Murray figures, her share of the proceeds could be considerably greater than her current equity.    Looking ahead, Ms. Murray was talking about seeking partnership investments or other bargains in the depressed real estate and energy sectors. &quot;I'll probably keep my cash until I find a good investment like that,&quot; she said.    ---   Name: Edwin Ounsted   Personal data: Age 60, married, two grown children    Profession: Engineer, Ford Motor Co.   Residence: Dearborn, Mich.   Household income: $78,000   Portfolio: $290,000   In early April, Edwin Ounsted made probably his biggest investment move of the year: He transferred $43,000 of his Ford Motor Co. savings plan from Ford shares to an income account paying more than 11%.    It was the latest step in his effort to prepare financially and psychologically for retirement -- possibly as soon as two years from now, when he will be 62. &quot;We are taking the money we have and putting it into areas where there is a little more security than in the stock market,&quot; he says.    In reality, the Ford engineer has mixed feelings about retirement -- and about some investment moves he has been making to get ready for it.    He enjoys his work on projects such as developing a ceramic engine. &quot;I've got no burning desire to go and sit out in the sun,&quot; he says. At the same time, he believes he will be happier if he leaves relatively soon -- to start a new life of work, of travel or whatever it may be -- rather than staying at Ford as long as possible.    Meanwhile, Mr. Ounsted has had mixed feelings about his move into mutual funds from individual stocks. &quot;You lessen the ups and downs,&quot; he says, but &quot;I don't find them very much fun.&quot;    He also is unsure about reducing his Ford stockholding. His financial planner has been urging him to diversify for several years. But Mr. Ounsted, who joined the Ford savings plan in 1970, resisted until last year because the Ford stock has been &quot;without any doubt&quot; his most successful investment.    He finally transferred about $32,000, or roughly one-third of his Ford shares, into the income-paying account in late 1985. He said he then decided on the April transfer, which represented almost half the stock he had left, because he doubted the stock could match the guaranteed return on the income account. &quot;I'd rather take the certainty as opposed to the uncertainty,&quot; he said -- though his resolve waivered for a while as Ford stock continued to rise.    As of Sept. 30, Mr. Ounsted's investments included about $184,000 in the Ford savings plan, $40,000 in mutual funds, $4,000 in individual stocks and about $20,000 in real estate partnerships. In addition to the Florida hotel unit, his property holdings included a half interest in a Michigan vacation home and a stake in some Colorado land that he describes as a &quot;disaster.&quot;    Ford hasn't been Mr. Ounsted's only successful investment in the industry he knows best. He bought shares in then-troubled Chrysler Corp. in the early 1980s because, he says, &quot;I just could not see them going under.&quot; His investment grew sevenfold to $35,000 in about three years.    Mr. Ounsted isn't very happy with his partnership investments, including a stake in an apparently untroubled investment from beleaguered real estate sponsor Craig Hall. &quot;I really don't like them because you get in and it is so difficult to track where you are,&quot; he says.    ---   Name: Allan Lyons   Personal Data: Age 45, married, two teen-age children    Profession: Accounting company executive   Residence: Vestal, N.Y.   Household income: $200,000   Portfolio: $1 million   Some weeks this year, Allan Lyons spent as much as 25 hours working on various investments.    His stock-trading method is labor-intensive. It can take a lot of study and monitoring to rack up the more than 350 stock trades the New York City native figures he made between April and September.    Moreover, Mr. Lyons spent considerable time over a period of months -- some of it billable time for his upstate New York employer -- on a big diversification away from the stock market. He helped structure a transaction in which he and several clients of Piaker andamp; Lyons provided financing to businessmen buying 38 Wendy's fast-food restaurants in Florida.    Mr. Lyons invested about $350,000 in the transaction, $250,000 of it borrowed. By the end of September, when his stock portfolio had fallen to $700,000 from around $870,000, he consoled himself that, as he said, the new Florida franchise holders were &quot;really turning things around down there.&quot;    Mr. Lyons's mixed stock-market results in the middle six months of this year were exemplified by his experience with Fidelity Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association in Philadelphia -- his favorite stock and one of his biggest holdings in the period.    The stock started the six months at a little above $14 a share and ended in the $13 range, adjusted for a split. In between, it topped $17 in mid-April, fell below $14 and then rose to $20 in July.    Mr. Lyons sold about 12,000 of his 18,000 shares in July, collecting an average of $19 each on shares he had bought for less than $13. Then he invested further in Fidelity and other savings-institution stocks, only to watch them tumble. &quot;I got tempted,&quot; he said later. &quot;I would have done very well to sell the Fidelity and sit still.&quot;    One of the auxiliary benefits of his heavy trading, he says, is the fact that his numerous brokers offer him a share in initial public offerings.    Mr. Lyons got a big chunk of shares and posted a quick profit on the hottest new issue of 1986 -- the May offering of Home Shopping Network Inc. His 8,000 shares were more than half the 15,000 allocated to the local Merrill Lynch office. He sold the $18 shares shortly after trading began -- at $42 each -- for a profit of about $19,000.    Always looking for overvalued stocks to sell short as well as bargains to buy, Mr. Lyons tried to short Home Shopping Network later the same day at $50. Merrill Lynch refused, citing possible difficulty in procuring shares to cover the short position. That proved lucky for Mr. Lyons, as the stock continued a phenomenal rise.    Mr. Lyons decided against a couple of possible investments during the six months. The stock market decline led him to abandon the idea of seeking a local franchise for frozen-yogurt stores. And the new tax law's restrictions on deducting real estate losses persuaded him not to invest in a new Days Inn hotel near New York City.    ---   Name: Peter Reilly   Personal data: Age 30, single, no children    Profession: Accounting company manager   Residence: Alexandria, Va.   Household income: $52,000   Portfolio: $41,000   Possibilities rather than completed transactions dominated Peter Reilly's investing from April through September of this year.    The manager with accountants Councilor, Buchanan andamp; Mitchell devoted the biggest part of his time to a plan to build six townhouses in Falls Church, Va. The plan was dropped after two months of study.    The most unusual project he was involved in was a friend's idea to organize a Grand Prix automobile race through the nation's capital. &quot;This is another wild one,&quot; Mr. Reilly said happily in July.    The townhouse venture began when a builder, a client of Mr. Reilly, approached him in June for assistance. After a lot of study and about $1,200 in expenses, Mr. Reilly decided the high price of the land made the deal too risky -- particularly in light of the $20,000 that he personally would have kicked in. &quot;To me, $20,000 is a lot of money,&quot; he said. &quot;I was trying to jump before I could crawl.&quot;    Among his more offbeat projects, the Grand Prix race edged out a South American vacation plan for Mr. Reilly's attention. As of the end of September, Mr. Reilly and two friends had obtained information from other cities that hold auto races and had applied for licensing by the federal government. Mr. Reilly was uncertain what would come of the deal. &quot;It's a humongous project,&quot; he said.    The largest item in Mr. Reilly's portfolio as of Sept. 30 was about $15,000 of common stocks, mostly blue-chip stocks with a smattering of lower-priced, higher-risk issues. Other holdings included $6,000 in two racehorse partnerships; $3,000 in stock mutual funds; $4,000 of lithographs by an Italian artist, Simbari; and about $1,000 in a coin collection he started as a teen-ager.    Mr. Reilly, who also owns the condominium he lives in, didn't buy or sell any of his stocks during the six months, and their value didn't change much over the period. But in April, he put about $500 of &quot;fun money&quot; -- profit from a sideline tax-preparation business -- into a call option on a stock-market index. He made about $200 on the call, essentially a bet that stock prices would rise.    Meanwhile, Mr. Reilly, who recalls posting big gains and big losses in options shortly after his college years, has been expecting to use put options to profit on an eventual sustained slide in the stock market. &quot;I've made more money on puts than on calls,&quot; he says.    Mr. Reilly says he &quot;may be mellowing out some&quot; after some turbulent investment times about five years ago. He is as conservative as the stereotypical accountant in at least one investment -- his individual retirement account. Each month, $166 and change ($2,000 a year divided by 12) is automatically deducted from his paycheck and invested in a savings certificate. He says he will continue to be able to do that, on a tax-deductible basis, because he isn't covered by a qualified pension plan. </TEXT></DOC>