<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0119 </DOCNO><HL> AIDS and Panic: Enemies Within---By David F. Musto</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A nation under attack by a foreign enemy unites in opposition. The country's boundaries become walls against invaders. With AIDS, the U.S. faces a civil war, an urging to create a biological boundary through a community, not around it. As unifying as external attack may be, the spread of a biological contaminant within a nation breeds suspicion, fear and desperate action often not responsive to reason.    Quarantines of the past are reasonable guides to future tensions over the spread of AIDS. Quarantines reveal a range of responses to biological danger depending on the length of an attack, consequences for the infected, and social characteristics ascribed to those who are believed to spread the disease. We should not think of quarantine as limited to signs on a front door of a home with a child who has scarlet fever. Quarantine for a childhood disease, a public-health measure now rarely employed, is insignificant compared with the demand for anti-AIDS boundary-making that may develop over the next decade.    In order to understand these powerful forces, we should think of quarantine as a legal demarcation between two groups intended to prevent the penetration of a biological contaminant into the unaffected group. This definition permits a better appreciation of the range of methods that have been employed over the centuries to restrict what the boundary-making groups consider contamination.    Tuberculosis and leprosy no longer occur with the frequency that created fear among observers and hopelessness among the sufferers, but both ailments endured in society for centuries and share some characteristics with AIDS. TB as recently as 1900 caused more deaths per hundred thousand Americans than today are caused by all cancers and motor-vehicle deaths combined. As long as TB was considered hereditary, the chief concern was felt by the tubercular patient and family, but when TB was shown to be a communicable disease, society stepped in.    Public-health authorities gradually achieved widespread testing, physicians were required to report cases to health departments, hospitals and sanitariums limited to tuberculosis appeared across the nation, and &quot;no spitting&quot; signs reminded everyone of lurking danger. Patients tried to disguise their ailment from employers and insurance companies. A few people infected but strong enough to be ambulatory would do nothing to curb their activities or receive treatment. Termed &quot;careless consumptives,&quot; their isolation and involuntary treatment was legalized by the time of World War I. Laws guarding the public's health attained a very high legal standing in the face of ubiquitous danger. Now these responses of Americans to a longstanding health danger are mostly forgotten.    Fear of leprosy is ancient. Leprosy was thought contagious, but just how was debated. At times sexual promiscuity seemed a cause, at other times a consequence. Lepers and religious orders operated leprosaria in many parts of Europe. Although some secular authorities still persecuted lepers, by the 12th century elaborate social and religious customs had evolved to ease for both victim and society the isolation of the leprous. After determination that a person had leprosy through examination by a committee that often included lepers, the newly diagnosed was formally led to church, where a service similar to the requiem Mass would be conducted. Afterward, the leper would be read the rules of isolation to prevent spread of leprosy, but would also be assured that his basic needs would be met and that &quot;this separation is only corporeal. . . . God will never forsake you.&quot; Whether some ritual of reconciliation with AIDS victims will become established in our secular society remains to be seen.    If tuberculosis illustrates some medical policies developed in recent times to deal with lengthy exposure to a contagious disease, and leprosy the social and religious adjustments to a contagious disease in the Middle Ages, the cholera epidemic that hit New York in 1832 shows that intense public fear can override the almost unanimous recommendations of the medical profession against quarantine. We now know cholera is spread through ingesting food or water contaminated with wastes from infected people. The onset is abrupt and the course lasts a week or two. Before modern therapy, the mortality rate was 50%. Physicians in 1832 had mistaken theories, but they were correct that a civic quarantine would have no effect on the spread of cholera within the city. Nevertheless, the public and mayor of New York insisted that person-to-person contact spread cholera, and the city ordered a quarantine against ships and vehicles.    For reasons clear to us now, cholera was most common in the poorest neighborhoods with the worst sanitary facilities. The conclusion drawn by the Special Medical Council, however, was that the disease was &quot;confined to the imprudent, the intemperate and to those who injure themselves by taking improper medicines.&quot; One lesson of this encounter with cholera is that quarantine can be a natural, if ineffective, response to the spread of illness in a community regardless of medical opinion. Furthermore, the tendency to identify diseases with the undesirable promotes acceptance of quarantine.    American immigration laws earlier in this century were partly based on the assumption that certain ethnic groups had an inferior germplasm and that, worse yet, the &quot;superior races&quot; could not even hope for a genetic compromise. In the words of Madison Grant, intermarriage &quot;gives us a race reverting to the more ancient, generalized and lower type.&quot; Seen in the light of these racist eugenic concepts, the immigration laws were a form of quarantine, a boundary to separate the healthy from biological contamination.    Significantly, the motivation for some of our earliest anti-drug laws also had an ethnic component: Blacks were closely identified with cocaine before World War I, Chinese with smoking opium, and in the 1930s, marijuana with chicanos. The association of a feared substance with a feared group is an easy ascription and can result in extreme penalties.    After this brief excursion into quarantine and isolation, what can be said about the prospects for quarantine in the instance of AIDS? AIDS has characteristics that in the past have led to isolation of victims: It is linked with groups rejected by much of society -- homosexuals and intravenous drug users; it is a disease of great danger that most often is transmitted in ways that have been outlawed as illicit practices; and it is an illness that may well exist for decades, endangering larger and larger numbers.    Calls for boundaries around nations to keep AIDS carriers out or expel foreign students and &quot;guest workers&quot; who test positive have already been heard in Europe, Asia and the Pacific, areas with a more limited number of cases than the U.S. and Africa.    Bavaria's conservative government has announced tight restrictions on high-risk groups, including compulsory AIDS testing of foreigners wishing to reside in the West German state. Foreign students are coming under such regimen in several countries. Japan soon is to bar entry to foreigners who are known to carry the virus and are considered &quot;likely to spread the virus to many people,&quot; and this appears to be a developing regional pattern.    It is true that AIDS in the U.S. has characteristics that make a quarantine illogical: It cannot be spread by casual contact; it has not been proved that all people who test positive for AIDS antibodies will go on to develop the full-blown disease; the number of exposed people in some cities is already so high that a quarantine would be extremely expensive and impractical.    But logic and concerns for civil rights and liberties may fall by the wayside and a demand for quarantine may arise as deaths from AIDS mount. Averting this pressure will require great political skill. For by that time, the enemy within may be panic and disorder as much as AIDS.    ---   Dr. Musto is a professor of psychiatry and the history of medicine at the Yale School of Medicine. </TEXT></DOC>