<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870129-0043 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan, in a move that added to his political woes on Capitol Hill, proposed to finance this year's pay increase for federal workers with money that Congress has earmarked for other programs ranging from mass transit to food for the poor.    The funds switch is aimed at complying with the Gramm-Rudman law, which requires that all supplemental appropriations for the current year be offset by equivalent deficit-reduction measures. A supplemental appropriation for fiscal 1987, which ends Sept. 30, is needed to finance the 3% pay raise for federal workers that took effect Jan. 1.    But by proposing to divert funds from other popular programs to cover the cost of the pay increase, the White House ran into renewed protest in Congress over its efforts to cut domestic programs.    Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) denounced the president's proposal to defer $28.6 million of the $50 million that Congress appropriated for the Temporary Emergency Food Assistance program, which funds the costs of intrastate storage and distribution of surplus commodities that state agencies give to needy families. &quot;This is for people at or above the poverty line. The president talked in his State of the Union message about our obligation to those people,&quot; Sen. McCain said.    But administration documents supporting the proposal said that the money was needed to pay for part of the pay increase for Agriculture Department employees. &quot;The program was set up to be a temporary program and is no longer needed,&quot; the documents stated.    The president also proposed to finance pay increases for other departments' personnel by deferring spending for mass transit projects, Forest Service land acquisition, railway safety grants to states and several other programs.    The amount of money involved in the president's proposed deferrals is relatively small -- $265 million -- compared with the $1.016 trillion that the federal government is expected to spend this year. The pay increases are for civil service employees, and aren't the same as the politically sensitive raises proposed for cabinet heads, members of Congress and other high-level officials.    The whole issue of budget deferrals is under a cloud, as the federal appeals court here has ruled that the law governing them is invalid. Under the law, either house of Congress can overturn a deferral, which entails the temporary withholding of appropriated funds. Lawmakers are expected to reject many of the latest deferrals along with previously submitted White House proposals to rescind funds appropriated for the current fiscal year.    But by refusing to rescind or defer current-year outlays, Congress faces the problem of how to finance the pay increase and other supplemental appropriations for fiscal 1987 without running afoul of the Gramm-Rudman law. One possibility is that lawmakers will waive the law's requirements, as they did last year in enacting a drug-abuse prevention bill.    Separately, President Reagan sent Congress a proposal aimed at curbing federal credit programs that benefit such borrowers as students, farmers and small businesses.    The proposal, which was expected, was contained in documents the White House budget office released yesterday providing details of the president's budget for fiscal 1988, which begins next Oct. 1. Earlier this month the president submitted a summary version of the budget.    The administration wants to require federal agencies that administer loan and loan-guarantee programs to seek congressional appropriations for the subsidies implicit in the programs. The budget documents state that &quot;the discipline that the current budget process imposes on most Federal agencies is not fully effective in controlling Federal credit programs,&quot; because the process doesn't show how big the subsidies are.    The administration is hoping that by requiring Congress to provide appropriations for the subsidies, lawmakers will be less generous in funding credit programs. But the programs themselves are popular on Capitol Hill, and the administration faces a tough time getting Congress to approve its proposal to overhaul the process.    Under the administration plan, the government would use several methods to determine the size of the subsidies. It would apply a market test to some federal loans, such as Small Business Administration loans and rural housing loans, that are slated for sale to private investors. The subsidy in these cases would be the difference between the loans' sale price and their face value.    For loans that aren't suitable for sale because they are too sensitive politically, such as foreign military-sales loans, the calculation would be based on a hypothetical sale price.    For loan guarantees, the subsidy would equal the cost of purchasing private insurance to cover losses arising from defaults.    Federal loans outstanding totaled $252 billion, and loan guarantees $450 billion, at the end of 1986. Currently, these programs are subject to a variety of limits. Some loan programs require annual appropriations for the full loan amount, but others don't require annual action because they are financed by revolving funds. Still other credit programs have limits on the amount that can be lent or guaranteed at any one time. </TEXT></DOC>