<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870526-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Donovan, Seven Others, Are AcquittedOf Criminal Charges in New York Case---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 05/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Former Labor Secretary Raymond J. Donovan, the first sitting cabinet member to be indicted, was acquitted of the larceny and fraud charges that forced him from office more than two years ago.    His seven co-defendants, including executives of Schiavone Construction Co., a company Mr. Donovan co-owns, also were found innocent of the charges stemming from a 1979 New York City subway construction project.    Mr. Donovan, who resigned his cabinet post March 15, 1985, stood with arms folded as the jury's verdict in the eight-month-old trial was read. After being proclaimed innocent of grand larceny, the first and most serious charge, the 56-year-old former seminarian made the sign of the cross. As he was acquitted of the last of the 10 counts, Mr. Donovan turned to the jury in New York state Supreme Court in the Bronx, nodded and silently mouthed the words: &quot;Thank you.&quot;    Later, outside the courtroom, Mr. Donovan spoke bitterly of the case, which began when he and his business associates were indicted in September 1984. From the outset, he has contended that the charges were a politically motivated attempt to embarrass President Reagan before the 1984 general election.    &quot;The question is, should this indictment have ever been brought?&quot; said Mr. Donovan, a leading fund-raiser in Mr. Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign. &quot;Which office do I go to to get my reputation back? Who will reimburse my company for the economic jail it's been in for 2 1/2 years?&quot;    When asked by the Associated Press if he would ever consider serving in government again, Mr. Donovan replied: &quot;I will not.&quot;    In Washington, Mr. Reagan expressed his pleasure with the verdict in a prepared statement. &quot;I have always known Ray Donovan as a man of integrity, and I am happy to see this verdict. I have never lost confidence in him,&quot; the president said.    Bronx District Attorney Mario Merola said he wouldn't appeal the verdict, which he attributed to a complicated tangle of evidence consisting of business records and tape-recorded telephone conversations.    &quot;There was no smoking gun. It was a paper-trail case,&quot; Mr. Merola said.    Mr. Donovan's four-year tenure as Labor Secretary was clouded by controversy. Nominated to the post by Mr. Reagan in 1980, the Senate Labor Committee postponed a vote on his confirmation until the Federal Bureau of Investigation issued a report on Jan. 12, 1981, clearing Mr. Donovan of allegations linking him to organized-crime figures. Following suggestions that the FBI hadn't fully informed the Senate of the allegations against Mr. Donovan, special prosecutor Leon Silverman was named later that year to investigate the allegations again, and in 1982 came to the same conclusions that the FBI had. Mr. Silverman issued a second, final report that also concluded that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute Mr. Donovan on any federal charges in connection with the subway project.    But on Sept. 24, 1984, a Bronx County grand jury returned a 137-count indictment charging that from 1979 to 1984 Mr. Donovan and his co-defendants -- most of whom are executives of Secaucus, N.J.-based Schiavone -- tempted to defraud the New York City Transit Authority of $7.4 million. The project was heavily funded by the federal government, and prosecutors alleged that Schiavone never intended to subcontract 10% of the project's work to businesses owned by minority-group members as required by federal regulations.    Mr. Donovon pleaded innocent to the charges, and unsuccessfully attempted to have the case tried in federal court. After losing a bid to have a judge dismiss the charges in state court, Mr. Donovan and his business associates went on trial in the Bronx, after lengthy legal wrangling, last Sept. 30.    Mr. Donovan's attorneys have said the defense of his company's executives has cost more than $13 million, as well as scores of millions more in lost business.    The other defendants in the case were: New York state Sen. Joseph Galiber; William P. Masselli, Mr. Galiber's business partner; and Schiavone officials Joseph A. DiCarolis, president; Richard C. Callaghan, senior vice president; Albert J. Magrini, vice president; Gennaro Liguori, second vice president; and Morris J. Levin, secretary and counsel.    Charges against another defendant, Robert Genuario, were dismissed, and Ronald A. Schiavone, chairman of Schiavone, was granted a separate trial because of ill health.    The prosecution -- which subsequently reduced the charges to 10 from 137 -- took seven months to present its case, calling 40 witnesses and introducing 558 exhibits. The defense rested last month without calling a single witness, arguing that the prosecutor failed to prove any crime.    Yesterday, as the jury filed out of the courtroom after spending 30 minutes delivering its verdict, the defendants, lawyers and court officers broke into spontaneous applause. The jurors also cheered themselves.    The verdict came after two days of courtroom tumult prompted by the emotional outburst of one juror. The juror had locked herself in a bathroom Friday, the second day of deliberations, and demanded to see a priest. When she was brought into court by Justice John P. Collins, she chanted &quot;The Lord is my shepherd&quot; and read the 23rd Psalm in court. The judge released her and added an alternate juror who had heard all the evidence at the trial but hadn't been in on the beginning of deliberations.    Only Mr. Donovan and one other defendant wanted to go on with the alternate juror; the others wanted to file for mistrials. But Justice Collins ordered the jury Saturday to begin deliberations anew on all defendants. </TEXT></DOC>