<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:An Agenda for American Jewry</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The article on the American Jewish Committee by Elliot Rothenberg (editorial page, Nov. 19) has a quaintly old-fashioned ring. The AJC decades ago, after sober assessment of its potential for contributing to the protection of human and Jewish rights, concluded that to achieve our goals it is imperative to participate in a broad range of social issues. Mr. Rothenberg distorts our program and mission.    Fundamental questions are now being raised about the nature of our society. All citizens, civic organizations and religious groups should be encouraged to express their views, as Catholics have recently done on the economy and Protestants on international relations.    The AJC is indeed concerned with the rise of the fundamentalist right in politics. That movement has targeted several institutions critical to American life: the political process, the courts, the schools, and separation of church and state.    Fundamentalist candidates claim to know God's will and work to change social policy to conform to it. To an unprecedented degree, the 1986 elections were characterized by office-seekers identifying themselves with divine guidance and their opponents with Satan. Political philosophies and programs ought to be debated vigorously. This can't happen when one group claims divine sanction.    Fundamentalists advocate the doctrine of &quot;original intent,&quot; which purports to understand the thoughts of the Founding Fathers and declare any judicial evolution since then as illegitimate. This would roll back decades of gains on civil rights and religious pluralism. Even more serious is the fundamentalists' attack on the schools. They support censorship of books with which they disagree and introduction of sectarian religious observances.    The threat presented by the fundamentalist right in politics, the courts and the schools indicates the wisdom of church-state separation. Government cannot be a tool used by one religion to impose its views on others. It must remain an open forum of ideas to be debated and acted upon in a democratic and civil manner.    Our position is anything but hostile to religion or supportive of any narrow ideology. By allowing the free expression of all faiths in the U.S. we have become the most religiously observant society in the Western world. Government support for one religious system would endanger the freedom that protects all faiths.    We also have opposed threats to pluralism from other sources. Mr. Rothenberg truly distorts our position, for example, on affirmative action. Here again, we stand for basic American values.    In our view, affirmative action is necessary to remedy past systematic discrimination against minorities. We support vigorous training, recruitment and education programs to assure the advancement of members of disadvantaged groups. To assure compliance with affirmative-action standards, we endorse the use of flexible goals and time-tables, which can measure progress in overcoming discrimination while assuring that people who are hired merit their positions.    We oppose rigid quotas that demand that a fixed percentage of job or educational slots be set aside for a certain group regardless of the merits of those who fill them. This position best reflects the core American values of opposing discrimination and upholding merit.    The AJC vigorously opposes bigotry and anti-Semitism from all sides, whether from the left by personalities like Louis Farrakhan or from groups like the Aryan Nations on the right.    Mr. Rothenberg and others seem to expect that Israel should be the only concern for American Jewish organizations. Our staunch support for Israel derives from its special importance for us and its moral and strategic meaning to the U.S. But we also affirm that we have a responsibility to promote pluralism and democratic values in our society.    Theodore Ellenoff   President   David M. Gordis   Executive Vice President   American Jewish Committee   New York   ---   I applaud Mr. Rothenberg because of the increasing arrogance of major Jewish organizations in presuming to present agendas that they say reflect the political and social attitudes of the &quot;majority&quot; of the American Jewish community. These agendas, in my opinion, predominately reflect the views of the left-leaning, ultra-liberal &quot;professionals&quot; who dominate the policy-programming of these institutions.    I have been active in Jewish communal affairs for more than 50 years, and have become increasingly alienated as these trends continue to dominate. I have been made to feel like some sort of heartless fascist pariah for pointedly suggesting that the business of our institutions is to function in their primary areas of Jewish defense and the promotion of Jewish cultural, educational and religious values and, above all, to evenhandedly denounce any individual or group that has an overt or covert anti-Semitic bias and is destructive to the essential democratic principles. I have dared to point out that the rise of ultra-orthodox and right-wing extremists such as Rabbi Kahane and his Jewish Defense League and others may in a large measure be a reaction to the super-liberal activists who have taken over so many of these organizations.    Mr. Rothenberg's comments should serve as a warning to those who develop these agendas that there is a substantial segment of Jewish citizens who do not agree with their views. Such citizens are inclined to withdraw support from organizations when their activities in the social and political areas are being extended far beyond the basic purposes for which the groups were formed, and for which they continue to seek support.    George S. Davidson   Toledo, Ohio</TEXT></DOC>