<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880209-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DOLE WON Iowa's Republican caucuses, while Gephardt narrowly led Democrats.    Returns from nearly all the 2,487 precincts showed the Kansas senator leading the Republican presidential field with 37% of the vote, followed by Robertson, 25%; Bush, about 19%; Kemp, a little more than 10%; and du Pont and Haig trailing. With most of the Democratic returns in, the top candidates were bunched, with the Missouri representative's nearly 30% slightly topping Simon and Dukakis. Babbitt, Jackson, Hart and Gore trailed.    Robertson's performance puts Bush's lead in New Hampshire polls in jeopardy and makes a Kemp surge questionable in that state's primary next week.    ---   GORBACHEV OFFERED to begin pulling troops out of Afghanistan by May 15.    The Soviet leader, heightening pressure on the U.S. and Pakistan to make concessions, offered to start the pullout by that date and complete it over a 10-month period if U.N.-sponsored talks between Pakistan and Afghanistan result in a settlement by mid-March. Reagan reacted cautiously to the offer, but an administration official said it will boost withdrawal expectations among the Soviet people.    A U.N. mediator engaged in shuttle diplomacy in preparation for the peace talks said in Pakistan that his efforts toward an accord were nearing an end.    ---   Palestinian mourners clashed with Israeli troops during the funeral of a Gaza Strip youth allegedly beaten to death by soldiers, and hospital officials said 10 were wounded by gunfire. Israel's military denied its troops had beaten the youth. Curfews were imposed on 11 Arab towns in occupied territories.    ---   The Pentagon began its most complex Strategic Defense Initiative space test to date with the launch of a Delta rocket carrying a research craft at Cape Canaveral. If the $250 million project succeeds, it will move the U.S. closer to knowing whether space-based systems can track and intercept enemy missiles.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci said NATO will modernize its short-range nuclear arms and that West Germany, which had tried to persuade the U.S. to make reductions in the weapons a priority in East-West talks, has agreed. He said the allies agreed the talks should focus on long-range nuclear missiles, chemical arms and conventional forces.    ---   Austrian President Waldheim knew about and didn't try to stop Nazi atrocities during his World War II German army service in the Balkans, but there is no proof that he committed war crimes, a panel of historians has concluded. The Austrian Press Agency obtained a copy of the panel's report, which was commissioned by the government.    ---   Contra leaders said they will delay peace talks with Nicaragua's government because of last week's congressional rejection of further aid to the rebels. Contra leaders said they wouldn't attend a session that had been scheduled for tomorrow in Guatemala and that they have created two tax-deductible organizations to receive private donations.    A Nicaraguan judge cleared Illinois farmer James Denby on charges he worked with the Contras to overthrow the Sandinista government. Denby's light plane was shot down over Nicaragua in December and he was released to the U.S. last month.    ---   The White House denied allegations by Gen. Noriega, Panama's military ruler, that the U.S. sought his cooperation in a plan to invade Nicaragua. Meanwhile, a New York district attorney told a Senate panel that the U.S. knew of Noriega's drug activities for years, but that he wasn't indicted until last week because U.S. officials shielded him.    ---   The U.S. will conduct naval exercises off the South Korean coast next fall as part of a campaign to deter North Korea from disrupting the Seoul Olympics, administration officials said. At least one and possibly two aircraft carriers, along with supporting warships, will move into the Sea of Japan during the Games, the officials said.    ---   A West German commuter plane crashed about seven miles north of Dusseldorf, its destination, killing all 21 aboard. Officials said the Nuremberg Flight Service FA-4 Metroliner probably broke up in a storm during a flight from Hamburg. It was the worst West German air crash since 1971.    ---   West Germany indicted Mohammed Hamadi for air piracy and murder in connection with the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner to Beirut, where a Navy sailor was killed. Hamadi is wanted by the U.S., but West Germany last year refused an extradition request and touched off weeks of tension between Bonn and Washington.    ---   Philippine communist rebels killed a government official in a Manila ambush and 11 other people died in a series of provincial attacks, the military said. The attacks came hours after President Aquino called on Filipinos to pinpoint rebel hideouts and the military went on alert against retaliations for the capture of rebel leaders last week.    ---   A Somalian court sentenced a former vice president, a former foreign minister and six other people to death by a firing squad for plotting against the government of President Mohamed Siad Barre. During a weeklong trial, the former officials were accused of negotiating with the Iraqi government to raise a 30,000-strong militia.    ---   Raymond Barre said he will run in the April 24 French presidential vote. The former prime minister's announcement follows those of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac and rightist leader Jean-Marie Le Pen. </TEXT></DOC>