<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870330-0094 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR TEX UAL TWAAIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's 3 a.m., and Bobbie Baur gulps coffee while applying makeup with the deft touch of a professional model. In just two hours, the 29-year-old flight attendant for United Airlines will be aboard a plane heading down the runway at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport.    She reaches for her uniform, a somewhat shiny navy-blue polyester pantsuit with worn spots on the legs. It has taken her two years to repay United the $800 the airline charged her for clothes, and she hopes that United soon will at least replace the pants.    With her scarf tied in United's regulation &quot;perky bow,&quot; Ms. Baur flips on her telephone answering machine, waters a scraggly plant and turns off the heat in her small apartment. This is her last month here. Her roommate recently moved out, and she can't afford the $575 rent.    Before joining United in 1985, Ms. Baur, a small and spirited brunette, had a lofty image of flight attendants, with their blocks of days off and free plane fare to exotic vacation spots. But she has had neither time nor the spending money to use a single free travel pass. There is less glamour in the work than there is physical labor, low pay and stress.    Turmoil in the airline industry today has clearly affected the cabin crews. Mergers and competition spawned by deregulation have made a hard job harder and have soured flight attendants. &quot;More people nowadays . . . get fed up and quit,&quot; says Kit Darby, a vice president of the Future Aviation Professionals Association, an airline-career trade group.    Currently, more than half the nation's 100,000 flight attendants have at least 10 years' experience, but some industry experts view that stability as precarious. They believe that more of today's flight attendants will fly for a few years and then move on -- much as stewardesses did before the 1960s, when attendants formed their own unions and won job security, better pay and benefits.    Rapid turnover is already a way of life at some carriers. At financially troubled Eastern Airlines, where attendants last year agreed to take a 20% pay cut and to work more hours, 133 of the 1,000 flight attendants hired in 1986 quit after less than six months on the job.    Ms. Baur, however, says she is determined to make a career of flying -- if salaries improve. She is a &quot;B-scaler,&quot; hired in 1985 after United began paying new hires less money. But the continuing consolidation in the industry, which is shrinking the number of airlines and pushing fares higher, will, she hopes, eventually increase salaries. &quot;I chose United because it's a strong company,&quot; she says.    The ever-smiling Ms. Baur radiates energy. &quot;I really do love this job,&quot; she says. And she doesn't look half as tired as she claims to be. Every month, Ms. Baur tries to fly 85 hours -- 20 hours above her base requirement -- so she can pay her bills. To log that much flight time, she is away from home about 20 days a month. On her remaining 10 days off, she says, &quot;I'm too jet-lagged to do anything but rest.&quot;    Her monthly take-home pay is $1,100, which includes $350 -- or $1.50 an hour -- for personal expenses while she is on the road. But even with overtime, she says, &quot;I can barely afford to live on this salary.&quot; To help make ends meet, Ms. Baur is moving back home with her parents in St. Louis.    Her salary is based only on time spent in the air. On this trip -- Chicago to Grand Rapids, Mich., to Chicago to Tucson, Ariz., to Chicago to Hartford, Conn., and back to Chicago -- she earns work credit for 12.5 hours, but she will be away for about 40.    Arriving for work at daybreak, Ms. Baur heads for United's crew lounge at O'Hare, already abuzz with uniformed women and men dragging luggage carts. She stops for a quick briefing with three flight attendants who will accompany her on this trip: Vanessa Griffin and Ronald Fleming, who, like Ms. Baur, are two-year veterans, and Jeff Troendly, who has flown five years for United, a unit of UAL Inc.    All four are single. Ms. Griffin, 27, has always lived with her parents in Chicago. This permits her an occasional splurge, she says, such as the two-day shopping trip she took last year to Korea. Mr. Fleming, 24, has parents who help him maintain a small studio apartment in Chicago. Mr. Troendly, 30, earns about $22,000 a year, almost twice what the others are paid, because he was hired before 1985.    Since deregulation in 1978, big airlines such as United have been trimming operating costs to compete with low-cost carriers. Their principal tool has been the two-tier wage scale, pioneered by American Airlines but subsequently adopted by most others. Under such plans, new employees are paid substantially lower wages than those with more seniority. For example, American flight attendants hired after 1983 begin at $972 a month and reach a ceiling of $1,200 a month after five years. The last group of American flight attendants hired before 1983 started at $1,142 a month and peak at $2,306 after 12 years. The lower-paid &quot;B-scalers&quot; now constitute about 4,000 of American's 10,000 flight attendants. American's two-tier wage scale is an issue in its currently stalled contract negotiations with flight attendants.    Declining salaries notwithstanding, the airlines are awash with applicants -- including college graduates -- eager to be flight attendants. Continental Airlines even charges a $25 application fee. TWA, Eastern and Continental charge recruits for training at &quot;charm farms,&quot; where they learn emergency and safety procedures, food service and grooming. At $2,200, TWA's tuition is the highest.    Few passengers will be unfortunate enough to see how a flight attendant can evacuate a planeload of passengers in 90 seconds. But air travelers' impressions of an airline hinge in large part on the cabin crew's ability to serve food and drink with efficiency and aplomb.    With 135 coach passengers bound for Tucson, Ms. Baur bounces through the narrow Boeing 727 cabin like an experienced carhop, balancing three lunch trays at a time. &quot;I like to run with the trays since I don't get much time to exercise,&quot; she explains.    Forcing a smile, Ms. Baur asks four passengers standing in line for the lavatories to sit down because the plane is rocking through some turbulence. They ignore her until she tells them firmly, &quot;I insist that you return to your seats.&quot;    Up in the first-class compartment, Mr. Troendly is biting his tongue to keep from cursing. One businessman is irate because the airline didn't provide the special meal he had ordered. Mr. Troendly tries to console him with a fruit plate, which he rejects. After all the fruit plates have been given out, the man changes his mind. Mr. Troendly fumes, &quot;I came this close to letting him have it.&quot;    Close confinement in a cramped plane tends to make people explode at little annoyances, explains Sonia Butterfield, who has flown 29 years with United. &quot;It's a type of cabin fever,&quot; she figures. Boozers are particular nuisances, and they are sure to make a scene if flight attendants refuse to serve them.    In commercials, airlines tout their service, challenging travelers, in TWA's words, to &quot;find out how good we really are.&quot; It falls to flight attendants to make good on the promises. &quot;We're on the front lines,&quot; Ms. Butterfield says. &quot;Passengers come back to an airline because of us.&quot;    And in today's highly competitive climate, management expects them to give more. After they complete their assigned tasks, &quot;We don't want them sitting in the back of the plane smoking or reading a book or doing cross-stitch,&quot; says a United supervisor in Chicago. &quot;They should be out there talking to passengers.&quot;    But behind the scenes, flight attendants complain that management doesn't always treat them professionally. In their belt-tightening, some carriers are cracking down on absenteeism and employee theft, with measures that ignite resentment.    &quot;We're all scared to use our sick leave,&quot; confides one American attendant, who says that some supervisors require a doctor's note after just a two-day absence.    Ms. Baur also worries about being reprimanded -- so much so that she sometimes flies when she is sick. Once she flew when she had a cold and the pilot made her leave the plane after her congested ears began to bleed. &quot;The doctor told me that I nearly blew my eardrum,&quot; she says, adding, &quot;There's a lot of wear and tear on your body with this job.&quot;    At Eastern, which says it loses $70 million a year to pilferage and absenteeism, flight attendants say they undergo random handbag and luggage searches, and a few say they have been frisked. An Eastern spokesman acknowledges that the airline is stepping up its spot checks of personnel but denies that frisking is part of the procedure. Eastern did recently fire a flight attendant who was $2 short on liquor money at the end of a flight.    &quot;Don't get caught with a deck of cards, liquor bottles or anything with Eastern Airlines written on it,&quot; warns Lori Gray, who has flown nine years for the airline. &quot;Management is looking for any excuse to fire us so they can hire new people at $12,000,&quot; Ms. Gray asserts.    The differences between veterans and new recruits goes well beyond paychecks. Airline mergers, strikes and bankruptcy proceedings have disrupted flight-attendant camaraderie, creating new pressure in the cabin. Among TWA's 5,000 flight attendants, for example, are several factions. One-half are newly hired, brought in to break a strike last year. Veteran employees fall into two camps -- those who refused to strike and those who did but were rehired as a result of a federal court order. The TWA ranks also include 700 former Ozark Air Lines employees who took pay cuts as high as 50% in order to stay on the payroll after TWA had acquired Ozark in a merger last year. &quot;There's a lot of bitterness here,&quot; says Linda Matto, a TWA striker who was rehired. &quot;We go about our work all right, but sometimes we don't talk to each other during the whole flight.&quot;    United's financial stability has left it relatively free of such strife. On their three-day trip, Ms. Baur and her colleagues kid one another most of the way. During the overnight layover in Tucson, they gather at the hotel pool for sunbathing before going out to dinner together.    The 22-hour layover is a rare treat. The airlines, in their drive to hold down costs, are striving for faster turnaround. Attendants are booked on flights scheduled in rapid succession.    In 1986, for example, TWA changed its work rules to book flight attendants on domestic trips 10 hours after completing a previous trip, instead of one day. Turnaround for international trips has dropped to 24 hours from as many as three or four days. A round trip may involve several flights and 12 hours of flying time.    With long hours and low pay becoming the industry standard, flight attendants such as Ms. Baur increasingly must grasp at intangibles for their job satisfaction. She still takes pleasure, for example, in the many complimentary letters she receives from passengers. In one, two little girls wrote in crayon: &quot;Bobbie, we had fun playing with you.&quot; A United supervisor says flight attendants get a copy of each such &quot;orchid letter,&quot; along with &quot;a pat on the back.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>