<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0079 </DOCNO><HL> At One Newspaper, Gunshots and Fires Cover the Reporters --- South Africa's Saamstaan Is Opposition-Press Legend; Hiding Notes in Hubcaps </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Thurow (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><IN> PUB </IN><DATELINE> OUDTSHOORN, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When the three policemen asked Patrick Nyuka for his notes from a political rally, he did what any reporter for the Saamstaan newspaper would do: He ate them.    Next the policemen demanded his camera. He tossed it to his brother, who threw it to a friend, who handed it off to someone else, who ran away.    Infuriated, the policemen grabbed for all that was left: the reporter himself. Mr. Nyuka was trying to scramble over a fence when his pursuers opened fire. Thirteen buckshot pellets hit him in the back, and another blast caught him in his left wrist. He spent a week in intensive care, and then five days in jail, charged with inciting public violence.    The 21-year-old reporter, pellets still lodged in his back and his left arm hanging limp, manages to laugh. &quot;There they were with their guns, and here I was with a notebook and camera,&quot; he says. &quot;I get shot and they charge me with public violence.&quot;    That's the way it goes when you work for the opposition press in South Africa. Saamstaan (Afrikaans for &quot;stand together&quot;) is one of seven newspapers the government has threatened to close. Its harsh reports from the depths of rural South Africa, where few other journalists go, have sparked a government warning that the newspaper is fanning revolution and is thus a danger to public safety. Under the state of emergency laws, the minister of home affairs now can ban the paper for three months if he feels like it. That's the official way to silence Saamstaan.    Then there are the unofficial ways.    The newsroom has been set on fire three times, once while a reporter was inside. That same reporter was later mysteriously charged with cattle rustling and now faces trial on another subversion charge. Someone identifying himself as a security officer phoned the newsroom saying he intended to kill the editor. Obscene shouting often bursts on the line in the middle of phone calls. Three staff members have been shackled with restriction orders, meaning, among other things, that they can't leave this southern town.    &quot;Everything is being done to stop us,&quot; says Reggie Oliphant, a member of Saamstaan's executive committee and one of the restricted trio. &quot;But against all the odds, we're still coming out.&quot;    Pretoria's repressive state-of-emergency measures, which include a maze of press restrictions, have generally succeeded in putting a lid on the dissent that brought this country to the verge of revolution two years ago. The reduced unrest has moved South Africa off many of the world's front pages and television screens. And the government measures have forced much of the nation's mainstream press to opt for self-censorship rather than risk government censure.    But small opposition presses continue to roll. Two newspapers Pretoria temporarily banned under its emergency powers -- the New Nation in Johannesburg and South in Cape Town -- have reappeared with renewed vigor. Saamstaan, flouting its official warning, has begun publishing monthly instead of every six weeks, and has been pumping up its circulation, now at 17,000.    Still, Saamstaan is in a particularly difficult position. Of all the papers that have drawn government warnings, it is the only one operating in a conservative Afrikaner backwater. None of Oudtshoorn's white lawyers will represent the paper. None of the local printers will touch it. The editors would like to double its size, but few businesses will advertise in it. (The ads it does carry are mainly from anti-apartheid groups.)    &quot;Revolutionary rag,&quot; sneers a shopowner in the white part of town.    The newspaper's staff can't work underground, for in Oudtshoorn there isn't any place to hide. &quot;It's getting so that you can't even go to the toilet without being watched,&quot; sighs Derick Jackson, Saamstaan's 28-year-old acting editor.    Saamstaan's newsroom, three small offices adjoining a grocery store in the colored, or mixed-race, part of town, is a frequent target of police stakeouts and raids. The paper makes copies of its stories and hides them in several places, in case they get confiscated. During a recent raid, reporters sat on the stories to keep them away from the police.    A staffer takes home the paper's lone typewriter every night in case there is another fire. On the way to the printers 300 miles away in Cape Town, the copy and photos are stashed in various parts of the paper's van. Editor Jackson once hid his notes in the van's hubcaps to get them through a police roadblock.    &quot;It's dangerous to take anything for granted,&quot; Mr. Jackson says. &quot;You get to be very clever.&quot; The staff's latest trick is to publish a sister publication, called Staansaam, which could legally take Saamstaan's place should it be banned.    A police official in Oudtshoorn denies harassing Saamstaan. &quot;As a police force we deal with crime, not newspapers,&quot; he says. At police headquarters in Pretoria, a spokesman says, &quot;We don't harass people.&quot; A Ministry of Home Affairs spokesman says, &quot;We deal solely with the emergency media regulations. I have no knowledge of the other things.&quot;    Saamstaan has become a legend in the black and mixed-race townships of the southern Cape Province. Before the newspaper started publishing in 1983, Oudtshoorn was best known for its ostrich farms. Today, it is known as a center of anti-government resistance.    &quot;The paper has become a symbol in our community. Saamstaan, standing together, that's all people talk about,&quot; says one reporter who has been in and out of detention. &quot;When the paper appeared, it was the first time people came together to talk about our common problems.&quot;    Saamstaan also opened a small window onto what was happening in rural South Africa, where the living conditions and political repression are often far more severe than in the urban areas. &quot;Saamstaan goes to areas where the urban journalists never go and the rest of the world never hears about,&quot; says the Rev. D.S. Banzi, the regional organizer of the South African Council of Churches. &quot;They have taken us out of hiding.&quot;    Financed largely by church groups in the Netherlands, Saamstaan has no formal owner. A committee of local black and colored anti-apartheid activists manages it. It relies on community organizations across the southern Cape to provide it with news tips. Only one of the five full-time reporters has had formal journalism training, but the others make up for their lack of experience with determination.    &quot;We've made a commitment to ourselves. We've said we want to contribute toward changing the system, and now we're under an obligation to do that,&quot; Mr. Jackson says. &quot;No matter what the government says about us threatening public safety, it won't infringe on our commitment to bring out the real news.&quot;    Saamstaan's eight tabloid-size pages -- written in Afrikaans, English and Xhosa -- are full of stories that make the government squirm: reports about the detention of children and political prisoners, features about repressive conditions in rural black and mixed-race townships, interviews with families of men on death row for politically motivated crimes, profiles of prominent anti-apartheid activists. When a captured member of the outlawed African National Congress claimed that he should be treated as a prisoner of war, Saamstaan ran a series of articles examining the Geneva Convention's war rules.    Saamstaan doesn't try to hide its bias. It supports the United Democratic Front, the country's largest anti-apartheid organization, and it promotes the ideals set out in the Freedom Charter, the guiding document of the African National Congress. The motto above the newsroom door is taken from the Book of Hebrews: &quot;Remember those in prison as if you are in prison with them.&quot;    Since much of what it prints technically violates one or another of the many emergency laws, Saamstaan rarely appears on the newsstands. Instead, most of the 17,000 copies are distributed, and read, clandestinely. Few people will risk keeping the paper for longer than it takes to read it, so Saamstaan is handed out for free.    For the Saamstaan staff, though, the price of publication has been high. After the shooting incident, Patrick Nyuka has had to give up his beloved pastimes: boxing and playing soccer. He faces further operations on his arm and his back.    Not long ago, somebody sent Derick Jackson's sister a picture of his head attached to a photo of a nude body. In the picture, he is wearing his hair in a big afro, a style he says he had only in detention in 1986.    Today, Mr. Jackson is under house arrest, which means he must be in his home between 6 p.m. and 5 a.m. and can't address gatherings of more than 10 people at any one time. This means he can't even attend rugby practice (there are 15 men to a side), and he was prevented from making a speech at his wedding reception in July.    Mr. Oliphant of the Saamstaan executive committee, who is also a former regional organizer of the United Democratic Front, has seen his car firebombed and his career as a teacher destroyed. Now, confined to Oudtshoorn, he is getting restless.    &quot;It's one hell of a life,&quot; says the 40-year-old father of five, taking a long, tired drag on his cigarette.    His recent application to attend a teacher's convention in Cape Town was denied by the local police commander. The official letter, written with the double negatives that are the hallmark of South African bureaucracy, declared, &quot;I wish to advise that the divisional commissioner is not convinced that the granting of consent by him in order for you to visit Cape Town will not result in the safety of the public {and} the maintenance of public order being threatened, or the termination of the state of emergency being delayed.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>