<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870825-0123 </DOCNO><HL> REGIONS:Florida's Service-Tax DisputeMay Come to Early Showdown---By Eugene CarlsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESMARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)PUBLISHING (PUB)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   IS FLORIDA'S controversial new tax on the service sector a shrewd revenue-raising tactic engineered by a rising young Republican Party star? Or is the tax a political embarrassment and a fiscal flash in the pan? The next few months will tell.    Until last week, the paramount question seemed to be how many states would follow Florida's lead and begin to levy taxes on services -- the fastest-growing sector of the economy, but one that is largely untaxed.    As evidence of the growing interest in the tax in state capitals beyond Tallahassee, the American Legislative Exchange Council, a politically conservative, business-backed organization that funnels information to state lawmakers, announced Friday a national campaign aimed at stopping the service tax at the Florida line.    But the game plan changed over the weekend when Florida Gov. Bob Martinez said Florida voters should decide as early as next March whether the 5% tax on most services should survive in their own state. Mr. Martinez said he would call the legislature into special session next month to draft an amendment to the state constitution prohibiting the tax, which took effect July 1. The question would appear on the March 8 presidential primary ballot. The governor would spend considerable time in the intervening months campaigning to defeat the very amendment that he proposed.    THE CURIOUS TURN OF EVENTS reflects a belief by the governor and his chief aides that opponents of the service tax -- an amalgam of business and taxpayer groups -- are gaining momentum. &quot;Everybody knows the initiative is picking up steam,&quot; says Glenn Robertson, the governor's director of policy and finance, referring to a grass-roots signature-gathering campaign aimed at putting the service-tax question on the presidential ballot in November 1988.    More noteworthy have been well-publicized howls from groups of businesses and professionals -- advertisers, hoteliers, publishers, lawyers, accountants and homebuilders -- covered by the tax. Unlike narrower service-sector taxes in a half-dozen other states, the Florida tax covers nearly all services and even stretches beyond state lines to nail advertisers whose campaigns run in Florida.    The sales tax idea, which originated in the Democrat-controlled legislature, but which Mr. Martinez seized and championed shortly after his inauguration in January, was expected to finance basic needs such as schools and roads in one of the nation's fastest-growing states. Income taxes are prohibited by Florida's constitution, as are state taxes on personal property and real estate.    BUT THE PROTESTS, particularly by newly stung taxpayers with media access, like newspapers and broadcasters, have overshadowed the projected $1 billion annual windfall. A few national advertisers have canceled Florida campaigns, a blow to the pocketbooks of publishers and broadcasters. Some conventions have shifted to other states. Lawyers have said they'll tie the issue up in court for years on questions ranging from tax equity to the First Amendment (the latter on the argument that the provision taxes commercial speech).    Other states are fascinated by Florida's dilemma. Some are flirting with the same tax strategy, but don't want to fall into the publicity trap that has snared Gov. Martinez. But Florida, assuming that the fierce criticism coming its way will soften if other states get the service-tax religion, has been proselytizing at every chance.    &quot;Florida officals have been finding as many national and state forums as possible to extol the virtues of what they did,&quot; says Constance Heckman, executive director of the Washington-based American Legislative Exchange Council. &quot;They're actually out there promoting it as a national trend.&quot;    LINGERING IN EVERYONE'S MEMORY is the state's awkward experience with the unitary tax. In July 1983, just three weeks after the U.S. Supreme Court defined how states may tax multinational companies, Florida lawmakers passed a unitary tax on world-wide income -- and promptly brought down the wrath of big business.    Such a measure allows states to tax multinationals on the basis of their world-wide income, not just on what they earn in the state. The state saw it as a painless way to pay for an expensive education bill. Critics said it injured the state's pro-business reputation. The tax was repealed 18 months later.    &quot;He's scared,&quot; says Ms. Heckman of Gov. Martinez's call for a popular vote on the sales tax. &quot;He's obviously feeling the heat very much.&quot;    Gov. Martinez's plan for an early vote on the issue is intended to keep the issue from dragging on in continuing debate through next November, and to give the state a better shot at realistic budget planning for fiscal 1989, which starts next July 1. &quot;It's hard to prepare a budget when about 15% of your revenue may cease in November,&quot; says J.M. Stiponovich, the governor's chief of staff.    And it lets Mr. Martinez go on the offensive, fighting for a cause on which he has staked much prestige. The 52-year-old former mayor of Tampa is Florida's first Republican chief executive in 15 years. His sales-tax strategy has won him favorable national notice even as it has offended conservatives at home.    The outcome is anybody's guess. Florida's service-tax opponents are &quot;real concerned about the First Amendment,&quot; says Mr. Stiponovich. &quot;We think the people are concerned about roads, schools and prisons. So we're going to find out.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>