<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0125 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> BAGHDAD, Iraq  </DATELINE><TEXT>   While American politicians are busily dodging responsibility and dishing out blame for the secret sale of U.S. arms to Iran, the bitterest harvest of Ronald Reagan's misguided policy is being reaped here in the Middle East.    Two weeks of travel in Egypt, Jordan and Iraq find Arabs profoundly confused and deeply despairing. Those Arabs who by choice, or lack of it, have cast their lot with the West speak with the bitterness of the betrayed. Others, like the Iraqis, who had masked their cynicism about the U.S. out of temporary need, are regretting the momentary marriage of convenience. And Saudi Arabia, widely suspected by its Arab brethren of having knowledge of the secret arms sales through Saudi arms merchant Adnan Khashoggi, is simply too frightened to say anything.    Such genuine friends as Jordan's King Hussein and Egyptian leaders talk about American arms sales to Iran in terms that a wife would reserve for a faithless husband. They are humiliated at having vouched for American fidelity in the fight against Khomeinism only to discover that the U.S. was secretly carrying on an affair with their enemy. As for the Iraqis, whose army is now bleeding by the shores of Basra's Fish Lake, their bitterness and anger are palpable.    &quot;The region feels shattered,&quot; says Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz.    To be sure, American allies everywhere have been distressed by the deception of America saying one thing in public and doing another in secret, but the Arabs are the epicenter of that shock. After all, Iran is using U.S. weapons not on France or Japan but on Arabs. And, while the intertwining of U.S. policy with that of Israel may be a mild palliative to some U.S. politicians, it's the bitterest pill of all to the Arabs, confirming all their worst suspicions of Uncle Sam being manipulated by tiny Israel. The only happy Arabs these days are Libya's Moammar Gadhafi and Syria's Hafez Assad. They can claim vindication in their abiding belief that America is the enemy of the Arabs. The moderates, meanwhile, are more vulnerable than ever before.    The Middle East has always been a region of bitter ironies and sad paradoxes. The best way to understand the current mood of the region is to focus on four such paradoxes.    Westerners have always been bemused and bewildered by the Arab proclivity for conspiratorial thinking. One and one never add up to two in the Arab world, say the logical, linear thinkers of the West, and there is a great deal of truth to this. So, if three months ago a group of Arabs had sat around a Cairo coffeehouse and propounded the theory that Ronald Reagan, the American president who said what he thought and did what he said, was secretly shipping arms to Ayatollah Khomeini's terrorist regime, it would have been dismissed as the tortured thinking of twisted minds. Equally unbelievable, but now widely believed in Arab capitals, are the reports from Washington that the U.S. not only provided secret intelligence data to both sides in the Iraq-Iran conflict but purposefully falsified the data to confuse the combatants. This bit of deceit contributed to an Iraqi defeat with an estimated 15,000 casualties, according to Iraq's first deputy prime minister, Taha Yassin Ramadan.    These days no twisted thoughts the Arabs can concoct are any worse than the nightmare that has just come true. Thus, one now hears in both Amman and Baghdad the theory that the U.S. in league with Israel sought a secret pact with Iran to oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein and to turn over the Iraqi port city of Basra to the ayatollah.    Why in the world would the U.S. want to do that? Simple, say the Arabs. Iran would get Iraq's second-largest city and its Persian Gulf property, leaving Iraq a landlocked lesser state. Israel would be left to deal with an emasculated Iraq and an indebted Iran. And the U.S., by sealing this bargain, would so frighten Saudi Arabia, ostensibly our friend, that the Saudi royal family would have to consent at last to an American base on Saudi soil.    Several months ago all this would have seemed laughable, but what Westerner now has full confidence to call the Arabs conspiratorial fools?    However it is viewed, Mr. Reagan's policy toward Iran hasn't been popular in the U.S. Polls show that Americans, who harbor bitter memories of Iran's holding 52 diplomats hostage for more than a year, are overwhelmingly unsympathetic to the explanation that the president was trading arms for hostages. They are somewhat more understanding of a justification that claims America was trying to open a dialogue with Iranian moderates. But that's an explanation Americans don't seem to believe.    Arabs, who are used to bargaining over everything, find nothing particularly sinister about a policy of trading arms for hostages, but they are absolutely convinced that America's interest in hostages was only a flimsy cover story for a fundamental American strategic shift from the Arabs to the Persians.    Ronald Reagan loses both ways. The justification that he might sell to the Arabs is the one he can't sell to the Americans, and the explanation that would sell at home is the one that is anathema to the Arabs.    In recent weeks, there's been much talk at the White House about building bridges to so-called moderates in Iran. It has never been exactly clear who these Iranian moderates are, much less how TOW missiles and spare parts for Iranian jet fighters would have served the cause of moderation. In any case, the forces of radical fundamentalism still seem entirely ascendant in Iran.    Meanwhile, however, it is America's frail bridges to the Mideast's moderate Arab leaders that have been burned by the events of recent months. These bridges -- of Camp David, American aid and repeated, if unsuccessful, peace initiatives -- were never strong to begin with and had weakened considerably during the past few years of benign neglect by the Reagan administration. Still, Jordan's King Hussein, Egypt's Hosni Mubarak and the Saudi royal family clung to their links to Washington.    Now, with America seen to be arming those forces in the region that threaten them the most, the Middle East's real moderates are staring into the abyss. Each seems to have its own horror story. In Jordan, for example, officials recount in embarrassment and anger the tale of how only four days before the news of the U.S.-Iran arms traffic broke, a Pentagon team was in Amman to tout the successes of Operation Staunch, America's public policy to stem all arms sales to Iran. When Jordanian officials pointed out that Iraq had captured U.S. equipment sold to Iran by Israel, the U.S. team insisted that couldn't be so. &quot;Show us just one piece of armament and we'll put it on {Israeli Prime Minister Yitzak} Shamir's desk and put a stop to it,&quot; Jordanian officials say they were told.    From this vantage point, it may be the ultimate irony that Israel, which has been intimately and intricately involved in the secret American dealings with Iran and which appears to have instigated the whole arms-sales policy, now is loudly demanding apologies from Washington. The Israelis, understandably, don't want to be the fall guys for a failed secret diplomacy and thereby risk losing U.S. congressional and public support.    The Arabs, who of course are the real victims of the American-Israeli initiatives toward Iran, are so dazed and depressed that they haven't summoned up the courage to ask Washington for apologies.    The Kuwaitis, in their vulnerable little principality threatened by neighboring Iran, put it in black humor. They have taken to talking of &quot;Greater Washington&quot; and &quot;Lesser Washington.&quot; Greater Washington, of course, is Jerusalem.    The whole affair has confirmed all of the Arabs' worst suspicions about the American-Israeli relationship. Ostensibly, the U.S. has an even-handed Mideast policy maintaining friendships with both the Israelis and the more moderate Arabs. No one in the Mideast entirely believes that, but moderates such as King Hussein and President Mubarak have taken some consolation from the belief that while the U.S.-Israeli partnership is paramount, America at least is the dominant partner, periodically pulling the strings on Israel. The lesson they profess to see in recent events is that it's Israel pulling the strings and America doing the dancing.    ---   Ms. House is foreign editor of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>