<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871210-0040 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AND GORBACHEV HELD talks on arms control and regional issues.    During a two-hour White House meeting, the president and the Kremlin leader discussed the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, cutbacks in strategic nuclear arms, and the Iran-Iraq war. While they talked in more detail about withdrawing Soviet troops from Afghanistan, there were signs that they haven't overcome differences on spacebased missile defenses. The Soviet leader also met with a group of U.S. newspaper and TV executives. He accused the American press of portraying Moscow as an enemy, and suggested that there have been some tense moments in his conversations with Reagan.    Gorbachev appealed to congressional leaders for Senate ratification of the newly signed treaty providing for elimination of intermediate-range missiles.    ---   MANILA SAID the leader of last August's violent coup attempt was captured.    Philippine soldiers and police arrested Col. Gregorio &quot;Gringo&quot; Honasan and four other military officers at a townhouse in a suburb of the capital. The renegade didn't offer resistance, and there weren't any injuries or shots fired, an official said. The arrest came four days before Asian leaders are scheduled to begin arriving in Manila for a summit of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.    President Aquino said she was &quot;really overjoyed&quot; by the arrest of Honasan, who had eluded the military since his coup attempt failed Aug. 28.    ---   Haiti's military-led junta announced that it will choose a new electoral council tomorrow and scheduled new elections for Jan. 17, state-run TV reported. The move came after three leading opposition politicians vowed to boycott any elections organized by the government. Voting was canceled Nov. 29 because of widespread violence.    ---   Investigators found a gun in the wreckage of a Pacific Southwest Airlines jet that crashed Monday near Cayucos, Calif., killing all 43 people aboard. It wasn't known whether the pilot and co-pilot were shot, but officials are almost certain that a gunman disabled the crew.    ---   Deaver's defense lawyers were told by a federal judge in Washington that they couldn't argue to jurors that the former presidential aide's alcoholism impaired his memory when questioned about his lobbying business. Deaver is on trial for perjury.    ---   Police in South Korea tightened security for presidential candidates after reports circulated that radicals may attempt to kill one of the two rival opposition candidates, Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam. Separately, campaign aides said the two men responded favorably to a proposal to form an alliance after next week's elections.    ---   Nicaragua said that papers seized from an American whose private plane was downed Sunday by the Sandinistas indicate he was involved in a Contra rebel plot to kill Foreign Minister D'Escoto. The American, James Jordan Denby of Illinois, was interrogated for a second day about his alleged links to the U.S.-backed insurgents.    Elliott Abrams testified before a grand jury investigating the sale of U.S. arms to Iran and the diversion of profits to Nicaragua's rebels. It wasn't clear whether the assistant secretary of state is a target of independent counsel Walsh's criminal inquiry.    ---   Military officials in Peru said a navy plane carrying the country's soccer team crashed into the ocean off Lima. A crew member was believed to be the only survivor among 43 people aboard. At least 12 bodies were recovered. The plane crashed late Tuesday night after circling Lima because of trouble with its landing gear.    ---   A French aircraft maker disclosed that it is holding discussions with Iraq about the sale of several Mirage F-1 fighter planes. The talks by Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet Aviation come amid efforts by the Paris government to normalize ties with Iraq's enemy, Iran.    Iranian jets attacked Iraqi positions near Basra for the second consecutive day as diplomatic sources in New York said U.N. efforts to negotiate a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war were at an impasse.    ---   Researchers in Massachusetts said a new technique to analyze heartbeats may eventually be used to predict which babies are at most risk for sudden infant death syndrome. Earlier research suggests that as many as 10% of SIDS babies die from respiratory defects. Other causes are little understood.    ---   Data submitted to the EPA shows that certain electric water coolers could be adding unsafe concentrations of lead to drinking water. The problem, discovered at two Navy offices, apparently stems from lead-lined tanks or lead soldering in coils of the refrigerated fountains.    ---   The Senate Labor Committee voted unanimously to confirm Ann McLaughlin as labor secretary, sending the nomination to the Senate floor for final action. McLaughlin would succeed William Brock, who left the post in November to run the GOP presidential campaign of Kansas Sen. Dole.    ---   Riot police in Paris stormed the Bank of France in a pre-dawn assault that freed two directors held by about 1,000 striking employees occupying the building. There weren't any injuries reported. The workers later voted to continue their stoppage.    ---   Two Japanese jets scrambled into the air and one fired several warning shots when a Soviet bomber violated Japan's airspace near Okinawa, defense officials in Tokyo said. It was the first such Japanese-Soviet incident in about 33 years, officials said. </TEXT></DOC>