<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870126-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Well-Planned Charity Helps Giver and Receiver---By James Rosebush</HL><DD> 01/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Pan Am has no money specifically designated for charity nor does it have an executive in charge of donations, but it has given away several hundred thousand dollars a year in air travel to individuals in need. Recently, it transported a six-year-old heart-transplant patient from Poland to the U.S. for treatment. And when a model whose face had been slashed was facing surgery, Pan Am flew her father from Texas to New York to be by her side.    These mercy flights are typical of what Pan Am and other airlines do routinely. The flights create good will and provide often critical services to people in need.    However, despite increasing corporate expenditures on charity and their growing acceptance by shareholders as legitimate uses of earnings, there has been little improvement in the way grants are made. Many decisions are haphazard, and often reflect a chairman's whims or interests.    While private foundations long have had scientific methods for evaluating proposals, corporations seem less interested in this approach, resulting in reduced returns for both the companies and the recipients. But would a company invest millions in plant and equipment, inventory, product development or marketing without stringent financial planning and management objectives? Such projects are always tied to the bottom line. Should the contributions budget escape this scrutiny?    A corporation is not a charitable entity, nor does it exist to assuage guilt. It exists for the good of shareholders and investors, and therefore for the good of the marketplace, the consumer and the community. Within this context there is adequate justification for spending pre-tax earnings on programs that will enhance the company's good will and image with particular constituencies. However, managers need to apply cost evaluation to charitable donations and develop ways to measure returns to the companies.    As corporate donations to the nonprofit sector climb, companies such as Coca-Cola, McDonald's, Rockwell International and Ford Motor are giving to projects as diverse as Hands Across America, the Phoenix House Drug Treatment Center and the Ethics and Public Policy Center in Washington. An entire sector of our economy (representing 6.2% of gross national product in 1984) is largely dependent on the continued expansion of corporate largesse. In the past 10 years, corporations have been the fastest-growing source of contributions while private foundations' share has declined.    Assuming that our communities are more and more dependent on these nonprofit organizations for enrichment and essential services, and assuming a greater future dependency on the corporate dollar, what would happen as a result of an economic downturn or elective shifts in charitable policy? Up to now there has been little volatility. But the first crack may be appearing in oil-industry cutbacks to cash-needy public broadcasting stations. Exxon recently said it intended to withdraw a considerable amount of support in this area, forcing at least one station to cut back to programs related only to its broadcast region.    In most cases, corporate officials do a fairly good job of informing grant recipients of the expected lengths of grant periods and whether projects are likely to be funded annually. Some grants extend for five years but most are funded for one, which keeps the recipients constantly hunting for capital. More sophisticated planning and evaluation techniques inside the companies also will benefit recipient organizations and the services that communities have become dependent upon.    Here are some steps that can show how contributions affect the bottom line:    --Determine the level of exposure you want with your contributions program.    --Examine the placement of the contributions program within your company. Does it report to the logical area to fulfill corporate or divisional objectives?    --Integrate the public-affairs, community-relations, corporate-marketing and communications goals of your company with your contributions program. In too many companies, the contributions program has been the stepchild left outside during the planning process.    --Make contributions work for your company. Determine the public-relations value of each potential grant.    --Develop a strategic list of questions to ask each grantee. Make certain the grantee not only fulfills your requirements but also receives help with his own financial planning and management.    Use executives-on-loan, donated equipment and marketing-gift programs to enhance your employee relations and procurement program.    These evaluation measurements need to be creative and conclusive. Jeff Krindler, vice president, corporate communications, for Pan Am, says he can measure the return on gifts of airline tickets by the personal responses. He cites a letter from a woman in the Midwest praising Pan Am for &quot;reuniting the model with her father -- you can be sure I'll fly Pan Am the next time.&quot; Mr. Krindler says the likelihood this woman and others like her will use Pan Am has increased because of its policy of giving away tickets. Thus, he underscores its value to the bottom line. He hastens to add that this is not the primary reason for deciding to provide tickets.    Bob Taub, Ford Motor's contributions manager, cites the justification for his company's massive investment in &quot;The Treasure Houses of Britain&quot; at the National Gallery in Washington: &quot;Car buyers, stockholders, suppliers and the general public have reacted very enthusiastically to Ford's sharing the cultural treasures of Britain. We think this kind of investment shows the corporation is not living in isolation from society but is a vital participant.&quot;    ---   Mr. Rosebush, who started President Reagan's Private Sector Initiatives Program, heads a management-consulting firm in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>