<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Conferees ClearTax IncreasesOf $9 Million---Congress Panels Also BackCuts in Farm SubsidiesAs Part of Budget Plan---By Monica Langley and Bruce IngersollStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FREST LATAM TAXES LIL GOVMTCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)UTILITIES (UTI)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)AEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AIRLINES (AIR)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congressional negotiators, pushing toward completion of two massive spending and tax bills, agreed on a $9 billion tax-increase package and on a series of reductions in agricultural subsidies.    The tax package, hammered out by Senate Finance Committee Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) and House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.), also would tax liquidations of so-called mirror subsidiaries. Companies often use such subsidiaries to dispose, without incurring a tax liability, of the assets of other companies they acquire.    The lawmakers agreed to drop a controversial House provision that would increase the corporate minimum tax, but they decided to speed up payments of the corporate estimated tax. In addition, they agreed to drop a proposal that would have prevented a parent corporation from using all the income of a partly owned subsidiary to offset its own losses.    They also dropped a provision that would have prohibited depreciation of many &quot;customer base&quot; intangible assets, such as subscription lists and core deposits at banks. And they decided to drop a proposal that would have limited the amount of cash that a person can elect to receive under a cafeteria benefits plan.    The conferees agreed to tax as corporations certain publicly traded master limited partnerships if they include operating units.    Moreover, they agreed on a provision that would prevent hostile takeovers of private utilities through the issuance of tax-exempt bonds, but made an exception for Long Island Lighting Co.    Referring to the tax changes, Sen. Bentsen said, &quot;It's a good agreement that is fair.&quot; But he said he didn't know whether the White House would accept it.    The farm changes would save about $950 million in fiscal 1988, which began Oct. 1, and $1.55 billion in fiscal 1989. But at the same time, the conferees from Senate and House Agriculture Committees defied the Reagan administration by deciding to allow major electric cooperatives to refinance about $5 billion in loans guaranteed by the Rural Electrification Administration without having to pay pre-payment penalties.    Refinancing would enable the co-ops to take advantage of lower interest rates from commercial lenders. The Reagan administration has threatened to veto any bill containing the REA provision. It argues that the move, while providing savings initially, would raise the federal deficit over the long run because the Treasury would miss out on at least $1 billion in future interest payments on the long-term Federal Financing Bank loans.    The farm conferees succeeded in meeting their goal of reducing the deficit by $2.5 billion over two years mainly by lowering target prices and adjusting price-support loans for wheat and feed grains, including corn and oats, as well as cotton and rice.    Under the compromise thrashed out last night, the cuts in target prices would range between 1.25% and 1.5% in the two fiscal years, and would save $187 million in fiscal 1988 and $427 million in fiscal 1989. The cuts would come on top of decreases already mandated by a 1985 law.    The farm provisions were included in one of two bills designed to provide funds for the federal government through fiscal 1988 and bring the budget in line with the deficit-reduction accord that Congress and the White House reached last month. The accord would trim $30.2 billion from the $180 billion projected deficit for the current fiscal year, but it wouldn't actually reduce spending or leave the deficit below the previous year's $148 billion level.    Congressional leaders spoke optimistically about completing action on both bills as early as the weekend and thus rescinding the across-the-board budget cuts required by the Gramm-Rudman law. But obstacles remained, including continuing threats from the Reagan administration that one or both bills might be vetoed unless certain offending provisions were excised.    Yesterday, lawmakers agreed to:    --Prohibit for eight months the imposition of sanctions on cities that have failed to plan adequately to meet Clean Air Act standards. Currently, 14 metropolitan areas, including Los Angeles, Atlanta and Dallas-Fort Worth, have been found in violation of the requirements of the law.    --Ban smoking on flights lasting two hours or less. The prohibition would begin four months after the legislation is enacted, and it would expire in two years.    --Permit the sale of 70 shoulder-mounted Stinger missiles to Bahrain, a major U.S. ally in the Persian Gulf. Bahrian would have to return unused missiles after 18 months.    --Allow Pakistan to receive U.S. foreign aid for the next 2 1/2 years even though that country is believed to be developing atomic weapons in violation of nuclear nonproliferation treaties.    --Provide $700 million for a single-warhead, mobile missile system called Midgetman. That reversed earlier efforts in the Senate to slash spending on the weapon during this fiscal year. The Air Force has proposed canceling the entire project in the next fiscal year, however.    --Provide $425 million for the proposed U.S. space station, an amount that the Reagan administration called adequate to continue the program.    --Allow Israel, Egypt and other countries to prepay billions of dollars of high-interest loans from the U.S. and to receive U.S. guarantees on 90% of the new borrowings that replace them.    --Name an aircraft carrier for the chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, John Stennis (D., Miss.), who is retiring after 40 years in the Senate.    Yesterday, the big unresolved issues included whether to give &quot;nonlethal&quot; aid to the Nicaraguan rebels and whether to write into law the Fairness Doctrine, which requires broadcasters airing controversial material to give opponents free air time to respond. The Federal Communications Commission earlier this year rescinded a regulation that imposed the doctrine on broadcasters.    The House-passed omnibus spending bill measure wouldn't grant any aid to the Contras; the Senate's would. The House included the codification of the Fairness Doctrine in its spending bill, but the Senate didn't.    The conferees also accepted a House-approved provision that would impose an excise tax on all childhood vaccines to raise funds for a federal program to compensate children who become ill from injections. The White House opposes this funding mechanism as an extra cost on taxpayers.    The accord on farm programs would produce $65 million in additional budget savings in fiscal 1988 and $150 million the following year by adjusting price-support loan rates for wheat, feed-grains, cotton and rice.    In addition, the conferees reached final agreement on major changes in the government's program for taking cropland out of feed-grain production. Farmers would be paid $1.75 for every bushel of corn that they don't produce from their idled land, down from $2 a bushel currently. At the same time, the amount of land diverted from production would be reduced to 10% of a farmer's base acreage from 15%. These changes would save $568 million in fiscal 1988 and $227 million in fiscal 1989.    Last night, the conferees also embraced a proposal by Rep. Jerry Huckaby (D., La.) that would save $83 million in fiscal 1989 by tightening restrictions on subsidy payments to individual farmers. In the past, the subsidy program had been abused by farmers who set up phony corporations to qualify for payments of as much as $1 million.    The conferees rejected a proposed marketing-loan program for such oil-seed crops as soybeans and sunflowers. But House members assured their Senate colleagues that they would take up such legislation in February.    ---   Jeffrey Birnbaum contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>