<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Cover --- Is Your Job Making You Sick? Stretched Thin by Overwork and Insecurity, Managers' Morale and Health Are Suffering </HL><AUTHOR> Amanda Bennett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   TAKE A CORPORATE WORLD roiled by restructurings and takeovers, and obsessed with the idea of getting lean and mean. Cut out as many middle managers as you can and pile the work onto those that remain. Leave people with the feeling that if they start staggering under the load, they'll quickly be history. Then stir in the biggest stock-market crash ever, one that creates anxiety among executives from top to bottom, and what have you got? A truckload of gut-twisting, sweaty-palms stress.    All across the country this stress is building among middle managers, the junior officers and senior NCOs of the American business army. It is harming them physically, emotionally, mentally. And while their corporate employers may be leaner -- they are certainly meaner -- it's clear that the increased pressure they're putting on middle managers is frequently impairing performance instead of stimulating it.    Working scared and tired, many managers simply aren't working well, and confess that their zeal and loyalty to their companies is crumbling. Says one at Bell andamp; Howell Co., a recent takeover target: &quot;It's really difficult to look forward to tomorrow.&quot; An increasing number show signs of cracking. Marilyn Puder-York, a psychotherapist who treats managers, says: &quot;I see headaches, stomachaches, ulcers, overeating, too much drinking, too much smoking. I see cases involving family abuse. I see more negative attitudes, more wariness, more anxiety, less trust and more cynicism.&quot;    W.H. Brownlee, president of Brownlee Dolan Stein Associates Inc., an employee assistance and counseling firm in New York, says: &quot;Pile on enough stressors and you can make the strongest person sick.&quot; His group is seeing managers with no previous history of mental disorders who &quot;appear almost psychotic.&quot; Some, he adds, are paranoid, believing themselves the objects of conspiracies.    Most managers interviewed for this story were terrified that their names might be used, fearing they would lose their jobs. One of them, speaking from his bunker at a big soft-drink company, has been promoted twice recently but still is plagued by fear and a bitter resentment. He says:   &quot;You see the guys to the right and left of you get it, and after that you're not the same man. Suddenly you realize you might as well be a coolie digging a trench; finish it, and they don't need you anymore. You know there's a bullet out there with your name on it. It just hasn't been fired yet.&quot;    At Chrysler Corp., another manager quakes every time his boss calls him into his office. This man was laid off once and later rehired, and he cannot escape the doomed feeling that he will be found dispensable again. He says his boss wants to talk to him several times a day, and that every time he beckons, &quot;I just about mess my pants.&quot;    Until only a few years ago, American middle managers had no reason to feel such fear, such bitterness. Indeed, they were a protected class, with almost as much job security as their counterparts in Japan. When their companies suffered downturns it was the blue-collar force, not the managers, who usually felt the bite of the ax.    No more. In an orgy of cost-cutting inspired by ferocious global competition, American corporations have unilaterally repealed the unwritten law that once bound them to their managers, and have been jettisoning them in carload lots. It's estimated that the Fortune 500 companies alone have eliminated almost 2.8 million jobs since 1980 -- a million of them managerial.    For those who have to let lower-ranking colleagues go, there is pain and guilt. A manager at Eastman Kodak Co. is now under intense pressure from above to quickly sack underlings who don't meet stated goals instead of giving them another year or two to shape up, as before. &quot;The ones you have to get rid of are the ones you've worked with extensively, and have rapport with,&quot; he says. &quot;It just wrenches your guts out.&quot;    Ironically, many a manager with a mandate to whack away at overhead has found himself declared surplus by still higher-ranking cost-cutters. That happened to Thomas Grant III, who is now free-lancing as a direct marketer while looking for another corporate job; he spent the last six months at his old job pruning costs before being swept out himself, in a purge that cut the staff in half.    &quot;I really hated it,&quot; he recalls. &quot;Every day the question wasn't 'How do we make this place boom?' but 'What can we do next to reduce overhead?' We literally got to the point of doing an analysis of copies made on the Xerox machine, counting them and categorizing them. It was awful, an expensive use of human intelligence and energy.&quot;    Mr. Grant says that in previous jobs he had felt part of a team with a single goal. In the last one, he became alienated from the brass, and he is deeply disturbed by this. But he has a lot of company; the bond of mutual commitment between senior management and the middle level is snapping at many concerns.    One consequence: Middle managers who once avidly sought responsibility and acted on their own now are passing the buck. &quot;Middle management here won't make decisions anymore; they think upper management should make them,&quot; says a department manager at a big midwestern chemical company. Even routine, legitimate travel requests, he adds, are being passed upstairs for approval.    This manager admits that he and his associates are paralyzed by the fear of making mistakes -- a common stress reaction, according to psychologists. His company only reinforced that fear by reducing the size of his department without even consulting him, and in a way that makes it extremely difficult for him to do his job. He no longer has, he says, the sense of belonging and creativity his post once gave him.    Budgeting by blind decree from above, instead of by consultation, is a common complaint. One such move left a fleet manager at a midwestern electrical utility with 16% more trucks to take care of and the same staff to service them that he had before. He feels the pressure, but adds: &quot;The real stress is on my foremen. They all want to do a good job, and are fearful they won't be able to.&quot;    There's no doubt that at many companies the managerial ranks had grown so bloated that some pruning was in order, and it's generally agreed that a certain amount of stress can stimulate job performance, not impair it. But in a good many cases layoffs have been so unthinking and so deep that enormous workloads have been piled on those remaining, endangering their health.    One marketing manager at a Chicago-based transportation company is now traveling four days out of five to keep up with work once done by others; the company has cut his department's personnel 25% in the past two years. &quot;I'm exhausted, totally frazzled, out of gas. I just hope I'm not setting myself up for some major illness,&quot; he frets.    Therapists can almost count on seeing a rash of similar complaints when some kind of crisis roils a segment of the marketplace. Beatrice Harris, a partner in Harris, Rothenberg Associates, which provides psychological counseling for corporate customers, says her group saw many managers from banks last year, when the banks were retrenching after taking writedowns on foreign debt.    &quot;They were pushing people at an extraordinary pace,&quot; she says. &quot;They were working until 10 p.m., working weekends. The feeling was that if they didn't do it they'd lose their jobs. Who can live every day like that?&quot;    In certain industries such as consumer products, the sheer speed and volume of computer-produced data is adding to the load. Andrew Parsons, head of the marketing center at McKinsey andamp; Co., the big consulting firm, says that electronic scanners -- which give instant information on purchasing patterns -- are producing so much information demanding so many decisions that managers are drowning in it. &quot;Many marketing departments are overwhelmed,&quot; he says. &quot;They need trucks to bring in all the reports.&quot;    From whatever quarter job stress comes, managers gripped by it may have bad dreams, reach for the bottle or watch their marriages deteriorate. They may feel somehow responsible for their own plight, thus adding guilt to their burdens. And they may suffer in comparative isolation, not realizing that others around them are undergoing the same degree of pain.    Stephen Ashworth, who lost his job as business-development manager for Time Inc., remembers his chagrin at one counseling session for laid-off employees when a fellow manager vented her rage. &quot;She showed such animosity and pain,&quot; he recalls, &quot;and I felt embarrassed that I hadn't known such feelings were under the surface. In going forward, I hope I can draw on that to be more understanding.&quot;    Realizing that their employees are under increasing pressure, a growing number of companies have begun offering stress-management programs. But these usually focus on what the individual can do to cope with stress in general and fail to face squarely the excessive strain that the company itself may be putting on those who work for it. James Quick, a professor of organizational behavior at the University of Texas, says:   &quot;One of our concerns is that some of these programs can be used as substitutes for dealing with legitimate workplace issues that are creating stress. The burden of adjustment is often put on the worker. That's illegitimate. It should be shared.&quot;    There are, however, some people who would be willing to accept almost any degree of work stress and insecurity, shared or not. They are the long-term unemployed, caught in a job market already glutted with laid-off middle managers, and the stress many of them are feeling is far greater than that experienced by colleagues who can still bring home a paycheck.    Public relations executive Peter Greenhill, who never had trouble landing a job before, was sacked in an agency reorganization four years ago and hasn't been able to get work since. He has sent out some 2,500 resumes, made hundreds of phone calls, spent $3,000 or so on advertising. Nothing.    He finds it increasingly difficult to handle the constant rejection, to keep despair from overwhelming him. In interviews, he says, &quot;you're always dancing, always having to show your best side, every day trying to be up when you already know what the outcome will be.&quot;    His savings are rapidly fading away and his marriage has undergone strain. His wife wants him to redouble his efforts; he doesn't know how he can do more. &quot;There's doubt that I'm covering all the bases, that I'm advertising myself enough -- but I know I am,&quot; he says. &quot;She's anxious about the outcome. When will it end? How will it end?&quot;    ---   Ms. Bennett reports on management from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>