<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0042 </DOCNO><HL> Military Contractors Put on Defensive --- Pentagon Scandal Could Spur New Revisions </HL><AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES LABOR GE UTX </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF JUS CNG </G><TEXT>   The growing Pentagon bribery investigation is already causing concern in the defense industry and could lead to important changes in the nation's military procurement practices.    No charges have been brought yet against any of the individuals and companies subpoenaed or searched by federal investigators.    But the scandal has already claimed its first victim: The defense industry's campaign to rebuild its image and ease cumbersome government rules that were crimping earnings. As recently as last month, industry executives were crowing about the relaxation of regulations under Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci and the prospects for an era of peace between contractors and their critics in Congress.    Those hopes have swiftly been dashed. &quot;Anybody who felt it was okay again to be seen with a defense contractor is now going to stay at arms length,&quot; says one industry executive who declined to be identified by name because of the sensitivity and scope of the current investigation.    Some industry executives maintain that, despite the scandal's apparent breadth, any improper activity resulted from individual conduct rather than procurement procedures, and that major changes are neither necessary nor likely. And companies aren't likely to lose contracts already awarded because the resulting loss of expertise and continuity would trigger high costs and long delays.    But the outcry over contractors' reliance on consultants and the possible selling of sensitive information by Defense Department officials probably will be translated into legislative proposals, observers say. And, they add, bills to overhaul military procurement practices that stood little chance of passage a few weeks ago now are likely to receive serious consideration. The House Armed Services Committee will begin hearings next month on the implications of the investigation, and other committees are likely to follow. And Defense Secretary Carlucci has appointed two top aides to monitor the Justice Department investigation.    Since it's an election year, observers give procurement-overhaul legislation a better-than-average chance of passage this fall. &quot;This is the opportunity to make major changes in the basic system,&quot; says Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa).    Indeed, Congress has already translated outrage over the growing bribery scandal into a provision in the pending tax bill. The House Ways and Means Committee, meeting Tuesday to begin work on new revenue-raising legislation, added a provision at the last minute that would repeal the completed-contract method of accounting, a tax benefit that primarily benefits defense contractors.    &quot;We were taken totally by surprise,&quot; says LeRoy J. Haugh, a veteran aerospace industry lobbyist in Washington. &quot;We're puzzled about why they did that unless it was a punitive action in view of the recent disclosures.&quot; Such an action is &quot;completely unwarranted,&quot; he adds, because it permits the Congress to &quot;strike at a group that isn't in a position to strike back.&quot;    The battle, some say, is only beginning for defense contractors. Pending measures likely to be considered include one that would close the revolving door that allows former military officials to retire and open consulting firms to lobby their former colleagues.    Other possible bills range from one that would increase protection for whistle blowers to a sweeping measure that would replace the Pentagon's complex weapons-buying bureaucracy with a new civilian agency. &quot;The outcome of all this isn't likely to be less regulation, it's likely to be more regulation,&quot; says Robert C. McCormack, a deputy assistant secretary of defense.    Litigation is also considered possible. Although Pentagon attorneys say it is unlikely that the government would bring bid-rigging charges under federal antitrust laws, some lawyers believe shareholder lawsuits on such grounds as securities fraud are possible.    Two lawyers who typically represent shareholders, say they have already been contacted by shareholders of some of the companies under investigation. Both lawyers say it's too soon to sue, but they believe there is potential for shareholder suits against contractors or their directors or officers.    A union representing 6,000 General Electric Co. employees at aircraft and turbine-engine plants near Lynn, Mass., has asked its attorneys to determine if it has grounds to sue United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt andamp; Whitney division and the Navy in connection with an aircraft-engine contract. The contract, which GE bid on, was partly awarded to Pratt andamp; Whitney. If the contract was improperly awarded, Dennis Daly, a union official, says, &quot;We have 500 to 600 union members whose jobs were stolen from them.&quot;    These potential actions, if they occur, would come at a most inopportune time for the aerospace industry. &quot;This sort of thing certainly isn't going to do the industry any good,&quot; says Jack Bierwirth, chairman of Grumman Corp.    A handful of company executives, working with three Washington trade groups, have spent the better part of the past two years on a campaign to rebuild their industry's tarnished image. With the defense-budget growth slowing down and a change in presidential administrations coming, their national effort has been geared to &quot;upgrade the public perception and status of the aerospace industry,&quot; as an Aerospace Industries Association publication puts it.    The campaign began with the signing of agreements to adhere to the recommendations of the Packard Commission, which in 1986 reported to President Reagan on ways to improve the Pentagon's weapons-acquisition practices. Next, most big contractors created internal departments to discourage waste, fraud and abuse, and began training employees in ethical standards. Finally, the industry hired a Cambridge, Mass., consulting firm, MAC Group, to study the effects of congressionally mandated procurement changes on contractors' financial health. That study's recent findings -- that the nation's defense industrial base was imperiled by efforts to overhaul it -- were widely circulated and quoted.    The study was well received, particularly by Robert Costello, the Pentagon's chief of acquisition under Secretary Carlucci, who has pushed for a less antagonistic relationship between contractors and the military. With his encouragement, the military has moved away from costly revisions such as competitive bidding and fixed-price contracts. Moreover, some past cuts in monthly progress payments were partly restored.    The industry's relationship with Capitol Hill had also shown signs of thawing. The new Department of Defense authorization bill, largely written before the scandal broke, includes two measures that would roll back earlier revisions thought to have a negative impact on the industry's financial health. Members of the House and Senate Armed Services committees, meeting yesterday to finalize the bill, retained those provisions despite the current controversy.    The provisions reduce required investment by defense suppliers in weapons development and permit companies to charge the Pentagon for part of the cost of marketing arms overseas.    The public, too, was beginning to forget the scandals of the early 1980s -- an era when members of Congress grabbed headlines by disclosing Pentagon payments for thousand-dollar hammers and toilet seats, and by exposing corporate directors who billed the Pentagon for dog-boarding fees.    &quot;I'm worried that this will hurt the industry and the Department of Defense,&quot; says Roy A. Anderson, retired chairman and still a consultant to Lockheed Corp. &quot;A lot of work had gone into really rebuilding relationships, and I think a lot of progress had been made. Now the damage to the industry could go far beyond any individual convictions that might result.&quot;    James Woolsey, a Washington attorney who was a member of the Packard Commission, is concerned that Congress will quickly pass a new round of overhaul measures as a band-aid on complex procurement woes. &quot;If they add requirements that increase the amount of bureaucracy, they could end up making the system considerably worse, not better,&quot; he says.    Contractors worry about restrictions on their future dealings with the Defense Department, especially those that might -- in the interest of preventing trading in proprietary or classified documents -- curtail the flow of technical information between contractors and the military.    Contractors claim that regulations governing the actual bidding process already contain rigid requirements to discourage bid rigging. But executives are troubled about possible new rules to govern the time period before the formal bidding process begins, when the military engages in a delicate dialogue with industry.    &quot;At that point the military still isn't sure what they want to buy, and they don't know what industry can produce, and there has to be a lot of informal give and take on an engineer-to-engineer basis,&quot; says Stanfield Johnson, an attorney with the Washington firm of Crowell andamp; Moring, which has long represented contractors selling to the Defense Department.    &quot;Regulations tend to be stultifying, so you could lose the ability to discuss research&quot; with defense officials at this early stage, says Mr. Bierwirth, the Grumman chairman. This could slow or even block weapons development in some cases, he says. &quot;I know that at Grumman, our research scientists often have to talk to the customer (at the Defense Department) to learn about potential applications before our people can proceed any further.&quot;    Others worry that adding to the existing regulatory burden creates new problems, such as slowing the procurement process, without really solving old ones. Moreover, new rules create an incentive to craft a means to circumvent them, some say. David Smith, an industry consultant, contends increased competition, although in principle a beneficial revision, has led indirectly to the current Pentagon scandal.    &quot;Competition created a feeding frenzy for information. Every marginal piece of information about what the government wanted commanded a higher price, and people were willing to pay it,&quot; he says. &quot;So consultants who could sell this information ended up making a lot of money.&quot; Clamping down on the role of consultants, he suggests, would only create a challenge to find some other way of gaining a competitive edge.    Even without new regulations, the current investigation is still likely to make industry workers and others more wary about communicating with the government. &quot;If you think your conversations are being tapped or bugged, are you going to phone up Defense (Department) guys and feel you can speak freely?&quot; asks one securities analyst.    But others on Wall Street believe their business could benefit from a slowdown in the spread of information that supposedly comes from those in the know -- but which often turns out to be wrong. Howard A. Rubel, an aerospace analyst with C.J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc., decries the &quot;highly competitive environment for passing information, with no specific limits.&quot;    Whatever its ultimate consequences, the unfolding scandal isn't likely to quiet down soon. That, observers say, will increase its chances of becoming an election-year issue, exacerbating pressure on an already-embattled industry.    &quot;For just a little while,&quot; says Mr. Smith, &quot;there was a bit of a rebound back to defense contracting being a legitimate business.&quot;    ---   William M. Carley in New York contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>