<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Global Finance (A Special Report): The Plungers --- Riding the Golden Dragon: Despite Some Spectacular Scandals, Hong Kong Capitalists Resist Regulation </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> SCR BNK STK CMD </IN><DATELINE> HONG KONG  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The economic engines that drive this city have run on a volatile fuel: the so-called policy of &quot;positive non-interventionism.&quot; Translated, this means only that Hong Kong's British masters have let its Chinese residents -- notorious gamblers on risks small or great -- do business pretty much as they pleased.    Broadly speaking, this has worked. Largely free of regulation, oversight and restrictive requirements, the entrepreneurs of Hong Kong turned the place from a torpid outpost of the Empire into a Horatio Alger dreamland, a place where a refugee from China could arrive with nothing but the rags on his back and leave in the first-class cabin of a Boeing 747.    We don't hear nearly as much, however, about the darker aspects of the Hong Kong dream, evidenced in recent years in a wave of scandals, failures and bailouts. They have made it more and more apparent that if &quot;positive non-interventionism&quot; is one guiding slogan here, another should be enshrined beside it.    &quot;Caveat Emptor&quot; is its name.    SEPTEMBER 1982: Amid the forest of high-rises climbing the slopes of Victoria Peak, the shops of Hong Kong were opening -- except for those of the Tse Lee Yuen jewelry chain, where the doors remained locked, the lights off, the phones unanswered.    Like many jewelers here Tse Lee Yuen had been selling gold certificates, allegedly redeemable for bullion anytime the purchaser wished. But Tse Lee Yuen could not redeem them. The jewelry chain's certificates were worthless. Its managing director had fled Hong Kong.    Word of the fraud circulated quickly and unease spread in the teeming city. Nobody, however, could have foreseen the chain of events that would flow from this one.    ---   EARLY ON, trade and light manufacturing drove Hong Kong, but over the past 15 years or so finance became the hot growth sector. By the mid-80s, this city of six million somehow supported 284 insurance companies, 142 mutual funds, 900 stock brokerages, 1,300 registered securities dealerships and a battalion of banks. Its financial-futures market became the world's second-largest, and its stock exchange, housed in mirrored waterfront towers, ranked 11th in capitalization.    All these institutions sprouted in the same environment of extreme &quot;laissez-faire&quot; that nourished the colony's earlier success. In rival Singapore the government shaped the framework under which financiers must operate; in Hong Kong the government watched while the financiers made their own rules.    Predictably, the structure they built allows them maximum freedom, secrecy and profits, but provides few safeguards for investors. There are still no significant exchange controls, no central bank to redress imbalances, no penalties for insider trading, no standardized accounting principles, and only the skimpiest of disclosure requirements. You can get away with a lot in Hong Kong.    ACROSS THE HARBOR on the mainland side of Hong Kong, where the highrises and traffic jams give way to the bicyclists and fish ponds of the New Territories, a resident of the town of Yuen Long somehow got the notion that his bank, Hang Lung, had loaned money to the shut-down jewelry chain. Fearing that the bad debt might sink the bank and that his life savings of $500,000 would go down with it -- there is no deposit insurance in Hong Kong -- he rushed to his branch and demanded his money.    He was told the office didn't keep that much cash on hand. He would have to wait. Other customers overheard and began thrusting withdrawal slips at the tellers. Anxiety became panic.    Police were called to control the shouting crowds while armored trucks bringing cash steamed in gridlocked traffic. By the end of the day desperate depositors had yanked $11 million out of Hang Lung.    The bank's officials protested that they hadn't loaned a nickel to the jewelry chain. Pouring more oil on the waters, a prominent banker called Hang Lung &quot;one of the ten most conservative banks in Hong Kong,&quot; and Sir Philip Haddon Cave, chief secretary of the colony, said that &quot;it can be clearly assumed that all banks are in a sound position.&quot;    Assumed, maybe. But certainly not proven.    ---   SOME EXOTIC FLOWERS bloomed in the hothouse of untrammeled capitalism that was Hong Kong's financial sector. One was Ronald Li, a go-getting Chinese investor who sported huge diamonds in place of buttons on his tuxedo. Bursting upon the scene in the late 70s, he set up the upstart Far East Exchange, which listed many small indigenous companies the existing exchange wouldn't touch and pledged to reward small investors mightily. He delivered -- for awhile.    Maids, taxi drivers, seemingly everybody took a flyer on Mr. Li's exchange. Other entrepreneurs, sensing a good thing, set up other exchanges. Companies went public in droves, including the likes of the Hong Kong Backfire Loop Antenna Co., whose sole asset was a TV antenna patent and whose stock price multiplied twentyfold as soon as it hit the market. Eventually all the exchanges were combined, and Ronald Li emerged as the central figure in securities trading in the colony of Hong Kong.    Meanwhile, a strange new kind of financial institution was proliferating in Hong Kong. Authorities had forbidden the opening of new banks since a financial panic in the 60s, but by 1976 they were persuaded to allow the formation of &quot;near banks&quot; -- so-called deposit-taking companies, or DTCs, which in some ways were like savings banks in the U.S: They took in deposits and made loans, but couldn't offer their depositors checking accounts.    There, however, the resemblance ended. DTCs were not regulated as strictly as conventional banks in Hong Kong, meaning they were barely regulated at all. An applicant needed to scare up only $2 million in capital to start one, and hundreds of DTCs quickly sprouted, some of them founded by tailors, exporters and even newspaper reporters. Lending standards were liberal, to put it charitably, and disclosure requirements minimal. Some people saw quickly that having a DTC was a great way to loan someone else's money to yourself.    NOVEMBER 1982: The run on Hang Lung was short-lived, and confidence in the banking system seemed to be restored -- when suddenly a DTC named Dollar Credit andamp; Finance told its creditors it had run out of cash. It was about to default on some $88 million in debts.    Conventional banks in the colony reacted by trimming their credit lines to DTCs and other small financial institutions. Checks began bouncing all over town. Within a few days after Dollar Credit had revealed its shortfall, two other institutions admitted they were having liquidity problems, and the depositors of yet another petitioned to have it liquidated.    These developments, unsettling in themselves, had a further ominous twist: Several directors of Dollar Credit, it turned out, were also top executives at Hang Lung bank. Given the sparse financial-disclosure requirements of Hong Kong, such interlocking interests were viewed with great suspicion -- it would be too easy to use one entity to plunder the other -- and colonial officials suggested to Hang Lung that for the sake of appearances the executives resign from the bank.    Two did -- but only weeks later, at the beginning of 1983, they returned. Wai Yu Tsang, senior manager of Hang Lung, explained that the departure of the executives had &quot;made us vulnerable to competition.&quot; The government went along with this, to the horror of the creditors of Dollar Credit. &quot;How the {banking} commissioner can give his blessing to such a move, I just can't understand,&quot; fumed one of them.    The consent did seem inexplicable. An investigation of Dollar Credit was under way, and some of the biggest names in international banking -- American Express, Chemical Bank, Barclays Bank and Bank of Tokyo among them -- were trying to recover on loans they had made to the troubled DTC.    There was one other little thing. Willie Yu, Dollar Credit's chairman, had fled town for parts unknown.    ---   FROM TIME TO TIME, Hong Kong's masters tried to put a somewhat tighter rein on its freewheeling bankers and brokers. They didn't get far. In 1980, an attempt to introduce more controls was swiftly beaten back by a private sector that screamed that the mere threat of regulation had set off a tumble in the stock market. The government watered down the suggested new controls. Still nothing doing.    Hong Kong's businessmen had good reason to fear new regulations, particularly those that might force fuller disclosure of their ownership interests. Britain's lease on the colony from China would expire in 1997, and the world's consummate capitalists would then be under the thumb of the world's least predictable communist state. Sheer prudence dictated that they preserve the secrecy of their assets.    The brokers, led by Ronald Li, were adamant. Under existing law the stock exchange, not the government, had the power to police securities fraud and abuse. Not surprisingly, the brokers who ran the exchange preferred selling stock to making trouble for the companies issuing it. They wanted no change in the status quo. Mr. Li called the attempts at reform &quot;a waste of time&quot; and thundered, &quot;We can't accept such humiliation.&quot;    SEPTEMBER 1983: Having suffered a enormous loss of confidence stemming from disclosures in the Dollar Credit case, Hang Lung bank collapsed into insolvency and was taken over by the colonial government. There was abundant reason for the loss of confidence. Seven officials from both Dollar Credit and Hang Lung bank, including the two men who had resigned from the bank but later returned, were subsequently indicted for running a coordinated check-kiting scheme from 1977 to 1982. They had kept afloat a staggering $21 billion in checks -- a sum roughly equivalent to the annual national income of Ireland -- from 1977 to 1982, writing new checks against various accounts to cover the most-pressing bad ones. In effect, the scam gave them hundreds of millions in interest-free loans.    The kite might be flying still but for one ironic development. When depositors feared -- wrongly -- that Hang Lung had loaned money to the defunct Tse Lee Yuen Jewelry and started a run on the bank, auditors were brought into Hang Lung for a routine check. Their presence made it impossible for the conspirators to issue more checks, and the kite dove to earth. The institution stuck with the last bad check was Dollar Credit, which sank under its weight.    Police say that Willie Yu, the Dollar Credit chairman who fled the country, was the mastermind behind the whole scheme. He has never been found.    ---   BY THE END OF 1985, the aroma emanating from Hong Kong's banking sector was getting too strong to ignore. Another huge scandal had broken at the Overseas Trust Bank, which had had a Hang Lung director and major shareholder on its board; investigators estimated that Overseas executives had made off with as much as $516 million in bank assets. Dozens of banks with actual or rumored ties to Overseas and Hang Lung, including some in Bangkok, Singapore and Kuala Lumpur, faced runs.    The following year the colony finally enacted a tougher banking ordinance -- by Hong Kong standards, at least -- under which management practices and capital adequacy ratios were subject to closer scrutiny by the banking commissioner. If the banks were chastened, however, the brokers were anything but.    Racing to beat Singapore to the punch, Hong Kong had just opened a financial-futures market, hoping to attract more big stock investors who needed a place to hedge their positions. Within months the carpet on the trading floor had been worn threadbare by the pounding feet of frantic speculators. The exchange vaulted to second place in the world.    It didn't seem important that there were no checks on whether the broker-traders -- or their clients -- had the funds to make good on their transactions. No one even required them to put down deposits on every trade.    Then, on October 20, 1987, Ronald Li and the other lead brokers in Hong Kong awoke to discover that the New York Stock Exchange had taken a historic hammering on Black Monday. They would be next.    So they closed both the stock and financial-futures exchanges for the rest of the week rather than tough out the crash. They had no authority in law to do so. But the government, in a remarkable last gasp of positive non-interventionism, just stood by, giving tacit consent to the elimination of the one thing any market must provide -- liquidity.    The consequences were immediate and dire. The futures exchange had $860 million in contracts outstanding, and traders were exposed to steeply mounting losses because they had no way to liquidate their positions. The guarantee corporation set up to cover such calamities had just $2.9 million. Hong Kong faced financial disaster.    The government had to bail out the brokers, assembling a rescue package that included $258 million in public funds. Suddenly there were a lot fewer people in town who thought the investment community was doing a dandy job at running its own affairs.    ---   A SUMMING UP: Besides rescuing the brokers, the Hong Kong government has had to commit hundreds of millions more in recent years to bail out seven banks, including Hang Lung and Overseas Trust; though it had no legal obligation to save them, letting them die might have precipitated full-scale panic.    The government has suspended a dozen commodities futures brokers, including a former chairman of the commodities exchange, for alleged embezzlement of clients' money. More recently, it charged Ronald Li and seven other stock-exchange officials with taking bribes from companies that were trying to float new stock issues. It has suffered waves of scandals among property-development companies.    And it is making determined noises about reform.    Last winter it commissioned an expert panel to suggest what those reforms should be. The panel issued a scathing report in June, recommending upgrading of regulatory staffs and a change in governance at the exchanges; local brokers, who had dominated them before, would have to give much more power to large international houses, which, out of self-interest, presumably would enforce far higher standards of propriety. Without those standards,, the panel said, Hong Kong could not call itself a world financial center.    But will Hong Kong actually do what needs to be done?    &quot;Hong Kong is torn between being the pirate's lair and being Zurich,&quot; says Paul Phenix, an accountant newly installed atop the stock exchange's compliance division. &quot;The society doesn't know what it wants. Until recently it has managed to juggle, and be both. I don't know how much longer that can continue.&quot;    ---   Ms. Walsh is an Asia correspondent based in The Wall Street Journal's Hong Kong bureau. </TEXT></DOC>