<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880427-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Soybean Prices Soar Amid Speculation That U.S. Intends to Restrict Planting </HL><AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PET </IN><TEXT>   Soybean futures prices soared amid wild speculation that the government plans to restrict soybean planting.    The rise was fueled by rumors that the U.S. Agriculture Department is mulling whether to prohibit government-aided wheat farmers from also growing soybeans, a common practice in the South. The rumors excited traders because many expect that the increase in soybean prices during the winter has spurred farmers to consider double-cropping with soybeans this year.    The speculation, however, is groundless, analysts and government officials said. A spokesman denied that the Agriculture Department is considering such a move, which would tighten the nation's already dwindling soybean stockpiles.    Daniel Basse, an analyst at GNP Commodities Inc., Chicago, said he expects soybean futures prices to come under pressure today as investors grow skeptical. &quot;Once the rumors are digested, prices will again weaken,&quot; he said.    The price of the soybean contract for May delivery closed yesterday at $6.775 a bushel, up 18.5 cents.    The rumor mill apparently kicked into gear after trade reports that a high-ranking Agriculture Department official had estimated that U.S. farmers would idle as many as eight million acres this year under the department's 0-92 program.    Under the program, wheat, corn, oat and sorghum farmers can receive 92% of their crop support payments if they don't plant. Some private market analysts have forecast that only about five million acres would be idled under the program. A higher participation rate would indicate a smaller harvest than projected by some traders, and thus higher prices.    The high-ranking official, Ralph Klopfenstein, deputy administrator of the department's commodity programs, refused to comment on the trade reports. The department hasn't yet officially disclosed how many farmers met the April 15 deadline to sign up for the 0-92 program, one of several programs that farmers can participate in.    Regardless, analysts are baffled that reports about the 0-92 program would interest soybean traders very much. Soybean farmers aren't eligible for the program and the government already prevents 0-92 participants from planting soybeans on idled acreage.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   ENERGY: U.S. crude-oil futures rallied late yesterday on a slice of bullish news from the big Vienna meeting between Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries members and several non-OPEC producers. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, June-delivery crude closed at $18.60 a barrel, up 20 cents, in light trading. Yesterday afternoon, a few hours before the meeting was scheduled to start, a member of China's delegation disclosed that six of the seven non-OPEC nations at the meeting were prepared to reduce their oil exports 5%. The futures price rise &quot;was a psychological reaction,&quot; said Richard D. Donovan, head of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.'s international-energy desk. The cut described by the Chinese delegate is &quot;hardly significant if you look at the world-wide supply/demand equation. But it's a symbolic gesture, and considered by some traders to be an encouraging sign.&quot; He added that for now, &quot;this new consortium (of OPEC/non-OPEC nations) has spooked the sellers out of the market.&quot;    COPPER: Futures prices fell for the second consecutive day, on continued slower demand. The May contract declined 1.6 cents a pound to 89.35 cents. As the price weakness extended with no new developments, traders watched the narrowing of the premiums of nearby deliverymonth prices over those of more deferred contracts as an indication that the previously tight supplies were becoming more plentiful. The premium of May over July, the most closely watched spread, narrowed 0.1 cent to 3.5 cents a pound from Monday. At the end of the year, when prices were at their peak, the May premium over July ranged between 12 and 13 cents. April-December isn't a popularly traded spread, but the narrowing of the premium of those two months is an even stronger indication of traders' belief that near-term supplies are less scarce, one analyst pointed out. On Monday, the premium of April over December was 10.4 cents; yesterday it narrowed by 1.45 cents to 8.95 cents.    SUGAR: Futures prices fell as much as they gained on Monday, as rumors that the Soviet Union might be a buyer of sugar dissipated. May delivery sugar declined 0.31 cent a pound to 8.66 cents. On Monday that contract rose 0.3 cent on talk that the Soviets might take delivery of 300,000 tons of sugar when the May contract in London expires Friday. The London trade firm that was rumored to be the one that would take delivery for the Soviet Union yesterday denied the reports, causing some selling of futures, an analyst said. In addition, the fact that futures opened lower yesterday rather than extending Monday's advance also prompted selling, the analyst said. F.O. Licht, the West German statistical firm, yesterday lowered its estimates of European acreage planted in sugar beets and of production for the 1988-89 season, which begins Sept. 1. But the changes were so small they affected prices very little, the analyst said. </TEXT></DOC>