<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ HELD three rounds of talks with Shevardnadze in Moscow.    The secretary of state and the Soviet foreign minister, who held morning and afternoon talks in an attempt to stabilize superpower relations amid an exchange of spy charges, met for an unscheduled late-night session to discuss the issue of nuclear-arms reduction. There wasn't any immediate word on the outcome of the talks. In California, however, White House Chief of Staff Baker said a decision on a U.S.-Soviet summit could emerge from Shultz's three-day visit to Moscow. Shultz is expected to meet with Kremlin leader Gorbachev today.    Shultz attended a Passover Seder at the U.S. Embassy with about 40 Jewish &quot;refuseniks,&quot; a move designed to demonstrate U.S. support for Soviet Jews.    ---   U.S. officials said South Korean President Chun's decision to suspend debate over constitutional changes doesn't bode well for the democratic objectives the U.S. has in the Asian nation. Chun halted debate until after the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, ensuring that a successor wouldn't be chosen by direct election.    ---   Anglican Archbishop Tutu defied a South African government decree by urging more than 700 people at a church service in Cape Town to join in calling for the release of those detained without charge. The service was attended by U.S. Ambassador Edward Perkins, who expressed &quot;shock and outrage&quot; at the continued detentions.    ---   Former Sen. Gary Hart declared his candidacy for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination, his second bid for the White House. In a brief statement in Morrison, Colo., Hart underscored his intention to portray the election as &quot;a referendum on America's future.&quot;    ---   A federal commission proposed guidelines for U.S. judges to use in sentencing criminals, but it asked Congress to delay their effective date until August 1988 so the guidelines can be tested first. The U.S. Sentencing Commission's plan is intended to reduce the disparity in criminal sentences.    ---   Independent counsel Walsh has submitted to a federal court sealed evidence against Albert Hakim, an Iranian-American businessman, according to a report by the Associated Press. Hakim has been linked to Swiss bank accounts that are considered central to the Iran-Contra inquiry.    ---   Morton Thiokol Inc. asked a federal judge in Washington for permission to examine an FBI criminal inquiry report about the company. The motion was opposed by Justice Department lawyers and by Thiokol engineer Roger Boisjoly, who has filed suit against the rocket maker in the wake of last year's explosion of the shuttle Challenger.    ---   India's Parliament abruptly adjourned amid an uproar from opposition members, who demanded that Prime Minister Gandhi explain the ouster of the defense minister. The cabinet official resigned Sunday, three days after he launched an investigation into a defense contract, which some viewed as a challenge to Gandhi's leadership.    ---   Zimbabwe has been negotiating with the Soviet Union to purchase a squadron of advanced MiG-29 Fulcrum jet fighters, Reagan officials said. The aides, however, said it was unclear whether an agreement between Moscow and Harare had been reached. Zimbabwe apparently wants the jets to bolster air defenses against South Africa.    ---   Italy's Communist Party urged political leaders to form a coalition opposing the dominant Christian Democrats. The move, aimed at ending a five-week government crisis, was an effort to avoid widely expected early elections in June.    ---   Pope John Paul II returned to Rome from a two-week trip to Uruguay, Chile and Argentina. The pope denounced the violence that marred one of his masses in Santiago as base, brutal and provocative. More than 120 anti-government demonstrators were injured in the clash with police.    ---   The Army suspended amphibious operations with its Bradley Fighting Vehicle following the sinking last week of one of the troop carriers at Fort Benning, Ga. A spokesman said such maneuvers would be halted until hinges on the front of the vehicle, made by FMC Corp., can be modified.    ---   Israeli soldiers stormed a university campus in the occupied West Bank to disperse hundreds of rock-throwing demonstrators. An army spokesman said at least one Palestinian was killed in the clash. The army also ordered the 3,000-student Bir Zeit University closed for four months.    ---   The State Department said it will revise official statements about an Iranian opposition group, but doesn't foresee a change in policy toward the People's Mujahedeen, which has been accused of terrorism. The decision came after two congressmen urged talks with the group as part of an effort to seek contacts with anti-Khomeini Iranians. </TEXT></DOC>