<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861215-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Nissan Motor, Japan's No. 2 Automaker, PlungesInto the Red Amid Continuing Union Problems---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/15/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NSANY LABORAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Few people would look to Japan to find an auto maker weakened by union troubles, misdirected by short-term decisions and losing millions of dollars overseas and at home.    Nissan Motor Co. is making people look again. Japan's No. 2 auto maker is falling victim to the kind of problems that have battered Detroit, the kind that Japanese companies exploited to decimate the U.S. auto industry. In fact, Nissan could serve as a textbook example of how to go wrong.    Nissan's shortcomings are all the more remarkable because it is one of the most powerful members of an industry long considered invincible. The company played a major role in the Japanese auto industry's rise from the rubble of World War II. Founded in 1933 to make trucks for Japan's war machine -- its founder was labeled a war criminal by the victorious Americans -- Nissan had little left after the war ended.    But Nissan refined what had been little more than a box on wheels into a world beater; to millions of Americans, the Datsun car came to symbolize Japan's economic miracle. So much so, that &quot;The Reckoning,&quot; a new best seller by David Halberstam, examines the fall of the U.S. auto industry by featuring Nissan's right stuff as a counterpoint to Ford Motor Co., which Mr. Halberstam characterizes as an example of American failure. Ironically, Ford is doing well.    Moreover, Nissan was long known as &quot;the company of firsts,&quot; widely praised for innovative engineering. It was the first with front-wheel drive, which provides more efficient power in small cars. It brags about an electronic &quot;drowsiness monitor,&quot; which sounds an alarm when the car senses that the driver is becoming inattentive. It pioneered computer-assisted suspension systems, collision-avoidance gear and other high-tech features.    Nonetheless, Nissan's current problems can be traced back to the 1950s. The company's shortcomings weren't caused by the surge of the yen against the dollar, but they have been severely aggravated by it. Last March, for the first time, Nissan cut its executive salaries, by 10%. And it even began turning off restroom lights in its headquarters as part of a &quot;Let's Be Stingy&quot; cost-cutting program.    There were other, more important signs of weakness. Nissan's loss-ridden dealers in Japan couldn't halt its drop in market share to less than 20% from 30% only five years before. Car sales were also sliding in the U.S., the source of most of its money, and unsold inventories doubled from year-earlier levels.    The biggest blow came last month. &quot;The company of firsts&quot; became the first Japanese auto maker to report a loss since the postwar recovery, a $121.9 million operating deficit for the six months ended Sept. 30. &quot;I feel very disappointed,&quot; says Yutaka Kume, the company's president.    More disappointments are likely. Nissan is expected to report an operating loss of about $300 million for the fiscal year ending March 31; it will post a net profit, as it did for the first six months, only by selling assets. Even then, net income will plunge almost 70% from its fiscal 1983 high. &quot;There is some structural weakness in our company,&quot; Mr. Kume concedes.    The fall from grace has forced Nissan to confront its hubris. &quot;This is a time of self-criticism to discover what is wrong with us,&quot; says Atsushi Muramatsu, Nissan's new managing director of finance. But despite the deep-seated problems, Nissan's leaders remain confident that it will turn around within three years.    Any recovery won't come easily. On one side, Toyota Motor Corp., the General Motors of Japan, is using its enormous resources to squeeze Nissan relentlessly. Honda Motor Co., with half Nissan's sales but already as profitable, nips at the No. 2 maker with a bold strategy of innovative &quot;niche market&quot; products. Auto analysts say Nissan, the world's fifth-largest auto maker, won't collapse -- the good times have provided a substantial financial cushion -- but its size and influence in the global auto industry could certainly shrink.    &quot;Nissan faces great difficulties,&quot; says Yoshide Kondo, senior analyst with Daiwa Securities Co. &quot;In two or three years, Honda will overtake Nissan.&quot;    The high yen that is hurting all Japanese auto makers is hurting Nissan worst because Nissan's problems stretch back to a Faustian bargain negotiated in 1953, when the Nissan union closed the company in a long strike. To make peace, Katsuji Kawamata, then a top financial and labor-relations executive who later became Nissan's president, made a deal with some ambitious union leaders, including Ichiro Shioji. The then-reigning union boss was ousted and a union friendly to management was set up, and, in return, the union got a voice in decision-making. By the 1970s, the union grew powerful enough to dictate personnel changes and plant-location policies.    In the late 1970s, as the aging Mr. Kawamata was heading for retirement, his successor, Takashi Ishihara, chafed under the union interference. Mr. Ishihara wanted Nissan to become a global company, but Mr. Shioji, then the union chief, wanted a say about plans to put plants in the U.S. and Europe. When Mr. Ishihara refused to yield to Mr. Kawamata's old ally, Nissan executives began choosing sides, and the infighting disrupted decision-making.    Finally, two years ago, Mr. Ishihara, now Nissan's chairman, engineered the fall of Mr. Shioji, and, in a repeat of history, enlisted a new union boss. Now, the union is so docile that it wouldn't grant an interview to this newspaper without Nissan's approval.    Meanwhile, the highly politicized atmosphere most strongly affected the design of new cars. Creativity was stifled, and out came a string of stodgy cars.    In the U.S., Nissan's Stanza model, though better than most U.S. cars in that class, didn't have the subtle, appealing styling details and construction quality that made Honda's Accord so popular. In Japan, Nissan's Skyline and Laurel cars, which aren't sold in the U.S., were aimed at sophisticated young buyers but failed to attract them because the styling resembled that of a 1970s Chevy Malibu more than that of a Mercedes.    Much like Detroit auto makers, Nissan engineers lost touch with young Japanese families, who no longer thought first of Nissan when looking for a new car. &quot;The mood inside the company wasn't good. People with original ideas couldn't develop them,&quot; says Kinji Hanawada, a section chief of Nissan Shatai Co., a Nissan manufacturing subsidiary. Adds a former employee, &quot;All the efforts were channeled at guessing what the bosses wanted rather than building the best car.&quot;    It was so bad that at a new-product introduction for dealers, one independent soul bravely asked, &quot;Which one is the new car?&quot; Quality also slid, and independent surveys showed that this slide influenced customers.    While Nissan's engineers were distracted by the corporate infighting, Honda was working hard to market innovative new models such as the CRX, a speedy two-seater, and the Today, a roomy minicar. Toyota was more cautious about styling changes, but it caught up with the pace of new technology and, with its marketing muscle, moved further and further ahead of Nissan.    Toyota also compounded Nissan's problems by raising the cost of doing business. The giant rival increased its ad budget; Nissan followed. Toyota tripled the pace of new-product development; Nissan models also began proliferating, and Nissan dealers now hawk six versions of the Sentra. Toyota helped its dealers get attractive, larger showrooms in good locations; Nissan struggled to keep pace.    &quot;In effect, Toyota said, 'I see you and raise you,' &quot; says James C. Abegglen, a business consultant in Japan. &quot;When you are the richest guy in the game, you can stay in longer.&quot;    Nissan's shortsighted attempt to follow Toyota's moves ultimately weakened Nissan's dealer network. By emphasizing volume, Nissan's dealers slashed prices even though they ended up losing money on every sale. So Nissan had to step in and buy dealerships to keep them open, in effect subsidizing the weak sisters. Nissan even exiled out-of-favor employees to dealerships. &quot;Usually, they gave us pretty useless people,&quot; says Masahiro Kimura, sales-section chief at a Nissan dealership near Yokohama.    Constantly pushed for increased volume rather than customer satisfaction or profit, Nissan got caught in a vicious circle. By 1985, only 31 of its 254 dealers were making money, compared with 70% of Toyota's dealers. Nissan's own bottom line suffered. Its profit margins averaged only 1.3%, far below the 5% at Toyota and the 4.3% at Honda. Worse, when the yen strengthened, Nissan didn't have the capacity to expand sales in Japan to make up for declines in the U.S.    The dissension in the company also hobbled its global strategy. Major manufacturing projects in Italy and Spain have yet to pay off. &quot;They spent millions to buy the plant in Spain and then watched it lose millions more,&quot; says a European competitor at a nearby plant. &quot;It was utter confusion because the managers got no clear signals from Tokyo.&quot;    Yoshikazu Hanawa, the general manager of Nissan's corporate-planning office, says that when management wanted to send an employee overseas, the union could hold up the decision. The union's control over careers made managers beholden to its goals and policies. &quot;I think to some extent {the politics} affected the managers,&quot; Mr. Hanawa says.    Notes Maryann Keller, a leading American auto analyst, &quot;It's hard to find a success story for Nissan overseas, including the U.S.&quot; In contrast to Honda's bonanza in America, Nissan's ultra-modern Tennessee plant made a profit for the first time only last year -- and a small one at that. </TEXT></DOC>