<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0086 </DOCNO><HL> The Adjuster:Man Likely to BecomeJapan's Next LeaderLives to Compromise---Noboru Takeshita EspousesConsensus, May Be SlowTo Respond to the West---Ties to the Special Interests---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN </IN><DATELINE> MATSUE, Japan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As far back as boarding school, Noboru Takeshita, the man widely expected to be Japan's next prime minister, showed a natural talent for cooling conflict.    He was assigned to a dormitory room where the older high-school boys were taking special delight in tormenting one young student, sometimes searing his arms with red-hot metal. Other schoolboys were amazed when the unimposing, jug-eared Mr. Takeshita stopped the bullies, not by fighting but by talking with them. &quot;He did it so he wouldn't get bullied himself,&quot; recalls Uemon Takeuchi, a high-school and college buddy of his who is now the mayor of a small town. &quot;He was always an adjuster.&quot;    Today, the 63-year-old Mr. Takeshita is known primarily as that, an adjuster who is clever, cautious and quiet. His supporters say those are his great strengths, for he is able to forge compromise and get opposing sides headed in the same direction. Detractors say he lacks the independence, international stature and vision to guide the world's No. 2 economic power in a period of rising tensions with the U.S. and Europe.    The world is likely soon to have the chance to judge. For Mr. Takeshita seems about to emerge, like a brass rubbing, from the murky back-room political processes of Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party.    He stands to be named LDP president because he controls the largest faction within the party. And because the LDP has ruled Japan for nearly 40 years, selection as party president is tantamount to election as prime minister. But to avoid embarrassing the present party president, Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, the formal selection of a successor won't take place until late this month when Mr. Nakasone's term ends.    The selection of a new leader by America's most formidable economic competitor is bound to have repercussions for the U.S. Because Mr. Takeshita places such emphasis on laboriously compromising until consensus is reached within the LDP and among bureaucracy, business and farming interests, his selection seems likely to further upset Tokyo's relations with Washington.    Mr. Takeshita (pronounced ta-KESH-ta) is quite a contrast to Mr. Nakasone, an outgoing, charismatic, Western-style leader whose five years as prime minister have been marked by a steady slide in U.S.-Japanese relations. Mr. Nakasone sought -- sometimes with limited success -- to shake up long-held Japanese practices and open Japan to the world. Mr. Takeshita advocates such opening only after those Japanese who would be hurt by the competition have been accommodated. In short, he is widely seen here as a throwback to an earlier political age, representing predictability and stability.    &quot;Japan must look outward, and Mr. Takeshita looks inward,&quot; says Masayuki Fukuoka, a political scientist at Komazawa University. &quot;Under him, I can only see U.S.-Japan relations getting worse. He is a mismatch for the times.&quot;    Indeed, Mr. Takeshita is a status quo politician in a status quo party. He rose through the LDP ranks, learning the rules of political favors and cash politics. &quot;I'm not a leader who says 'follow me,'&quot; he acknowledges in an interview. And, he emphasizes, he isn't about to change.    Thus, his views on major issues -- from trade to opening markets, aid to developing nations and agricultural subsidies -- are the views of the party. And the party largely favors things the way they are.    What Mr. Takeshita does believe strongly is that any market opening hurts somebody or other in Japan and victims must be compensated if they are to be persuaded to change. All of which takes time and money and debate about who should pay.    Thus, the critical thing about Mr. Takeshita isn't what he believes -- he believes in consensus -- but rather how he handles problems. His supporters note that he has much more control than Mr. Nakasone has had over the party, which has grown in power to match that of the bureaucracy. As a result, his supporters argue that when the time comes to do something, Mr. Takeshita will be able to get it through, while Mr. Nakasone, for all his flash and charisma, often has failed -- or has been forced to turn to Mr. Takeshita for help.    For instance, when Mr. Nakasone unveiled his plan for a national sales tax without first lining up support in the party, he found himself with a revolt on his hands and his political effectiveness in jeopardy. He turned to Mr. Takeshita. The &quot;adjuster&quot; talked to party mavericks about the importance of harmony. He talked about loyalty. He talked about projects they wanted for their constituencies. And he listened. Then he persuaded old friends in the opposition party, including two from his home district, to agree to shelve the tax bill temporarily so it could be revived this winter. He let the opposition claim it had killed the bill in exchange for allowing it to be considered again at a later date. That was enough to satisfy maverick LDP politicians, who also fell in line.    &quot;The tax bill was a chicken with its neck almost cut off, but it still had a little piece of skin holding it together,&quot; says an LDP legislator. &quot;Mr. Takeshita made sure that little piece of skin stayed there.&quot;    The story of Mr. Takeshita's rise mirrors the rise of the Liberal Democratic Party. Both have their base in the rice fields of Japan. Mr. Takeshita was born in a poor, isolated village near the Japan Sea that was and is dependent on rice farming. His family wasn't poor by any means. It owned the local sake brewery.    But the real family business was politics. Mr. Takeshita's father was an autocratic local politician, a retainer of a powerful regional boss. The house was always full of visitors talking politics.    The family wealth also taught him lessons about how money helps win friends and influence. As a child, he would show his friends movies he had made with the 8mm camera his parents had given him -- a remarkable gift for the 1930s. More than 50 years later, people in his hometown still recall the little party favors his mother would hand out to his playmates.    His school and university friends remember him as good-natured, but with few other remarkable attributes save his constant interest in discussing politics. He was not an academic standout; in fact, he failed in his first attempt to enter the university.    In 1944, during the last year of World War II, he was called away from college. He joined the army air corps and spent the year in flight school. He saw no action in the war.    As a skinny schoolteacher back in his home area, he created a youth group that successfully challenged two entrenched politicians for a prefectural post. By 1958, at age 34, he won election to the Diet on the LDP ticket despite a minor campaign-financing scandal.    The conservative and pro-U.S. LDP, formed just four years earlier, was attracting men like Mr. Takeshita. And the farmer-oriented political machine back home kept returning the young politician to Tokyo. Mr. Takeshita kept quiet, ingratiated himself with powerful party leaders, showed his talent for organization and compromise. By 1963, he was getting top party jobs.    By the late 1960s, he had become convinced he could be prime minister. At first only with friends, and later in front of Prime Minister Eisaku Sato, he would sing a little drinking song. The final verse went: &quot;There are lots more people around, but 10 years from now it's Takeshitasan.&quot;    He could sing that ditty because in his new political jobs he controlled the allocation of certain government funds. The party could pull the strings of the ministries that, in concert with business, ran &quot;Japan Inc.&quot; The longer party members served, the more power and expertise they gained in economics, defense and social policy.    As head of the construction ministry, or as chairman of the Diet budget committee, Mr. Takeshita could earn favors by handing out pork-barrel public-works projects. That cemented his relations with the farmers who needed dams and roads and established links with the construction companies that built them. One of his three daughters married into the family that owns Japan's fourth-largest builder.    His influence has grown so great that, last spring, Mr. Takeshita was able to raise a record $14.7 million at a single evening party. Supporters paid the equivalent of $210 for the privilege of drinking a beer or a whiskey and hearing Mr. Takeshita speak. Government officials and construction companies bought huge blocks of tickets, 70,000 in all, though only about 13,000 people actually attended the affair.    It is far from clear that Mr. Takeshita's ties to domestic special-interest groups will render him unable to bring about change in Japan. The construction companies and the farm lobby, which is still most powerful even though Japan imports much of its food, oppose more foreign entry into their markets. Mr. Takeshita's supporters say, however, that just as it took an anti-Communist like Richard Nixon to establish relations with Communist China, only Mr. Takeshita has the influence with the special interests, the party and the bureaucracy to bring about change.    Mr. Takeshita says he won't budge from his tried-and-true political formula, dispensing patronage and presiding over what looks very much like a political machine. &quot;I do feel consensus within the party comes first for changing policies,&quot; he says. And that party power gives him more control over the bureaucracy than is wielded by his two competitors for the party presidency, Shintaro Abe, a former foreign minister, and Kiichi Miyazawa, the finance minister.    &quot;I came to posts with more contact with the bureaucracy than average,&quot; he says. I think I therefore have some influence on the bureaucracy. It will be faster to get consensus and then make promises, than to make promises and then get consensus,&quot; he adds, in a veiled criticism of Mr. Nakasone's penchant for making promises to the U.S. that he could never deliver on.    Indeed, that was Mr. Nakasone's biggest problem, analysts and diplomats say. Mr. Nakasone, with a weak faction of the LDP, had trouble taming the bureaucracy and the party, and that worsened trade and security relations with the U.S. Mr. Takeshita, on the other hand, takes credit for gaining the consensus that allowed the opening of Japan's financial markets to outsiders.    But arriving at a consensus takes time. That's a weakness, because there are many in the U.S. Congress and some Europeans, too, who believe Japan has already dragged its feet too long on trade and other issues. &quot;There are political effects to moving slowly,&quot; admits Mr. Takeshita's half-brother and a top aide, Wataru Takeshita.    And unlike Mr. Nakasone or Mr. Miyazawa, Mr. Takeshita couldn't conduct direct negotiations with the Americans. Although he once taught English, Mr. Takeshita can't speak the language. &quot;That isn't my strong point,&quot; he says. Inexperienced in foreign affairs, he doesn't have any close American friends. (Mr. Nakasone makes much of being on a first-name basis with Ronald Reagan.)    Also, Mr. Takeshita's indirect way of answering questions irritates and baffles many people. For example, in discussing why U.S. construction firms can't expect to participate in the $6.8 billion Kansai airport project, he cites the 20-year-old example of a U.S. company that defaulted on its promise to build a highway.    U.S. diplomats think the analogy is specious and gnash their teeth every time they hear it. </TEXT></DOC>