<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870310-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Back Restriction on Coal Firms;Ruling Will Bolster State Land-Use Laws---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> X DD USW T ICH AIT BLS NYN BEL PAC SBCMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court, in a ruling that will bolster the power of states to regulate land use, upheld a Pennsylvania law requiring coal companies to leave enough coal in the ground to avoid damaging buildings on the surface.    The 5-4 decision is a defeat for coal-mine operators who argued that the Pennsylvania law amounted to a government's taking of their property without compensation, in violation of the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution.    The ruling was an important victory for state and local officials in the first of three Supreme Court decisions expected this spring in an escalating fight with developers over the limits on government landuse regulation.    But the high court stopped short of adopting the suggestion by 26 states and by state, city and county groups in friend-of-the-court briefs that land-use regulations can never constitute a taking of property. These groups argued that because the aim of such regulation is to control a public hazard or nuisance, it can never be challenged as an unconstitutional taking of property.    If the court didn't accept the entire argument, however, it did give government land-use planners broad support. &quot;Under our system of government,&quot; Justice John Stevens wrote for the majority, &quot;one of the state's primary ways of preserving the public weal is restricting the uses individuals can make of their property.&quot;    The ruling involved a 21-year-old Pennsylvania law that was challenged by a coal-mine operators group, the Keystone Bituminous Coal Association, and by USX Corp. and Consolidation Coal Corp., a unit of Du Pont Co.    The Pennsylvania law is intended to protect buildings from the dangers of cave-ins, collapse or sinking because of underground mining. The law says that mine operators must leave enough coal in the ground to protect public buildings, private residences and cemeteries, and must repair or pay for any damage that occurs.    The mine operators say the law requires them to leave about 50% of the coal unmined beneath protected areas. But the high court said that taking protected and unprotected areas into account, the operators are required to leave only about 2% of their coal undeveloped.    The lawsuit was filed in federal court in Pittsburgh in 1982, and a federal judge upheld the law in 1984. A federal appeals court in Philadelphia also upheld the law in 1985, and the mine owners appealed.    The Supreme Court said its past rulings suggest that a land-use regulation may result in a taking of property if it serves no significant public purpose or if a landowner is denied &quot;economically viable&quot; use of the land.    But the high court said the mine owners haven't claimed that they can't profitably extract their coal. And the high court said the Pennsylvania law is intended &quot;to protect the public interest in health, the environment, and the fiscal integrity of the area.&quot;    In dissent, Chief Justice William Rehnquist, joined by Justices Lewis Powell, Sandra O'Connor and Antonin Scalia, said the state law does result in a taking of property, requiring the government to compensate the mine owners.    In Pittsburgh, U.S. Steel Mining Co., a USX subsidiary, expressed &quot;disappointment&quot; with the ruling. A spokesman for Consolidation Coal said the company was &quot;disappointed&quot; but couldn't comment further because the company received the decision late in the day.    U S West Appeal   The justices refused to hear an appeal by U S West Inc. over a federal judge's ruling that the court order breaking up American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. was binding on the seven regional telephone-holding companies created by the order.    Denver-based U S West and other regional companies filed suit here in 1985 arguing that they can offer some services outside their own regions without court approval, particularly cellular telephones and paging services. Judge Harold Greene, who presided over the ATandamp;T breakup, rejected the claim in January 1986.    A federal appeals court last August ruled that Judge Greene was wrong to require court approval for the services the companies wanted to offer outside their regions. The appeals court also rejected, however, the argument that making the ATandamp;T breakup order binding on the regional companies violated their right to due process.    U S West, alone, appealed to the Supreme Court only over the due-process portion of the appeals court's ruling.    In Englewood, Colo., a U S West spokeswoman said &quot;the decision, while disappointing, isn't surprising in light of the small number of cases that the court actually hears each year.&quot;    Penalty on Appeals   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether it is constitutional for a state to impose a penalty on defendants who appeal damage awards unsuccessfully in state courts. The high court will review a Mississippi law that automatically adds a 15% penalty for unsuccessful appeals of monetary judgments. Several other Southern states have similar laws.    The appeals penalty was challenged by Bankers Life andamp; Casualty Co., a unit of ICH Corp. A jury awarded $20,000 in damages to an injured man whose employer had a Bankers Life policy. Bankers Life had said the injury wasn't covered by the policy. The jury also awarded $1.6 million in punitive damages for Bankers Life's &quot;bad faith refusal&quot; to pay the claim. Bankers Life appealed unsuccessfully, and a $243,000 penalty was added.    Waiving Right to Sue   The justices upheld the validity of an agreement in which a criminal defendant agreed to give up his right to sue local officials for violating his civil rights by arresting him, in exchange for their dropping the charges against him.    The agreement involved the town of Newton, N.H., and Bernard Rumery, arrested in 1983 and charged with tampering with a witness in another case. Mr. Rumery's lawyer told the prosecutor that the charges wouldn't hold up and that Mr. Rumery planned to sue for damages for violating his rights by arresting him. An agreement resulted in which prosecutors dropped the charge and Mr. Rumery waived the suit.    But Mr. Rumery sued in 1984, arguing that the agreement was invalid and against public policy. A federal court in New Hampshire dismissed the suit, but the federal appeals court in Boston reinstated it.    In an opinion by Justice Powell, the high court yesterday ruled by a 5-4 vote that such agreements may sometimes be valid and consistent with public policy. The court rejected the appeals court's view that such agreements are inherently void, and ordered Mr. Rumery's lawsuit dismissed.    The five-member majority was divided, however, about which public policy factors should be considered in reviewing waiver agreements. Justice O'Connor wrote a separate opinion setting out different factors.    Justice Stevens dissented, joined by Justices William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall and Harry Blackmun. </TEXT></DOC>