<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880830-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   WALESA SAID he must represent Solidarity in any talks with Warsaw.    As about 5,000 people joined a strike at the Stalowa Wola steel mill in southeastern Poland, the Solidarity founder was quoted as saying he wouldn't join government talks unless he could negotiate on behalf of the banned trade union. He said &quot;there must be compromise on both sides.&quot; Walesa's comments came a day after Polish authorities said they might allow him to participate in negotiations aimed at ending a two-week-old wave of strikes, but only as an individual.    About 10 enterprises remained on strike nationwide. During the peak of the unrest, about 20 facilities employing about 100,000 workers were idled.    ---   THE U.S. WON'T APPEAL a ruling allowing the PLO's mission to the U.N.    The Justice Department, citing &quot;foreign policy considerations,&quot; said it wouldn't appeal a June 29 ruling by the federal judge that permitted the PLO to keep its observer mission in New York. Congress, in passing the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1987, had sought to force the closing of the mission on grounds that the PLO endorsed terrorism, but the judge said such a move would violate the U.N. Headquarters Agreement.    The Reagan administration said it would continue to oppose efforts to reopen a PLO office in Washington, which isn't covered by the U.N. pact.    ---   West Germany suspended military air shows after Sunday's crash involving three Italian jets at a U.S. military base in Ramstein. At least 45 people were killed and about 500 injured, including at least 11 Americans critically burned. Bonn also called on NATO to prohibit stunt flying exhibitions.    ---   Burma's state-run radio said at least eight people died in protests and prison riots over the weekend. But some inmates released from the jail outside Rangoon said hundreds of prisoners were killed. Meanwhile, senior politicians and dockworkers formed illegal associations, joining a student union created to protest one-party rule.    ---   Police in Chile clashed with anti-government demonstrators as President Pinochet and other military commanders prepared to meet today to choose a nominee for an October presidential referendum. Pinochet, who ousted Allende in 1973, is expected to be the only candidate. A victory by the 72-year-old leader would keep him in office until 1997.    ---   The EPA announced a ban on construction of major air-polluting plants in Los Angeles. The ban, which is effective Thursday, affects facilities that produce large amounts of carbon monoxide or form ozone. It could be extended to a dozen cities this fall. The move boosts pressure on Congress to revise the Clean Air Act.    Researchers found that fire extinguishers based on bromine compounds may be doing as much damage to the Earth's protective ozone layer as chlorofluorocarbons. A scientific team reported evidence that bromine compounds are building up in the atmosphere.    ---   Bush said Dukakis gives the impression of being &quot;against every new weapons system since the slingshot.&quot; The Massachusetts governor said his GOP rival's call for a cut in the capital-gains tax amounts to a handout for the wealthy. The candidates exchanged barbs as their aides prepared to meet today to arrange campaign debates.    ---   Iran-Iraq peace talks faltered over the disputed Shatt al-Arab waterway, Iraq's only outlet to the sea. Both nations' foreign ministers failed to attend the negotiating session in Geneva. At the U.N., Iran accused Iraqi forces of capturing hundreds of Iranian soldiers in violation of a cease-fire that began Aug. 20 in the Persian Gulf war.    ---   The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz space capsule that is headed for a rendezvous tomorrow with the Mir space station. The spacecraft is carrying a veteran cosmonaut, the first Afghan to travel into orbit and a doctor who is to examine the health of two cosmonauts aboard the space station.    ---   Romania and Hungary failed to resolve a dispute over national minorities during a weekend meeting between their leaders. The talks Sunday between Romanian President Ceausescu and Hungarian leader Grosz reportedly focused on Romania's plan to raze thousands of ethnic Hungarian villages to make way for state-run farms.    ---   Tropical storm Chris spawned tornadoes that damaged houses, destroyed mobile homes and caused at least one death in the Carolinas before gradually weakening. The storm, the third of the 1988 Atlantic hurricane season, also left thousands of people without electricity before being downgraded to a tropical depression.    ---   An independent team launched an investigation in Haiti into widespread reports of killings, police brutality and other human-rights abuses linked to the military regime of Lt. Gen. Henri Namphy. The four-member team represents the Organization of American States and is expected to report to the Western Hemisphere body Nov. 14.    ---   The Veterans Administration has taken more than 13,000 beds at VA hospitals out of service while telling Congress that the agency wasn't &quot;making compromises&quot; because of budget cuts, the House Veterans Affairs panel said. The committee is to hold a hearing on the matter next week. </TEXT></DOC>