<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID the Soviets had &quot;backtracked&quot; on efforts to cut nuclear arms.    The president said Moscow was trying to block progress on reducing nuclear weapons because of the U.S. space-based antimissile project. Reagan also promoted chief U.S. arms negotiator Max Kampelman to the post of State Department counselor. He will head the U.S. team at arms talks that resume Thursday in Geneva. At Senate hearings, Weinberger said Star Wars would complement, rather than replace, the U.S. nuclear arsenal.    The defense secretary also made clear that the U.S. plans to bolster nuclear forces and develop space arms to intercept and destroy enemy missiles.    ---   IRAN AND IRAQ REPORTED heavy fighting along their southern war front.    Iran said its forces attacked an Iraqi defensive position near Basra, sparking heavy fighting in the four-day-old Persian Gulf offensive. Iraq said that its troops repulsed the assault and that its warplanes bombed targets inside Iran. The reports couldn't be confirmed. In Baghdad, Iraq's second-highest political leader said the U.S. provided Iraq with &quot;intentionally misleading&quot; intelligence, which was meant to appease and assist Iran.    U.S. officials said the latest military moves in the gulf war appeared to be a limited operation despite thousands of casualties claimed by both sides.    ---   The White House has assured Israeli officials that the release of documents outlining the Iran arms-sales strategy wasn't intended to cast blame on Israel, an administration aide said. Meanwhile, Reagan returned to the Oval Office a week after surgery and met with David Abshire, his special counselor on the Iran-Contra scandal.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide when military contractors may avoid liability in accident lawsuits by claiming that they were following contract requirements. The justices refused, at least for now, to decide whether the law requiring warnings on cigarette packages protects tobacco firms from lawsuits.    ---   The Rev. Charles Curran was suspended from teaching at Catholic University of America in Washington, five months after the Vatican declared him unfit to teach as a Roman Catholic theologian. Curran had been criticized for dissenting from church views on divorce and on sexual issues such as birth control and homosexuality.    ---   Officials in Peking dismissed the president and vice president of the Chinese University of Science and Technology in the eastern city of Hefei, the Xinhua News Agency reported. The academicians, considered liberal, had been blamed for inspiring pro-democracy student demonstrations, which began last month in Hefei.    ---   Former HEW chief Califano called for a minimum health-care law to ensure that all Americans have at least some health insurance coverage. Speaking before the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee, Califano said the law was needed &quot;just as we have a minimum wage law.&quot;    ---   Federal safety officials reenacted an Amtrak train crash and were able to stop three Conrail locomotives about a half-mile from where they would have been hit by the high-speed passenger train. Fifteen people were killed and 176 others injured in the Jan. 4 collision near Baltimore.    ---   Senior Reagan aides are divided over a proposal to make it more difficult for suspected Soviet spies to enter the U.S. The Justice Department, the CIA and others have sought a presidential order to impose more stringent screening procedures on Soviet diplomats. These officials said Shultz has objected to it.    ---   Shultz discussed with Nigerian officials ways of curbing a &quot;considerable flow&quot; of Asian heroin through the West African nation to the U.S. The secretary of state, on a six-nation tour of Africa, also held talks in Lagos on political and economic issues.    South Africa accused Shultz of using Pretoria as a scapegoat to divert attention from &quot;fickle&quot; U.S. foreign policy. Foreign Minister Botha said the U.S. wasn't &quot;interested in civil rights for Africa's millions,&quot; but only for South African blacks.    ---   Anglican envoy Terry Waite arrived in Beirut and expressed optimism about winning the release of Americans and other foreigners held hostage in Lebanon. In southern Lebanon, Israeli jets bombed Palestinian and Shiite Moslem positions, killing at least five guerrillas and wounding 14. It was the third such air raid in two weeks.    ---   Polish leader Jaruzelski arrived in Rome and met with Italian officials to discuss measures to reduce Warsaw's $30 billion in foreign debt and Italy's policy of encouraging East-West ties. Jaruzelski is to meet today with Polish-born Pope John Paul II.    ---   The Soviet Union reported that at least 77 people have died because of the record low temperatures and heavy snow gripping much of the European continent. Deaths also were reported in Britain, Turkey, Poland and Hungary. Temperatures across parts of Europe were lower than at the North Pole, meteorologists said.    ---   Thousands of Parisians attended rallies against strikes by state employees. At one demonstration, rightists clashed with militants of a communist-led labor union. The rallies were held to protest a nearly monthlong national rail strike and a walkout by workers of the state-owned electric firm.    ---   The Philippine government announced the closure of a pro-Marcos newspaper and canceled an interview show that was to feature former Defense Minister Enrile, an Aquino rival. While Manila said the moves didn't renege on a promise of a free press, critics said they constituted censorship.    ---   Afghan guerrilla leaders agreed on a joint response to the Kabul government's offer of a cease-fire, but declined to disclose their decision. One of the leaders said the rebel response, which is expected to be a rejection of the Communist bid, would be announced Saturday in Peshawar, Pakistan. </TEXT></DOC>