<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880825-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Dan Quayle: Not Just Another Pretty Face </HL><AUTHOR> Kenneth L. Adelman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Here's why I'm an unabashed Quayle-backer.    It's not based on his appearance or his age -- his having better looks and fewer years than I are hardly pluses to me -- nor on his college grades, where I may have something over him. Rather, it's based on five years working closely with him as a senator serious about the issues under my responsibilities as director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.    Through thick and thin, one battle after another -- that's what we do in arms control, battle -- and year after year, I found Dan Quayle a serious man of solid judgment.    I received my first inkling of this in 1983 when Sen. Quayle helped form a small study group of senators to dive into the substance of arms-control and defense matters. These senators gathered each month or so with the leading lights in the field.    When the group once started to flag, Sen. Quayle called another lunchtime meeting. While other senators might occasionally flit about or leave early, Sen. Quayle stayed put until the end, always asking his questions and probing the Masters. Such sessions were intensive and private. Few, besides the members and invited guests, even knew the group existed. This is rare, to find senators keener on what they could learn about a subject than what they could walk out and say about it.    So when a big issue arose, Sen. Quayle knew enough to take the lead. He was pivotal in persuading President Reagan to end the U.S. commitment to the flawed, non-ratified, expired and Soviet-violated SALT II Treaty -- that I know first-hand as a Quayle ally -- and in beginning the U.S. commitment to the INF Treaty, where we did not always see eye-to-eye.    Indeed, he and I squared off on a critical &quot;end-game&quot; issue, namely whether to bar conventionally armed cruise missiles in the INF Treaty. Those of us favoring their ban for better verification found Sen. Quayle our most formidable foe. He called me innumerable times until realizing he was wasting his quarters, and then turned his firepower on the secretary of defense, NATO military commander, national security adviser and others. He argued fiercely that precision-guided conventional arms would become critical to NATO defense next century and so we should not now preclude their contribution.    The day the issue came to a head within the administration, I was having lunch in the White House with a top official who took the call. With a sigh, he told Sen. Quayle that he would check once again with the president, since the senator felt so strongly and made a strong case. He then headed for the Oval Office and returned a few minutes later to say that the president still wanted the missiles prohibited. I cheered while my colleague broke the news to one disappointed senator.    Dan Quayle cared deeply, even though this did not concern his constituents any more than it did other Americans. Even though preserving conventionally armed GLCMs (ground-launched cruise missiles) is hardly a popular rallying cry. Even though the issue concerned future security rather than today's safety. And even though he opposed the decision of a president he always sought to support. These are the traits that I respect in him, and on which we have built a warm personal friendship over the years.    A few months later, Sen. Quayle launched another INF campaign. And again we were pitched in combat, this time over the INF Treaty precluding &quot;futuristic systems.&quot; Readers will be spared the particulars here, but suffice it to say that President Reagan this time sided more with Sen. Quayle, as did many senators. So Secretary of State George Shultz went back to the Soviets to &quot;clarify,&quot; if not renegotiate, a point in the treaty that we had previously closed and that might have henceforth set off a firestorm as the ambiguous ABM Treaty language has done. This would not have happened without Sen. Quayle's persistence.    On job-training, he likewise studied the issue and then made it happen legislatively. Now castigated as a callow ideologue, he worked hand in glove with that archenemy of conservatives, Sen. Edward Kennedy, in crafting the bill and yanked along a skeptical business community in passing it. This turned around the federal government's $8 billion yearly program of make-work public-sector CETA jobs. Disadvantaged and dislocated workers were placed in tax-paying, rather than tax-eating, positions. A program evaluation showed more than 70% of four million adults found real private-sector jobs after completing the training program. That, too, would not have happened without Sen. Quayle.    Sen. Quayle is an avid reader, which is all too rare among senators and other top officials I know well. Not just of newspaper clips or an occasional magazine piece, but of real live books. Two weeks ago, when our families spent the day together, I spotted a hefty biography of George Marshall lying about his kid-cluttered den. When I mentioned having reviewed another Marshall biography for this newspaper, the senator began comparing Marshall's performance as chief of staff during the war with his postwar service as secretary of state and of defense, which the book I reviewed covered.    He enjoys talking substance. During our sundry trips together over the years, he would pepper me with questions about international affairs, whether defense procurement or Persian Gulf deployment.    Not that Dan Quayle is ideal. No candidate is.    As that sage of the West, Sen. Alan Simpson, would put it, he came out of rodeo chute No. 4 sideways. The trouble with a relative unknown being thrust under the national klieg lights, as I learned during my baptism-by-fire 1983 confirmation ordeal, is first sheer shock. The individual is stunned when the announcement is made, his mind whirling and his appearance tentative and not reassuring. Compounding this is the second shock of shark-like media finding some morsel -- no matter how minnow-like -- to foul the waters.    Yet first impressions, however lasting, are not always correct. This clearly was true for some giants who stalked the earth this century.    Lady Lytton said about Churchill, whose school record was abominable, &quot;The first time you meet Winston you see all his faults, and the rest of your life you spend in discovering his virtues.&quot; It was not until late in life that Churchill's virtues became widely appreciated.    One of the most beloved presidents of our era, John F. Kennedy, was considered no mighty might before occupying the White House. Even his close friend John Kenneth Galbraith writes cleverly in &quot;A Life in Our Times&quot; of how &quot;Kennedy's congressional performance did call for defense rather than celebration. . . . His casual attendance record on the Hill was held by some to be the result of an unduly active social life.&quot; Even after an unsuccessful run to be vice-presidential candidate in 1956, JFK did not improve his performance in the Senate, which, charitably put, was not much.    Before him, the superficial pretty-faced politician was said to be Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who incidentally flunked the bar exam several times before passing. The intellectual guru of that era, Walter Lippmann, was not impressed with this &quot;kind of amiable boy scout&quot; who &quot;just doesn't happen to have a very good mind.&quot; On the very eve of FDR's election as president -- not vice president, but the big job -- Lippmann called him &quot;a pleasant man who, without any important qualifications for the office, would very much like to be president.&quot;    No doubt Dan Quayle has his work cut out for him. No doubt he has to play in the NFL like a professional player. But based on the scrimmages I've had with him and the things I've witnessed in his nearly eight years of training camp in the Senate, I have to say that I am impressed.    ---   Mr. Adelman left the administration in December and now writes a syndicated column for Tribune Media Services. He was an early booster of Sen. Quayle for vice president. </TEXT></DOC>