<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Losing Muscle: Troubled Nautilus Fails To Regain Strength Under Its New Owner --- Arthur Jones Invention Loses To Rivals and Inattention; Acquirer's Money Trouble --- Of God, Sharks and Cannibals </HL><AUTHOR> Charles McCoy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> PHA PRO BIO </IN><G> JUS IRS </G><DATELINE> OCALA, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Nautilus, not the beautiful mollusk shell but the exercise machinery, is practically synonymous with the nationwide quest for the perfect body. This is the strange tale of how the biggest name in muscles, Nautilus Sports/Medical Industries Inc., lost its strength.    The company was founded in 1970 by Arthur Jones, an eccentric former wild-animal importer who had invented a revolutionary line of exercise machines. The name Nautilus quickly became a generic term for fitness equipment. And its success, which made possible Mr. Jones's personal indulgences (the world's largest private elephant herd, a fleet of Boeing 707 jets), gave the secretive, closely held company the aura of a corporate giant. It turns out the impression was false.    &quot;Nautilus could have been the Rolls-Royce of fitness, it could have dominated,&quot; says Nicholas Orlando, a former Nautilus distributor, one of several now suing the company in contract disputes. Today, he feels, the name is tarnished.    Two years ago, Mr. Jones, who admits to being over 60 but won't give his age, sold Nautilus to Travis Ward, a publicity-shy Texan as smooth as the oil from which he made his fortune. Mr. Jones believed he was getting a good price for a company with problems. Mr. Ward thought he was getting a great company for peanuts. Each came out a loser. And Nautilus, which is now based in Dallas, may never recover.    &quot;This is a deal where you've got Barnum on one side and Bailey on the other screaming at each other across the Big Top,&quot; says Stephen Thompson, who was the president of Nautilus until he quit in June. &quot;It's comic. It's tragic.&quot;    It's evening at Arthur Jones's 520-acre ranch in deepest, darkest Central Florida. His 31 elephants lumber about in one pen. A big, black rhinoceros loiters in another. Mickey, a 456-pound gorilla, and Gomic, a 17-foot crocodile, are hanging around, too. And Mr. Jones is saying he doesn't want revenge against Mr. Ward. &quot;I don't give a damn about vengeance,&quot; he thunders. &quot;I just want to get paid. And I want to see that S.O.B. go to the federal penitentiary.&quot;    That's typical Arthur Jones -- contradictory, bombastic and tinged with menace. He has his animal collection, which also includes some 2,000 alligators. He has had five wives -- all teen-agers when he married them. He used to carry a pistol stuffed in the waistband of his pants. He has publicly claimed that, as a mercenary in the Third World, he killed dozens of men. And periodically he predicts an imminent cataclysm that might even lead to cannibalism in America. He dismisses his predecessors, contemporaries and competitors in the fitness business as &quot;frauds, fools or criminals.&quot;    Mr. Jones says that he has been misunderstood and misquoted over the years, unfairly saddled with an image as a gun-toting wild man that overshadows his true accomplishments as a research scientist. But he can still swerve into a strange private world that makes the image hard to shake.    &quot;I have the solution to the drug problem,&quot; he announces, while dragging on a Pall Mall and tooling down a back-county highway in a slighty beat-up Cadillac Biarritz, at 23 miles an hour. He thinks curbing demand is the key. But how does he propose to deal with drug users?    &quot;Kill them,&quot; he answers.    &quot;You might have to kill a thousand, maybe two,&quot; he continues. &quot;Drugs and drug crimes are killing many more than that now. You keep killing users. Don't you think the message would sink in sooner or later?&quot;    Come evening, he is driving again. &quot;You may not believe me when I say I have enemies,&quot; he remarks suddenly, then recounts how a relative of his -- or so he alleges -- set fire to his house while his young children slept inside. The purpose of this act of malice, he says, was to deprive him of heirs. &quot;Failing in that attempt,&quot; he says, the relative &quot;then took out a contract on my life. . . . But I took care of that, you know.&quot; How? &quot;There are ways,&quot; he says mysteriously.    Once, Mr. Jones was lecturing a man he had just hired on the importance of loyalty. &quot;Let me show you what happened to the last employee who double-crossed me,&quot; he said, according to witnesses including G. Gordon Liddy, the Watergate figure who happened to be visiting Mr. Jones. Mr. Jones then walked over to the freezer in which he kept various human body parts -- legs mostly -- for research on muscles. He popped it open and invited the new man to look inside. &quot;The guy freaked,&quot; Mr. Liddy recalls. &quot;Arthur thought things like that were funny,&quot; says a former employee.    However offbeat Mr. Jones may be in other respects, he is brilliant in his understanding of muscle groups and in the designing of exercise equipment. After 30 years of tinkering and pondering, he invented a nautilus-shaped cam that, incorporated in an exercise machine, varies the resistance as a stack of weights is raised and lowered. An exercise machine employing this cam enables the user to produce remarkable growth in strength and muscle size.    Mr. Jones's machines arrived on the scene in 1970, just as the national obsession with bodies beautiful was building. Nautilus has never put out sales figures, but estimates of annual sales (including some published in this newspaper) have run as high as $400 million. Thus, Mr. Jones, a short, balding, paunchy chain smoker, was proclaimed a genius among fitness gurus. He made the rounds of talk shows and predicted he would win a Nobel Prize. He flew off in one of his three 707s for long weekends in places like Australia with people like John and Bo Derek. Forbes magazine listed him among America's ultrarich, putting his Nautilus fortune at $125 million. Other published estimates, which he has never confirmed, have ranged as high as $300 million.    But the carnival dazzle obscured some basic business problems. For one thing, though Nautilus quickly took on the swagger and style of the muscle-bound giant everyone thought it was, it was actually rather puny. Its sales went from about $10 million a year in 1980 to about $20 million in 1981, thence to a peak of around $69 million in 1984, former Nautilus officials say. Currently, sales are stalled at about $30 million annually. Mr. Jones today doesn't dispute those figures.    Mr. Jones believes the government isn't entitled to any of the fruits of a man's labors. So he deliberately operated Nautilus so as never to show a profit and never to owe taxes. In 1984, even though Nautilus's manufacturing plants were behind in paying suppliers, he says, he spent $4.2 million for television advertising in the last days of December, merely to avoid recording a profit for the year. (He didn't file corporate or personal tax returns from 1968 to 1976 and later had to pay back taxes.)    When competitors sprang up, Mr. Jones denounced them as thieves and accused them of ripping off his patented designs, a charge that many in the fitness business say is well-founded. But even when a group of distributors offered to put up the money to finance a court fight to defend the patents, he refused. The reason: a deep-seated hatred of lawyers and the courts. &quot;It is utterly impossible to get justice in the courts today,&quot; he says.    &quot;We pleaded with Arthur to sue, but he said the lawyers would just steal our money,&quot; recalls Mr. Orlando, the distributor. &quot;And all the while, we were losing millions because these people were stealing his designs. It made no sense.&quot;    As Nautilus grew and Mr. Jones's fame increased, former Nautilus officials say, he spent less of his time designing exercise machines and tending to the business. He dismissed suggestions from some old Nautilus hands that he import professional management and dedicate himself fully to research. &quot;Everyone was telling him what a genius he was, and his ego was getting to the point that he couldn't conceive of anyone possibly running Nautilus as well as he could,&quot; recalls a former Nautilus official. Mr. Jones was photographed wearing a name tag inscribed &quot;God.&quot;    At first he said that was just a gag, meant to draw attention to Nautilus, not himself. But now he disavows the photograph as a fabrication.    By the early 1980s, Mr. Jones was putting his energy and millions of dollars into pet projects having little or nothing to do with his exercise machines. He decided, for instance, to create a Nautilus Television Network and set about building a $20 million TV, motion-picture and video complex. Among the projects he had planned was a talk show on which Mr. Liddy, known for his hard-edged right-wing views, would debate liberal guests.    The set, designed by Mr. Jones, is a concrete and metal cylinder 40 feet high, with huge windows. It was to be placed in a big aluminum aquarium stocked with sharks and other sea creatures. As Mr. Liddy talked, the fish would provide a living backdrop. Mr. Jones thought TV viewers, whom he calls morons, would be more likely to tune in with the sharks there to captivate their attention.    The unfinished cylinder today sits in the multimedia complex Nautilus owns near Lake Helen, Fla. Mr. Liddy taped pilot shows for the prospective series, but none ever aired.    Toward the end of 1984, Nautilus's sales peaked and began to slide. Competitors, such as the Cybex Eagle weight-training system, were cutting into sales with less expensive, less bulky machines. With Mr. Jones distracted, Nautilus fumbled efforts to come up with new products of its own. A line of machines for home use bombed with would-be consumers and angered Nautilus's traditional customers -- health clubs -- which saw the new machines as a threat to their business. A Nautilus stationary bicycle tended to break down, and only a few hundred were sold before the product was yanked off the market.    As problems increased, relations between Mr. Jones and his distributors got a little touchy. He threatened to kill one of them, according to the distributor. Mr. Jones denies threatening the man.    &quot;He leaned over the desk and looked me in the eye and told me, 'I'm asking you a question, and your very life depends on a truthful answer,'&quot; recalls Steve White, the president of Nautilus's mid-Atlantic distributorship in Charleston, W.Va. The scene was Mr. Jones's office, the year 1984. The question Mr. Jones wanted answered was whether Mr. White was wearing a concealed microphone.    His answer was &quot;No,&quot; but Mr. Jones wasn't satisfied until after Mr. White started disrobing and Mr. Jones had produced a pistol from his desk drawer and &quot;threatened to have me killed, slowly and painfully,&quot; Mr. White says. He says Mr. Jones was angry because Mr. White had been talking of suing him.    Mr. Jones denies that he ever threatened anyone. But half a dozen former associates and competitors say that at one time or another he vowed to kill them; one associate, Dennis Hollembeak, alleged he was threatened. He made the charge in testimony before an Orlando federal court, which heard his successful breach-of-contract suit against Mr. Jones.    &quot;I never said I was going to kill any of these people who claim I did,&quot; he complains in an interview. &quot;It's all lies and perjurious fabrications.&quot;    Mr. Jones says he had enough of Nautilus by 1986. Beset by slumping sales and problems at manufacturing plants, the company had repeatedly fallen behind in payments to suppliers -- by as much as $4 million in early 1985. Several distributors had sued over disputed commissions. And Mr. Jones's real interest had shifted to perfecting a machine for testing and rehabilitating bad backs, a project that remains his passion today. &quot;I was tired, I had other things to do, I was ready to get out,&quot; Mr. Jones says.    Called the lumbar-extension machine, Mr. Jones's new invention is a massive throne of metal, glass and computer cables, which took 16 years to develop and sells for $50,000. Mr. Jones calls it &quot;the most significant medical invention since the hypodermic needle.&quot; He sold his first machine in April and projects eventual sales in the &quot;billions of dollars&quot; for his new company, Medex Corp. Though competitors question Mr. Jones's claims for the device, certain orthopedists say it is a boon to the treatment of bad backs.    ---   In the spring of 1986, Travis Ward flew in from Texas to offer Mr. Jones a way out.    At 66, Mr. Ward has the courtly aspect of big money. He has a shock of silver hair and talks in soft Texas tones full of backwoods poetry. He owns Ward Cos., a corporate umbrella with interests in coal, oil and gas and in leasing jets and limousines. At the end of last year, he claimed to be worth $126 million. He has even been mentioned on &quot;Dallas,&quot; as an acquaintance of J.R. Ewing's.    In a rare interview at his 32nd-floor office in a downtown Dallas skyscraper, Mr. Ward describes himself as a simple, honest businessman, &quot;one of a dying breed.&quot; He says he runs two miles every morning, and while he does, he says his prayers. He points out that he is a big contributor to the Methodist Church, the Boy Scouts and the Dallas Civic Opera. He says he looks people in the face &quot;with these two blue eyes&quot; and tells the truth. He says, &quot;I've got a square chin and a straight jib . . . and there's never any question about that.&quot;    Actually, there is some question. Federal law-enforcement officials in Mississippi confirm that a grand jury is looking into whether Mr. Ward played a role in the possible bribery of Mississippi public officials in connection with a business venture unrelated to his purchase of Nautilus. Mr. Ward says he did nothing improper.    And other business problems are circling Mr. Ward like the sharks in Mr. Jones's tank. He has court judgments against him, with awards totaling well over a million dollars. Those cases -- contract disputes -- have nothing to do with Nautilus. Some are on appeal; in one case he has begun to pay the award.    The Internal Revenue Service is trying to collect hundreds of thousands of dollars in back taxes from companies Mr. Ward once purported to own. Now that the tax problems have come up, he says he doesn't own the companies in question, but several former and current officers of Mr. Ward's companies say he is worried that the IRS will nevertheless stick him with the bill.    Mr. Ward says he became interested in buying Nautilus only after discovering that a lucrative Nautilus distributorship, which he had secretly put up the money to acquire, was being plundered by the man Mr. Ward had backed, a man who among other things had put his mistress on the distributorship's payroll, at $100,000 a year.    When Mr. Jones heard of the problems with the distributorship, he threatened to close it down, an act that prompted Mr. Ward to fly to Florida to see whether he could set things right. Mr. Jones told Mr. Ward he could keep the distributorship -- for $1 million cash. Both men recall that Mr. Jones paced furiously around his office, roaring about the trouble in Dallas and other business problems. He blurted out that he would just as soon sell &quot;the whole damn thing and be done with it,&quot; they both now agree. Whereupon Mr. Ward, who says he was offended by Mr. Jones's performance, said he might just be willing to buy all of Nautilus and straighten out the Dallas mess himself. Says a former Ward confidant: &quot;From the very start, you could see it was a manhood thing for both of them.&quot;    At first, the sale of Nautilus to Mr. Ward's company seemed straightforward enough. In August 1986, Mr. Ward agreed to pay Mr. Jones about $23 million for the company -- a far cry from the $125 million or more Mr. Jones and Nautilus were once thought to be worth. Mr Ward sensed a chance for ahuge profit if he could rid Nautilus ofMr. Jones's elephants, airplanes and other &quot;toys&quot; (Mr. Ward's phrase) and capitalize on its potent name. There was talk of maybe going public, thus picking up $200 million or so.    In August 1986, Mr. Ward made a paymen of $3 million and took control of Nautilus. But almost immediately, the deal began fall apart. Beneath the sheen of wealth, it turns out, Mr. Ward's own empire was -- and is -- troubled. Like most other oil men, he has been hurt by depressed oil prices. Beyond that, much of Mr. Ward's stated net worth is in coal; he used to boast that he was the biggest owner of lignite in Texas, but that doesn't count for much in today's virtually dead lignite market. Several lenders refused financing to complete the Nautilus deal. Indeed, Mr. Ward says his only business problem is finding solvent banks in Texas with money to lend.    Things got worse in September 1986, when an Orlando jury awarded a California man $5.6 million in a breach-of-contract lawsuit against Nautilus. The suit was later settled for substantially less, but not before it had scared away other potential lenders to Mr. Ward who were concerned about Nautilus's liabilities, as well as Mr. Ward's credit-worthiness. Mr. Ward missed deadlines for paying off Mr. Jones and two minority shareholders. And as time dragged on, the two men came to hate each other.    They sued each other for fraud, Mr. Ward in federal court in Dallas and Mr. Jones in state court in DeLand, Fla. At one point, Mr. Ward's lawyers threatened to evict Mr. Jones from his ranch, which he had bought in Nautilus's name. The lawyers also threatened to seize Mr. Jones's airplanes -- also Nautilus assets. But Mr. Ward still owed Mr. Jones about $19 million, so he didn't yet own Nautilus free and clear.    Mr. Jones responded in a handwritten memo to Mr. Ward that he hoped Mr. Ward was &quot;really stupid enough&quot; to try to evict him. Upon hearing from friends that one of Mr. Ward's advisers had referred to Mr. Jones as a &quot;scumbag,&quot; Mr. Jones wrote to Mr. Ward: &quot;It is an honor to be called a scumbag by a real scumbag!&quot;    Nevertheless, by April of last year, the two men had sufficiently ironed out their differences to finally close the deal. PSFS Meritor Financial Group, of Philadelphia, had agreed to put up about $20 million, and Prudential Insurance Co. of America put up an additional $10 million, to close the sale and to provide working capital. Though Mr. Ward had scared up the money and Mr. Jones got his, there was no love lost between the two. At the closing in a Philadelphia bank tower, they refused to sit in the same room together.    When Mr. Ward bought Nautilus, it was facing big legal claims; unresolved civil suits against the company sought $47 million. (Mr. Ward says he was aware of the suits but did not realize how tenuous Nautilus's legal position appeared to be in some of them.) Those lawsuits have cost Mr. Ward and Nautilus more than $1 million in settlements and legal fees since Mr. Ward took over. Nautilus still faces unresolved lawsuits from its former distributor in the Northeast and from its current distributor in California, two of its most important sales regions.    Worse, the structure of the buy-out, past and present Nautilus officials say, was inappropriate. Nautilus had operating income before debt payments and taxes of about $5 million in 1987, former officials say; they maintain it needs twice that to cope with payments on its $28 million of debt and to finance growth. &quot;We just put too much debt on that baby,&quot; says a former Nautilus executive.    Mr. Ward and his advisers had planned to meet the debt by increasing Nautilus's annual sales to $100 million, mainly through diversification. But despite warnings from Mr. Jones, Nautilus diversified back into the market for exercise machines for home use -- and bombed as badly as Mr. Jones had done. Last summer, these machines, which sell for $485 to $795, were stacked up by the thousand at Nautilus factories. Mr. Ward's crew brought back the Nautilus exercise bicycle, and it flopped again, too.    In an interview, Mr. Ward and James Bonney, who became the chief operating officer of Nautilus in June, concede that sales slumped in the first half of 1988. They say the company is rebounding and will have sales of more than $30 million for the year. They blame their troubles on Mr. Jones and on since-departed Nautilus executives (their own people, not Jones holdovers), who they say spent too aggressively in the diversification effort. And they are upbeat about new products -- a line of exercise machines for handicapped people and computerized medical machines designed to diagnose and treat bad backs (in competition with Mr. Jones's new device) and other maladies. &quot;We're excited about the medical line,&quot; says Mr. Bonney.    Actually, a few days prior to the interview, cash-short Nautilus had drastically scaled back plans for its medical-device business, which was supposed to be heavily financed and expensively promoted but now won't be. &quot;Medical is on the back burner,&quot; says a Nautilus executive. Mr. Bonney now concedes that Nautilus will not proceed &quot;full bore&quot; with its original plans.    An exodus of management people has left Nautilus with almost nobody from either Mr. Jones's old team or the new regime Mr. Ward installed 18 months ago. Nautilus recently has skipped several major exercise-equipment trade shows; competitors consider that a sign of surrender. It is behind on debt payments by several million dollars and concedes as much. Meritor urged Mr. Ward to sell Mr. Jones's multimedia studio by Oct. 31, which he failed to do. For months he has tried in vain to sell the facility, seeking about $5 million, just a quarter of what it cost to build. He now says a sale is imminent. According to Nautilus officials, Meritor wants Mr. Ward to personally guarantee about $4 million of Nautilus debt. Mr. Ward and Meritor decline to comment on the status of the Nautilus loan.    Even some of Mr. Ward's confidants now say that he may have been so intent on battling Arthur Jones during the eight months it took to consummate the purchase of Nautilus that he overlooked just what it was he was fighting for. He denies that. &quot;I did my due diligence on that company, you better believe that,&quot; he says angrily.    ---   One last, lingering problem is the matter of Joe Denson, the Ward executive who helped put together the Nautilus acquisition. For months his receptionist has told callers that Mr. Denson is on &quot;extended temporary leave.&quot; In fact, he has been in prison.    Mr. Denson pleaded guilty to embezzling $300,000 from a Mississippi bank and to tax evasion, acts committed before he went to work for Mr. Ward. Mr. Denson, who began serving a six-month sentence in June, was released late last month.    Mr. Ward defends him passionately. Indeed, he sent President Reagan a thick dossier seeking a pardon for Mr. Denson. &quot;He is a good man, and he is innocent,&quot; Mr. Ward says. But lately he has been playing down Mr. Denson's role in the enterprise: &quot;He had nothing to do with Nautilus,&quot; Mr. Ward says, and he wasn't a big part of the Ward organization.    Mr. Ward seemed flabbergasted when it was pointed out to him that despite his limited role, Mr. Denson still rated enough to have his name listed just below Mr. Ward's on the smoked-glass corporate directory in the lobby downstairs -- one of only three names listed for Ward Cos. At first, Mr. Ward was dubious. But he phoned an aide, who confirmed that Mr. Denson -- his name, that is -- was still there in the lobby.    &quot;Whatever you're doing, you stop doing it and get that name off of there,&quot; Mr. Ward barked into the phone. He turned to a visitor, stabbing a finger into the air: &quot;Whoever had that name put on, put it on without any authorization whatsoever.&quot;    Within an hour, Mr. Denson's name was gone. As of yesterday, however, the man himself was back on the job. </TEXT></DOC>