<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0088 </DOCNO><HL> The NSC Is No Place for Active Military Officers---By Seymour Weiss</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   While volumes have been written on the fundamental soundness, or lack thereof, of the administration's provision of arms to Iran and the diversion of funds to the contras, one issue has been ignored: the nature and propriety of the role of the active military officers on the National Security Council. It can be argued that involving officers in this process was a mistake, but a mistake inherent in having active military personnel serving on the NSC staff.    The practice, of course, has a venerable history. Alexander Haig rose from colonel to four-star general while serving as Henry Kissinger's deputy. Lt. Gen. Brent Scowcroft also served as Mr. Kissinger's deputy. Later on Vice Adm. John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North, both active duty officers, were to play key roles in the Iran-Contra affair.    It is a mistake to place a military officer in such a position. No matter how professionally able, a military officer serving on the NSC staff must become, in some measure, a political animal. (Regrettably, politics also makes tight security very difficult to accomplish.) This is in contrast to service in the State Department, where active military officers are expected to bring nothing other than their professional expertise and are not expected to, nor required to, involve themselves in domestic politics.    The job of a State Department officer, whether from the Foreign Service or the military, is to offer expert advice to his political superiors. In any event, the State Department, a massive bureaucratic institution not known for brilliant policy innovations, does have the virtue of protective checks and balances. The number of clearances that any policy initiative must receive ensures that dozens of naysayers have the opportunity to explain why an action should not be taken. This is in strong contrast with the small, politicized NSC staff.    The distinction between professional experts and politically responsible officials is impossible to observe while serving on the NSC staff. The NSC is part and parcel of the White House structure, and decisions on national security cannot be made in a domestic-policy vacuum. While serving as head of the NSC, Mr. Kissinger maintained, for example, that President Nixon's approach to an arms-control agreement was totally above domestic-policy considerations.    That notion is absurd. No president can ignore the question of how an arms-control agreement would affect his political fortunes. The fact that SALT I was entered into slightly before rather than slightly after President Nixon's run for reelection was not entirely coincidental.    It isn't inappropriate that domestic political considerations be weighed by a president and his senior advisers in the formulation of national security policy. The president cannot expect to carry out his policy if he isn't elected, and he cannot get elected without a policy that appeals to the electorate. (In my own view, the importance of an arms-control agreement to the achievement of wide-based popular support for any administration has been massively exaggerated, but it is undeniable that such a connection has existed in the minds and calculations of senior administration officials.)    Those who serve on the NSC staff are expected to reflect an understanding of this interaction between domestic political imperatives and national-security objectives. This doesn't mean that they won't give the president their best professional advice. It does mean that that advice ought to be in tune with the political philosophy of the president they serve. It would be absurd to imagine a Jimmy Carter NSC staff serving Ronald Reagan or vice versa.    But how does such a vision of an NSC staff accommodate itself to service by active military officers? It can be argued that it doesn't. A military officer is trained from word one to be unquestioningly loyal to political direction. Under our political and constitutional system, American officers are trained to follow orders of political authorities. This is an important tradition, much to be cherished. One needs only to consider those nations that have never developed this tradition of civilian political dominance over the military to appreciate the value of our system.    In thinking through a national-security initiative as complicated and fraught with uncertainty as was the Iran affair (let alone its contra appendix), there are no easy guidelines to be followed. A critical facility, an inquiring mind and a gut instinct may be all that can be relied upon. A military officer may be as well equipped with these three attributes as his civilian counterpart. What is less clear is whether, given his background and training, an officer serving on active duty is likely to be willing to challenge the judgment of his commander in chief if such a challenge is warranted. At the very least, the professionalism of a military officer on the NSC staff is bound to be affected by the need to serve his president's policy preferences.    The charge of impropriety in having active duty military officers take the Fifth Amendment illustrates another facet of the problem. No one has denied that when Adm. Poindexter and Col. North sought Fifth Amendment protection, they were acting within their rights; it just seems wrong to have men serving in the active military forces of the nation do so. The point is, they should not have been placed in such a position; it is not good for the military establishment and it is not good for the nation. Even though it might well deprive the nation of the services of able and devoted men, such officers should resign their commissions or not serve on the NSC, an inherently political position.    There are undoubtedly exceptions to every rule, including this one. It would be going too far to reject the best available man for the job solely because he is an active military officer. Perhaps this explains why the tradition of using active military officers is being continued on the new NSC. One of the ablest officers it has been my pleasure to know in recent times, Lt. Gen. Colin Powell, is the new deputy. I have no doubt he will serve with the highest distinction, yet it seems to me a disservice to place him in what will inevitably be a compromising position. No matter that he is a man of the highest integrity, certain to reject illegal actions in support of even the most worthy of policy objectives, he, and the other military officers who serve on that staff, will be confronted with the need to make judgments about national-security policy that cannot be removed from the pressures of domestic politics.    That is a burden no military officer should be asked to bear.    ---   Mr. Weiss, a retired ambassador, was director of the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs in 1973.    (See: &quot;Corrections&quot; -- WSJ Feb. 6, 1987.) </TEXT></DOC>