<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870820-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Beyond the Dollars:Debt Crisis Is InflictingA Heavy Human TollIn Dominican Republic---Many People Become PoorerWhile Official Moves Fail;Riots and Wasted Money---A Lucky Boy Gets a Fat Rat---By Charles F. McCoyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> SANTO DOMINGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Third World debt crisis isn't denominated in dollars alone. Here in the impoverished Dominican Republic, it is also denominated in blood.    &quot;This is where they shot my brother,&quot; Alejandro Brito remarks with odd detachment, gesturing toward a trash-choked trench in an alleyway in one of Santo Domingo's poorest neighborhoods. His brother and about 150 other people were killed by soldiers three years ago in food riots sparked by the government's effort to apply a dose of austerity to please the International Monetary Fund.    As Mr. Brito recounts in icy detail how his brother took three bullets in the neck and shoulder and died mumbling praise to God, a snarling knot of youths in the dirt street above him burn tires and fling garbage to protest high prices and low wages. A series of strikes has rattled the country in recent weeks. At least three protesters have been killed, and more strikes are threatened.    The Dominican Republic is facing a debt crisis. Again.    With Latin America's foreign debt now totaling about $400 billion, the Caribbean nation's problems may seem minor. They are dwarfed by those of Brazil, the biggest Third World debtor, which has quit making payments on two-thirds of its $108 billion debt. They are dwarfed even by those of Peru, which last year restricted its payments to 10% of its export earnings and basically stopped paying on all $14 billion it owes.    But with only six million people and about $4 billion of debt, the Dominican Republic bears a millstone proportionally as heavy as those of the biggest debtors. And because the country is small, the crisis comes clearly into focus here. Above all, the Dominican Republic offers a sad lesson in the intractability of the debt problem and its crushing human toll.    &quot;What we and every other debtor have discovered is that economies unbalanced by debt are a nightmare to repair,&quot; says Andres Dauhajre, a Dominican economist. &quot;We repeat the errors of the past. We try to fix one problem, and the solution causes two more new ones.&quot;    The Dominican Republic has stumbled from rescheduling to rescheduling, yet it has piled up more than $200 million of missed payments -- about a third of its export earnings in a good year. It is at odds with the IMF and many other creditors, and it has become a junkheap for failed Third World debt and development strategies. Highways, power dams and other public works that the debt bought are falling apart. Most Dominicans are getting poorer and hungrier.    The bleak tapestry is woven from many of the common threads that have made the debt problem so intractable through most of the Third World: pervasive corruption, grandiose spending projects, bad luck, injudicious bankers. The pattern suggests that, despite the $15 billion of losses taken recently by Citicorp and other lenders in admitting that some Third World debt can't be repaid, many years and many more billions of dollars of losses lie ahead.    &quot;Our debt is unpayable,&quot; says Luis Julian Perez, the head of the central bank. On second thought: &quot;Maybe it's payable in a hundred years.&quot;    The Dominicans have about run through every supposed treatment for debt except simply not paying. They have flirted with orthodox austerity, letting fuel and food prices rise in 1984. A blood bath ensued. They promised the politically unpopular move of letting loss-plagued state industries sink or swim on their own. But when the state airline recently suspended flights to New York for four months for fear of having its planes seized by creditors, the government dutifully poured in at least $16 million of its scarce funds to get the airline aloft again. Trimming bloated state payrolls has cut government expenses but has raised unemployment to an estimated 40% and has been partly responsible for paralyzing strikes.    The latest approach is an ill-defined plan to limit payments to whatever the government thinks it can afford -- in spirit, a cap on debt service similar to Peru's. This is combined with a New Deal-style public-works program crafted by Joaquin Balaguer, the 79-year-old blind poet who is the country's president, to give people jobs.    So much state money has cascaded in that annual growth has leaped from virtually zero to an estimated 11%, about twice the government's target. The predictable price: The Dominican currency has sunk against the dollar, and inflation, historically low by Latin American standards, has soared to 35% a year and is expected by some economists to go as high as 50%. That is a heavy burden in a nation where the minimum wage -- equivalent to $2.50 a day -- hasn't gone up for several years.    Often, priorities seem twisted. In a ragged neighborhood of Santo Domingo called Villa Duarte, the government is building a $15 million monument to itself and Christopher Columbus. It is called Faro de Colon, Columbus's lighthouse.    Seven-year-old Juanito Perez can see the faro's squat pilings from the mountain of garbage he is picking through. In a small open lot between houses made of sticks and rusted car parts -- and in others like it all over the capital -- trash piles up because the government can afford enough trucks to collect only about a third of the garbage produced by Santo Domingo's two million people. Young Juanito paws through the muck looking for things to reclaim and sell or for things to eat. Today, he has found a rat, now wriggling at the end of a spear improvised from a stick and part of an old machete blade.    &quot;Look at this fatso,&quot; Juanito squeals gleefully. &quot;I can sell this fatty for a good price,&quot; Juanito says. In parts of the Third World, fried rat is a prized delicacy; in the Dominican Republic, it is merely preferable to hunger.    How did things get so out of whack here? As recently as 1979, the Dominican Republic was staying on top of its $1.7 billion debt with foreign exchange generated mainly by its sugar industry, in turn dependent on the subsidized U.S. market. In 1981, the U.S. began cutting foreign sugar quotas to help domestic producers, devastating Dominican sales. The Dominican government began running huge deficits, borrowing to keep its projects going, and the foreign debt soared.    While the dollars poured in, many Dominicans say, bankers seemed less and less interested in details, such as how the debt would be repaid. And, as in most of the Third World, lenders miscalculated their customers' capacity for absorbing the shower of money. The Dominican Republic had virtually no capital markets, a stunted banking system and no experience in managing huge capital inflows.    &quot;Pouring buckets of money into a situation like that was like trying to empty the Caribbean into a soda bottle,&quot; says Philip Schwab, a former director of U.S. Agency for International Development in Santo Domingo.    Questions about where all the money went draw many sad smiles and few hard answers here. &quot;Se fue,&quot; says Vinicio Castillo, a legislator, brushing his palms together in the characteristic Dominican gesture of disgust. &quot;It just went.&quot;    Some of it went to the Tavera Dam near Santiago in the mountains north of the capital. Built in the early 1970s with the help of some $40 million from the Inter-American Development Bank, it was supposed to generate electricity for 50 years.    But Western engineers say the dam wasn't maintained, mainly because the Dominicans couldn't afford the cost. And farmers, drawn to the dam's reservoir, stripped bare the hills above it to plant crops and make charcoal; consequently, rains sluice chunks of hillside down into the turbines. The Dominicans have had to borrow millions more to dredge out the muck, and many years have been knocked off Tavera's productive life.    Valdesia Dam, about 80 miles south of Tavera, was supposed to last well into the 21st century. But its hills were stripped, too, and it's so choked with silt that it could become useless within a few years, some bankers estimate.    Many other debt-financed projects are in ruins. Millions of dollars of loans and public funds were spent building highways, including a pitted stretch from San Cristobal to Bani, a coffee-producing corridor in the mountains. Truckers complain that government road builders skimped on materials to save money -- and to pocket more themselves. Rain and heavy trucks have battered sections of the road.    On a steamy morning, traffic crawls along, with drivers swerving like slow-motion slalom skiers to dodge craters occasionally more than six feet across. Coffee growers worry that if such roads aren't repaired within weeks, much of this year's crop could rot before it gets to market.    &quot;This highway is a damn mine field,&quot; grumbles Teodoro Alfonso, as he wrestles with the rear axle of his flatbed truck. His load of rice was due in the capital two hours ago, but the truck, waylaid by a pothole, is up on a jack at roadside. &quot;Third time this month these damn holes have wrecked me,&quot; Mr. Alfonso says.    Borrowed money also poured into loss-plagued state businesses -- sometimes with lousy timing and foresight. As recently as 1980, a year before the U.S. had cut sugar quotas and long after world prices had peaked, the World Bank was lending $35 million for upgrading cane fields and sugar mills here.    Much of the sugar company's debt was supposed to go for renovations at mills such as Catarey, which was so decrepit that it had rarely turned an annual profit in the past 20 years. But Miguel Guerrero, who heads the state sugar company's information bureau, isn't sure where all the money went. By the time the state shut down Catarey a few months ago, he says, its fields hadn't been fertilized in five years.    Some of the debt appears simply to have been plundered. Corruption is probably no worse in the Dominican Republic than in much of Latin America. In other words, it's pervasive.    The current government accuses a former president, Salvador Jorge Blanco, of a role in a kick-back scheme involving millions of dollars of alleged overcharges on military purchases. He denies the charge from Atlanta, where he ended up after a failed bid for asylum in Venezuela.    A confidential government audit found that the state agency overseeing price controls was bankrupt and turned up evidence of millions of dollars of unexplained payments, undocumented deposits in private banks and apparently phony invoices. Some $5,000 of agency funds went for repairs on six privately owned Mercedes-Benz cars, according to the auditors.    All over the Third World, such problems are easy to identify but hard to fix. Reform often is overwhelmed by inertia or the hard reality that social peace sometimes depends on not rocking the boat.    Corporacion Dominicana de Electricidad, for example, has been losing about $125 million a year. Its ranks have swollen to 5,596 workers from 1,276 in 1978, mainly through political patronage. Some well-connected employees, according to a union official, have been on paid vacation for two years. Meanwhile, CDE's debt-financed dams are so poorly operated and maintained that Santo Domingo suffers daily blackouts.    In a recent heated speech on television, President Balaguer called CDE a national disgrace and vowed to clear out do-nothing workers. Few in the utility seem worried, though. One morning shortly afterward, a team of seven workers lolled about their red truck parked on a busy street. One worker tinkered with a transformer. Three sat on the grass eating pineapple, one read a newspaper, and the remaining two were in the truck's cab, apparently asleep.    &quot;If Balaguer fires all the people at CDE who do nothing, two-thirds of Santo Domingo will be out of work and on the streets,&quot; one worker said. His colleagues chuckled and resumed eating pineapple.    The Dominicans also face a quandary with the IMF. President Balaguer needs an accord to restructure debt owed other lenders and to appease bank creditors. But the IMF is said to oppose his public-spending program. Beyond that, the violent riots in 1984 forever linked the IMF, in many Dominican minds, with the hated Yankee Marines who seized the customs house in 1905 to get creditors out of an earlier jam. &quot;A deal with the fund that brings more hardship on the people would be a political disaster,&quot; says Ramon Martinez, a Dominican lawyer.    But the biggest problem facing the Dominican Republic and other troubled Third World debtors may be the bleak truth that, in many ways, their citizens are worse off today than before the money rolled in. In the Dominican Republic, the infant mortality rate in the past five years has risen to 80 per thousand, one of the highest levels in the region, from 64 per thousand. Tuberculosis has staged a comeback. About half the people here are undernourished, foreign health workers estimate.    In the town of Guayabal, deep in the mountains, people have suffered their own frustrations with the once-glittering promise of progress. A few years ago, some American volunteers fighting soil erosion planted trees along the bald ridges near the town to replace ancient stands of pine cut down by campesinos for firewood. The campesinos were delighted by the new trees. They cut them down for firewood.    Now, the soil grows poorer with each crop. Most of Guayabal's 12,000 inhabitants toil in the coffee fields for a few dollars a month, nine months a year. The town hasn't any electricity. &quot;We don't have enough to eat,&quot; says Felix Alcantara Ramirez, leaning forward in a battered chair beneath a faded picture of Jesus. A few scrawny chickens and many young children play in the dirt street outside his house.    There is a spark of hope, though. &quot;This is the start of a new era for Dominicans, a new age,&quot; Mr. Alcantara says. &quot;Change is coming.&quot; A moment later, there is commotion outside. A boy has suddenly taken sick. His father races up the rutted dirt road with him toward the clinic on the town's fastest means of transport -- a tiredlooking brown nag.    &quot;Well,&quot; Mr. Alcantara later says with a shrug, &quot;we Dominicans have a long journey still ahead.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>