<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880308-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ARAB GUERRILLAS SEIZED a bus as violence raged in the occupied areas.    Israeli army officials said three Palestinians commandeered a commuter bus in southern Israel, killing three Israeli civilians and wounding nine before being killed by police. The officials said the Arab guerrillas, who held a group of workers hostage for about three hours, had infiltrated from Egypt. In the Israeli-occupied territories, at least 12 Arabs were wounded in clashes with Israeli troops. The army said Palestinian protesters hurled a grenade at soldiers in the West Bank, wounding one.    Jordan said a U.S. initiative aimed at Mideast peace contained some positive elements but insisted that the PLO participate in any negotiations.    ---   CANDIDATES PURSUED support for today's primaries and caucuses.    With contests in 14 Southern or border states, two in New England and four in the West, the Republican and Democratic presidential candidates appealed to Super Tuesday voters in a barrage of TV and radio ads. Most of the hopefuls made appearances throughout the region. Polls showed Bush was poised to sweep the GOP contests. Dukakis and Jackson appeared to be leading the Democrats.    A U.S. judge dismissed Robertson's libel suit against an ex-congressman who questioned his war record after Robertson agreed to pay court costs.    ---   The U.S. and Morton Thiokol purchased annuities totaling $7.7 million to settle legal claims by the survivors of four of the astronauts killed in the January 1986 explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, documents showed. The settlement was reached in December 1986. The documents didn't show how much each family would receive.    ---   Shultz met with Chinese Foreign Minister Wu and said the U.S. is prepared to increase exports of high-technology gear to Beijing. As Wu began an official two-day visit to Washington, the Reagan administration also expressed concern about weekend unrest in Tibet. Several people were killed in the clashes with police in Lhasa.    ---   The Soviet Union sought an urgent U.N. Security Council meeting to demand an end to continuing missile bombardments by Iran and Iraq on each other's capitals. Moscow's ambassador to the U.N. said he expected a meeting of the 15-member council by tomorrow. The Reagan administration insisted anew on an arms embargo against Iran.    Iran and Iraq unleashed ground-to-ground missile assaults and sent their warplanes on bombing sorties on provincial towns. Scores of casualties were reported. Meanwhile, the Navy denied that the U.S. was preparing to retaliate for Sunday's machine-gun attacks by Iran on American helicopters in the central gulf.    ---   Noriega's opponents united in an alliance including ousted President Delvalle to call for removal of Panama's military chief and establishment of a transitional government. The alliance comprises nearly all the civilian political forces not directly linked to the armed forces or the Noriega government.    Panamanian retirees staged a rally in Panama City to demand pension money. Local banks remained closed. The move came as a federal judge in New York extended for 10 days a temporary order barring two U.S. banks from transferring Panamanian government funds to Noriega's regime.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether states may use anti-racketeering laws to close adult bookstores. The justices said they will review a pair of free-speech challenges to such a law in Indiana, where law-enforcement officials in 1984 seized the inventories of several bookstores, though the material hadn't been ruled obscene.    ---   Philippine rebels ambushed a vehicle near the U.S.-run Subic Bay naval base, killing three civilians and six Filipino sailors assigned to the facility. There weren't any reports of rebel casualties. Last October, three Americans were killed in a communist rebel attack near Clark Air Base.    ---   Britain's foreign secretary confirmed that British security forces killed three unarmed Irish Republican Army guerrillas Sunday in Gibraltar. Sir Geoffrey Howe said a &quot;terrorist act has been averted.&quot; The three, two men and a woman, reportedly were planning a bomb attack on a military parade today in the British colony.    ---   Nicaragua announced that Cardinal Obando and the secretary-general of the Organization of American States would be witnesses at peace talks between Managua and the Contras. The talks are to begin tomorrow in Nicaragua. In El Salvador, Duarte's son denied &quot;any tie&quot; to a fellow Christian Democrat accused of misusing U.S. funds.    ---   Ethiopian guerrillas gained control of two major food-distribution centers in the country's drought-stricken northern province of Tigray, rebels said. Western relief sources, who confirmed the report, said the move would cause additional problems in international efforts to avert mass starvation.    ---   Pakistan's President Zia told a United Arab Emirates newspaper that an Afghan peace accord would be signed soon. Zia's statement came as Islamabad's representative to U.N.-backed talks in Geneva continued to press for an interim government in Kabul to oversee a withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. </TEXT></DOC>