<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Affordable, Effective SDI Is Possible by 1994---By William Kucewicz</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Technical feasibility and financial affordability are two of the major criticisms hurled at President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. Opponents claim that the system either won't work or would be too expensive. Neither criticism is true. The deployment of an SDI network to destroy Soviet nuclear missiles and warheads can be achieved in five to seven years at a cost of about $124 billion -- or less than the amount Congress recently allocated for new public housing and highway repairs.    SDI is often misconstrued -- especially by its critics -- as one, massive system that must be totally in place before it can deter a Soviet first strike. That bias underlies last week's report by a special panel of the American Physical Society, which focused its attention solely on the most advanced SDI technologies, such as lasers and particle beams. But no one reads &quot;War and Peace&quot; from the middle. Wholly ignored were the existing technologies that the U.S. need only integrate into a coordinated, effective antimissile network.    Kinetic-kill weapons are currently America's most advanced missile defense. They don't use an explosive charge; the force of a high-velocity collision destroys the incoming warhead. For instance, in a U.S. Air Force experiment last September, a kinetic-kill vehicle nearly vaporized a simulated Soviet missile. Impact occurred at a closing rate of speed of 1.8 miles per second. The probe hit the target within six to 12 inches of the desired accuracy. An even more sophisticated test of this system is planned for next year.    Meanwhile, several new reports rebut the SDI critics and provide substantial optimism for the early deployment of the first three layers of strategic defense -- from terminal defenses of missile sites to ground-based and space-based kinetic-kill devices.    These studies were done by well-qualified SDI proponents: the George C. Marshall Institute, which is headed by Frederick Seitz, former president of the National Academy of Sciences and the American Physical Society, and Robert Jastrow, founder and for 20 years director of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies; High Frontier, an organization founded by retired Gen. Daniel Graham, former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency; and Col. Simon Worden, who is an astrophysicist, senior research fellow at the National Defense University and a former official in the Pentagon's SDI program.    All three studies argue that a space-based, antimissile defense, using existing technologies, is possible by the mid-1990s. More limited, ground-based systems could be in place even sooner. Some of the simpler systems could cost less than $3 billion, with more comprehensive projects ranging up to $121 billion.    Taking the layers from the ground up, &quot;terminal&quot; or &quot;point&quot; defenses would protect high-priority targets such as missile sites and command and control centers. These ground-based units would fire either salvos of small rockets or a high-velocity cloud of thousands of metal spikes. The U.S. Navy now uses a similar &quot;steel wall&quot; to disable or destroy attacking missiles or aircraft. High Frontier estimates that deployment of these systems could be under way within five years, defending 200 military locations at a cost of about $2.6 billion.    Longer range, ground-based, kinetic-kill rockets include HEDI, which can hit a missile up to 30 miles away, and the ERIS system, with a range of 2,500 miles. Both systems, which can destroy incoming warheads in midair, have already been tested successfully; deployment could begin in the early 1990s. The Marshall Institute calculates the costs of 3,000 HEDI rockets at $18 billion and 10,000 ERIS interceptors at $32 billion, including launch facilities, new radars and airborne sensors to identify incoming missiles.    It has long been assumed that space-based defenses would take much more time to deploy than ground-based systems. But technological advances, especially in the past two years, are dispelling that view. &quot;A space-based defense, attacking missiles in their boost phase, can be deployed in the same time frame as the ground-based layers of the defense,&quot; the Marshall Institute says. &quot;The recognition that an effective boost-phase defense, based in space, is feasible for deployment in the near term is one of the most significant products of {the U.S. government's SDI} research thus far.&quot;    Such a space system, the Marshall team says, would use homing interceptors -- small, non-nuclear, heat-seeking missiles -- and full deployment could be achieved in seven years, or as early as 1994. These kinetic-killers would destroy an enemy missile or warhead by the sheer force of collision, and would be effective in all three phases of missile flight -- from the boost phase shortly after launch through midcourse and terminal trajectory.    The Marshall Institute's most extensive plan for near-term deployment calls for 11,000 space-based kinetic-killers (along with sensor satellites) and 13,000 short- and long-range, land-based interceptors as early as 1994. This would achieve President Reagan's goal of a widespread defense of the U.S. against Soviet ICBMs.    Assuming a massive Soviet first strike -- 1,200 ICBMs with 11,200 warheads and 90,000 decoys -- the Marshall team estimates a kill ratio of 73% in the boost phase and 93% for all three layers. This kill ratio, it adds, could rise to more than 99% with better sensory devices to discriminate between decoys and real warheads. That's not an impenetrable defense, but it's a high enough kill rate to deter a Soviet first strike -- which is, after all, the fundamental objective of SDI.    The Marshall Institute puts the cost of its complete system at $54 billion for the initial operational phase and $121 billion for full deployment. Add to that some $3 billion for terminal defense, and the near-term deployment of SDI would total about $124 billion.    Some SDI critics, such as the American Physical Society panel, have suggested that the Soviets could overcome such a system by replacing their existing missiles with fast-burn rockets that would shorten the boost phase to less than a minute. But, as the Marshall Institute has previously noted, such a wholesale Soviet modernization would cost the Kremlin about $900 billion, an excessive sum for the Soviets. More recently, the institute also discovered that even with enough money, it's technologically impossible to fire large, fast-burn ICBMs because they would be too unstable and would disintegrate soon after launch.    &quot;All the signals indicate that we can build in the 1990s a defensive system that will do what the president asked our scientists and engineers to do,&quot; says Col. Worden. The U.S. can begin sustained testing of components of this system over the next two years, he says, adding that &quot;our advanced research is proving not only that an initial system will work, but that we will have the technology to counter any new tricks the Soviets may try to spring.&quot;    Some scientists persist in rebuking SDI, but scientific know-how is not now an insurmountable obstacle to achieving a significant defense. Near-term deployment of an antimissile shield is a serious possibility.    ---   Mr. Kucewicz is a member of the Journal's editorial board. A related editorial appears nearby. </TEXT></DOC>