<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870728-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Sri Lanka's Uncivil War---By William McGurn</HL><DD> 07/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> THE JAFFNA PENINSULA, Sri Lanka  </DATELINE><TEXT>    From an altitude of3,000 feet the palm-fringed beaches and rolling waters ofthis teardrop Indian Ocean isle unfold in travel-brochuresplendor. But a closer look discloses a paradise pockmarkedwith the unmistakable ravages of war, and the twomachine-gunners poised on either side of this Bell-214helicopter remind a reporter that the Sri Lankan army isneither welcome nor in control of much of this peninsula. Asif to underscore the point, the chopper sets down quickly inPoint Pedro to pick up a wounded soldier, a boy not oldenough to shave, clutching what's left of his knee, andtrying hard not to cry. &quot;Land mine,&quot; explains anothersoldier.   Army choppers have become a regular feature of the skyline here on the northernmost tip of Sri Lanka, at one point but 21 miles from India. They were brought here during the government's May offensive to retake an area where ethnic Tamil insurgents battling for a separate Tamil state comprising the northern and eastern provinces -- Tamil Eelam -- still deny the army control of the ground. The offensive was launched after a spate of Tamil terrorist attacks that came during a cease-fire.    This is the latest round in the clash between the Buddhist Sinhalese majority and the Hindu minority that since 1983 has seen more than 6,000 people killed and last year alone cost the former British colony of Ceylon $348 million, almost a seventh of this country's gross national product.    At the moment the military has been put on hold in the hope that the Indian government, which provides sanctuary and supplies for the Tamil insurgents, can persuade the insurgents to accept the Sri Lankan government's latest offer: a federal Tamil homeland with official recognition of the Tamil language. This was the basis of an accord originally expected to be signed in Colombo tomorrow by Sri Lankan officials and Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi but jeopardized by the insurgents' intransigence. Whether the initiative is successful will go a long way toward determining the prospects for peace not just in this island, but in the subcontinent as a whole, with dramatic implications for the East-West strategic balance of power.    &quot;I believe that the government's latest offer for the devolution of powers in the north and east is one that cannot be repeated,&quot; says the minister for national security, Lalith Athulathmudali.    Had Sri Lankan governments in the past shown even a little of such foresight, the grudges on both sides of the ethnic fence might never have led to bloodshed in this tropical island of 16 million. These grudges date back to the nation's colonial rule, when the British administrators favored the Sri Lankan Tamils (12.6% of the population today) with better jobs and education, and brought over Indian-born Tamils (5.5% of the population) to farm the plantations.    This favoritism completely flip-flopped with independence, and in 1956 the government -- led by what is today the opposition party -- passed laws making Sinhala the only official language, effectively shutting the Tamils out from better opportunities. In 1977 the current United National Party government of President Junius R. Jayewardene repealed the laws, but only the new agreement will place Tamil on the same footing as Sinhala. &quot;The problem today has been brought about by the stupidity of our politicians,&quot; says the president of Mercantile Credit, N.U. Jayawardena, a leading Sinhalese businessman. &quot;A minority has rights and must be made to feel equal and respected.&quot;    The festering disputes spilled over into violence in July 1983 when the murder of 13 Sinhalese soldiers, in what was then a largely ceremonial army, set off what can be described only as a Sinhalese massacre of Tamil civilians, often with the connivance of the security forces. Since then the army has made impressive reforms, and even critics concede it is better disciplined, having also gone from about 8,000 regulars in 1983 to nearly 26,000 today. But memories of the past and the fact that no Sri Lankan soldier has ever been court-martialed for any atrocity weighs heavily on the mind of every Tamil. &quot;The children must lose their fear of the army if this bloody war is ever to end,&quot; says the civil-affairs officer here, Lt. Col. S. Musafe.    This month's peace bid by Colombo shows a Sri Lankan government that has learned the painful lessons of how to forge a successful counterinsurgency. Clearly a large part was a more professional army. But an equal part is a campaign to convince a frightened Tamil community that the army is there to protect Tamils and that the government is responsive to their concerns. Past blunders have born bitter fruit: In 1983 the government required politicians to take an oath against even peaceful efforts toward separatism, the result of which was an exodus of Tamil politicians from Parliament. &quot;By driving us out of the political arena the government made the people feel they had no effective democratic alternative,&quot; says one Tamil moderate thus excluded from Parliament, Neelan Tiruchelvam.    The constricting of Tamils' political options inevitably filled the ranks of Sri Lanka's various Tamil insurgent groups, all spouting some form of Marxism. Although this itself is alien to the traditions of a caste-conscious and hard-working Tamil population, it follows a general pattern of modern insurgency whereby original ethnic and national grievances eventually become subsumed by radical ideology. Of these groups the largest and most important is the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, which works closely with the Eelam Revolutionary Organization.    These two are believed responsible for the spate of killings in April, including a bomb blast at the Colombo bus depot during rush hour and a mass shooting of Sinhalese civilians in a bus convoy; together these accounted for the deaths of more than 300 people. According to the U.S. State Department's report on Sri Lanka, last year the militants were also responsible for an estimated 80 to 120 &quot;lamppost killings,&quot; in which they tied suspected informers to lampposts and then either shot or burned them.    What has kept the Tamil insurgency alive more than anything else is India, home to 50 million of its own Tamils. Notwithstanding its brutal suppression of any separatist movements within its own borders, India for years has provided Sri Lanka's Tamil separatists with bases, training and supplies.    In April, for example, the Indian state of Tamil Nadu made a well-publicized gift of $3.2 million in &quot;humanitarian aid&quot; to the insurgents, and last month Mr. Gandhi provoked international censure by violating Sri Lankan airspace with an airdrop of food; it was, he says, a &quot;message&quot; to Colombo. This message was less humanitarian than political, a reminder that although India officially supports the unity of the Sri Lankan nation, the prime minister is unlikely to risk badly needed votes by cracking down on the Tamil terror bases on his soil. Doubtless, too, it reflected India's longtime irritation at Sri Lanka's pro-Western outlook.    Initial press reports had the Tigers reacting favorably to Indian diplomats in Jaffna pressing for an acceptance of the government's latest offer: virtually everything short of independence for a Tamil homeland. But Tiger leader Velupillai Prabhakaran, who has long made it clear he will settle for nothing less than an independent Eelam, this weekend balked at the provisions calling for the Tigers to lay down arms and for a vote in the newly established homeland after a year. Better than anyone else, the Tigers realize that a political solution is not likely to serve their interests. &quot;If there is an election the question is whether they {the Tigers} will win,&quot; says the president of the Civil Rights Movement, Desmond Fernando. &quot;They have had a chance to win the hearts and minds of the people and I'm not sure that they've done this.&quot;    The larger question is whether Sri Lanka, not to mention the region as a whole, can afford another failure. The Jayewardene government has gone as far as it can in concessions, and it might not be able to muster again the necessary backing from a public increasingly complaining that the government isn't doing enough to stop the terrorists. In addition, the emergency powers the government has invoked are straining Sri Lankan democracy. A failure here would strengthen the hand of those opposed to any concessions to legitimate Tamil grievances and could set off another bloodly backlash. That's not a comforting thought to most nations of a subcontinent bursting with tribal rivalries needing only a spark to set them off, of which India itself is most vulnerable.    The threat to Sri Lanka's democratic and generally pro-Western government -- which grants regular access to U.S. Navy ships and now has the world's second-largest Voice of America transmitter on its soil -- should also be worrying Washington. Although diplomats say the superpowers have steered clear of the troubles here, the insurgents' refusal to accept the homeland that would satisfy the vast majority of war-weary Tamils suggests that their Marxism is no mere revolutionary window dressing. Were the insurgents to reject the accord and wrest control of the natural port at Trincomalee, the great winner would be Moscow.    But even forcing the overthrow of a government that currently gives U.S. and British navies access to its ports would be a blow to Western interests. The tragedy of yet another breakdown is that once again it will be the innocent Tamil population caught in the crossfire.    In peaceful areas of the country one can come across young men wearing only broad white smiles and the traditional saram, an ankle-length skirt. Here, however, smiles are replaced by the dull listlessness of a beaten people, as young men full of promise and potential yield to despair. Although Tamils doubtless would feel more secure with the self-rule that a federal homeland would bring, no one talks of Eelam; like most people everywhere, they say they want only to be left alone. At a Hindu-run orphanage here on the peninsula, Swami Paramanda dismisses the ideologies that have wracked this land and this people. &quot;If not for politics,&quot; he says, &quot;all the people would be like brothers.&quot;    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. A related editorial appears today {see: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Gandhi on the Spot&quot; -- WSJ July 28, 1987}. </TEXT></DOC>