<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0097 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Gain From an Iranian Victory---By Michael Reisman</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FREST </IN><TEXT>   Because Tehran has humiliated the U.S. repeatedly, Americans tend to forget Baghdad's blemishes, to sympathize with Iraq and to view the prospect of an Iranian victory as a calamity. In truth, although an Iranian victory would present many problems, it would also offer opportunities.    The usual wisdom of the Middle Eastern proverb notwithstanding, the enemy of my enemy is not necessarily my friend. While Iraq may have stepped back somewhat from its former intimate Soviet association, it is no Western or even Western-oriented state. An Iraqi defeat, followed by, say, Iraq's reorganization as an Islamic Republic within Iran's sphere, would present enormous problems for Moscow. Besides having to cope with the diplomatic embarrassment, the demonstration of the inferiority of its weaponry and its inability to protect a friend, the Soviet Union would have to reckon with a larger, ideologically antagonistic force that was militant, expansionist and flushed with victory.    Saudi Arabia and the Gulf Emirates make much of the military threat of a victorious Iran. But Iran's formidable political-military machine would more likely turn its attention to Afghanistan. Key parts of the mujahedeen, the loosely coordinated Afghan resistance, are fundamentalist and are deeply influenced by the Iranian revolution. Many resistance fighters are Farsi speakers and look to Persia as the mother civilization.    For its part, Tehran's clerical elite finds abundant similarities between the detested Soviet-supported modernizing regime of President Saddam Hussein in Baghdad and Najibullah's Soviet-backed regime in Kabul. The similarities are not only in ideology. The Soviet presence in each is a serious geo-military problem.    Iran's support for the mujahedeen has received insufficient analysis. While it would certainly increase after victory in the Gulf, Iranian attention might confine itself to greater diplomatic support, weapons infiltration and the provision of base camps in Iranian territory. But even if it stops short of providing &quot;volunteers,&quot; it would, by creating two fronts, aggravate the Soviet position.    In 1956, 1967 and 1973, the Soviets saved their protege, Egypt, from total defeat by threatening to intervene; Washington restrained Israel. Moscow doesn't have that option in the Gulf war. The U.S. cannot restrain Tehran and a Soviet attack on Iran would be diplomatically disastrous. Barring our swing to the Iraqi side, we would surely oppose and deter it.    The Soviets have few other options. In the short term, they might support a preemptive coup against Iraqi President Hussein, in the hope of satisfying Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini and laying the basis for a negotiated settlement that would leave the pro-Soviet infrastructure in Iraq intact. But even if the Soviets were to accomplish this, they would not necessarily succeed in bringing the desired elite to the fore or in satisfying Khomeini.    As the situation in Iraq deteriorates, the Soviet Union can be expected to renew its efforts to accelerate a cosmetic if not real withdrawal from Afghanistan. The U.S. extrapolates its Vietnam experience and assumes that Soviet leaders are concerned about the long-term diplomatic costs of the war, particularly in the Moslem and Third worlds, and about related domestic problems such as drugs and the demoralization of the Soviet troops. But it's just as likely that Moscow, looking ahead, is seeking to avoid a direct confrontation with Iran, since the implications for its Middle Eastern policy and its own five internal Moslem republics could be grave.    The consequences of an Iranian victory for the Mediterranean are more complex. As Iran's ally, Syria has gleaned many tactical benefits from Iraq's preoccupation with the Gulf front. Like many others, Syria prefers a continuing inconclusive conflict, bleeding but not killing Iraq. It certainly doesn't want an Iranian victory, which would bring an Islamic Republic to its border. It, too, is a Soviet-supported secularizing regime with its own fundamentalist pressures. Those pressures have been dormant since the brutal suppression of a fundamentalist uprising in the Syrian city of Hama in 1982, but are still a potential to be reckoned with. Under the circumstances, President Hafez Assad may well wish to secure his other borders and so may prove more tractable in negotiations with Jordan and even Israel, at least with regard to Lebanon, which is most open to Iranian influence.    In the Persian Gulf, an Iranian victory would bring a mix of costs and benefits. Britain's withdrawal from the Mideast created a power vacuum in the Gulf that the Soviets, pressing southward since the days of the czar, were poised to fill. Iraq was the first step. Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger encouraged Iran, then bulging with petrodollars, to expand militarily, extend Iranian influence and at least partially fill the vacuum. The Iranian revolution destroyed Mr. Nixon's plan and the shah's military machine. The Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan, Kuwait established diplomatic relations with Moscow and Saudi Arabia is reported on the verge of doing the same.    Iran's victory could halt the growing Soviet influence in the Mideast and allow breathing space to local governments. To be sure, many of the local elites would have to accommodate Shiite fundamentalism by various internal legal and social changes and by adjusting external commitments. But these need not include a swing away from the West and certainly not a swing toward the Soviets.    There are indications that Israel has already taken into account a possible Iranian victory. Arab-Israeli relationships have always mixed self-righteous rhetoric and self-interested pragmatism, allowing economic and even arms exchanges. (Iran has not been an exception.) The pattern is unlikely to change. The ayatollah frequently exhorts his followers onward toward Jerusalem. If this is more than rhetoric, changes in Jordanian and Syrian policies in reaction to an Iranian victory could well block such initiatives and actually redound to Israel's benefit.    In Lebanon, the deterioration of the balance of force and initiative between Israel's proxies and Lebanese Shiite groups is not related to the Gulf war. The key to any settlement there -- a solution to the Palestinian problem by the establishment of some sort of homeland -- is still resisted by Israel. The pressures on it to yield are not likely to increase appreciably with an ayatollah in Baghdad.    It is especially hard now for Americans to think rationally about Iran. The ayatollah's government has given the U.S. many reasons to dislike and distrust it. But the ayatollah is not Iran. Iran is a nation of more than 40 million people, with a formidable infrastructure, in an important place and with important resources. It is too important strategically for the U.S. to glower on the sidelines until the country's rulers are more to our liking or to get impatient and throw in our lot with Iran's enemies in the hope of changing its government -- a move that probably would succeed only in bailing out the Soviets and letting them move to the winner's side.    Neither the U.S. nor Iran requires diplomatic relations or the exchange of tokens of friendship to appreciate their common interests. Our major concern, as a global power locked in competition with the Soviet Union, is to stem Soviet influence in the Middle East and Central Asia. Islamic Iran, whatever its attitudes toward the U.S., shares, at least for the moment, that concern. As a resurgent force in the area, coordinating Iraq and Afghanistan, it would be in a better position to accomplish that goal than at any time in the past century.    The power struggle within Iran is intense and its elite composition and internal arrangements will surely change. However unappealing its current theocracy, a non-communist Iran promises a wider spectrum of desirable change in the future than would a &quot;people's republic.&quot; Inevitably, such an Iran will gravitate toward us. As its revolution moves from charismatic leadership to institutionalized bureaucracy, it can be expected to seek more economic and commercial ties with the West. Improvement of human rights in the Western sense remains unlikely, but economic necessities may push the Islamic government toward increasing respect for private property, if only to enhance productivity. That alone promises some human gains.    ---   Mr. Reisman is a professor at Yale Law School. </TEXT></DOC>