<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Uproar Exceeds the Damage in Embassy Spy Scandal---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTEXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   The language suggests something between a Victorian love affair and a 20th-century police report. The victim has been either &quot;compromised&quot; or &quot;penetrated,&quot; often a mixture of both. These indignities climaxed, if that's the right word, with what columnist William Safire described hotly as the &quot;rape of our national privacy.&quot; The victim is of course U.S. security, particularly in Moscow in the old embassy and the new one under construction.    The uproar has somewhat shifted attention away from the Iran-contra scandal. Though it seems President Reagan was warned about the security problems some time ago, he bounced in front of the press earlier this week talking tough about refusing the Soviets access to their new embassy in Washington until the U.S. Embassy in Moscow has been swept clean.    Congressmen have been making hay. Reps. Dan Mica (D., Fla.) and Olympia Snowe (R., Me.) staged a late-night raid on the existing U.S. Embassy, flanked by TV crews they had mustered for the occasion. After an interval they emerged to announce gravely that security had indeed been compromised. Their escapade seemed somewhat contradictory in nature since they appeared to be trying to get the TV crews into a secure area. Following in the wake of Reps. Mica and Snowe will be Secretary of State George Shultz, who has been advised to conduct his private discussions with U.S. officials in a Winnebago or in the U.S. Embassy in Helsinki, which apparently is regarded as secure.    Overall, the image given in the press here is of an espionage orgy, with spies strolling of an evening through secure areas of the U.S. Embassy and Marines standing guard to protect the Russians from being unduly disturbed while they snooped, bugged and pored over files identifying CIA assets in the Soviet Union.    As is almost invariably the case in matters involving spying and security, the affair is being blown ludicrously out of proportion, as is suggested by the terminology of sexual trauma in which accounts are being couched. Problems for U.S. security, as perceived by the Reagan administration, are not being caused by KGB snooping around the embassy but by what General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev is saying openly in the maneuvers over arms reduction and in the battle for world opinion. The infantile propensity to read U.S.-Soviet relations in terms of successes or setbacks in espionage remains as powerful and as foolish as ever.    Such foolishness is nicely summed up by an anecdote about the late Harold Macmillan, who, as British prime minister, visited Moscow in the late '50s. Officials wedged Macmillan and the British ambassador to Moscow into a tiny box supposedly beyond even the superb penetrative powers of the KGB. Eyeball to eyeball inside their &quot;secure&quot; container, the two could not think of anything to say to each other and sheepishly clambered out again.    Even if one accepts the premise of the fetishists of espionage (mostly in the hawk faction in the U.S.), there are gross exaggerations in this case, many of them centering on the man the Marine Corps and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger may wish to send to the gallows -- Sgt. Clayton J. Lonetree, age 24. Even if one accepts the ill-founded notion that Sgt. Lonetree and an associate, Cpl. Arnold Bracy, let Soviet spies into the embassy, it is nonsense to suggest that the Soviets could have roamed freely through areas where secret activities were in train.    A former U.S. intelligence official who was stationed in Moscow six years ago says that &quot;secure areas&quot; were behind combination-locked doors, and though it is just conceivable that spies could have got into the embassy, they would have had to conduct the equivalent of a prolonged safecracking operation before even entering the areas where secrets were stored. The idea that Sgt. Lonetree could lead Soviet agents to a CIA assets file is nonsense. The same former intelligence officer said the likelihood of misconduct by Marine guards wasn't new and that during his tour they were being sent home at a rate of about two a month for black-market currency transactions and kindred offenses.    There is no doubt that Sgt. Lonetree is being pegged as the sacrificial victim with the insinuation that as a Native American he might have had historical reasons for being disloyal. He has a Navajo mother and a Winnebago father. The Winnebagos have had a long association with the U.S. military, and Sgt. Lonetree's great uncle was given a posthumous Congressional Medal of Honor for courage in Korea.    Some statements Sgt. Lonetree made to the Naval Investigative Service in London at the end of December 1986, under circumstances in which it is questionable whether his rights were properly respected, were damaging. They are also contradictory and, according to one of his civilian attorneys, William Kunstler, an interrogator subsequently admitted telling Sgt. Lonetree to &quot;say anything, even lies.&quot; So far as Moscow is concerned, the statements mostly reflect an admitted affair with Violetta Seina and a somewhat sad fantasy life in which Sgt. Lonetree dreamed of engineering an intelligence triumph over the Russians to enhance his career. Mr. Kunstler said Sgt. Lonetree has &quot;no interest&quot; in Native American affairs.    In none of his statements available for inspection did Sgt. Lonetree ever say that he had let foreign agents into the U.S. embassies in either Moscow or Vienna, which is where he was posted when he volunteered at the end of last year that he had committed breaches of security. The only person to have alleged that Sgt. Lonetree did contrive such unauthorized foreign entry to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow was Cpl. Bracy, who recanted such statements on March 21 and, on one account, then passed a polygraph test sustaining what he said in his recantation and alleging those investigators told him they needed this sort testimony to nail Sgt. Lonetree.    Sgt. Lonetree, not yet formally charged and now in the brig in Quantico, is being sealed off from reporters. Though both the military and the federal authorities have concurrent jurisdiction, he will be tried in a military court unless Mr. Kunstler's motion for a transfer to a civil court succeeds. Thus he will face military accusers with a military jury and military judge. Mr. Kunstler suggests that there was an attempt by the military to persuade Sgt. Lonetree to give up civilian counsel.    Meanwhile, Mr. Weinberger has told the Washington Times that Sgt. Lonetree might have caused &quot;shocking&quot; damage; and at the time of the Walker trial he said that spies &quot;should be shot, though I suppose hanging is the preferred method.&quot; According to Mr. Kunstler, this raises the question of whether any court martial of Sgt. Lonetree would be legal, since the Uniform Code of Military Justice holds that neither an accuser nor anyone below him in rank can convene such a proceeding.    The main reason Sgt. Lonetree and the other Marines were on guard duty in Moscow is that as unmarried military men they represent a cheap way of managing security. It has been known for a long time that such a system is vulnerable. Today Sgt. Lonetree faces the death penalty because his railroading to the gallows might help to clear the Marine Corps and the administration of the blunders now compounded by hysteria.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>