<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Back to the Future: Why Pillsbury's Chief From the '70s Is Again Taking Firm's Helm --- Spoor Assumes Stafford's Job As Sales and Profit Erode And New Products Wane --- A Takeover Specter Remains </HL><AUTHOR> Richard Gibson and Robert Johnson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> PSY WNEWS </CO><IN> FOD </IN><TEXT>   As 51-year-old John M. Stafford walked into a hotel meeting room in Naples, Fla., yesterday to resign as chairman and chief executive of Pillsbury Co., a piano player in the lobby a few feet away was playing &quot;Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin'.&quot;    It was a fitting end. During a turbulent three years as head of the giant Minneapolis-based food and restaurant concern, Mr. Stafford time and again seemed out of step with those around him and with his businesses. During his tenure, sales growth slowed and earnings fell, leadership positions in such moneymakers as baking mixes and pizza eroded, few new products were introduced and Pillsbury's Burger King chain lost market share to McDonald's. In recent months, the company has widely been rumored to be a takeover candidate.    Now it falls to William H. Spoor, the 65-year-old former chairman, to fix things. Mr. Spoor, who has been serving as chairman of the executive committee, was named yesterday to all Mr. Stafford's positions -- chairman, president and chief executive -- and is expected to lead a search for new management and a new strategy. Mr. Spoor first served as chairman and chief executive from 1973 to 1985, transforming Pillsbury from a sleepy flour miller into what is now the fourth-largest food and restaurant company in the country.    Whether Mr. Spoor can keep Pillsbury independent is questionable. Mr. Stafford's departure and Mr. Spoor's return bear an eerie resemblance to what happened at Beatrice Cos. in 1985. An old Beatrice chairman returned that year, and the company was eventually sold.    Pillsbury is considered one of the most attractive targets in a food industry already viewed as particularly vulnerable to raiders. Some people see Pillsbury as a cheap fix. Stronger management and some asset sales could turn the company around, they say.    At the least, the change underscores the difficulty of one company's owning both packaged-food businesses and restaurants. In recent years most food companies, including Quaker Oats Co. and Ralston Purina Co., have sold their restaurants.    The change is also a slap of sorts at Mr. Spoor. Privately, some directors blame Mr. Spoor for Mr. Stafford's troubles. They say that Mr. Spoor turned over a company short on management talent and that before he retired, Mr. Spoor should have bought another food company to keep Pillsbury growing.    And several directors blame Mr. Spoor for naming Mr. Stafford as his successor. Some board members, worried over Mr. Stafford's inexperience, fought the appointment three years ago. They urged a transitional team led by Winston R. Wallin, then the vice chairman, with Mr. Stafford as No. 2. &quot;We felt it was a gamble to give Jack both titles,&quot; one director at the time recalled yesterday. &quot;But Bill felt Stafford was ready to take over.&quot;    Many people feel that Mr. Stafford's departure became inevitable last fall when the board persuaded Mr. Spoor to give up retirement and return to Pillsbury to &quot;assist&quot; Mr. Stafford. By that point, the board was sure that Mr. Spoor had been wrong about Mr. Stafford. One person close to the board says that Mr. Stafford hastened his departure when he told securities analysts late last month that Pillsbury managers were &quot;overpromising and underperforming&quot; -- a statement that shocked some in the audience.    The same source cites Mr. Stafford's indication to the board recently that he wanted to fire J. Jeffrey Campbell, the chairman of Pillsbury's restaurants group. Directors reacted with concern, worrying that losing Mr. Campbell would leave more than half the company's businesses even more vulnerable at a time when they were already on shaky ground.    &quot;I've pleaded with him, 'My God, you just can't let this core business slip,'&quot; says Paul Gerot, 85, a former Pillsbury chief executive who has consulted with Mr. Stafford in the past. &quot;Your market share must be kept up or it will bite you.&quot;    Mr. Campbell hasn't been fired, but people close to Pillsbury say that more high-level changes may be announced after a meeting of the board today.    Mr. Stafford and Mr. Spoor refused repeated requests for interviews over the past two weeks, and few current or former executives were willing to be quoted by name. Mr. Spoor, reached after the board meeting, wouldn't talk about the specifics of his or Mr. Stafford's record. &quot;You can print all that you want to,&quot; he said. &quot;Have all the fun with that you want to.&quot;    In his three years at Pillsbury's helm, Mr. Stafford, who began his career in the advertising business, seemed determined to soothe executive nerves rubbed raw by the tempestuous Mr. Spoor, and colleagues give him high marks for starting that process. He also favored teamwork, in sharp contrast to the autocratic Mr. Spoor.    Still, Mr. Stafford from the start struck some at Pillsbury as weak. In 1985, for example, there was a meeting of Pillsbury's restaurant-group executives to discuss the future of the troubled JJ. Muggs chain. Some of those present had been assured beforehand that Mr. Stafford supported the chain. But in the meeting, Mr. Spoor attacked the chain, insiders say, and indicated he wanted to close it. One source says that Mr. Stafford went over to the other side during the meeting and that within 15 minutes after it ended, everyone in the Pillsbury restaurants group knew about it. The source asserts that executives were reluctant to trust Mr. Stafford after that.    Mr. Stafford was cautious and reluctant to spend for expansion. When executives at Distron, the $1 billion Pillsbury unit that supplies food to Burger King and some other restaurants, asked for $2 million last year to buy about 20 refrigerated tractor-trailers, Mr. Stafford said he would get back to them. He never did.    Partly because Distron couldn't deliver the food, outside suppliers stole Burger King business. Former executives estimate that as many as 500 Burger Kings have abandoned Distron during the last 18 months, though a Pillsbury spokesman says that number is too high. Those defections are costing Pillsbury dearly. Although the company doesn't report Distron's results separately, former executives estimate that the Miami-based unit's pretax profit of about $31 million in fiscal 1986 will fall to only $4 million in fiscal 1988, which ends May 31.    Former Pillsbury executives say that Mr. Stafford was so preoccupied with numbers and procedure that the businesses suffered. He always had subsidiaries working on projections, they say. Each unit files a five-year plan every year and spends most of the summer and fall preparing it. &quot;We were always planning-never executing,&quot; says one former executive.    Mr. Stafford's first big move after becoming chairman was to establish a committee to write a lengthy explanation of the company's &quot;Mission and Values.&quot; It was his most visible effort to change Pillsbury's corporate culture, but rivals within Pillsbury quickly began sniping that he lacked a clear vision of his own.    Mr. Stafford's reliance on numbers permeated the company. Last year he named a financial man -- Charles Olcott, previously head of investor relations -- to run Burger King, amazing other restaurant executives, who believed that Burger King needed a marketing wizard to turn things around after the disastrous &quot;Herb the Nerd&quot; ad campaign.    The emphasis on numbers sometimes led to questionable business decisions. As Burger King prepared to introduce Chicken Tenders in 1986, the chain set a rule that franchisees had to make a 60% profit on the product. Then the chain could find only one supplier that would sell the chickens cheap enough to permit the 60% margin. The result: Burger King didn't have enough chickens, many restaurants ran out of Chicken Tenders, customers went back to McDonald's Chicken McNuggets, and millions of dollars in advertising was wasted.    At headquarters in Minneapolis, executives barely hid their lack of respect for Mr. Stafford. He was sometimes called &quot;the wooden soldier&quot; because of his stiffness. Mr. Campbell, the head of Pillsbury's restaurant businesses, is well-known by insiders for an unflattering imitation of Mr. Stafford sitting stiffly at his desk and making a point by waving his glasses in a predictable pattern.    At a generally hostile meeting with securities analysts last month, Ronald Morrow of Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. introduced Mr. Stafford by using the Ricky Ricardo line from the &quot;I Love Lucy&quot; television series of the 1950s: &quot;Lucy, you got some 'splaining to do.&quot; Mr. Stafford forced a smile. Mr. Morrow says he cleared the joke ahead of time with Roger Headrick, Pillsbury's chief financial officer. Mr. Headrick wouldn't be interviewed for this story, but a Pillsbury spokesman says that while Mr. Headrick had said it would be all right to start off with a joke, he hadn't known specifically what the joke would be.    Both Mr. Campbell and Mr. Headrick are believed to want Mr. Stafford's job, and others are said to be jockeying. &quot;Everyone spends days reading the tea leaves instead of paying attention to improving their businesses,&quot; says one insider. Says another: &quot;The long knives are out.&quot;    Though Mr. Spoor seems to be riding to the rescue, industry executives say he must share the blame for the company's troubles. No one would ever mistake him for a weak manager -- during his 12 years as chief executive, the company grew from $20 million in profit and $816 million in sales to $192 million in profit and $4.8 billion in sales. But along the way, say these executives, he made two major mistakes that now haunt the company: He failed to groom a stable of successors or to acquire another food company that would help keep Pillsbury growing.    &quot;Pillsbury for years has needed another wheel on the ground,&quot; says a former senior executive at the company. &quot;The business base is too narrow.&quot;    Mr. Spoor's impatience and ego are legendary at Pillsbury, and they sent many talented executives packing. Stephen M. Carnes, now a securities analyst in Minneapolis and once Pillsbury's director of investor relations, remembers hearing Mr. Spoor storming toward his office one day, angry because Pillsbury's stock price was down. Mr. Carnes says he crawled under his desk and hid.    Mr. Spoor dressed down subordinates in meetings. One former executive tells of a brainstorming session at which Mr. Spoor criticized one of his suggestions by saying, &quot;That's a terrible idea. I don't know why we hired you.&quot; Another remembers being told to get an airline to hold a flight that Mr. Spoor was scrambling to catch -- or be fired. He couldn't get the airline to agree. Mr. Spoor could, but the man kept his job.    There was never any doubt that Mr. Spoor was in charge. Executives still talk about the night Mr. Spoor challenged some of them to race their cars home after a late-night meeting. Mr. Spoor wheeled into the driveway of one of his vice presidents and howled with laughter as the man pulled in behind him. The moral: Nobody at the company charged harder than Bill Spoor, no matter what the hour.    But over the years, Mr. Spoor's abrasiveness and I-know-best attitude took its toll. Former Pillsbury managers now run ConAgra Inc., Golden Valley Microwave Foods Inc. and Medtronic Inc., a Minneapolis pacemaker company.    The man who was widely regarded as the Pillsbury restaurant group's best brain, Norman Brinker, left in 1983 after Mr. Spoor refused to buy Chili's Inc., then a 20-restaurant Sun Belt chain. Mr. Brinker, who had 18 years of uninterrupted profit gains while running Pillsbury's restaurant group, bought into Chili's and expanded the chain to 135 units. Pillsbury's restaurant group, on the other hand, has had three chairmen since he left. Its earnings growth has slowed. There have been layoffs, and Pillsbury is now taking writeoffs to dispose of its two newest chains.    Whether Mr. Spoor is capable of rebuilding management is the big question at Pillsbury. Some former executives believe that Mr. Spoor's main job will be to steady the company for whoever succeeds him. But others suggest that he will also start hunting for a big acquisition -- one that requires so much borrowing as to protect Pillsbury from an unfriendly takeover and brings in a new take-charge man to eventually succeed him.    Speculators are swarming around Pillsbury's stock. &quot;It's a wounded duck,&quot; says one longtime shareholder. European giants Unilever and Nestle S.A., as well as cash-rich RJR Nabisco Inc., are among companies mentioned as interested in Pillsbury. Some analysts, noting Kraft Inc.'s longtime relationship with Pillsbury -- Pillsbury supplies Kraft with refrigerated dough -- think the Chicago-based food giant might be a white knight in a hostile situation. Pillsbury and Kraft have numerous complementary businesses.    Pillsbury's announcement of Mr. Stafford's resignation came just a few minutes before the stock market closed. In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Pillsbury closed at $36.75 a share on volume of 1.57 million shares, up 50 cents.    Mr. Spoor isn't expected to stay for long. At his old office suite downtown -- known as the &quot;elephants' burial ground&quot; because Mr. Spoor and several other former chief executives have been sharing the quarters -- James P. McFarland, the retired chairman of General Mills, says Mr. Spoor was reluctant to return to Pillsbury. Mr. Spoor and his wife recently bought a house in Wyoming, and Mr. Spoor looked forward to trout fishing.    Says Mr. McFarland: &quot;He was really beginning to enjoy retirement.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>