<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880120-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Maze: Iran-Contra Prober Relentlessly Pursues Leads in Complex Case --- Lawrence Walsh Is Assailed For Being Too Zealous And for Doing Too Little --- Negotiating With Khashoggi </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM MDEST </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> JUS EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   While most of the government was closed last Veterans Day, Independent Counsel Lawrence Walsh's investigation of the Iran-Contra scandal was pressing ahead in the gloomy, nearly deserted federal courthouse a few blocks from the U.S. Capitol.    Mr. Walsh's prosecutors were questioning Attorney General Edwin Meese during his first grand-jury appearance in the case. Though not a target of the criminal inquiry, Mr. Meese was asked to rush back from the White House a few hours later, at the height of a freak November snowstorm, for more closed-door testimony.    The incident illustrates the dogged, methodical approach of the chief Iran-Contra prosecutor as his investigation, after 13 months, moves toward a climax. The 76-year-old Mr. Walsh, associates say, is pushing himself -- and his 46-member team of lawyers and Federal Bureau of Investigation agents -- to seek indictments against former Reagan administration officials within the next few weeks. Meanwhile, Mr. Walsh faces difficult legal hurdles. And his investigation is under fire both from administration officials who say he has gone too far and from some lawmakers and others who say he hasn't gone far enough in probing White House activities.    The patrician prosecutor remains confident, unruffled and, above all, pragmatic. &quot;I have never had any second thoughts about accepting the challenge,&quot; says the trim Mr. Walsh, who stays in a suite at the posh Watergate complex here four or five nights a week, between weekend commutes home to his wife in Oklahoma. To fully appreciate the complexities of his task, he says with a grin, &quot;You have to sleep with the case and eat breakfast with it, too.&quot;    Mr. Walsh, whose persistence and obsession for detail are matched by his clipped, almost painfully careful public statements, isn't saying what action he will take. But the chief targets for indictments are former White House National Security Adviser John Poindexter; Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North; and Richard Secord and Albert Hakim, two other central participants in President Reagan's foreign-policy misadventures.    At one point last summer, Mr. Walsh even considered seeking major indictments before some principal witnesses in Congress's Iran-Contra hearings were heard. Bleary-eyed prosecutors stayed up until dawn several days in a row, drafting a flurry of proposed charges, motions and other court filings requested by Mr. Walsh. The idea was to seek indictments quickly, before Messrs. Poindexter and North and others testified under congressional grants of limited immunity from prosecution.    &quot;There was a blizzard of paper, and seemingly endless, emotion-packed meetings,&quot; one of Mr. Walsh's associates recalls. But after wrestling with the issue and getting conflicting advice from aides, Mr. Walsh decided against using any of the documents. Instead, he delayed seeking charges in order to build a stronger case against targets who sought protection through immunized testimony.    The investigation includes more than 1,000 interviews and already has taken nearly three times longer than Mr. Walsh originally estimated. Budget concerns and the lure of returning to private practice have trimmed his staff nearly 40% in the past few months; three of the six most senior assistants no longer are working full-time.    Despite complaints from some White House aides and members of Congress that his work could stretch into the middle of this year's presidential campaign, the court-appointed prosecutor has refused to be rushed. &quot;There isn't any question,&quot; says federal Judge Miriam Cedarbaum, an old friend and colleague of Mr. Walsh's, &quot;that he devotes himself wholeheartedly to whatever he does.&quot; Another longtime associate says Mr. Walsh may take his time devising strategy in any complex case, &quot;but he is absolutely fearless and indomitable once he makes the decision.&quot;    The transformation of &quot;Judge&quot; Walsh -- as many colleagues call him -- from American Bar Association president, quintessential corporate counsel and defender of the status quo to scrappy prosecutor taking on the White House reflects, in part, some of the contradictions of his own personality.    Friends joke that Mr. Walsh is so reserved and proper that they have never seen him take off his suit jacket in the office or take time off from work to engage in small talk over a sandwich with his staff. Yet he routinely goes to chat with the Iran-Contra grand jurors, offering them encouragement and thanks for their efforts in the complex, grueling case.    Mr. Walsh, who rose to national prominence in the Eisenhower era and faithfully worked for President Richard Nixon as a special envoy to the Vietnam peace talks in Paris, refuses to discuss his personal ideology. He is a lifelong Republican who wears conservative three-piece suits, but he hired a former aide to liberal Democratic Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts as his top press spokesman.    Aides and friends describe Mr. Walsh as a blunt, demanding taskmaster. He often prefers to work alone, out of the office, early in the morning. And at 7 or 7:30 in the evening, he routinely takes a briefcase bulging with files back to his hotel for more reading. With decades of red-eye flights under his belt, Mr. Walsh proudly reels off -- down almost to the minute -- how much time he can set aside for work during the weekly flights to Oklahoma.    The independent counsel has pushed hard behind the scenes -- often to the dismay of State Department officials -- to try to persuade Switzerland, Israel and at least 11 other nations to turn over secret bank records and other material. Israeli officials who tried unsuccessfully to bluff U.S. prosecutors into dropping their demands now find themselves locked in a bitter, uphill legal battle with Mr. Walsh's office. In Switzerland, on the other hand, his diplomatic, low-key style and avoidance of public criticism of bureaucratic delays paid off; some 2,000 pages of financial documents were released recently.    Mr. Walsh has used strategically timed speeches, status reports and announcements of guilty pleas by lower-level targets to demonstrate progress and emphasize his independence. During the televised Iran-Contra congressional hearings last summer, when Col. North became an instant celebrity, Mr. Walsh gave a speech warning that &quot;high office, well-intentioned policies&quot; and personal popularity &quot;do not place anyone above the law&quot; and won't &quot;short-circuit&quot; his investigation.    The overall effort reveals Mr. Walsh's steely determination to cap a distinguished career with a series of indictments. Asked whether any Iran-Contra figures are likely to go to jail, Mr. Walsh snapped during a rare TV interview last year: &quot;We are not doing this just for the exercise.&quot;    Such aggressive tactics sometimes backfire, though. For example, Adnan Khashoggi, an important middleman who helped finance some early sales of U.S.-made weapons to Iran, initially balked at cooperating with prosecutors. The apparent reason: He blamed a Walsh assistant for aiding the French seizure of his posh DC-8 jetliner in an unrelated civil case.    Lawyers familiar with the discussions say it took several months to soothe the volatile Mr. Khashoggi and additional time to hammer out compromise procedures for interviewing him. Not until last November, according to officials, did prosecutors obtain Mr. Khashoggi's complete statement and records.    Some veteran criminal lawyers and congressional investigators criticize Mr. Walsh's team as inexperienced in the ways of Washington. By concentrating primarily on how millions of dollars from secret U.S. arms sales to Iran were raked off as profits by middlemen or diverted to help the Nicaraguan rebels, the critics contend, Mr. Walsh has, in effect, overlooked other, perhaps equally significant legal and political questions.    He has, for example, devoted scant attention to the unlikely network of amateur spies and free-lance intelligence operatives who sometimes passed information to or otherwise helped Col. North and his associates. Congressional investigators have evidence suggesting that these unofficial &quot;agents&quot; -- ranging from conservative adventurers and small-time businessmen to weapons dealers -- became involved in Central American politics, helped keep tabs on Polish trade officials in the U.S. and dealt with Col. North on other matters.    By contrast, Justice Department spokesmen fault Mr. Walsh's investigation for being overly aggressive. Assistant Attorney General Charles Bolton, the department's chief lobbyist, asserts that independent counsels, including Mr. Walsh, tend to pursue &quot;every lead, every possible violation, every picky little concern&quot; precisely because they operate outside executive-branch control. &quot;Nothing is too trivial for them to pursue,&quot; Mr. Bolton fumes.    Mr. Walsh's legendary thoroughness -- which, according to critics, makes him arrogant, unbending and sometimes tyrannical toward aides -- shows up in many ways. Months ago, prosecutors were told to cancel newspaper and magazine subscriptions, stop watching TV news and even avoid talking to relatives or friends about the case -- all to insulate Mr. Walsh from anticipated defense motions that he relied on material from congressionally immunized witnesses.    His prosecutors now receive &quot;sanitized&quot; versions of articles and news summaries, and they, in turn, provide the chief prosecutor with regular progress reports. Then, almost every week, Mr. Walsh dutifully files two separate, carefully dated batches of documents under seal with the chief judge of the federal court here.    Early on, he ruled out prosecution of the attorney general, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams and senior U.S. intelligence officials for their role in the scandal, apparently concluding that their testimony and cooperation would be essential to prove the &quot;core conspiracy&quot; case against others. Mr. Meese, for instance, has been summoned to testify before the grand jury on at least six occasions.    And Mr. Walsh, according to attorneys familiar with the investigation, appeared to drop consideration of seeking charges against former White House National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, partly on the ground that jurors wouldn't have much taste for such a case after Mr. McFarlane's suicide attempt last year. </TEXT></DOC>