<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0073 </DOCNO><HL> The Decision Against a Heart Drug</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GENEPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>   On May 29, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's Cardiovascular and Renal Drugs Advisory Committee voted against approval of Genentech's tissue-type plasminogen activator (TPA), a genetically engineered blood-clot-dissolving drug. After the vote, much controversy ensued over the committee's debate about whether dissolving blood clots will save lives among heart-attack victims (or in the committee's jargon, whether clot lysis is a surrogate for mortality). Thrombolysis, or breaking up blood clots, has been a central goal of much heart-disease research, and some prominent cardiologists have expressed concerns at the implications of the committee's arguments. In the following excerpts, most of the committee members and several FDA medical officers offer their arguments on TPA, breaking up clots and reducing deaths from heart attack.    Dr. Jeffrey Borer, Cornell Medical Center, Chairman of the committee: We go on to the crux of the issue here. Is clot lysis a suitable surrogate for a mortality endpoint?    Dr. David Aronson, medical officer with FDA's Office of Biologics Review: Effectiveness means a reasonable expectation that in a significant proportion of the target population the pharmacological or other effects of the biological product when used under adequate directions for use and warnings against unsafe use will serve a clinically significant function in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease in man.    I think the key point there is how you relate that pharmacological interaction to clinical benefit, but that is the wording of efficacy. You are allowed to do that.    Dr. Borer: I think we understand that.    Dr. Aronson: You don't have to show a direct benefit but a probability.    Dr. Barbara Alving, Walter Reed Hospital {non-committee member}: I think we are doing a great disservice to all the hundreds of investigators who have demonstrated the efficacy, the importance of clot lysis in animal models with reperfusion throughout the years. Now, to show this of each and every thrombolytic as it comes down the pike is going to be . . .    Dr. Borer: Excuse me. Dr. Alving. May I just interrupt you, please? I don't think that is really the issue we are dealing with now. We are not setting a precedent for all time to come. We are trying to deal with one specific issue here, and what I would like to do is to get the opinion of each of the members of the committee about this specific agent with regard to the information that we have concerning its efficacy, and what happens after that is another issue that perhaps we can deal with at another time. But if we can just move ahead from there. David?    Dr. David T. Lowenthal, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York: . . . I think that based on the fact that there is a lack of controlled data on mortality with the t-PA in perfusion vs. reperfusion cases, as well as an inadequate amount of data on ventricular function, I would like to be able to show that there is some endpoint, such as an improvement in ventricular function with the administration of the drug vis-a-vis clot lysis, and since we don't have that, I would have to maintain that the answer is no. . . .    Dr. Borer: Okay, So, you are suggesting that you cannot accept clot lysis as a suitable surrogate for mortality in the absence of some other information.    Dr. Lowenthal: That is right.    Dr. Robert Temple, Director, FDA Office of Drugs: Just to be specific, we concluded this morning that a drug {streptokinase} that among other things lyses clots had an effect on mortality. I presume, therefore, that in answering the question you are mindful of the discussion that went on this morning that there may be other explanations for at least part of the effect of streptokinase.    Otherwise, there is a logic that says that streptokinase opens clots: It alters mortality; therefore something else that lyses clots affects mortality. So, it must be those other things? We need to understand the reason.    Dr. Lowenthal: . . . The point is that this morning there was a heckuva lot more data presented that could substantiate such a contention that there may be some relationship between clot lysis and improvement in the mortality rate. . . .    Dr. Borer: If we concluded that clot lysis with streptokinase clearly was the mediator of the clinical benefit, it would then be inconsistent for us to say that what appears to be better clot lysis with t-PA cannot be a basis for the same conclusion.    Dr. Temple: That is why I want to be sure I understand the basis for the statement. . . . It is basically the last question that was asked this morning, and the answer was, no, whatever we think is most likely, we really don't know exactly how streptokinase does all of what it does.    Dr. Borer: . . . We have not come to the conclusion that all beta blockers were created equal. And since we don't know the mechanism by which the beta blocker mediates the life-prolonging effect and since we cannot say that all beta blockers are equal, we have required that there be independent data with regard to each that wants to make that claim, and that, again, is the issue we are coming back to here. . . .    Dr. Jeremy Ruskin, Massachusetts General Hospital: It is a difficult thing to say, but while my bias is that clot lysis is a clearly desirable goal, that it probably is the mechanism by which these drugs are effective, we don't know that, and I believe those data are not available. T-PA is very clearly an effective thrombolytic, and my gut feeling is it is an exciting drug with a great deal of promise, but with regard to any proven clinical benefit, I think the data is not here. . . .    Dr. Carl V. Leier, Ohio State University: I am not sure that t-PA can ride on the coattails of streptokinase this morning, and the reason is I am not clear what the connection is between streptokinase and the mortality data that we saw, as you indicated many times, and we are making the assumption that perhaps it may be related to clot lysis, but I am not absolutely certain about that, and for that reason I think we need to do more than lyse clots. I think we need to find out if that, in fact, is a beneficial effect clinically. . . .    Dr. Craig M. Pratt, Baylor College of Medicine: In the presentation, one thing I feel is this leap back from RB {roller bottle} test CTPA and making conclusions about the compound they wish to market from data from a different compound just intuitively bothers me. . . . I don't think there is mortality data. I think the data regarding LV {left ventricular} function is preliminary, and it is, in fact, less than powerful. It is confounded by the fact that sometimes both types of t-PA were used, sometimes the wrong dose, at least from the one we are discussing today was used, and finally it was compounded by data regarding angioplasty. So, given those two things, then I am only left with the fact that I truly, firmly believe that it is an effective drug in establishing patency of coronary arteries, and I would like to see additional beneficial effects.    Dr. Borer: Then . . . what is your conclusion about clot lysis as an endpoint as a suitable surrogate for mortality?    Dr. Pratt: I tried to put it in the context of my other concerns and given that alone and with the other concerns I have, in fact, about safety of the suspension culture TPA and the problems with bleeding that have occurred even with higher doses. I don't think that alone is a suitable surrogate endpoint.    Dr. Borer: If the sponsor can provide in short order clear, unequivocal data about safety in large numbers with the dose of the drug that they are using in their current trials, would then clot lysis be sufficient as an endpoint?    Dr. Lowenthal: I think I would be willing to consider that. I hesitate to say that I would accept that as an endpoint off the bat, and if they could do that in a reasonably good high volume of patients with safety, I don't see any reason why that couldn't, also, be combined with the mortality trial. . . .    Dr. Elsa-Grace V. Giardina, Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons: . . . Both agents lyse clots, but the major difference really is that there were thousands of patients to draw upon in the streptokinase data. The mechanism of action by which streptokinase improves mortality or improves reperfusion may, in fact, be other mechanisms that come into play with streptokinase that haven't been evaluated or worked out or presented here with t-PA, and so, I don't think we can completely extrapolate, other than the fact that this is a very good agent to lyse clots, better than streptokinase. But whether or not it improves mortality or ejection fraction or left ventricular performance really hasn't been clearly elucidated here, and I think that what we need is more numbers, more studies. And again, I say that intuitively I want to believe that it will improve mortality.    Dr. Borer: OK, I think then, Ray, the consensus of the committee is that while everybody intuitively believes that clot lysis alone should be a reasonable surrogate for mortality, there is no sufficient confidence from the data that we have seen about lytic agents to be able to firmly draw the conclusion that it should be.    {The committee vote against approval of TPA was 10 to 1.}    Dr. Thomas Zuck of the FDA's Office of Biologics Review: Iknow it is not possible to ask the committee a questionbecause the committee is largely gone, but I think you areposing an additional problem which for those of us who meetwith sponsors with IND {investigational new drug} and pre-INDmeetings, etc., it is not trivial. There are many, manyagents, and I am not leaking any secrets, that are beingproposed as lytic agents. You said that we were not making arule but everybody was going to have to prove efficacy inmortality studies with every sequential agent with 15 or 20thousand, but I think that is precisely what you have done.   We have no option now but to tell a sponsor that if it is going to go back to the Cardiovascular and Renal Committee, most likely you are going to have to prove that you had an improvement of mortality. It seems to me that at some point somebody has to make a decision that lysing clots probably is a measure of efficacy.    Dr. Temple: At some point the data may be available to reach that conclusion, but I think what happened is that it was felt that the data on streptokinase alone, given its other activities and with only a single example, was not sufficient. Now, you know, you can argue that point, I guess, but if an additional lytic agent showed a favorable effect, you might, at that point, conclude that the question had been shown.    Dr. Zuck: How does the sponsor know at the front end what study to institute?    Dr. Temple: Look. Granted that that is one problem, let me pose the problem in a different way. The therapies we are talking about, streptokinase, produce a 20% reduction in mortality. Now, for a person receiving that benefit, that is a serious business. So, if it is true, if the committee is correct in thinking that one cannot know that you will get a comparable benefit without testing it, and I understand that there are people who could disagree with that, but if that position is correct, it is as important to know how to find out whether a drug will have that effect as it is to have an easy answer for sponsors. I mean the stakes here are life and death. . . .    Dr. Zuck: You are misinterpreting what I am saying. What I am asking is what message do you send someone at a pre-IND meeting of the appropriate studies to design? . . .    Dr. Temple: . . . The concept of clot lysis as equal to mortality improvement is one that needs, I mean, judging from what the committee has concluded, is one that needs further proof. It is the streptokinase data alone, the GISSI study, etc., do not all by themselves prove that. But you know, there is a point at which having demonstrated something that continues to be associated with one property where, for example, there isn't the same magnitude of effect on viscosity, you might be left with the conclusion that clot lysis is, indeed, the operative phenomenon, and that in fact, it does correspond to improved survival. The fact that it cannot be concluded yet for this product doesn't mean that it cannot be concluded after further data. I would not conclude that at all.    Dr. Zuck: That is not what I am asking, but what do you tell a sponsor when they . . .    Dr. Raymond Lipicky of FDA's Office of Drug Review: There is advice that can be given a sponsor, very simple advice. How long do you think it will take you, and do you think someone else will have proven that clot lysis and mortality are synonymous before you are ready to get licensed, and if you think someone else will have established that then, indeed, you won't need to do something that significant. If you think you will be ready to be licensed before someone else has done that, you probably should put that into your program or minimally have measured some ventricular function with great care.    Dr. Temple: But, also, you don't have to take the committee's advice.    Dr. Elaine Esber, director of FDA's Office of Biologics Review: That is right.    (The meeting was concluded.) </TEXT></DOC>