<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0008 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:Books for the Armchair Traveler---By Manuela Hoelterhoff</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A resourceful friend of mine used to head for Rome with two hundred-dollar bills sewn into a tie wide and ugly enough to repel the most slovenly Italian thief. I thought of him while reading &quot;A Taste for Travel&quot; (Knopf, 435 pages, $22.95), an anthology of excerpts from travel books, journals and guides culled and introduced by John Julius Norwich, historian and champion traveler. The travel-advice chapter offers a Victorian version of the hollow-tie trick for adventurers heading into an &quot;imperfectly civilized land&quot;: Slit your upper arm and put some jewels inside in a small silver case embedded near the vaccination mark.    This is a diverting survey of letters, commentary, essays and book excerpts ranging in time from Herodotus to Paul Theroux, without scorning such lesser-known adventurers as Augustus Hare, a British eccentric whose snobbery was his salvation in Naples some 100 years ago. &quot;I shall be missed,&quot; he screamed at brigands who were ready to cut him up.    &quot;No you won't be. You've only been here two days,&quot; they sneered, before prudently giving him a society quiz. (Who is the Princess Altamonti? What is the name of the daughter of Count So-and-So? etc.) Of course, Hare passed, and they let him hop away.    ---   &quot;The Norton Book of Travel&quot; (W.W. Norton, 873 pages, $19.95), edited and introduced by Paul Fussell, whose emphasis is different from Lord Norwich's. &quot;Just as tourism is not travel,&quot; he writes, &quot;the guide book is not the travel book.&quot; He looked for lasting literary merit, and found it in writers as diverse as Mark Twain, Freya Stark, Evelyn Waugh and Patrick Leigh Fermor, who are as sure-footed turning corners as they are turning phrases. This is a book about language and landscapes. For example, Mr. Fussell shows us 18th-century Istanbul through the eyes and words of Lady Wortley Montague, wife of the British emissary.    Swathed in veils, she scribbled her way through town, penetrating even the sultan's harem, where, she wrote a friend, she found herself surrounded by ladies lolling nude around the pools. She finally undid a few stays to prove to them that she, too, had bosoms.    ---   &quot;The Amundsen Photographs&quot; (Atlantic Monthly Press, 199 pages, $35), edited and introduced by Roland Huntford. In 1928, Roald Amundsen, the Norwegian polar explorer, vanished into the Arctic Ocean. The lantern slides he took of his famous expeditions also vanished, until last year when a curious relative opened a dusty crate of Horlicks Malted Milk that Amundsen had left behind in his house by the Oslo Fiord. The best of these handpainted, fragile slides show Amundsen's 1911 dash with skis and dog teams through Antarctica, a precisely orchestrated race that got him to the South Pole 35 days before Robert Falcon Scott arrived, manhauling his skimpy supplies every horrible mile. Many heartwarming shots of the dogs Amundsen loved but ate anyhow, and mysterious hillocks that turned out to be friendly seals who in this glacial wonderland waddled up to their guests, who ate them, too.    ---   &quot;A Walk to the Pole&quot; (Crown, 306 pages, $24.95), by Roger Mear and Robert Swan: If only a few of Amundsen's flippered friendlies had waddled inland to Scott! With four companions, he perished of hunger and cold only 11 miles from base camp on his dismal trek back from the South Pole. He, not Amundsen, captured the public with the quiet heroism of his last diary entries, and the two authors of this book re-created his journey as a tribute to their hero. The disaster that also beset them at the trek's end is described in diary entries that alternate with excerpts from Scott's journal. Fine photographs show the severe continent's beauty and scale.    ---   &quot;Prairiescapes&quot; (University of Illinois Press, 101 pages, $29.95), photographs by Larry Kaufer: land so flat you could think Columbus was wrong. And where are the people?, you wonder, mesmerized by landscapes devoid of virtually everything but the occasional, empty-looking house or a clothesline with some tattered overalls. Spooky night scenes bring to mind UFO landings and make one look suspiciously at a large cabbage.    ---   &quot;A Day in the Life of the Soviet Union&quot; (Collins, 240 pages, $39.95), photographs taken on a single day, May 5, 1987, by 100 photojournalists stationed in all corners of the cabbage citadel of the world. Predictable shots of babushka brigades in Tbilisi give way to glasnost scenes, not all of them heartening: Three panic switches at the Voronezh nuclear reactor casually sealed with bits of wax. We don't really want to see this. Though an officially sanctioned book, no great attempt was made to show the Soviet Union on the cutting edge of fashion and technology, or turn it into a place of paradisiacal bounty. Commonplace scenes often look unintentionally surreal. The man we see apparently being tortured in a small dreary chamber is really putting his extremities into those waterfilled tin cans to improve his circulation.    ---   &quot;A Country House Companion&quot; (Yale University Press, 192 pages, $24.95), by Mark Girouard, whose aim, he writes, &quot;was to take the reader into country houses as an invisible tourist&quot; -- and, surely, to profitably recycle and expand the anecdotes and data not fully used in his previous volumes on country living. Comparative runt though it is, this sequel is a moderately engaging read, thanks to the indefatigable eccentricities of the occupants of these drafty places. Learn how a crazed footman single-handedly reduced the staff at Knowsley with 37 bullets; or, in Cecil Beaton's hilariously heartless description, about &quot;puny and unattractive&quot; village children forced to have fun at a duchess's Christmas party.    ---   &quot;English Country: Living in England's Private Homes&quot; (Clarkson N. Potter, 288 pages, $35), by Caroline Seebohm and Christopher Simon Sykes. Despite the best efforts of past Labor governments, there are still a surprising number of these chintz-stuffed places lurking behind secretive hedges. Inside, there are people with large collections of muddy galoshes and straw hats with brims their ponies have nibbled on. You did not think you needed to read another book about them and their sense of history. But Ms. Seebohm is modest and smart and often funny as she describes the complexities of class structure and sexual politics (primogeniture and entailment kept most properties out of female hands) that have shaped English houses and land over the centuries. The houses are interestingly diverse, ranging from the Elizabethan Heydon Hall to a 17th-century rectory overgrown with honesty, spurge and bright red poppies. The book's design is stunning, and the photographs are as choice as its text.    ---   &quot;Shakespeare Country&quot; (Michael Joseph/Viking Penguin, 191 pages, $22.95), text by Susan Hill, photography by Rob Talbot: an unusually fine melding of biography, history, architecture and landscape by a writer who moves through the countryside with a stately pace, saying intelligent things. Though the gallows men, ostlers and butter women of Shakespeare's day have disappeared and his footprint is hard to follow, there still remain many sites in central England around the Avon River that recall the life and times of the playwright. And even if he possibly didn't poach a deer at Charlecote, who could object to the nicely told anecdote or to Mr. Talbot's memorable photograph of a scowling mass of chimneys and bricks underneath a malevolent sky? </TEXT></DOC>