<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Elusive Lenders:Financing for ExportsGrows Harder to FindFor All but Big Firms---Most Banks Give Up BusinessAs Unprofitable, Risky;Irving Trust Bucks Trend---Why Trade Gap Stays So Big---By Peter TruellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> VMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   When Jernigan Trading Co. of Knoxville, Tenn., wanted to sell white oak and black walnut to Western European furniture makers, it spent a year and a half looking for a bank interested in financing exports.    During that time, it nearly had to close up shop. &quot;We had no credit lines,&quot; recalls Victor Jernigan, the company's president. He says that nine Southeastern banks turned him away because they didn't do such business. &quot;It's those auto loans that banks want to do,&quot; he says. &quot;Export trade isn't in fashion now.&quot;    Finally, after a pair of thousand-mile round trips to Baltimore, Mr. Jernigan got a $500,000 loan from Maryland National Bank.    For small and medium-sized companies all over the U.S., finding banks to finance and guarantee exports has become much more difficult. Over the past few years banks have largely given up such business. &quot;Obtaining export finance is probably one of the most difficult things an exporter is confronted with,&quot; says Michael Rice, an executive vice president at Irving Bank Corp., whose Irving Trust is one of the few major New York-based banks that still court smaller exporters.    The change is hampering potential exporters' efforts to capitalize on the weaker dollar. It also helps explain why it is taking so long to reduce the huge U.S. trade deficit, which last year widened to $169.8 billion from $148.5 billion in 1985. Small and medium-sized companies are estimated to account for one-third of U.S. exports.    Exporters usually seek bank financing to guarantee payment for the goods they sell overseas or for working capital to produce goods. Unless an exporter is among the biggest in the country, it requires bank help, says H. Jurgen Schlichting, who manages Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale's New York office.    But from small regionals to money-center behemoths, banks are passing up export-related business as insufficiently profitable and too time-consuming and risky. The strong dollar of a few years ago and the world debt crisis persuaded many banks to cut back or close international and export-finance departments. Now, their trade-finance departments mostly survive on import financing, and they prefer to concentrate on investment banking and retail customers.    &quot;The expertise in the banks has vanished. I don't know what's happened to those guys. I guess they're pumping gas or selling old ladies Visa and MasterCard,&quot; says Charles Zemene, the commercial finance director at Terex Corp., a heavy-equipment manufacturer in Hudson, Ohio. He used to work in Chase Manhattan Bank's trade-finance department.    &quot;Banks generally have considerably reduced their export-financing capabilities and marketing efforts,&quot; says George Cashman, the vice president responsible for trade finance at Morgan Guaranty Trust Co.    Like most other big U.S. banks, Morgan has dismantled most of the costly framework that helped it provide companies with export-finance services. &quot;Ten years ago we had a large group that {sold services to} domestic companies and spent a lot of time educating U.S. companies about how we could assist them to export,&quot; says Mr. Cashman. But, he says, there just wasn't enough profit in such business. So Morgan, setting a trend, turned its U.S. export-finance department into a consultancy for financing very large foreign projects and turned its attention to financing exports in Britain and other countries where such services are more profitable.    &quot;The U.S. has never recognized that other countries do things to make export financing attractive to their banks,&quot; Mr. Cashman says. Adds a trade-finance specialist at a big money-center bank: &quot;For there to be a resurgence of U.S. bank interest in supporting exports, there has to be an economic basis for it.&quot;    In the meantime, Terex's Mr. Zemene says the company often can't match the financing packages offered by its foreign competitors. Its bankers aren't interested in winning such business, he says. Japan's Komatsu Ltd. recently won $5.6 million in contracts to supply heavy trucks to Mexico and Chile with financing packages from Japanese banks that Terex couldn't match, Mr. Zemene says.    In Hardwick, Mass., Marc Villa, the president and treasurer of North Atlantic Timber andamp; Shipping Co., says: &quot;It's hard for a small company. There's a major Catch-22 involved. You need export insurance to get financial expertise, but in order to get export insurance you need financial expertise.&quot; Mr. Villa's company has annual sales of between $10 million and $12 million, mainly of oak, ash and cherry to furniture makers in the Far East, Europe and the Mideast.    Roscor Corp., a family-owned business in Mt. Prospect, Ill., won a $5 million contract to build television trailers for the South Korean Olympics, its biggest order to date. It managed to complete the order with the help of loan guarantees from the U.S. government but found that it had to do most of the export-finance work itself because of a lack of local bank expertise.    &quot;If the bank had known more about it, that would have helped us,&quot; says Mitchell Roston, a Roscor vice president. Enviously, he recounts how Japanese banks in the Midwest hold regular meetings to help Japanese companies win export business and how smaller Japanese companies are allowed to band together to win export contracts.    The problem is particularly bad for those that export to developing countries, which are often mired in billions of dollars of foreign bank debt. In El Dorado, Kan., it used to be straightforward for International Petroleum Services Inc. (annual sales: $12 million to $20 million) to borrow money against a letter of credit when it sold oil equipment to a country in Asia or Latin America. Now it's &quot;like pulling teeth,&quot; says Richard Teichgraeber, the president. &quot;One time we had even completed the order before we got the financing.&quot;    Following Morgan Bank's path, Chase has cut its export-finance staff by about two-thirds and turned it into a consultancy that sells advice and services, mainly to large companies and other Chase units.    Chemical Bank closed its global-trade-finance group at the end of 1985, though a Chemical spokesman says that the bank now offers export finance through other departments. The unit used to have offices in New York, Los Angeles and Chicago. San Francisco-based Bank of America &quot;scaled down its whole operation in May 1985,&quot; a spokeswoman says. Bankers Trust Co. has cut back its staff in this area but continues to finance large exports, according to Lawrence J. Brainard, a senior vice president and the bank's chief economist.    For at least one small exporter, such changes meant running a gamut of banks that didn't want his business. Roy V. De Mellio, who runs Offshore International Ltd., a New York textile factoring company, tried to get trade credit to finance the apparel and fabrics he exports to Latin America. Despite more than 20 years in factoring, or buying accounts receivable, he says, he was turned down by Bankers Trust, Chemical, Chase, Citibank and others. Fortunately for him, he caught the eye of Alfred F. Daiboch, a Bankers Trust lending officer. When Mr. Daiboch switched jobs to head trade finance at the New York branch of Italy's Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, he financed Mr. De Mellio's business.    A few U.S. banks still court export-finance business, including Maryland National, First National Bank of Maryland and Pittsburgh National Bank. Among big banks, Irving Trust is pursuing a dogged individual strategy. Mr. Rice, who was recruited from Chase to lead Irving's trade-finance business, says, &quot;Irving senior management has said trade finance will be important in the longer term. It's definitely against the trend, but I think that trend will reverse in the next 12 to 18 months&quot; as the need for financing grows and the understanding of the problem improves.    Meanwhile, foreign banks are doing some small-export financing. &quot;The foreign banks are all trying to find a niche in this market, and the exit of the U.S. money-center and regional banks from export finance has provided us with that niche,&quot; says Malcolm Koch, a trade-finance specialist at DG Bank of West Germany in New York. Mr. Koch, who once worked for Chemical Bank, is -- like Mr. Daiboch -- part of a widespread shift of experienced U.S. export financiers to foreign banks.    The foreign banks -- particularly those from West Germany, Japan and Britain -- now provide about a third of the export credit granted in the U.S., according to trade-finance experts.    But the foreign banks are only picking off selected business. According to bankers and exporters, these banks are usually eager to land major customers and are often interested only in financing exports to countries near their home bases. They are leery of financing agricultural exports to developing countries. &quot;One of the reasons why the agricultural community can't export to {developing countries} is they can't get the financing,&quot; says William Anderson, the head of international operations at First National Bank of Minneapolis.    Even big companies have trouble getting financing for exports to debt-ridden countries. One is the Wabco unit of Dallas-based Dresser International Corp., a heavy equipment maker with 1986 revenue of $3.66 billion. Says Frank Calvert, the export-finance manager: &quot;Zambia, the Philippines, Chile and Brazil: Those are the most difficult ones for us. For Latin America, it's difficult to find a financial institution to do the coverage.&quot;    Recent Federal Reserve Board statistics indicate the extent of U.S. banks' retreat from export finance in developing countries. Outstanding trade finance lent by U.S. banks to Asia, Latin America and oil-exporting countries totaled $37.7 billion at the end of the 1986 third quarter, down 12% from $43.1 billion six months earlier.    But getting financing for exports to Europe can be difficult, too. When Mr. Calvert wanted to get bank guarantees for a recent equipment sale to Yugoslavia, he had to turn to the New York branch of Spain's Banco Atlantico S.A. His local banks wouldn't touch the business, he says.    Bankers don't apologize for their withdrawal from export finance. Frank Graebner, a trade-finance specialist at the Chicago office of Britain's National Westminster Bank, says that on typical government-backed export-credit business, U.S. banks make a 1 1/2 percentage point interest margin on guaranteed loans. He notes that they can make more money lending locally on mortgages.    Government officials say that they recognize the difficulties. &quot;Trade finance has fairly high overheads and traditionally has artificially high cost attribution, making it a difficult business to justify under present substantial pressure to make profits,&quot; says John A. Bohn Jr., the chairman of the Export-Import Bank, a government agency that helps finance exports.    The legislative and regulatory areas don't offer much hope to small and medium-sized exporters. The 1986 tax law contained new roadblocks for banks getting involved in financing exports. The law reduces the amount of foreign tax credits that banks can use to offset U.S. taxes on income from foreign loans, including export credits.    And pending new Fed capital requirements would make trade finance more capital-intensive. That, bankers say, would further discourage export financing, as banks would be reluctant to devote more capital to an area that they have recently deemphasized. </TEXT></DOC>