<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880429-0179 </DOCNO><HL> Save the Oil Rigs? Yes, Some Say, They Are Habitat-Forming --- Environmentalists' Pet Peeve Is Now an Ecologists' Pet; From Coral to Barracudas </HL><AUTHOR> James P. Sterba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> PET ENV </IN><G> DEF </G><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Just when you thought saving the whales was enough, some people have discovered even bigger endangered things in the sea: oil rigs.    Don't snicker. Offshore oil and natural-gas production platforms, yesterday's environmental bane, are today's ecological darlings. Since the late 1940s, nearly 6,000 such rigs have been planted in the world's shallow seas -- two-thirds of them in the Gulf of Mexico. Perched like giant erector sets on mud and sand bottoms, they have become teeming marine-life habitats.    But oil and gas wells beneath the older structures are running dry. Some 150 to 200 platforms stop production annually. When this happens, oil workers usually dislodge them with explosives, barge them to shore and cut them up for scrap. About 400 have already been taken out of the gulf.    This turns out to upset many people -- even people who didn't want the rigs in the ocean in the first place. Concerned conservationists say that ripping out rigs means uprooting entire undersea communities, leaving thousands of mollusks, worms and starfish, anemones, corals, sponges and fish either dead or homeless. Fishermen and divers say that some of their favorite angling and spearing sites are being consigned to the scrap heap at a rate of two or three a week. Even environmentalists for whom homeless barnacles aren't major priorities argue that a gastropod's home is his castle. Blow it up and you kill bigger fish and animals, too.    Don't blame us, say the oil companies. A 1958 Geneva treaty requires that rigs be removed within a year after they stop producing. Besides, they say, mollusks and other encrusting animals are scraped off working rigs every few years anyway.    The U.S. government is torn. Branches of the Interior and Commerce departments would like some rigs left in place or used as building blocks for artificial reefs. And the U.S., along with Britain and Norway, is urging treaty changes to allow this. But the U.S. Navy calls the rigs a threat to national security. It worries that Soviet subs might sneak up behind them and hide.    Save-the-rigs advocates want some of them left standing, or tipped over and sunk, or hauled to designated artificial-reef sites. They say that pulling rigs out and destroying them is stupid at a time when the U.S. and other nations are spending millions of dollars annually to create artificial habitats -- using everything from old Liberty ships to kitchen sinks -- for fisheries development. Nearly 600 man-made reefs now dot the U.S. coastline, says Richard Stone, who watches over the two-year-old National Artificial Reef Plan for the National Marine Fisheries Service.    &quot;These oil platforms are a resource, and once they're gone nobody is going to spend the money to re-create them,&quot; says Paul Driessen, a rig-to-reefs advocate with the Interior Department's Minerals Management Service.    The oil companies would love to leave the rigs where they are; removing them is expensive. One estimate puts the price tag, world-wide, at $30 billion. But the Navy, besides worrying about hiding places for the Soviets, calls the rigs navigation hazards. A West German sub rammed a rig in the Norwegian North Sea just last month. The Navy says the safest continental shelf is a flat and empty one. Nearly 90% of the U.S. shelf fits that description.    Trouble is, what's flat and empty doesn't sustain much marine life. Fisheries experts portray such bottoms as underwater deserts. Shipwrecks, oil rigs or other man-made habitats quickly become oases in such surroundings. A Florida diver donated his Rolls-Royce to the artificial-reef cause three years ago.    Virtually anything with a hard surface will do to colonize. Without such a surface to latch on to, most microscopic marine creatures drift until they die, some within hours, some within days. With such a surface, they can metamorphose and grow. As they flourish, they provide food and hiding places for little fish, which in turn provide food for bigger fish, and so on.    Biologists have long argued whether artificial reefs grow more marine life or simply aggregate creatures and fish already in the vicinity. Most now seem to believe that such reefs increase a sea's total biomass, or amount of living matter. &quot;It's basic marine biology,&quot; says Mr. Driessen, &quot;that if you double the number of niches, you can double the population.&quot;    Edwin Cake, a Sierra Club vice president in Mississippi, agrees. But he calls rigs left in place visual pollutants; he favors moving them to designated reef-building spots. Lynn Davidson, a marine-habitat specialist for another environmental group, Greenpeace, believes that rigs' oasislike qualities are exaggerated. But she says leaving them in place is preferable to using explosives to sink or move them. The blasts, she says, kill dolphins, many fish and already-endangered Kemps Ridley sea turtles.    Oil firms say they are working on safer removal, and they blame shrimp-trawler nets for turtle deaths. The shrimpers, who have long objected to rigs in their trawling grounds, blame the rig blasters. They also charge that the rig-removing subcontractors illegally leave lots of submerged junk that catches their nets.    The whole subject of what to do about the rigs has created rifts both within and between environmental organizations. Environmentalists argue over questions like this: If New York City's rotting piers are valuable enough as striped-bass spawning grounds to thwart the multibillion-dollar Westway highway project, shouldn't similar habitats like rigs get equal treatment? Greenpeace donated its monitoring ship, the Rainbow Warrior, as an artificial reef off New Zealand after French agents bombed it two years ago, but it hasn't taken an official position on rig reefs.    Some other groups, notably the National Wildlife Federation, favor artificial reefs, including rigs, if they are properly located so as not to interfere with navigation or commercial fishing. But they worry that such projects might become disguises for junk dumping or for toxic-waste disposal.    Several coastal states have enacted save-the-rigs legislation. Louisiana, the furthest along, has designated eight areas where obsolete rigs can be scuttled. It has also established conditions for transferring liability for the old rigs from oil companies to the state. Three-fourths of the state's 300,000 saltwater anglers head out to rigs to fish, mainly at producing wells. Out-of-state fishermen come to charter rig-fishing boats. Economists say Louisiana's offshore rigs are worth $200 million a year in fishing business.    Ironically, the oil rig perhaps most responsible for marshaling sentiment against the offshore-oil industry is now one of the best examples of a rig-turned-reef. Notorious Platform A, six miles off the California coast in the Santa Barbara Channel, did wonders for the environmental movement when it leaked 235,000 gallons of crude oil in 1969, creating an 800-square-mile oil slick that blackened beaches, birds and the industry's reputation. Today the still-producing platform is festooned with sea life. Mussels grown on the spindly legs of nearby platforms turn up at some of the best eateries.    Robert Meek, a marine biologist-turned-entrepreneur, has been periodically vacuuming the mussels and other encrusting organisms off these platforms for five years. His company, Ecomar Inc., sells the mussels to seafood wholesalers at a premium because they contain none of the grit, sand and pollutants that their shoreline brethren can contain.    Ecomar's current production averages 10,000 pounds a week. That is roughly 150,000 mussels. They wholesale for about 80 cents a pound -- about five cents more than counterparts from Maine, which diners say can be too sandy and briny.    Of the 21 production platforms in the Santa Barbara area, five to 10 miles offshore, 11 are farmed by Mr. Meek and his co-workers. Before he came along, oil companies paid underwater contractors up to $20,000 annually to scrape their platforms clean. Mr. Meek does it for the mussels. </TEXT></DOC>