<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880803-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Crop Busters: U.S.-Mexican Project For Planes to Wipe Out Drug Crops Is Faltering --- Illicit Narcotics Keep Flowing As Problems With Pilots, Aircraft and Parts Pile Up --- Many Acres of Dead Poppies </HL><AUTHOR> Stanley Penn (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM ESY </CO><IN> MON ARO </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> CULIACAN, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The five Bell 206 helicopters begin threading their way through narrow 7,500-foot mountain passes. Suddenly, a tell-tale hint of scarlet in the underbrush ahead betrays a target.    One chopper eases in at tree-top level. Pilots have learned to be wary: They sometimes find wire mesh waiting to snare them. And occasionally gunfire. Today there is neither. An empty tin-roofed hut and some hastily abandoned tools, blankets and a ratty cowhide below indicate no one stuck around. The pilot opens fire -- with a herbicide spray -- and the airborne armada then whirls back to base.    The kill: a garden-sized plot of flowering poppies.    This is the Sierra Madre, still hiding a treasure that corrupts. Only these days the treasure is the opium-bearing poppy, the raw material of Mexico's burgeoning heroin trade. For peasants tending tiny, secret mountain plots, the showy red flowers are a cash crop. But as far as U.S. policy makers are concerned, they are a primary target in the war against illicit drugs.    Federal strategists some time ago decided that destroying so-called narcotics crops -- poppies and marijuana -- while they are still in the ground would be more efficient than chasing smugglers. Today, the U.S. backs joint crop-eradication ventures with governments of a dozen drug-supplying countries. This is the biggest.    It is also one of the most troubled. The program is hobbled by mismanagement, red tape, and the whiff of corruption. Finger-pointing between U.S. and Mexican officials over blame strains relations between the countries. Meanwhile, poppy and marijuana growers continue to produce bumper crops. And Mexico continues to be America's chief heroin and marijuana supplier, raising questions about just how workable such foreign eradication programs really are.    At bottom is the question of who is in charge. Most of Mexico's 92 drug-fighting aircraft were purchased with U.S. money. And last year alone, the U.S. spent $14.5 million here for maintenance, parts and pilot training. But Mexico runs the program, on the ground and in the air.    &quot;The whole thing has turned into a shambles,&quot; asserts Rep. Lawrence J. Smith, head of the House Foreign Affairs Committee's anti-drug task force. &quot;Cajoling, pleading, begging, diplomatic inquiries -- none of them works.&quot;    The Reagan administration and the Democratic-controlled Congress both are reluctant to push a key ally like Mexico too hard. The Senate last April voted to sanction Mexico for failing to do enough, but the measure died in the House after Mexico promised to try harder to destroy opium-yielding poppy fields.    Top Mexican officials bristle at that kind of U.S. pressure. &quot;The U.S. attitude is, father knows best. We're not little kids who need tutors,&quot; says Mexico Deputy Attorney General Jose Maria Ortega-Padilla.    A prickly attitude is somewhat understandable, too. The State Department's drug-eradication agency in Mexico has had seven different bosses in the past seven years. &quot;How do you establish rapport with Mexicans and gain their respect with so much turnover?&quot; asks one American with close ties to Mexican drug fighters.    Under the best conditions, aerial crop destruction is difficult. Expensive modern machines, chemicals and trained pilots are used to find and annihilate obscure plots of plants one at a time. But under conditions existing here, the job is daunting.    U.S. and Mexican officials have squabbled over just about every aspect of the program -- right down to the choice of aircraft.    At one point, the U.S. pushed a fixed-wing plane called the Turbo Thrush, used for narcotics-crop eradication elsewhere in Latin America and Asia. The Thrush is fast; a poor target for snipers. It carries 400 gallons of herbicide -- six times the payload of a Bell 206 helicopter.    But Mexican authorities complain the Thrush is too fast. &quot;It overshot the poppy fields,&quot; and would accidentally spray legitimate crops such as corn, says Deputy Attorney General Ortega. By contrast, they rave about the Bell's maneuverability and even spent nearly $6 million of Mexico's own funds a while ago for a dozen of them. A fatal Thrush crash early last year settled the issue -- four remaining ones and their American pilots were withdrawn from service. The Bell helicopter is now the fleet's workhorse.    The plane issue pales, however, next to other problems. A big headache is poor pay for pilots and mechanics, and the low morale and the turnover that causes. Mexican government spray pilots currently earn $800 per month -- a better-than-average Mexican wage, but less than what they could make in private industry. American pilots on the State Department's payroll who were flying here until last year say their salaries -- including expenses -- were $9,500 a month, or more than 10 times what the Mexican pilots made.    &quot;The Mexicans took the same risks as us, but they got paid this cornbread living,&quot; observes one U.S. flier. A State Department offer to supplement the Mexicans' pay only irritated Mexican officials. &quot;The pilots cannot have two bosses,&quot; declares Deputy Attorney General Ortega.    In the view of one former U.S. adviser, the wage disparity influences the pilots' work habits. Americans took off at daybreak and flew two missions by lunchtime. &quot;The Mexicans,&quot; he says, &quot;wouldn't take off till 9. When they got back, that was it for the day.&quot; (No one flies in the afternoon, when stiff, hazardous winds rattle through the mountains.)    Mechanics aren't much happier. An investigation of the program's U.S.-funded aircraft maintenance last year showed a mechanics' work slowdown because of poor pay, says Robert Fox, a senior vice president of Evergreen Helicopters Inc., the Portland, Ore., concern hired to do the State Department study. The slowdown was keeping some aircraft grounded unusually long for repairs.    Mexican authorities now claim they are turning the corner with pilots and mechanics. After pilot pay was increased 120% last year to the current $800-a-month, the pilot roster, which had fallen to 100 last autumn from 159 in 1985, rebounded to 141. Mechanics also got 120% more, and officials are promoting some to higher-paying jobs as inspectors to keep them.    But the raises have barely kept up with Mexico's inflation rate. And Mr. Fox says that government mechanics, at least, still can readily double their pay by moving to private industry.    In addition to personnel troubles, shortages of repair parts hamper the program. &quot;A plane would sit for weeks because it couldn't get replacement parts,&quot; recalls Marvin Foster, until last January a paid aviation adviser to the State Department's narcotics assistance unit here.    At a big Mexico City hangar where spray planes are maintained, the problem is quite evident. Mechanics have stripped one airworthy helicopter down to its skeleton for parts to fix three others.    Shortages occur even though stockpiles are bulging, because many items on hand are obsolete or nonessential. Overall, inventories in 1986 were about twice the $7 million typical for a fleet this size, according to a recent report by the U.S. General Accounting Office.    Pinpointing the cause is another matter. Rafael Garcia-Delgado, Mexico's director of aviation services, blames poor U.S. workmanship. &quot;Parts are sent to the U.S., but aren't repaired properly, so we have to send them back,&quot; he says.    Deputy Attorney General Ortega criticizes E-Systems Inc., the Dallas electronics and defense company that, until recently, advised Mexico on maintenance and parts procurement. &quot;In '86 and '87, I never got spare parts in timely fashion, or I didn't get the right amounts,&quot; Mr. Ortega says.    E-Systems doesn't argue, but says it isn't to blame. &quot;On a number of occasions during 1986 and 1987, we stopped procurement of parts because funding wasn't available,&quot; a company official says. The State Department, in turn, denies any financing problems. Mexico replaced E-Systems with Bell Helicopter Textron Inc., a Textron Inc. subsidiary, when E-Systems' contract expired May 31.    Parts can even be a problem for ground vehicles. One American recalls seeing inoperable fuel trucks at the base at Culiacan and being told various components had been stolen. &quot;They'd tell us there was no battery, or no generator, or no tire, or it needs spark plugs,&quot; he says. Mexican authorities won't discuss such allegations.    Hints of corruption dog the spray program, though proven incidents are scarce. &quot;They wouldn't let us work in certain sectors,&quot; says one American formerly employed in drug eradication. &quot;Our pilots would fly over these fields. After they got back, they'd check with the zone coordinator, who said he'd have them sprayed by helicopter. He never did.&quot; The American suspects those crops were off-limits, though he hasn't any proof.    Mexico concedes some low-level corruption. In the past year, two Mexican pilots were jailed for accepting payments in return for not destroying drug-crop fields. But Deputy Attorney General Ortega denies that crops are regularly protected. &quot;Pilots have the freedom to fumigate whatever fields they might find. They have an obligation to report fields they might find,&quot; he says.    In a war where victories are measured by the quarter-acre, assessing progress is slippery business. Last year, Mexico claimed that the equivalent of 6,200 acres of poppies were destroyed, up from 5,900 acres the previous year. But more than 15,000 acres of poppies remained under cultivation, and Mexico's 1987 opium production actually increased over 1986, according to U.S. estimates.    Mexico reported destroying the equivalent of 9,300 acres of marijuana last year, up from 7,350 acres in 1986. Still, the U.S. estimates that the 1987 crop rose to as high as 7,130 tons from 6,000 tons in 1986.    Mexico verifies crop destruction by flying over sprayed sites; it calls on-ground inspections too risky. But the U.S. is pushing for more thorough, on-ground inspections, using helicopters capable of landing in small clearings.    As a step in that direction, Americans here two years ago asked to borrow a Mexican helicopter. The Mexicans said they couldn't spare one. After a year of U.S. badgering, they relented. There was a catch: The proffered helicopter had to be pried off the side of a mountain where it had crashed. It took a year to rebuild.    The incident still irritates Mexican officials. &quot;We have fixed-wing planes for verification, but, no, the Americans want a helicopter,&quot; one snaps. &quot;We gave them a helicopter. Soon they'll want ten helicopters. Then 50.&quot;    To refine the guesswork on results, the State Department has talked for more than a year of equipping a Mexican plane with a powerful camera. So far, that's only produced more hassles.    First, the Americans dickered among themselves. &quot;The question was, how sophisticated a camera was needed? Should we spend $50,000, or $100,000?&quot; recalls a State Department official. Then, an East German model was rejected because &quot;we weren't prepared to buy from them,&quot; the official says. Finally, last September, the Americans settled on a camera.    It still hasn't been purchased. Mexico hasn't yet produced a plane to carry it. &quot;When that will be is up to the Mexicans,&quot; the official says. </TEXT></DOC>