<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870108-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Avoiding Tax on Social SecurityIs Harder for Some Under New Law---By Constance MitchellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES LABORMUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Retired investors are on the prowl again, searching for ways to shield their Social Security income from taxes.    Two years ago the federal government started requiring Social Security recipients whose income -- including tax-exempt interest on municipal bonds -- exceeded a certain level to pay taxes on a portion of their benefits. But some retirees were able to sidestep the added liability by taking advantage of tax shelters.    Now the Tax Reform Act of 1986 has eliminated most shelters, and retirees are again looking for ways to ease the tax bite. &quot;Many retired people feel it's unfair to tax the money it took them so long to accumulate,&quot; says Karen Greb, a financial planner in the Pittsburgh office of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner andamp; Smith Inc. &quot;Some feel they are being penalized for being industrious enough to save for a comfortable retirement.&quot;    But while some can benefit from revising savings and investment strategies, the options are limited -- especially for retirees who need spendable income. There may also be drawbacks in changing investments. For instance, two of the principal alternatives -- single-premium annuities and single-premium life insurance -- levy stiff surrender charges if investors want to get out in the first few years.    &quot;Some investors are so occupied with the notion of reducing taxes that they overlook the hidden costs,&quot; says Greg Kushner, director of financial planning in the Los Angeles office of accountants Price Waterhouse.    Determining whether Social Security benefits are taxable and, if so, to what extent, requires potentially confusing calculations. The tallying begins by taking half of a recipient's net Social Security benefits, then adding taxable pensions, wages, interest, dividends and other taxable income, as well as tax-exempt interest.    If the sum is below $25,000 for individual filers or $32,000 for joint filers, none of the Social Security benefits is taxable. If it is over those amounts, the recipient must pay income taxes on 50% of the excess or 50% of the benefits, whichever is lower.    Retirees whose pension income alone puts them above the income thresholds probably can't avoid paying the added tax liability. But when the excess comes from interest or dividend earnings, financial planners suggest taxpayers consider shifting at least some of their money into the few remaining tax-deferred investments.    The most popular alternative retirees are using is the single-premium annuity. The investor pays one lump-sum premium, which collects interest tax-free until withdrawals begin. The American Council of Life Insurance estimates that premiums paid into annuity accounts more than doubled, to a $64.3 billion in 1986 from $30.4 billion in 1983.    Robert and Marjorie Wahrman are among the millions of people who made the change. Mr. Wahrman, a 69-year-old retired New York state employee, and his wife have annual pension and investment income of $29,400. In 1984, he and his wife also had combined Social Security income of $11,000, as well as $3,600 in interest earned on a $45,000 money-market account. Because their combined income for purposes of calculating the taxability of Social Security benefits was $38,500 -- $6,500 over the threshold -- they had to report an extra $3,250 of taxable income on their return.    In 1985, Rey Wells, a financial consultant in Albany, N.Y., convinced the Wahrmans to move the savings in their money-market account to a tax-deferred single-premium annuity paying 10.25% interest. Eliminating the interest from the money-market account reduced the couple's taxable income and the portion of Social Security benefits subject to taxation; as a result, they paid about $1,800 less in income tax, Mr. Wells says. Moreover, he adds, the Wahrmans earned tax-deferred income of $4,700 from the annuity.    Another option for retirees seeking to shelter part of their Social Security income is the so-called &quot;tax-managed&quot; mutual fund. Like an annuity, such funds allow money to grow on a tax-deferred basis. Robert Willens, a partner in the New York office of accountants Peat, Marwick, Mitchell andamp; Co., says that although these funds lose some important benefits under tax overhaul, they can still be attractive.    One feature of the tax-managed funds has been their ability to convert ordinary income from dividends into capital gains, taxable at lower rates and only when investors redeem their shares. The funds have done this by being taxed as corporations, not as mutual funds. They then avoid corporate taxes through trading maneuvers and a rule that makes dividends paid to corporations largely tax free. The funds retain all earnings, so shareholders don't have taxable income until they decide to withdraw the money.    Under the new tax act, however, the special capital-gains treatment is being phased out and the effective taxes for this type of investment will rise.    Other changes in the tax law will, in effect, force all mutual-fund investors to begin paying taxes on fund expenses. Previously, fund expenses -- which include advisory fees -- were deducted from assets by each fund operator before taxable dividends went to shareholders. But under the new law, investors will be taxed on pre-expense income. For tax-managed funds, the taxes could be &quot;higher than those on a conventional fund,&quot; Mr. Willens says.    Despite the tax-law changes, however, money earned by tax-managed funds still won't be taxable until it is withdrawn. And retirees can continue to exclude these tax-deferred earnings when calculating how much of their Social Security benefits is subject to tax.    For retirees who want to reduce taxes but need spendable income, Ms. Greb of Merrill Lynch suggests single-premium life insurance. As with an annuity, the policy is put in force with one lump-sum payment. The policyholder gets a small amount of life insurance, but the bulk of the money goes into an investment pool, where it accumulates tax-deferred income.    Policyholders can draw spendable funds by borrowing from the policy. The loan proceeds aren't taxed, and they don't have to be included when calculating how much of the retiree's Social Security benefits is subject to taxation. And when the policyholder dies, the death benefit and the remainder of the policy, minus the loans and interest owed by the policyholder, pass to the beneficiaries free of income taxes.    Another way to get spendable income with single-premium life insurance is by purchasing a dividend-paying policy issued by mutual life insurance companies. Policyholders can make annual tax-free withdrawals, as long as the money taken out doesn't exceed the initial investment. For tax purposes, these dividends are treated as the return of part of the premium and aren't taxable.    &quot;The idea of taking out a loan for income is frightening for some retired people,&quot; Mr. Wells says. &quot;The dividend-paying policy is far more acceptable.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>