<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890823-0082 </DOCNO><DD> = 890823 </DD><AN> 890823-0082. </AN><HL> Worker-Stockholders Can Transform Polish Economy@  ----@  By Lucja Swiatkowski </HL><DD> 08/23/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> EUROP LABOR </CO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><TEXT>   In the 1950s, Louis Kelso had a vision of an increasingly technological society in which productivity would be increased largely through capital improvements and in which employees could participate not only through their labor but through ownership. And so he devised Employee Stock Ownership Plans, or ESOPs, whereby an employer either gives employees stock, or extends or guarantees a loan for them to buy stock; the loan is then repaid with earnings and dividends generated by the stock.    The ESOP Association convention in Washington in June demonstrated ESOPs' growing popularity world-wide. The most interesting possibility for ESOPs is their use in privatizing state-owned companies in communist countries. There, the main obstacle to reforming the economy is managers' and employees' lack of interest in the results of their labor; this leads to low productivity, inefficiency and waste.    China, the Soviet Union and Poland sent representatives to the ESOP convention. China fielded a high-level government delegation that expressed interest in applying ESOP-like mechanisms on a large scale in China's cooperative and public enterprises.    The Soviet Union dispatched an economist, who talked about the beginnings of the ESOP movement there. Soviet ESOPs are concentrated in the Baltic republics, where they are productivity boosters even though the workers have no ownership rights and must pay a surtax if they make &quot;too much&quot; profit. Nevertheless, the results are considered successful enough to warrant an expansion of the program within those republics. (Apparently there are no plans to organize ESOPs in other republics because they are not considered entrepreneurial enough.)    It is in Poland, however, that ESOPs have the greatest chance of success. The Polish delegation to the convention consisted of four Solidarity members: Jan Mujzel of the Solidarity Economic Commission; Barbara Blaszccyk, an employee ownership expert; and Jan Kalita and Ryszard Wrzensinski, presidents of two enterprises' workers' councils. (Workers' councils would be the executive bodies of any ESOPs.) In Poland's national debate on economic reforms and property rights, Solidarity and the Communist Party agree that privatization must be the base of a market economy. But they differ on a fundamental question: Who owns the factories and enterprises? The state, as represented by the government bureaucracy, or the employees of these enterprises?    In response to calls for private enterprise and competitiveness, the Communist government increasingly has turned to &quot;nomenklatura capitalism,&quot; whereby ownership of state enterprises is transferred wholly to their Communist managers or state resources are used to set up Communist Party members in businesses that complement or fulfill needs created by the inadequacy of state-owned enterprises.    Solidarity opposes this, of course, and further fears that the capital assets of state-owned enterprises have such a low value that they might be sold out to foreign investors. And so Solidarity appears to be leaning toward ESOPs as the best way to privatize the economy. This was one of the points of its recent roundtable negotiations with the Communist Party.    According to the ESOP plan Solidarity is considering, some key enterprises would remain state-owned, but most would be transferred to employee ownership or to joint ownership between an ESOP and the state or an ESOP and a foreign investor. ESOP companies would become to some extent quasi-stock markets; their own share-trading and investment sources could substitute for the capital market that does not exist in Poland.    Under the plan, the first step is the organization of an International Advisory Board for Employee Ownership Development, which would advise enterprises on how to set up ESOPs and oversee the banks that would finance them. This board is being organized by Krzysztof Ludwiniak, director of international operations of ESOP Services, a consulting firm based in Baltimore.    The board will work closely with three other organizations interested in promoting ESOPs in Poland. One is the Solidarity Economic Research Institute, being set up by, among others, Mr. Mujzel of the economic commission. The second is the economics department of Catholic University in Lublin, which is a focus of free-market-oriented Solidarity economists. Catholic groups are particularly interested in ESOPs because this mechanism of privatization agrees with the social teachings of the church.    The Federation of Workers' Councils, whose two representatives attended the ESOP convention in Washington, is the third group studying ESOPs. Poles and potential foreign investors worry that letting workers' councils manage factories would result in runaway inflation, uncontained wage demands, and a chaotic economy, as happened in Yugoslavia. But Yugoslavian workers' councils are controlled by Communist Party nomenklatura, while Polish councils have ownership aspirations and want to transform the self-management movement into the employee-shareholder movement.    Poland has a small tradition of employee ownership and privatization of state-owned companies. Gasolina, a company that made equipment for the oil and gas industry in Lvov (now in the Soviet Union), was employee-owned and extremely profitable from its inception in 1912 until World War II. Starting with fewer than a dozen employees, by 1939 it employed more than a thousand workers.    The initial group of investors controlled 54% of the equity and the remaining 46% was spread among other employees in proportion to their length of employment and position within the company. Using Gasolina as a model, the prewar Polish government started in 1937 to develop a plan for privatization of the large state-owned industrial conglomerate Wspolnota Interesow Ltd., which employed more than 30,000 workers. Needless to say, World War II interrupted this process.    Many questions must be answered before ESOPs can be successfully implemented in Poland. Can they work in the absence of a strong legal framework and an adequate business infrastructure? What will be the response to calls of &quot;inequality&quot; when ESOPs result in some workers owning shares in competitive, valuable enterprises, while others, thanks partly to bad luck, own shares that are nearly worthless?    Will ESOPs contribute to the modernization of the Polish economy if they reward mainly industrial workers, already the highest-paid class in Poland? Are they going to stem the tide of emigration of highly educated young people? Where will the money to buy ESOP shares come from? Who will sit on the ESOP fiduciary trust boards? How will state-owned enterprises be valued in the absence of marketdetermined prices?    These are difficult but not insurmountable issues. If they can be resolved, they could transform the Polish economy.    ---   Miss Swiatkowski is a Washington consultant on Eastern Europe. </TEXT></DOC>