<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0112 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Expert Systems Are EnteringInto Mainstream of Computers---By William M. BulkeleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DEC SUNW INTC IBM SMBX INAI F DDCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, the technique of making computers mimic human intellectual activity, is making its way into the computer mainstream. More programmers and corporate customers are running expert systems, which attempt to put the expertise and knowledge of experts to use in diagnosis and decision-making, on ordinary minicomputers made by Digital Equipment Corp. and Sun Microsystems. Many small expert systems are running on personal computers -- a trend that will accelerate with the new generation of PCs based on Intel Corp.'s powerful 80386 chip.    Corporations increasingly believe that expert systems will give them a competitive advantage -- or fear that competitors will gain an edge. And nontechnical managers are becoming more comfortable with the idea. Warren Briggs, a professor at Suffolk University in Boston who has run conferences on expert systems for several years, says operating managers are starting to attend. &quot;In the past they just sent their 'techies,'&quot; he says.    But many corporations are eager for expert systems that work with International Business Machines Corp. mainframes. &quot;The majority of data is sitting on those Big Blue money-gobblers. You have to have access to it,&quot; says David Pensak of Du Pont Co. IBM has introduced a product for developing expert systems, but critics complain that it's limited. Several traditional software companies are incorporating expert-system technology from Aion Corp., a Palo Alto, Calif., concern, into programs for IBM mainframes.    Next year, Aion and Distribution Management Systems Inc., Lexington, Mass., will start selling software for developing expert systems for IBM mainframe data bases. Distribution Management's program is written in the widely used business-computer language COBOL, making it easier to &quot;embed&quot; expertise in existing commercial programs, the company says. For example, a computerized pricing expert could alert an order clerk about featured deals or say when a customer is nearing eligibility for volume discounts. Humans have trouble keeping track of constant pricing changes, says John Landry, chairman of Distribution Management.    ---   DESPITE GAINS in the artificial intelligence field, some pioneers in the business are suffering. Special LISP computers for developing expert systems have sold well to universities and program development laboratories. But corporate customers balk at spending $30,000 to $100,000 a machine to put the computers in offices and factories -- especially since they can't be used to run ordinary software. &quot;There has been total devastation of the specialized AI market,&quot; says Osman Eralp, an analyst with Hambrecht andamp; Quist Inc.    After two years of sharp growth, Symbolics Inc., the Cambridge, Mass., maker of LISP computers, recently has been spouting red ink. In its first quarter ended Sept. 28., Symbolics reported a net loss of $18.6 million on a 2.5% sales decline. It has cut prices on its computers and moved out of an opulent suburban headquarters.    Intellicorp, a Mountain View, Calif., maker of software that programmers use to produce expert systems, also had a loss for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 and predicted a loss in the current period due to unexpectedly sluggish sales.    ---   FORD MOTOR CO. PRESSES its machine-tool suppliers to write expert systems that diagnose problems. Ford says its repair people often forget their training before a machine breaks. So the car maker designed its own expert system for dealing with one type of robot and sent a videotape demonstrating it to suppliers with the warning: &quot;If this kind of expert system isn't available for your equipment soon but is available for your competitors' systems, it will clearly tip our purchase decisions.&quot;    ---   FREQUENT UPDATING IS NEEDED by some expert systems, users find. Digital Equipment developed one of the world's largest expert systems to figure out what combinations of computers, disk drives, terminals and communications cables a customer needs. Some 30 people work full time to change the expert as Digital introduces products and new communications standards emerge.    Du Pont had to add rules to a system used to diagnose problems at a chemical plant. The system didn't spot a clogged valve caused when a bird fell in a tank's open hatch and drowned.    ---   THE POSH BALSAMS RESORT in New Hampshire's White Mountains installs an expert system to improve reservation clerks' performance in giving customers the types of rooms they want. Eloquent Systems, the Manchester, N.H., company that wrote the system, claims it increases occupancy by six to 10 rooms a night because it knows how to avoid the one-night gaps that are common at resorts.    ---   READER'S CHOICE: Customers can use expert systems at some bookstores. Using a touch-screen, the customer tells the system the type of book he wants, then the computer displays screens full of authors names and asks the customer to touch the names he likes. Based on the response, it suggests a half dozen titles by other writers. The system maker, Del Mar Group Inc., Solana Beach, Calif., plans similar systems for other types of retailers. </TEXT></DOC>