<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880205-0059 </DOCNO><HL> Notable andamp; Quotable </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>      Former Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger testifying before the U.S. Senate Armed Services Committee on the INF treaty:   {W}e must fully understand that the verification regime for the INF Treaty would be quite inadequate for a prospective Start agreement. The chief risk in the INF verification regime is that it might be taken as an acceptable precedent for verification in Start.    The reasons that we can have measured confidence in Soviet compliance in INF are three. First, by reducing intermediate range missiles to zero, the task of detecting violations is made comparatively simple. An observation of any missile, in the proscribed category, would mean a violation. Second, the elimination of the entire class of weapons permits a ban on flight testing. The utility of a covert force would be substantially reduced, if one is unable to test the vehicles. Third, the INF agreement applies to a very small fraction of Soviet capabilities, none of which could be targeted against the territory of their principal opponent, the United States of America. Since detection is easier and since a relative handful of covert weapons would not upset the strategic balance, the Soviet incentive to cheat is quite weak.    But bear in mind that none of these considerations would apply in a prospective Start agreement.    First, the number of strategic delivery vehicles that would have to be monitored in such a regime would run into the many hundreds. Detection of violations would be much harder since the conditions would be inherently more ambiguous. Second, unlike the INF case there could be no total ban on flight testing. Since flight testing would continue, any covert force would have greater strategic value. Third, unlike the INF agreement -- which applies to a small portion of total Soviet capability -- the Start agreement would apply to the bulk of Soviet forces (and all those forces could reach North America). As the number of vehicles falls for the two sides, the premium on cheating would grow. Consequently, in the Start case one cannot rely on the weakness of the incentive to cheat.    The conclusion is clear. Caution must be the watchword. The details of and the prospects for verification are immensely more important in Start than in INF. We must bear in mind that in the new world of mobile missiles, the problems of verification are inherently more difficult than when we are simply monitoring silos as under Salt I. In this emerging world, never again shall we have a treaty as easy as the INF agreement to have measured confidence in Soviet compliance.    ...It has frequently been observed both by those who are cautiously sympathetic to arms control and those who are hostile to arms control that the greatest danger in an arms-control agreement, even one as attractive as the INF agreement, is that it will create euphoria and cause us to let down our guard. The fear is that a well-founded agreement will sweep us along in a torrent of good feeling and cause us to embrace other agreements that are ill-advised. Regrettably I must conclude on this somber note: Such apprehension is amply justified. As we proceed with further arms-control discussions, we must be cold-eyed if not cold-blooded, regarding the terms of any prospective agreements. </TEXT></DOC>