<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese Proposal on Third World Debt Disturbs the Peace at Economic Summit </HL><AUTHOR> Walter S. Mossberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN JAPAN EUROP LATAM CANDA AFRIC </CO><IN> MON BNK CMD ECO PCS PET </IN><G> EXE TRE CNG </G><DATELINE> TORONTO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The air of determined harmony that has prevailed at the seven-nation economic summit here was disturbed by a U.S.-Japanese dispute over a new Tokyo proposal to deal with the bank debt of the wealthier Third World debtor nations.    The disagreement took place behind the scenes at the summit, and isn't expected to alter the final communique today, which is likely to be a self-congratulatory document declaring the world economy sound, and papering over disputes. The new Japanese plan isn't expected to be formally considered, and is separate from the expected summit agreement on the much smaller problem of loans owed to rich governments by the poorest countries, largely in Africa.    But the emergence of a Japanese plan on Third World bank debt -- mainly in Latin America -- signals a new effort by Tokyo to lead in an area traditionally dominated by U.S. policy. It is part of a generally more assertive Japanese role at this summit, in which Tokyo has been riding high on praise for its economic record and for opening its beef market to imports while President Reagan is bowing out as a leader.    According to officials of several countries, the Japanese plan, which was presented at a finance ministers' meeting by Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, envisions that the debtors would transfer parts of their currency reserves into a special International Monetary Fund account, to be managed by the IMF, and from which bank loans would be repaid. In return for this assurance of repayment, the banks would negotiate with each debtor to turn parts of the debt into securities and to reschedule other parts.    The officials said the plan was designed to encourage the banks to offer debt relief while staying within the guidelines of Treasury Secretary James Baker's debt strategy. Those guidelines state that all solutions must be voluntary, approved on a case-by-case basis, and must avoid transferring risks from banks to governments or international agencies such as the IMF or World Bank.    The Miyazawa plan is much more modest than &quot;debt facility&quot; plans, which Mr. Baker has rejected, because it doesn't involve any mandatory discounting of debt nor any guarantee or repurchase of debt by the IMF, the World Bank, any new debt agency, or creditor governments.    But officials from the U.S., Britain, and West Germany worry that, because the plan interposes the IMF for the first time in the bank repayment process, it could quickly evolve into a debt facility, or a plan with guarantees and mandatory features. U.S. officials believe some IMF officials who favor a debt facility and guarantees might use the proposed escrow account as the seed of such a mechanism.    The Miyazawa plan is only the latest in a string of proposals aimed at supplanting the Baker approach in the secretary's final months in office. Mr. Baker recently gave up an earlier fight against permitting other countries to write off their African debts, leading to today's expected summit blessing of that approach. And, while Japan isn't pushing its Latin debt plan for this summit communique, it is expected to remain on the international agenda, and could reappear at the September meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund in Berlin.    The Japanese initiative is considered so politically sensitive that neither the U.S. nor Japanese delegations here would make any public comment on its details. Mr. Miyazawa's deputy, Toyoo Gyothen, stubbornly refused to discuss the plan at a news briefing yesterday, saying the finance ministers had agreed not to discuss it while talks are under way in several countries on the rescheduling of debt.    Secretary Baker, however, expressed public skepticism without disclosing details. He said Japan has characterized the plan as &quot;totally consistent with our debt approach.&quot; But he added: &quot;We want to make certain that that's the way it would work in practice.&quot;    Mr. Baker declared that if the proposal transfers private credit risks to international financial institutions or creditor governments, either expressly or by implication, &quot;we will express serious reservations and concerns about it, as will -- if I may say so -- a number of other governments.&quot;    Britain's Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nigel Lawson, told a British television network that &quot;the Japanese plan, which was shown to us really only a few days before the summit, does require a great deal more consideration before there can be any question of agreement on any parts of it. It does raise a whole lot of issues which are very tricky issues and I am not at all sure that it is entirely the right way to go.&quot; He added: &quot;There will certainly not be any agreement on that at this summit.&quot;    Mr. Miyazawa first notified the other six countries of his idea in letters before the summit, officials said, and Japan has already modified the plan in unspecified ways to meet objections from the U.S. and other countries. But, given the continuing objections, officials said, Japan agreed at the summit to do further work on the plan before attempting to win formal approval for it.    The U.S. delegation wouldn't comment on the plan, but the Reagan Administration was said to be prepared, if necessary, to recommend that it be referred for further study to the Group of Seven Finance Ministers and Central Bankers, who have consistently backed the Baker approach.    At U.S. insistence, today's communique is likely to contain a strong endorsement of the Baker strategy for handling the bank debt of the richer debtors. On the poorest African nations, the communique will also take account of U.S. sensitivities by adopting a Canadian compromise that permits countries to exercise several options for debt relief, including extending loan due dates. The U.S. has said that is all it will do in Africa, even though it won't block European nations from forgiving principal or reducing interest.    On the other big economic issue here, reduction of farm subsidies, both U.S. and European officials conceded the communique will likely wind up restating vague language adopted at last month's Paris meeting of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. That wording was interpreted by the U.S. as requiring a scheduled trade meeting in Montreal in December to set forth a &quot;framework agreement&quot; calling for the phasing out of all farm subsidies. But European officials interpreted the language as requiring no such agreement, and they repeated at the summit that they remain opposed to complete elimination of subsidies.    Separately, the finance ministers agreed to adopt a commodity-based price index, including gold, to help them analyze the world economy. The index, first proposed last fall by Secretary Baker, will actually consist of two commodity baskets, one including oil and one excluding oil. Officials stressed that the indices won't be used to set exchange rates or to automatically trigger policy decisions, but will merely be used as &quot;an analytical tool.&quot;    On the overall economy, the summit sessions continued to hail growth, dollar stability, and the reduction of the U.S. trade deficit. These gains were attributed to conservative economic policies stressing deregulation and tax reform, and to the summit coordination process itself.    Mr. Baker publicly confirmed that the U.S. won't be upset about today's likely rise in short-term West German interest rates, saying it was a &quot;technical&quot; move and &quot;consistent with our overall understandings.&quot;    The Treasury secretary added that, while domestic demand is slowing in the U.S., a recession is &quot;not going to happen.&quot; When a reporter alleged that White House economic adviser Beryl Sprinkel was predicting a recession, Mr. Baker declared: &quot;He's not predicting a recession is coming -- at least not anymore.&quot;    Separately, a Senate appropriations subcommittee agreed to fund the U.S. share -- $70.9 million for the coming fiscal year -- of the World Bank's $75 billion general capital increase. Nearly all of the World Bank's 151 member countries except the U.S. have approved the increase, for which Mr. Baker has lobbied strongly.    Last month, the House rejected the Reagan administration's request for the funding to protest a Third World debt policy that, according to the House Appropriations Committee, &quot;unfairly advantages money center banks at the expense of the agricultural and manufacturing sectors of the American economy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>