<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870302-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Taking Stock of Your Company's Real Worth---By Alfred Rappaport</HL><DD> 03/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Managers looking for some signal that their company is a takeover target should take note of a comment by Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Chairman Robert E. Mercer after Sir James Goldsmith's bid: &quot;I used to check the stock price maybe once a week, but I've started checking it every day, sometimes several times a day, after this Goldsmith thing got started.&quot;    A takeover threat manifests itself initially as an increase in the company's stock price, usually well in advance of a takeover announcement. But the challenge for a chief executive officer is to determine how much of the stock-price increase may be evidence of a takeover threat, particularly during the current bull market in which the Dow Jones average has tripled since August 1982. An increase may be due to any of three factors: more optimism about the company's future operating performance; a decline in interest rates; or the introduction of a restructuring premium -- that is, a premium that anticipates major restructuring, either by incumbent management or by an acquirer.    An insightful interpretation of market signals emanating from a company's stock price provides management with an early-warning system for takeovers and a strategic opportunity to evaluate its own operational and financial-restructuring alternatives. Management thereby is able to look at what the stock price says about the market's expectations for company's future performance. The question is no longer simply whether the shares are fairly valued. Management must first assess whether the company is being valued on a going-concern basis or on the basis of some anticipated breakup value or less comprehensive form of restructuring.    The market-signals approach can be illustrated by the example of a Fortune 500 company recently rumored to be a takeover target. The company's top executives were convinced the market was undervaluing the company's stock. In early 1986 the shares were trading at about $50 each. Management found this price was justified by long-term projections for sales growth, margins, capital expenditures and working capital investment that had just appeared in Value Line and other investment-research sources. The company's own five-year planning projections were very close to Wall Street forecasts. Management thus concluded the company was fairly valued rather than undervalued.    By midyear, the per-share price had increased to about $75. It was clear that the substantially higher level of operating performance required to justify the new price would be beyond management's reach. Indeed, Value Line and other investment-research services had not revised their operating expectations from beginning-of-the-year forecasts. Five dollars of the $25-a-share increase was attributable to lower interest rates. Further analysis disclosed the first important signal to management: The remaining $20 of the increase was attributable to the market's growing anticipation of a major restructuring program carried out by either current management or an acquirer.    There was another significant signal: While the stock was trading at about $75, individual investment analysts on Wall Street estimated the company's breakup value (that is, the sum of what the various businesses could be sold for) at $85 to $100 a share. The spread between the company's breakup value and its then current market value represented the potential profit to an acquirer and therefore signaled that there was a takeover risk.    To minimize the likelihood of a takeover, management naturally would like to see the stock price maintained at its current level, or increased; after all, there is no better means of avoiding a takeover than increasing the stock price. But this is likely to be accomplished only if management provides convincing evidence to the market that it will embark on substantial restructuring such as divestiture of underperforming businesses, spinoffs, and stock repurchases that are seen as creating value. Restructuring to create shareholder value is not a transitory fad; it will become a permanent part of management's strategic response to shifting economic forces such as deregulation, technology and global competition.    Managements that resist value-creating change and signal an unrelenting desire to keep their companies independent by initiating anti-takeover tactics such as poison pills and greenmail are likely to dissipate shareholder value. Gillette's blocking of Revlon's bid is an excellent example. The day Gillette announced its agreement to pay a premium for Revlon's 13.9% stake, Gillette's shares plunged almost 20%.    While many restructurings are motivated by a desire to foil a takeover bid, it is nonetheless essential to emphasize that increasing shareholder value has become the driving force for corporate restructuring. The first stage of the restructuring is largely based on one-time transactions involving the buying and selling of businesses or changing the company's capital structure. In contrast, the next stage, creating shareholder value, is becoming the basis for managing the entire business.    An growing number of companies such as Kraft, Trinova and Westinghouse are moving to the next stage by introducing the shareholder-value standard in planning and performance-monitoring of all business strategies on an ongoing basis. Top management and the directors thus will have more reliable answers to such basic questions as: Will the long-term corporate plan create value for shareholders, and how much? Which business units are creating value and which are not? How would alternative strategic plans affect shareholder value?    Successful execution of this second stage will accomplish two basic objectives. First, using the shareholder-value approach will ensure that management has met its fiduciary responsibility to evaluate corporate plans and performance on the same basis that investors use to value the company. Second, it will reduce the current concern that a takeover of an undermanaged company is imminent. Companies reluctant to enter the second stage of restructuring are likely to become the prime takeover candidates of the late 1980s. And those that ignore the powerful market signals to management do so at their own peril.    ---   Mr. Rappaport, Leonard Spacek professor at Northwestern University's J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management, is author of &quot;Creating Shareholder Value: The New Standard for Business Performance&quot; (The Free Press, 1986). </TEXT></DOC>