<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880624-0174 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Alger Hiss, the Model Citizen </HL><AUTHOR> Sidney Hook </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   No case is beyond challenge and revision in the courts of reason. Concerning the case of Alger Hiss, Allen Weinstein's 1979 book, &quot;Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case,&quot; offered the definitive analysis of the evidence. Mr. Weinstein's findings were all the more convincing because he had begun his inquiries sympathetic to Mr. Hiss's cause, and had been given access to the files of the defense. Concluding his monumental study, he wrote: &quot;The body of available evidence proves that {Mr. Hiss} did in fact perjure himself when describing his secret dealings with {Whitaker} Chambers, so that the jurors in the second trial made no mistake in finding Alger Hiss guilty as charged.&quot;    Mr. Hiss has steadfastly denied his guilt. During the 40 years since his conviction, he has published several books claiming that he was a victim of an unholy alliance of evil men -- Richard Nixon, J. Edgar Hoover and Mr. Chambers -- who were &quot;bound together by the theology of anticommunism.&quot;    Mr. Hiss's &quot;Recollections of a Life&quot; (Henry Holt, 240 pages, $19.95) throws some sidelights on its author but adds not a whit of new evidence to his case. The autobiography's main point is to present the picture of a person who is the very model of a good citizen, unmarred by any defect of character or behavior. Suddenly he is charged with the heinous crime of betraying his country by serving as an espionage agent for the Soviet Union.    How could such a person, a golden youth enjoying a brilliant career, with great expectations of rising to the peak of national prominence, be suspected? Is there not a prima facie absurdity to the charge? Of course there is, but on reflection one recalls that practically the same thing can and has been said of every outstanding figure in every country exposed as a Soviet operative. One thinks of Klaus Fuchs, the German atomic scientist, or of Sir Anthony Blunt, the scholarly art historian and Surveyor of the Queen's Pictures. After all, it is not likely that anyone would be recruited as a spy whose behavior would make him a natural suspect.    This memoir is then a further embellishment upon Mr. Hiss's version of his life, and much of it rings false. For example, he declares that by the time of the trials, &quot;the entire jury of public opinion had been tampered with&quot; by leaks to a hostile press. But Alistair Cooke, who wrote the first book on the case, reports the opposite -- that until the very eve of the trials, &quot;probably to a great majority of newspaper readers, Hiss would still seem like an impeccable man, greatly wronged.&quot; Mr. Hiss refers to the fact that he was readmitted to the Massachusetts bar 20 years after having served his sentence, as a kind of vindication of his innocence. He is careful not to quote the presiding justice's remark: &quot;Nothing we have said here should be construed as detracting one iota from the fact that in considering Hiss's petition we consider him to be guilty as charged.&quot;    To someone approaching the case for the first time, there is one piece of documented evidence sufficient to make extremely improbable the charge that Mr. Hiss was the victim of a frameup. On Sept. 2, 1939, Mr. Chambers, accompanied by Isaac Dan Levine, visited Adolf Berle, and told his story. Mr. Berle was then assistant secretary of state and an ardent New Dealer. Mr. Chambers named some 20 persons, among them Mr. Hiss, who were members of communist underground cells in government agencies. In addition to Mr. Hiss, to whom Mr. Chambers gave no special emphasis, he named Julian Wadleigh, who was later to proudly confess; Lee Pressman, who admitted membership in the Communist Party; and others who were to invoke the Fifth Amendment.    This was in 1939. Mr. Nixon was not yet in politics. Mr. Chambers had never met Mr. Hoover. Actually, Mr. Chambers was risking prosecution for his testimony, since he had no grant of immunity for his own past. How could Mr. Chambers possibly have anticipated in the 10-year period that elapsed before the trials in 1949, the fate of the Woodstock typewriter on which some of the incriminating documents he possessed were allegedly typed, and the hundreds of contingencies the conjunction of which led to Mr. Hiss's trial? After all, only Mr. Hiss, of all those named, ever brought a libel action against Mr. Chambers. What grounds could Mr. Chambers have had for anticipating the events Mr. Hiss has fantasized as a conspiracy? Mr. Berle himself would have had to be involved in it. Mr. Berle, with whom I discussed the Chambers visit several times, was shocked by Mr. Chambers's revelations at a moment when &quot;the world was falling to pieces around us.&quot; He didn't know how much to believe at the time, sent the information to the White House, and fortunately kept his notes.    The Hiss case is no longer a case of law but of psychology. In the face of the evidence, Mr. Hiss apparently has hypnotized himself into the belief that what it points to is not true. That persistent denial will undoubtedly influence those who are unfamiliar with the details of the evidence. Mr. Hiss may feel an obligation to many persons of good faith who have supported him in their belief in his innocence.    ---   Mr. Hook is a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution. </TEXT></DOC>