<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880210-0060 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): The Great Awakening </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Not too many political reporters may be able to recite the Ten Commandments these days, but you can be sure that before next Tuesday's New Hampshire primary they'll know a whole lot more about evangelicalism. Evangelicals have been the Rodney Dangerfields of American politics, but as a result of Pat Robertson's second-place finish in Iowa, they've got political respect.    Mr. Robertson's achievement is remarkable in at least one important way: Rather than merely steal votes from other candidates, as happens in most elections, he has created new voters who will support him. Mr. Robertson and his supporters now will draw the respectful attention of political professionals because there are so many millions of them.    If Pat Robertson and his voters have set off a great political awakening in this country, it remains to be seen how much sophistication the political community will display in trying to understand the evangelicals. Why are these people suddenly active in politics? Who are they and what do they want? Are they in fact automatic Republicans, and can the Republican regulars find a way to incorporate them into the party's platform goals? Put bluntly, will the political establishment treat evangelicals as normal people who have legitimate interests or will it continue to represent them as creatures from the swamp?    A fair inquiry into the politics of the some 50 million evangelical Christians in the U.S. would discover much unexpected complexity. These nuances were described by Stuart Rothenberg in an analysis on this page of Pat Robertson's constituency (&quot;Evangelicals Aren't Cut From the Same Cloth,&quot; June 18, 1986). Mr. Rothenberg noted that evangelicals have been traditionally Democratic, and of course they helped a born-again Christian Democrat enter the White House in 1976. Indeed Jimmy Carter established his political bona fides with his strong Iowa caucus performance. The fact remains that Republicans now have a more probable claim on these voters than Democrats.    Mr. Robertson, for instance, appears to have made good on his claim of attracting the support of some Iowa Democrats. In fact, the nature of the current Democratic constituency makes it unlikely that any of the party's current candidates could make a credible appeal to the evangelicals. The constituency that just gave Messrs. Gephardt, Simon and Dukakis some 80% of its vote in Iowa would surely say that one of the most hallowed tenets in its political canon is the Supreme Court's 1962 decision banning nondenominational school prayers.    Mention to most Democratic liberals the fact that some people are still upset about the school-prayer ban and you will get rolling eyes and much you-can't-be-serious head-shaking. That's the point. Over the past 25 years, American culture moved inexorably away from previously agreed upon standards of private and public morality, and much of that change resulted in greater degrees of social tolerance. On balance this was a gain. Ironically, however, this new aggressive tolerance somehow didn't cover the people who held to the old clear-cut values.    When, for instance, parents began expressing misgivings about the content of sex-education courses, they weren't listened to; they were lampooned or laughed out of the argument. Intelligent and quite strong-minded women who nonetheless wished to remain home to raise their children never found acceptance in the formal women's movement. Groups that expressed misgivings about the direction some TV programming was taking found out in New York and L.A. that they actually were destroying the First Amendment. When evangelicals tried to drop out of politics and go their own way, the Carter administration threatened to revoke the tax exemptions of their religious schools.    Articles began appearing about &quot;the rise of the religious right,&quot; a group that seemed to be dealt with more as anthropology than journalism. After watching evangelical TV ministers, Norman Lear began spending his fortune on a group called People for the American Way. Much of this swamp-creature treatment came to a head in the 1986 lawsuits over &quot;creationism&quot; and &quot;secular humanism&quot; in school texts. The establishment made virtually no effort to push below the surface of these grievances.    Pat Robertson's presidential campaign quite obviously is based on something much broader than a direct appeal to the moral grievances of evangelicals and others who, often silently, share their concerns. The lesson of the Robertson voters in Iowa is that all of the candidates need to think about making a serious place for this group in the political process.    There is, by the way, one small but certain sign that will tell you whether individuals or institutions has decided to think seriously about these voters. And that is if they don't snicker every time Pat Robertson gives thanks to God. </TEXT></DOC>