<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Asia Worries About Gandhi's Military Complex </HL><AUTHOR> Eric Margolis </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> NEW DELHI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The image India likes to project to the Western world is that of a poor but kindly nation intensely devoted to the lofty principles of Gandhian non-violence. India's neighbors, however, see a disturbingly different image: an assertive, even bullying colossus made bold by its newly acquired military muscle.    Those who persist in seeing India as a backward land of ox carts and spinning wheels will be startled to learn that it is today the world's fourth-ranking military power. The Bengal Lancers have been replaced by aircraft carriers, nuclear submarines and missiles. India is well on the way to becoming a superpower.    Indian officials, however, don't much like talking about this subject. Says one senior functionary: &quot;It is shameful to spend any money at all on arms when we are so terribly poor.&quot; More to the point is the matter of continuing to ask the West for development aid while spending $5 billion to $6 billion a year on the military.    A nation of India's vast size and huge population of 810 million must have large armed forces for both national defense and internal security. The borders with Pakistan and China are still tense. Indian newspapers routinely enjoy scaring their readers with lurid tales of giant Pakistani-Chinese-U.S. pincers closing in on India. The fact that India has a highly professional 1.1 million-man army, with some 3,000 tanks, including Soviet T-72s, does not seem to calm Indian fears. Memories are still vivid of the rout inflicted by the Chinese on India during the brief 1962 border war in the Himalayas.    There seems more confidence in India's 730 combat-plane air force, which is taking delivery of the latest agile Soviet fighter, the MiG-29, and will shortly receive Soviet airborne radar planes -- the Soviet equivalent of the U.S. E-3 AWACs. The armed services are supported by an extensive industrial infrastructure that produces under license many of India's Soviet-designed arms and that provides the military with in-depth logistical support. This gives India the unique ability among West Asian nations to fight a sustained war with modern weapons.    But perhaps most impressive has been the rapid growth of India's navy. Until the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, the navy had been a coastal defense force. After the war, the late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi embarked on a major upgrading of the navy that turned it into a true blue-water fleet. Two carrier battle groups, supported by diesel submarines, anti-submarine and anti-aircraft destroyers and frigates, form the core of India's naval power. In January 1988 India took delivery of its first nuclear-powered attack submarine, a &quot;Charlie-class&quot; boat leased to New Delhi by its ever accommodating Soviet ally. Six of the more modern Soviet &quot;Victor III&quot; nuclear attack boats are on order.    This formidable fleet goes far beyond the need for coastal defense or protection of India's sizable maritime trade. New Delhi clearly has ambitions to dominate the Indian Ocean. Any lingering doubts were dispelled by New Delhi's plan to build two or three 40,000-ton attack carriers in its Cochin shipyards. These large carriers will clearly be intended for power projection. Supporting them will be recently obtained Soviet BEAR-F, long-range naval bombers whose 4,500-mile combat radius allows India to sweep much of the Indian Ocean.    This news, coming on the heels of New Delhi's intervention in Sri Lanka -- which some Asians see as a virtual annexation -- has deeply alarmed many of India's neighbors. They see an emerging Indian &quot;Big Brotherism,&quot; openly backed by the Soviet Union. India is no cat's-paw of the Soviets, but there is a high degree of communality, if not outright coordination, between New Delhi and Moscow in matters of both grand strategy and tactics, to the point where they have a &quot;special relationship&quot; that is beginning to resemble the intimate entente between Washington and London.    Events last year in Sri Lanka neatly illustrate the point. After first interfering in attempts by the Sri Lankan government to put down the Tamil insurgency in the north of the country, India dispatched 60,000 troops and a fleet to Sri Lanka ostensibly to help put down these same Tamil Tigers -- whom India hitherto had been funding and arming. India quickly imposed a series of &quot;accords&quot; on Sri Lanka that turned it into a virtual protectorate. New Delhi, whose troops are clearly in for a long stay, was given a veto over Sri Lankan foreign and defense policy. Most revealing, all American and Pakistani influence there was eliminated. No foreign navy save India's would be allowed to use Sri Lanka's harbor at Trincomalee without India's prior &quot;consultation.&quot; Soviet fears that the U.S. would establish a naval base in Sri Lanka evaporated.    Indian influence is now moving south. New Delhi demands that the U.S. pull out of its main Indian Ocean base on the atoll of Diego Garcia, 1,000 miles south of Sri Lanka. The independent island groups of Mauritius and the Maldives are pretty well under New Delhi's thumb. Indonesia has reportedly complained about Soviet and Indian naval activities in the Nicobar Islands -- strategically located at the western exit of the Strait of Malacca. Australia is concerned over the Chakra submarines on lease from the Soviet Union and is shoring up naval defenses.    On the subcontinent, Pakistan, fearful of a naval blockade, is urgently seeking American anti-submarine weapons to counter India's nuclear subs. Last year, India massed 230,000 troops on Pakistan's border, nearly sparking a war. New Delhi, claim the Pakistanis, was moving in tandem with Moscow to try to pressure Pakistan into abandoning the Afghan resistance. The two old foes fight frequently along their disputed border in Kashmir.    At the same time, New Delhi has been making less than subtle threats to Nepal over the latter's plans to let China build more roads into the Himalayan kingdom. In the Indian view, Nepal exists only thanks to the good grace of New Delhi. Too much independence, and too many contacts with China, could mean Nepal's going the way of the former mountain kingdom of Sikkim or the Portuguese colony of Goa -- both annexed by the Indian army.    India's eastern neighbors also have felt rumbles of New Delhi's wrath. Bangladesh, at odds with India over border and water disputes, regularly raises the cry that India is about to invade. Burma has been sternly rebuked for sheltering ethnic rebels from India's rebellious eastern states of Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura. And now that the winter snows are melting along the Indo-Chinese border in the Himalayas, tension between the two Asian rivals is again rising.    &quot;India,&quot; says a neighboring critic, &quot;sees itself as the rightful successor to the British Empire.&quot; Are Western Asia and the Indian Ocean about to see a new Raj? Or is India only flexing the powerful muscles that form a natural part of its huge body? Indians insist they are intent only on economic development and modest self-defense. Then what, ask its neighbors, is the purpose for all those carriers, submarines and MiG's? One thing appears certain: the India of Gandhi is fast being replaced by the India of Rama, the warrior king.    ---   Mr. Margolis, a member of the International Institute of Strategic Studies, is a regular commentator for Radio Canada International on Asian affairs. </TEXT></DOC>