<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0005 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD a law on job protection for pregnant workers.    The justices, voting 6-3, ruled that states may require employers to give women disability leave for pregnancy and childbirth and to guarantee them reinstatement to the same or similar jobs. The decision upheld a California law that requires unpaid leave and reinstatement for pregnancy, even though state law requires neither for other forms of disability.    The court ruled that a New York state liquor regulation is inconsistent with U.S. law because it allows wholesale firms in effect to fix retail prices.    ---   OFFICIALS CHARGED a hotel employee with setting a San Juan blaze.    Federal authorities in Puerto Rico arrested the Dupont Plaza hotel maintenance worker and Teamsters union member, and charged him in U.S. court with 96 counts of murder, one for each person killed in the New Year's Eve fire. Arson and damage charges were filed in the commonwealth's local district court. Bail was set at $2 million. It was the first arrest in the case.    Tense labor-management relations at the hotel were cited as a possible motive for the fire. The Teamsters have denied any involvement in the blaze.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres told a parliamentary panel that Israel's government warned the U.S. a year ago that arms sales to Iran had only a 25% chance of winning the release of American hostages in Lebanon, sources said. President Herzog accused some Reagan officials of using Israel as a &quot;whipping boy&quot; in the scandal.    ---   Reagan asked the Senate to ratify two long-pending nuclear test-ban treaties, but said the pacts shouldn't take effect until the Soviet Union accepts on-site verification procedures. The requirements were met with opposition in the Foreign Relations Committee. The chairman called the reservations &quot;unworkable.&quot;    ---   Weinberger was warned by Sen. Lawton Chiles that congressional Democrats will look for ways to pare the Pentagon's $312 billion spending request for fiscal 1988. The chairman of the Senate Budget panel specifically mentioned Reagan's space-based anti-missile program as one area where a requested spending boost may be trimmed.    ---   An Iranian missile struck Baghdad, and Tehran said its forces smashed through Iraqi lines and moved closer to the Iraqi port of Basra. Iraq said the advance was repulsed, and its foreign minister predicted that Iran won't be able to mount a significant new offensive this year if Iraq defeats Iran near Basra.    ---   A federal judge in New York sentenced the convicted crime bosses of the Colombo, Genovese and Lucchese organized-crime families to prison terms of 100 years each. They were convicted in November of membership on the commission that has ruled the Mafia nationwide. Five underlings also were sentenced.    ---   Gunmen in Beirut kidnapped a French reporter covering Terry Waite's mission to free Americans and others held hostage in Lebanon. The kidnappers also pistol-whipped and shot at another French newsman, who escaped. Responsibility for the abduction wasn't claimed.    ---   Polish leader Jaruzelski met with Pope John Paul II for talks on Warsaw's problems, relations between the church and Communist state in Poland, and world peace. The Polish-born pope described the 70-minute meeting in Rome as &quot;historic.&quot;    ---   Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping said anti-socialist ideas posed a greater threat to Chinese society than thousands of protesting students. Deng's remarks were his first on recent pro-democracy demonstrations. He failed to quell speculation that Communist Party chief Hu Yaobang may be ousted in the wake of the student protests.    ---   South African authorities detained without charge the acting leader of the United Democratic Front, an anti-apartheid group, members of the UDF said. In the Orange Free State, about 3,500 black miners quit work at Gencor's Beatrix gold mine. The miners, about 44% of the work force, apparently were concerned about safety.    ---   U.S. safety officials said the Amtrak passenger train that collided with three Conrail freight locomotives was exceeding speed restrictions by 23 mph, and investigators are trying to determine whether that contributed to the severity of the Jan. 4 crash near Baltimore. The death toll rose to 16.    ---   Philippine President Aquino ordered an investigation to determine how a classified document on U.S.-Philippine relations was obtained by communist insurgents. Separately, government and rebel negotiators reportedly made some progress in peace talks and indicated that a 60-day cease-fire, which began last month, might be extended.    ---   An Ethiopian air force plane crashed shortly after takeoff in the north central part of the country, killing all 54 people aboard, Addis Ababa radio reported. Mechanical failure was cited.    ---   Colombia's envoy to Hungary was shot and seriously wounded by a gunman outside the envoy's residence in Budapest. Political sources in Bogota said the ambassador, a former justice minister, had received death threats from Colombian drug traffickers.    ---   Israeli warplanes attacked Palestinian targets in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley near the Syria border, and police said at least three people were killed and 13 wounded. It was Israel's third raid in Lebanon in five days.    ---   Died: Robert S. Driscoll, 75, former managing partner of Lord, Abbett andamp; Co., in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>