<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871224-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Overtaxed Agency:IRS Faces PressureTo Raise Collections-- But Not Get Tough---Politicians, Public Accuse ItOf Often Being Abusive;Ineptitude Hurts Image---Voluntary System in Danger---By Rose GutfeldStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESINTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As Congress struggled to produce a deficit-reduction package last month, one proposed revenue increase seemed painless: Ask the Internal Revenue Service to squeeze an additional $4.9 billion out of taxpayers over the next two years through more aggressive tax enforcement.    Raising money that way without increasing anyone's tax rates is a neat budget-cutting trick that Congress has employed before. &quot;Every year, when we seem to be short of money and everyone is unwilling to make spending cuts, there goes out a great cry that we should hire more revenue agents,&quot; says Rep. Bill Frenzel, a Minnesota Republican. Congress decides that these agents &quot;will fleece taxpayers out of more money and that won't be a tax increase,&quot; he complains.    Yet politicians are schizophrenic about the IRS. Even as they push for higher tax collections, they increasingly see the agency as overzealous and abusive. &quot;The IRS has a dangerous, bounty-hunter mentality,&quot; says Sen. David Pryor, an Arkansas Democrat and the sponsor of popular legislation to rein in the agency. The bill, which the IRS strenuously opposes, would curb the agency's ability to impose liens and seize property. It also would subject IRS employees to fines and even imprisonment in some cases for erroneous actions against taxpayers.    &quot;Congress is saying: Solve the budget deficit but don't be aggressive,&quot; former IRS Commissioner Sheldon Cohen says. &quot;That's very hard to do. The more people you audit, the more chance there is you're going to push too hard once in a while.&quot;    The schizophrenia, however, accurately reflects the public's attitude. Americans want to catch more cheaters but are less willing to back the only known way to get the job done: increasing IRS manpower. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that, by a three-to-one margin, Americans favor tougher IRS enforcement to catch more tax evaders. But they are about evenly split on adding more IRS agents.    Raising tax collections and IRS conduct are political issues that have spilled over into the presidential campaign. Vice President George Bush has called for a &quot;taxpayer's bill of rights&quot; that &quot;spells out explicitly what the limits of IRS power are.&quot; But Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, a Democratic hopeful, has made beefing up tax enforcement and service an important tenet of his campaign. Among other steps, he would add almost 25,000 IRS revenue agents, criminal investigators and other staff over five years.    Some tax experts worry that more aggressive IRS policing could weaken public support of the voluntary tax-collection system. &quot;The more there is a public backlash against the IRS, the more comfortable people feel about not paying taxes,&quot; says Hugh Calkins, a Cleveland attorney who is a former chairman of the American Bar Association's tax section. And such a backlash could grow more likely if Congress continues to turn to the IRS to increase tax collections through tougher enforcement to meet budget demands.    The deficit-reduction law that President Reagan signed this week calls for raising an additional $2 billion in revenue in fiscal 1988, which started Oct. 1, and $2.9 billion in fiscal 1989 through tougher tax enforcement; to do so, the IRS is to receive $400 million in increased funds for auditing, collection and other programs in fiscal 1988. The agency determines how much revenue each dollar of enforcement funds can raise based on a formula that takes into account the type of employees hired, how long it will take to train them and other factors.    Some lawmakers are skeptical. Republican Sen. William Armstrong of Colorado says attributing budget savings to tougher IRS enforcement is just a convenient way to avoid painful spending-cut decisions. &quot;It's a golden gimmick, an assumption that may turn out to be true, but it may not,&quot; he says. &quot;It's a pious hope.&quot; Rep. Frenzel says the revenue estimates are &quot;absolutely fictitious. I don't think they have any idea of how much money can be raised that way, and there is no way to prove whether they are right or not.&quot;    So far, at least, throwing money at IRS enforcement hasn't noticeably stepped up compliance. The so-called tax gap -- the amount of taxes going uncollected as a result of overstated deductions and credits or understated income -- remains about $100 billion a year, though estimates vary. That total doesn't include unpaid taxes on income from illicit activities such as drug dealing or prostitution.    Nevertheless, Congress has turned to the IRS for revenue before, and it probably will again. In fiscal 1983-85, lawmakers gave the agency an additional $495 million and ordered it to produce $7.2 billion in additional revenue. (The agency says it went beyond that and raised $9.5 billion, mainly by increasing collections of past-due taxes.) Between fiscal 1987 and 1993, it says, its expanded auditing force will be able to raise an additional $10 billion.    Lawmakers also have come to view tax penalties as a revenue source. Congress has sharply increased penalties, in some cases to levels that even IRS officials consider unfair. Last year, for example, Congress retroactively raised the penalty for substantial underpayment of taxes to 25% of the understatement from 10%.    &quot;It's hard to argue that raising the substantial-understatement penalty retroactively helps deterrence,&quot; IRS Commissioner Lawrence Gibbs says. &quot;It's just revenue raising. It gets back to the signal you send to the American public: Are we interested in assistance or just in penalizing after the fact?&quot;    Among other changes, the 1986 law requires individuals to pay a higher interest rate on tax underpayments than the IRS pays on refunds. It also requires them to have paid by the end of a tax year an amount equal to 100% of the prior year's liability or at least 90% of the current year's, up from 80% under previous law.    Gov. Dukakis says tougher enforcement has helped raise tax collections in Massachusetts. He wants to try nationally what he launched in his state: a one-time amnesty for tax evaders accompanied by warnings of tough treatment for those who don't take advantage of it. That would be followed by increased enforcement, including a substantial rise in the number of returns audited, along with improved education and assistance for taxpayers.    But Congress has never been as willing to increase spending on taxpayer assistance and service as much as on enforcement. John Rogers, the outgoing assistant Treasury secretary for management who has been involved in IRS budget and management issues, calls anti-IRS sentiment partly a response to an emphasis on collection at the expense of other aspects of tax administration, despite the tax-law changes during the Reagan years.    &quot;You cannot have an increase in revenue-producing programs since 1981 of almost 100% before inflation adjustment and at the same time allow taxpayer service to grow at a much smaller rate,&quot; he says.    Of course, IRS ineptitude is sometimes as much to blame as congressional stinginess for the agency's poor performance. A survey by the congressional General Accounting Office last spring, for example, found that people calling the IRS received incorrect answers to their questions 21% of the time.    The agency's infamous initial stab at designing the new W-4 withholding form that all employees had to fill out this year was so disastrous that it was disowned by the Treasury secretary. The agency eventually issued a revised W-4A. But in an acknowledgment that many taxpayers were left baffled by the forms, the agency announced Tuesday that it won't penalize people who have had insufficient taxes withheld from their wages this year, whether or not they filed a new withholding statement. Other new forms, including the one used to claim mortgage deductions, are difficult to decipher, too. The result: Taxpayers aren't sure how much they owe and can't get help in figuring it out; so, they understandably err in their own favor.    Perhaps more important, such IRS incompetence discourages compliance by sharpening the agency's image as a tough cop anxious to impose penalties against cheaters but unwilling or unable to help people who want to pay what they owe.    Sen. Pryor says a perception of the IRS as a &quot;mysterious agency that lacks any human compassion&quot; helps explain the strong support for his taxpayer bill-of-rights measure. At hearings earlier this year, current and former IRS employees told lawmakers of promotions based on the number of seizures agents had made and the amount of funds they had collected -- despite a longstanding IRS policy against using enforcement statistics to evaluate performance.    Taxpayers chronicled mistreatment at the hands of collection agents. An Arkansas restaurant owner, for example, said he was forced into a bankruptcy filing after the agency, following months of negotiation, refused to accept installment payment of taxes he had volunteered that he owed.    Sen. Pryor's measure would increase the amount of salary and wages exempt from IRS levy, lengthen the waiting period for levies on taxpayer property and subject IRS employees to $10,000 fines or imprisonment of up to five years for knowingly authorizing actions that aren't relevant to taxpayers' liability. It would require the agency, among other provisions, to give taxpayers more information about its actions and to certify that new regulations are the only way to carry out the law before proposing them.    Negotiations over the measure are still under way, and it isn't yet clear what will eventually be approved. That the proposal has got this far at a time when Congress and the public agree on the need for more tax revenue, however, underscores the resentment and mistrust that lawmakers and taxpayers feel toward the IRS.    What's more, it comes at a time when many tax experts contend that flagging morality already threatens to undermine the voluntary tax-payment system. In a study last summer, an American Bar Association commission found that &quot;willful tax cheating . . . reflects a weakness in public morality and a degree of public acceptance of such cheating.&quot; The report urged a grass-roots drive to teach Americans their obligation to pay taxes.    &quot;People just don't feel guilty enough when they don't fill out their tax return properly,&quot; says Mr. Calkins, who served on the commission.    ---   &quot;To help reduce the budget deficit, would you favor tougher law enforcement by the Internal Revenue Service to catch people who are evading taxes, or not?&quot;    Favor tougher enforcement -- 72%    Oppose tougher enforcement -- 24%    Not sure -- 4%   &quot;Would you support increasing the number of Internal Revenue Service agents so the agency can audit many more taxpayers, or not?&quot;    Favor increasing agents -- 50%    Oppose increasing agents -- 44%    Not sure -- 6%   Note: Results of NBC News/WSJ national telephone poll of 1599 respondents, conducted Nov. 30 to Dec. 1, 1987 </TEXT></DOC>