<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880121-0119 </DOCNO><HL> New Activists: Usually Last in Line, Holders Become Vocal In Bankruptcy Actions --- Groups Act to Protect Rights And Major Assets in Cases Like Texaco and Robins --- Following the Icahn Example </HL><AUTHOR> Paul M. Barrett and Allanna Sullivan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BCY </IN><TEXT>   In big-time corporate bankruptcy storms, lowly shareholders are starting to steal some thunder.    Traditionally, shareholders have been the last in line. Their claims on a troubled company's assets have had the lowest priority, and their impact on the course of bankruptcy-code proceedings generally has been next to nil. But lately the balance of power has been shifting.    In the newest mega-contests, like those of Texaco Inc. and A.H. Robins Co., shareholders are exerting far greater influence and weakening the dominant grip of management and creditor groups.    &quot;We are seeing the beginning stages of a new approach to shareholders' rights in bankruptcy,&quot; says Richard Lieb, a New York bankruptcy lawyer.    Adds George Treister, a bankruptcy lawyer in Los Angeles: &quot;In these newer, bigger cases, with companies that are arguably solvent, it's natural that shareholders would become more aggressive.&quot;    In Texaco's bankruptcy case, a committee representing shareholders recently accomplished in a few weeks what the combatants couldn't in four years of legal conflict: The group galvanized a $3 billion compromise settlement of the company's $10.3 billion fight with Pennzoil Co.    This week, the equity committee successfully pushed Texaco management to weaken anti-takeover defenses that the committee contends have allowed the oil giant's top officers to entrench themselves. Meanwhile, Texaco's largest shareholder, Carl Icahn, is even trying to use the bankruptcy proceedings to file his own reorganization plan to defeat Texaco's defenses.    Robins shareholders similarly exercised their power. In the company's stormy Chapter 11 case, a committee representing shareholders of the health-products maker played a key role in challenging management's efforts to merge with French drug maker Sanofi S.A.    The group in recent weeks prodded significantly higher bids from two other suitors, Rorer Group Inc. and American Home Products Corp., the eventual winner. By holding separate, private bargaining sessions with all three bidders, the committee helped turn the Robins proceedings into an auction and ultimately saw its favorite prevail.    &quot;We showed in both cases that an aggressive equity group can bargain on its own and shape outcomes,&quot; said Wilbur Ross Jr., senior managing director with the New York investment-banking firm of Rothschild Inc., who advises shareholder committees in the two proceedings.    The Robins and Texaco fights may be just appetizers. Bankruptcy experts see even greater shareholder activism in future Chapter 11 proceedings. They say the trend has several related causes:   --More large, potentially viable companies seeking court protection from creditors. The equity of these companies frequently is great, and holders have a strong incentive to protect their interests.    --More investors speculating in the stock of companies in Chapter 11. They create a constituency that is keenly concerned with how reorganizations affect short-term share value.    --A new breed of lawyers and financial advisers specializing in representing holders of troubled firms. These specialists lead equity-committee forays against management.    In recent years, large companies with successful operations have turned to Chapter 11 to solve -- or hide from -- a wide array of problems. In the eyes of some executives and investors, bankruptcy filings no longer carry the stigma of utter disaster. And after creditors are paid off, shareholders can expect plenty of value to remain in the troubled firm.    Robins, for example, used Chapter 11 to freeze thousands of suits brought by women who claim injury from the company's Dalkon Shield intrauterine contraceptive. Since August 1985, when Robins filed, the company has continued to turn healthy profits, and its share price has risen from about $8.50 to $24.875 this week.    Meanwhile, a sharp increase in speculation in the stocks of troubled companies has created an army of shareholders prepared to confront management.    As recently as seven years ago, short-term investment in companies in Chapter 11 totaled about $100 million a year, according to Chriss Street, an analyst for Bateman Eichler, Hill Richards Inc. who follows companies under court protection. Today, that figure is about $1.2 billion, Mr. Street says. Many institutional investors no longer drop companies automatically when they enter Chapter 11.    Private investor groups, brokerage firms and specialized mutual funds are pouring money into Chapter 11 companies. Their hope is that restructuring will increase share prices.    &quot;People are just starting to realize that there is a tremendous amount of money to be made in reorganization,&quot; says H. Sean Mathis, the chairman of the Robins equity committee and managing director of International Financial Group Inc., a New York merchant bank that invests in troubled firms.    Mr. Icahn, for instance, has racked up paper profits of at least $143 million on his Texaco shares. Wall Street analysts estimate that speculators in Robins stock, such as Steinhardt Partners of New York, have seen their holdings increase in value by tens of millions of dollars.    Short-term investors can exert pressure in bankruptcy cases independently or through official committees appointed by the court. Either way, shareholders' main source of leverage comes from negotiations over a reorganization plan. Management ultimately needs shareholder approval to avoid a protracted legal battle and emerge from Chapter 11 quickly.    &quot;Consensus means a lot when you're trying to get out of Chapter 11,&quot; acknowledges H. Arvid Johnson, Robins's general counsel. &quot;The uncertainty of the litigation takes a toll on everybody and on the business.&quot;    Moreover, all parties in a bankruptcy case can seek court permission to submit their own reorganization plans. The threat of dissident plans is &quot;the key tool just emerging&quot; for shareholders, says Mr. Lieb, the New York attorney.    In the Texaco case, shareholders jumped to center stage last Dec. 8, when U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Howard Schwartzberg gave the equity committee authority to negotiate a reorganization plan with Pennzoil and other creditors independently from Texaco. That night, Robert Norris, the chairman of the shareholders' group, flew to Houston to meet Pennzoil's chairman, J. Hugh Liedtke. The next day, they reached the $3 billion truce.    People familiar with the negotiations say that Mr. Icahn had facilitated the settlement with his earlier shuttle diplomacy between Mr. Liedtke and Texaco's chief executive, James Kinnear. Mr. Icahn is widely credited with getting Mr. Liedtke to back away from his public demand of $4 billion.    Harvey Miller, Texaco's lead bankruptcy lawyer, concedes that the equity committee usurped management's role in fixing the settlement amount. &quot;Texaco still believes it could have gotten Pennzoil to a lower number,&quot; he adds.    In the Robins case, shareholders have repeatedly had an unsettling effect on management's plans. Last summer, for example, the company was insisting that it could pay its Dalkon Shield debts and emerge from Chapter 11 without being swallowed by another company.    Robins executives say that the company's board simply changed its mind when it accepted Rorer Group Inc.'s $2.65 billion takeover offer in August. But others familiar with the deal say the Robins equity committee exerted important pressure on the company's chief executive, E. Claiborne Robins Jr.    Mr. Robins resisted the idea of being acquired, Mr. Mathis of the equity committee says, &quot;and only when he realized that we wouldn't support {management's} plan did he shift.&quot; Robert Miller, the equity committee's lawyer, says he made plain the holders' willingness to sue the board members personally. &quot;We told them it would be a breach of their fiduciary duty&quot; not to accept the Rorer bid, Mr. Miller says. &quot;I didn't think I had to be more graphic about it.&quot;    In December, the Rorer agreement was eclipsed by competing bids from Sanofi and American Home. But the equity committee kept the pressure on, helping to orchestrate a series of sweetened offers.    The shareholders' group frustrated the Robins board by opposing its agreement to be acquired by Sanofi. The group backed American Home on the ground that it offered more short-term value.    Meanwhile, Steinhardt Partners and Quantum Fund, New York investment groups owning a combined stake of about 15% in Robins, fanned the competitive flames by endorsing Rorer's bid.    At one point in the bidding, American Home asked shareholders what it could do to meet their demands. The committee replied by setting as a minimum $700 million in American Home stock and protection against fluctuation in the share price. Within a few days, American Home had met the demand.    On Sunday, both Sanofi and Rorer enhanced their offers with similar mechanisms to protect against erosion of short-term equity value. But American Home prevailed when it got the backing not only of the equity committee but also of the representatives of the Dalkon Shield claimants.    &quot;I've never been in a negotiation quite like this,&quot; says a Sanofi adviser. &quot;You have to deal with a group making these demands, but they can't really deliver the company.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>