<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880809-0017 </DOCNO><HL> Mogul's Gamble: Rupert Murdoch Takes His Biggest Risk So Far In Purchasing Triangle --- Move Will Balloon His Debt But Help Fulfill His Vision Of a Global Media Empire --- Luxury of Owning the Shop ---- This article was prepared by Wall Street Journal staff reporters Johnnie L. Roberts and Laura Landro in New York And John Marcom Jr. in London </HL><SO> </SO><CO> NWS RTRSY </CO><IN> TEL PUB TNM PRO </IN><TEXT>   Rupert Murdoch doesn't run News Corp. the way most companies are run. He doesn't have a fancy headquarters. His corporate plan is mostly in his head. His top managers can be counted on one hand.    And his acquisitions are so costly they astound competitors.    Mr. Murdoch's latest move, his $3 billion purchase of Triangle Publications Inc., is his costliest and perhaps riskiest purchase. Triangle, whose crown jewel is TV Guide, makes News Corp. one of the world's largest magazine companies, adding to its already-formidable power in broadcasting, newspaper publishing and entertainment.    News Corp. insiders say Mr. Murdoch is driven by a vision of building a global communications company that would be a single-source outlet for international advertisers. Over the past five years, Mr. Murdoch's global shopping spree, plus his companies' internal growth, has already quadrupled News Corp.'s revenue.    By adding Triangle in the U.S. market, News Corp. will be able to compete with such magazine giants as Time Inc., Conde Nast Publications and Hearst Corp. for advertisers' dollars. News Corp. executives are already eyeing ways to package TV Guide for advertisers with News Corp.'s current publications such as the Star, New Woman and Elle.    However, the acquisition of Triangle will significantly balloon News Corp.'s debt without a proportionate increase in its cash flow and earnings. The company also becomes more dependent on the U.S. advertising market, which has been growing slowly in recent years.    News Corp. appears uniquely positioned to take on the risks of the Triangle purchase. Because Mr. Murdoch personally controls almost half News Corp.'s stock, he doesn't have to answer to shareholders and the Wall Street community as much as most chief executives do. And because News Corp. is an Australian company, it can account for the Triangle acquisition under much more liberal accounting standards than a U.S. company could.    Unlike most publicly held companies, which must concentrate on reported earnings, News Corp. is run on the basis of cash flow-profit after taxes but before depreciation. And News Corp. is &quot;an enormous cash machine,&quot; says Steven Rattner, who heads the media investment-banking group at Morgan Stanley andamp; Co.    Despite the steep prices Mr. Murdoch has paid for companies such as Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., Metromedia Inc.'s TV stations, and Harper andamp; Row Publishers Inc., &quot;he's missed very few steps along the way,&quot; Mr. Rattner adds. &quot;Almost everything he's bought has generated the anticipated cash flow. The cash flow pays the debt, and there's room to do the next acquisition.&quot;    Although News Corp. is expected to sell some assets to help finance the Triangle purchase, the company is likely to add significantly to its current debt of $4.7 billion. Interest payments already total about $600 million, while cash flow is $1.2 billion.    Triangle's annual cash flow is about $200 million, according to News Corp. executives. Although that is substantial in relation to Triangle's estimated annual revenue of $700 million to $800 million, it won't cover the debt that News Corp. is taking on. &quot;There is no doubt Murdoch is really pushing News Corp. as far as it can be pushed now,&quot; says Richard MacDonald, an analyst at First Boston Corp. &quot;He's covered, but he's probably going to have to come up with some additional cash,&quot; probably through asset sales, Mr. MacDonald adds.    News Corp. executives clearly hope to increase Triangle's cash flow but acknowledge that they are considering the sale of part of News Corp.'s $3.2 billion investment portfolio, which includes a 20.5% stake in London-based Pearson PLC, the publisher of the Financial Times.    Stanley Shuman, a longtime News Corp. financial adviser at investment bank Allen andamp; Co., dismisses Wall Street concerns that additional debt would overload News Corp.'s resources. &quot;The quality of the cash flow is good, and the value of News Corp.'s franchises around the world is high,&quot; he says.    In pursuing his acquisitions, Mr. Murdoch moves opportunistically, acting on the basis of his own hunches and without relying on a planning staff. Mr. Shuman says Mr. Murdoch maintains at any one time a master wish list of 20 to 25 companies that he constantly revisits to see whether they are available. &quot;There is a large grid of opportunities, and he keeps upgrading it as he is able to buy at prices he considers reasonable,&quot; Mr. Shuman says.    In the case of Triangle, Mr. Murdoch has been wooing its owner, Walter Annenberg, for several years. News Corp. executives say Mr. Annenberg always either was unwilling to sell or was asking too high a price by even Mr. Murdoch's standards. When the price came into the range he was willing to pay, a deal was made quickly and quietly -- typical of the Murdoch style.    &quot;He's got that sense of being able to key into opportunity,&quot; says Martin Singerman, who heads News Corp.'s U.S. publishing operations. &quot;He's the person someone like (Mr. Annenberg) would come to -- he's been able to make connections like that.&quot;    U.S. publishing companies gnash their teeth over Mr. Murdoch's ability to be aggressive and opportunistic. Says the chief executive of a rival media company, &quot;He can create headlines, he can create deals, he can run it like a private company and deal with U.K. and Australian accounting standards that give him much more leverage than anyone else in the publishing business.&quot;    Mr. Singerman acknowledges that &quot;hired managers have got to think about whether to take chances. We're public, but Rupert Murdoch is the principal stockholder. He can make decisions other companies would be afraid to make and then manage his way through them.&quot;    Murdoch executives also concede that the Australian accounting rules give News Corp. an advantage. Under Australian accounting principles, TV licenses, titles and other intangible assets aren't deemed to have any finite life and thus don't have to be counted as good will and gradually written off against earnings. Another quirk of Australian rules: News Corp. can eventually write up the value of TV Guide and other assets on its balance sheet if it thinks the properties are worth more than it paid. Such a write-up would raise shareholders' equity and increase News Corp.'s borrowing ability.    Despite such advantages, News Corp. has occasionally stumbled. An effort to build a fourth TV network in the U.S. is sputtering. Fox Broadcasting lost about $80 million, before taxes, in its June 30 fiscal year, significantly more than the $50 million News Corp. officials had expected.    While aggressively expanding in the U.S., Mr. Murdoch is simultaneously accelerating his push in Europe. For Mr. Murdoch, Europe means Britain, where he has a solid, profitable base in newspapers. A few weeks ago, he unveiled plans to become a major broadcaster as well.    The British interests interact with the rest of the empire in important but often little-noticed ways. For instance, News Corp. controls 41.7% of William Collins PLC, a British book publisher. Collins last year purchased 50% of Harper andamp; Row, the U.S. publisher that News Corp. acquired in early 1987 for a generous $300 million. By passing on half of Harper to Collins -- at close to its own cost -- News Corp. shifted to Collins and its other shareholders much of the debt burden incurred to buy Harper. Meanwhile, both publishers gained needed international links while staying within the News Corp. fold.    Moves like that impress analysts and other observers. &quot;One of the joys of his way of doing business is he doesn't have that need for accountability,&quot; said a London executive at a major advertising agency who asked not to be identified. &quot;Despite all the recent softness in his share price, despite the increasing criticism, despite the worries about Fox, he's clearly been able to establish another $3 billion worth of credit (to buy the Annenberg interests). And he kind of did it overnight.&quot;    In the U.K., News Corp. controls about a third of newspaper circulation -- its sales approach five million copies weekdays -- with the sleazy but popular Sun and News of the World tabloids and the highly respected Times and Sunday Times. Mr. Murdoch turned his newspapers into money machines in 1986, when overnight he switched to new, low-cost technology. That touched off months of often-violent confrontation with the print unions, but they ultimately gave up the fight, partly because of the Thatcher government's tough union laws.    Even as the pickets demonstrated at its plant gates, News Corp. reaped the benefits of cost savings. With press capacity set to triple by next year, the papers are hungry for an ever-larger share of advertising revenue.    The Times has faced tough competition from the Independent, a two-year-old daily newspaper that has lured both journalists and readers from what was once the unquestioned voice of the establishment. But its Sunday sister is on a roll, remolding itself into a U.K. version of American Sunday-morning monsters. New book and travel sections this year have won readers and advertisers, and other new sections are planned as soon as the expansion of press capacity is completed.    Though often criticized as journalists, Murdoch lieutenants -- a close-knit, low-profile group -- undoubtedly know how to market. Last year, News Corp. took over Today, an ailing middle-brow British tabloid that had struggled to find an audience since its much-ballyhooed 1986 launch. Veteran Murdoch editor David Montgomery repackaged the paper to appeal to young office workers -- &quot;the kind of people who would choose Thailand over Spain for a package holiday,&quot; one London advertising executive says. A relentless onslaught of TV ads promotes big feature stories. Today recently claimed that its circulation topped 500,000, up 50% since January.    In the next couple of years, analysts expect most of the cash from the British papers -- about #120 million a year -- will go into a risky satellite-TV effort. Although satellite TV has proved a pie-in-the-sky, egg-on-the-face idea in the U.S., Mr. Murdoch is betting that Britain's cozy broadcasting establishment -- the publicly financed BBC and a high-cost commercial monopoly -- will crumble before his market-conscious, populist approach.    The backbone of the TV effort is Sky Channel, a five-year-old channel that reaches about 12 million European households with cable. Next year, Mr. Murdoch says he will expand Sky and add three more channels to a new satellite hovering over Britain; viewers will have to buy a satellite antenna and decoding equipment. Some analysts say success will require a huge marketing budget, and they question whether Mr. Murdoch's programming budgets will be large enough to lure people from four existing channels and other planned new services.    But Ian Cole, a Nomura Securities Co. analyst, likens the &quot;British old school&quot; TV broadcasters to the cautious, union-fearing newspaper publishers Mr. Murdoch took on years ago. &quot;He has demonstrated he can drive a coach-and-horses through such cozy arrangements and make extremely healthy returns doing so,&quot; Mr. Cole says.    The company's magazine interests in Britain don't compare -- so far -- with those in the U.S. A joint venture with Hachette S.A. of France publishes both U.K. and U.S. editions of Elle, the women's magazine developed by Hachette in France. One of the venture's other titles, an entertainment monthly called Sky aimed at a young audience, faces uncertain prospects.    News Corp. holds as well a 6.8% stake in Reuters Holdings PLC, the London news and financial-information service. News Corp. has one of the largest voting stakes in Reuters, which has a complicated dual-share structure intended to protect its independence.    Mr. Murdoch's most intriguing move in the U.K. was his 1987 purchase of a 20.4% stake in Pearson PLC, making News Corp. the largest single shareholder in the conglomerate that owns the Financial Times newspaper and extensive book-publishing interests. He told a Financial Times reporter last year that he wanted to help expand the paper's modest-sized U.S. edition -- to compete with The Wall Street Journal -- but he hasn't pursued specific ideas and has had only minimal contact with Pearson. Pearson has made clear that it isn't interested in involvement with News Corp. U.K. monopoly laws, in effect, bar Mr. Murdoch from taking over the Financial Times without divesting himself of one of the other News Corp. papers.    Analysts consider Pearson less vulnerable to a takeover attempt because of its own improving performance. But Pearson's chairman, Lord Blakenham, said yesterday he had &quot;no idea&quot; how Mr. Murdoch's latest multibillion-dollar move would affect his interest in Pearson. &quot;He lives with levels of gearing that are high by any standards,&quot; Lord Blakenham said. &quot;But I wouldn't speculate on his motives.&quot;    In Australia, where Mr. Murdoch started, News Corp. controls about 60% of daily newspaper circulation. Last year, it acquired Herald andamp; Weekly Times Ltd., which owned several of Australia's biggest-selling newspapers, including the Melbourne Sun with a daily circulation of more than 500,000. Australian antitrust regulators required Mr. Murdoch to sell some of his smaller newspapers and most of his TV stations in Australia, although he retains a 15% stake in one of the three national commercial TV networks.    News Corp. also has extensive magazine operations in Australia, including 50%-owned TV Week, two horse-racing weeklies -- Sporting Globe and The Sportsman -- and several women's magazines. These holdings may offer opportunities for technical and personnel transfusions between them and his latest U.S. purchases. There is also scope for using U.S. information in TV Week because American television programs are popular in Australia.    After the Triangle Publications announcement, the price of News Corp. shares rose 25 cents Monday to close at $11 on the Sydney stock exchange.    News Corp.'s rapid growth is causing some observers to worry about more than the company's rapidly rising debt. They say it soon will become too big and too unwieldy for its lean management. &quot;I don't want to say their plate is overflowing,&quot; says Neal Miller, a portfolio manager at a Chase Manhattan unit, &quot;but you kind of wonder that at some point, do they have to move from a first-name-basis management to some kind of structure.&quot;    Moreover, News Corp. might be particularly vulnerable in a global recession because the cash flow needed to service the company's debt could be severely pinched. &quot;One has to fear that someday the balloon is going to burst,&quot; says Arthur Sukel, the chief financial officer of Diamandis Communication, a magazine publisher recently purchased by Hachette Publications Inc. But he adds: &quot;I have to give (Mr. Murdoch) credit. The son-of-a-gun takes chances.&quot;    ---   Linda Sandler in New York and Tony Patrick in Sydney contributed to this article.    (Revised WSJ Aug. 11, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>