<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Warner Postpones Its Annual MeetingAfter Failed Bid to End Chris-Craft ties---By Laura and Landro and John AndrewStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WCI CCNTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX) </IN><TEXT>   Warner Communications Inc. put off its annual meeting for a month after failing to arrive at an agreement to end its ties with its largest shareholder, Chris-Craft Industries Inc.    In a separate indication that the battle of wills between the two New York-based companies is escalating, Herbert J. Siegel, chairman of Chris-Craft, sued Warner in an attempt to gain access to a report about the Westchester Premiere Theatre scandal that shook Warner in the early 1980s.    The report looked into whether any current Warner employees committed wrongdoing in connection with the company's 1973 purchase of stock in Westchester Premiere Theatre of Tarrytown, N.Y., a now-defunct company linked by federal prosecutors to organized crime interests. In 1982, three former Warner executives were convicted of various fraud and bribery charges involving the stock purchase.    Warner said it offered last week to buy back Chris-Craft's 20% stake in the entertainment concern for $1.25 billion. According to Warner, Chris-Craft then made a counteroffer, which was rejected by Warner. Mr. Siegel filed his suit in Delaware chancery court on Friday. It couldn't be determined if the filing was connected to the buyback discussions.    Warner said it now has tentatively scheduled its annual meeting for June 24. The meeting had been set for May 29.    Warner and Chris-Craft, which has interests in energy and communications, are linked through BHC Inc., a broadcasting concern in which Warner has a 42.5% interest, with Chris-Craft holding the remaining and controlling stake. Through BHC, Chris-Craft owns about 33.1 million Warner shares and controls about 17% of the voting power in Warner.    Under Warner's offer to buy the stake from Chris-Craft, Warner would have given its remaining shareholders rights to acquire Warner's stake in BHC for a below-market price of $300 million. Warner valued those rights at $350 million. Warner's share of the rights -- a result of having purchased Christ-Craft's Warner stock -- would have reduced the net cost of the buyback to $1.18 billion, or $35.65 a share.    At the time the offer was made, Warner shares were trading at about $30. The stock closed yesterday at $28.375 a share, up $1.125, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. Chris-Craft closed at $22.875 a share, up 12.5 cents, also in Big Board trading.    According to Warner, Chris-Craft offered to sell its Warner stock for $40 a share. At the same time, a Warner spokesman said, Chris-Craft wanted to retain the right to participate in Warner's offering of its BHC stake.    In a carefully worded statement, Chris-Craft disputed Warner's account of the discussions. &quot;While there were preliminary discussions between advisers, as there have been from time to time concerning possible methods under which a disassociation might be achieved, this account of the discussions is materially inaccurate,&quot; a spokesman said.    Mr. Siegel's suit involves a report regarding the Westchester Premiere Theatre submitted last year to a special committee of Warner's board by an outside attorney. According to the suit, Mr. Siegel, who is also a Warner director, was denied access to the report by the company. The filing says Mr. Siegel needs to view the document partly to determine whether he and other directors should support the reelection of Steven J. Ross, Warner's chairman, and Lawrence Buttenwieser as directors. The terms of Messrs. Ross and Buttenwieser expire this year.    The suit also named Mr. Buttenwieser and Raymond Troubh, another Warner director, as defendants. The two men were members of the special board committee that received the report.    A Warner spokesman characterized the suit as &quot;a sham and harassment.&quot; According to Warner, the company's board, including the Chris-Craft representatives, previously voted to accept a summary of the report rather than have it presented in its entirety to the board.    Warner said the report concluded there had been no wrongdoing by any present Warner official. In 1985, a lengthy federal investigation into the business dealings of Mr. Ross was closed after turning up insufficient evidence to justify filing charges.    In a response to Mr. Siegel's suit, filed late yesterday in Delaware court, Warner accused Mr. Siegel of &quot;using the threat of resurrecting the Westchester Theatre matter to extort an enormous and unjustified profit on the sale of his Warner stock.&quot;    The suit is the latest salvo in the fight between Messrs. Ross and Siegel. The two have been at odds ever since Chris-Craft acquired a stake in Warner in 1984 in what was characterized as a friendly transaction to help ward off a hostile bid for Warner by Rupert Murdoch, who has amassed wide communications holdings.    The feud has been escalating in recent months. Chris-Craft representatives on Warner's board unsuccessfully voted against a lucrative new employment contract for Mr. Ross. According to sources close to Warner, Chris-Craft also attempted to block Warner's recent agreement to buy Chappell andamp; Co., a New York music publisher, for $200 million. Under the terms of the acquisition accord, Chris-Craft's stake in Warner would be diluted slightly.    Sources close to Chris-Craft say the company is angered by Warner's rich compensation packages. Chris-Craft is also said to believe that Warner's stock price could be materially improved. Warner, meanwhile, has accused Chris-Craft of interfering with its business and tying up Mr. Ross's time in fighting over numerous policy matters.    One Chris-Craft representative on Warner's board, former Sen. Abraham Ribicoff, resigned after Mr. Ross's new contract was approved, but he refused to say why he resigned. </TEXT></DOC>