<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880912-0114 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Business Bookshelf: The New Player in Capital Markets </HL><AUTHOR> Martin S. Krossel </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The second wave of Japan's penetration of the American economy is well under way. We all know about Japanese companies' dramatic inroads into consumer markets during the '70s. In this decade, firms providing financial services have been equally successful at finding business opportunities in the U.S.    In his new book, &quot;The Gnomes of Tokyo: Japanese Financial Power and Its Impact on Our Future&quot; (Dodd, Mead, 307 pages, $22.50), business writer Jim Powell has tried to document the emerging presence of the Japanese in American capital markets. Mr. Powell's style is largely anecdotal. He writes about deals in which the Japanese have been a player, and he introduces his readers to some of the executives who run Japanese financial institutions in the U.S.    The author believes that Americans have nothing to fear from Japanese investment. Foreign investors have been successful in the U.S. because they have found niches in the marketplace; their exploitation of them has jointly benefited Japanese businessmen and the American public.    Toyota's purchase of an old General Motors plant in Fremont, Calif., financed through a loan from Japan's Long Term Credit Bank, probably is the best known of such investments. At the time of the transaction, according to Mr. Powell, the factory was &quot;a monument to the failure of American manufacturing.&quot; Though GM was putting many more man-hours than Toyota into the production of each car, quality was markedly worse. There were 6,500 people working at the plant, and absentee rates ranged around 20%. The floor was littered with beer bottles when GM was forced to shut down the operation in 1982. At that time there were about 1,000 grievances and 60 disputed firings on file with the National Labor Relations Board.    Toyota restarted production with a work force that was only 30% as large as it had been when GM had closed it. The overall quality of the cars produced rivals that of the Toyotas built in Japan. Worker attendance on the floor has reached 98%, and unexcused absenteeism rates are lower than 0.5%. In the two years before the book was published, fewer than 20 grievances had been filed by the union.    Japanese banks established operations in the U.S. shortly after World War II. But back then, as Mr. Powell tells it, they mainly were concerned with serving the subsidiaries of Japanese companies. However, their growing portfolio of Latin American loans also was serviced from the offices in the U.S. When Brazil and Mexico started having serious financial difficulties in the early '80s, the Japanese banks pulled their business out of the region, and began seeking opportunities in the U.S. itself.    Japanese banks made their first inroads into the U.S. in the tax-free municipal bond market. They supplied letters of credit that provide insurance for state and local government agencies that issue long-term debt instruments. Such insurance is necessary because the main purchasers of these bonds are wealthy individuals who are unable to get enough information about issuers for intelligent investment decisions. This is critical because defaults on municipals are not uncommon, and even very sophisticated investors have ended up losing their money.    The Japanese banks now issue about 60% of these letters of credit. They have been able to grab a large share of the market, because unlike some American banks, they have a triple-A credit rating, and they can offer letters of a credit at a better rate than their domestic competitors.    Success in obtaining corporate business has come somewhat more slowly, largely because treasurers aren't accustomed to dealing with Japanese financial institutions. As Mr. Powell sees it, this only leaves room for growth. He predicts that increasingly Fortune 500 companies will do business with Japanese banks. Mr. Powell says the Japanese will not get involved in the costly retail side of banking. This will free domestic banks to concentrate on providing services to smaller companies.    Mr. Powell goes on to discuss the nationalist resentments stirred by foreign investments. He rebuts the myth that Japan has unfairly closed its markets to U.S. products, pointing out that Japanese customers buy three times as many foreign-brand goods per person as American consumers. And he concludes the book with 60 pages of policy recommendations, revolving around free trade, free markets and cuts in government spending. These are certainly sound prescriptions, but they are hardly innovative. One wonders, however, whether government alone can correct all that is wrong with the American economy. What of cultural factors, such as the famous Japanese work ethic? Or what of the life employment system? There is virtually no discussion of these types of factors in Mr. Powell's book. It is a serious deficiency.    ---   Mr. Krossel writes on business matters from Toronto. </TEXT></DOC>