<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870330-0115 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Super Discoveries</HL><DD> 03/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   Bored by Iranamok? Had enough of &quot;insider-trading&quot; investigations? Take heart. While politicians and prosecutors dance atop the heads of legal pins, science has just presented two of the most dazzling discoveries of our time -- superconductivity and a grand and puzzling supernova.    Researchers seeking superconductivity have been science's men of La Mancha, dreaming an impossible dream. The dream was the possibility of creating materials that would transmit electricity at room temperature without losing power into the transmitting material. Superconducted electricity, for instance, could be transmitted from coast to coast without any loss of energy.    The search began in 1911, when a Dutch scientist observed that at temperatures near absolute zero, or 460 degrees below zero Fahrenheit, superconductivity occurred. This required special equipment and used expensive liquid helium as a coolant. That set scientists on a long, frustrating search to raise the temperature for superconductivity and make it practical.    Now, in the past year, scientists believe that they have learned how to achieve superconduction at higher temperatures using new, ceramic-like materials. The practical applications could be immense. At a scientific colloquium in New York on March 18, Bell Labs physicist Bertram Batlogg stood before a hall crammed with excited colleagues and spoke six words that may become history's signature for the superconductivity revolution: &quot;I think our life has changed.&quot;    Electric motors may become much smaller, perhaps a tenth of their current size. Electric cars become a reasonable option. The Japanese have been working on a new railway design that uses electromagnets to levitate the train slightly above the tracks and propel it at super speeds; superconductivity could make such trains an affordable reality.    Electricity could be stored in large magnets for use at times of peak demand, reducing the need to maintain often idle power-generating facilities. Magnets also might be used to contain fusion reactions to produce electricity using sea water for fuel.    In medicine, superconductivity could provide better imaging technologies, identifying tumors without surgery. Computers could be made smaller and infinitely faster, increasing their ability to solve complex problems quickly.    There could be large gains in national security. Superconductivity would vastly improve the efficiency of a strategic defense against nuclear weapons; computers would be able to pinpoint the targets more clearly, and dispatch interceptors or focus laser beams more quickly. An adaptation of the levitating railway could also be used to help launch rockets for civilian or military use by giving them an initial boost, much like catapults on aircraft carriers. Rockets would require less fuel and be able to carry substantially larger payloads.    Much hard work in these areas lies ahead of course. It is rare, though, for knowledge to hurtle progress forward on such a vast scale. The process began last April with a successful superconduction experiment by physicist K. Alex Muller at an IBM laboratory in Zurich. Researchers at the University of Alabama at Huntsville and the University of Houston then altered the composition of the material slightly and achieved even better superconduction results.    Physicists all over the world dropped their research to take up the challenge of achieving superconduction at or near room temperature. By now, rapid headway has been made at laboratories in the U.S., Europe, Japan and China. &quot;This kind of thing,&quot; an MIT scientist remarked, &quot;you see once in your lifetime.&quot;    Ian Shelton would agree. Early on the morning of Feb. 23, Mr. Shelton discovered the first supernova to appear in the Milky Way since Kepler saw one in 1604. &quot;This is an event unique in our lifetimes,&quot; said Stanford Woosley of the University of California. Astronomers hope the exploding star will teach us more about the origin of the universe and whether it is expanding or collapsing. Intriguingly, the supernova has already acted in unanticipated ways, indicating how new knowledge can lead us forward to new mysteries.    What is perhaps most fascinating about these great scientific events is that they are taking place in an era when some groups living in advanced industrial societies wish to give up on science. Animal research, of the sort that led to lifesaving heart bypass surgery for thousands, is demolished by vigilante groups. Nuclear power is demonized. While we are only beginning to reap the rewards of decades of biological research, Luddite litigation tries to strangle genetic engineering in its cradle.    The practical benefits of superconduction and solutions to the mysteries of Supernova 1987A may be years off, but they will come. Science is patient and eventually proves wrong the anti-science naysayers. These events are a reminder that the future is, first of all, an opportunity. </TEXT></DOC>