<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0010 </DOCNO><HL> Also Criticizes U.S. Major Economic Reform---Gen. Jaruzelski was interviewed byKaren Elliott House, Robert KeatleyAnd Barry Newman</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROP </IN><DATELINE> WARSAW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Polish President Wojciech Jaruzelski said he hopes to call a national referendum on a severe austerity program that he described as a &quot;painful but imperative&quot; step toward economic revival.    In a two-hour interview, his first with American journalists in nearly two years, Gen. Jaruzelski said he is determined to impose new economic policies by Jan. 1 that would &quot;eliminate&quot; the present &quot;centralistic {economic} model that hasn't passed the test of time.&quot;    Gen. Jaruzelski said the referendum is still only his &quot;thought&quot; and isn't a formal government idea. But if he goes ahead with a Western-style secret vote on a plan that would -- at least temporarily -- reduce living standards, it would be an unprecedented event in a Communist country. Poland last held a referendum four decades ago on postwar internal reorganization, but that one, like so many elections in Communist countries, simply rubber-stamped party policy. What Gen. Jaruzelski seems to be proposing could be an opportunity for more genuine expression.    &quot;As we've learned in the past, even the most beautiful and well-constructed decisions and intentions, if they do not command the support of society, they fail,&quot; he said.    Indeed, all three major political crises since World War II were precipitated by government-ordered price increases. Most Western experts believe only fundamental economic reform will allow Poland any chance at prosperity so it can repay its $35.5 billion foreign debt. And they doubt the Communist Party is strong enough to impose reforms without greater cooperation from the people.    Under a recent law, a referendum wouldn't be binding on the government. But it might be impossible for it to impose a policy rejected by the public, and the government hasn't got an alternative plan. If it lost the vote, a senior official said, &quot;we would just have to muddle through somehow.&quot;    The lengthy interview with the president took place in Belvedere, the president's official residence, a palace built early last century by a Russian-imposed grand duke (who ruled Poland) and later occupied by a succession of Russian, German and Polish rulers. &quot;It has a history that meanders as much as the history of Poland itself,&quot; Mr. Jaruzelski said.    The general, dressed in a brown suit and wearing his ever-present tinted glasses, displayed an air of confidence, good humor and old-world manners, kissing a woman's hand and presenting flowers at the end of the interview. He displayed annoyance only once when discussing Solidarity leader Lech Walesa and U.S. congressional aid to Solidarity.    During the interview, Gen. Jaruzelski:    Expressed his extreme disappointment with the slow progress toward normal economic and political relations with the U.S. He said American policies demean Poland. &quot;Poland is treated like a country somewhere on the Limpopo River&quot; in Africa.    Praised Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev effusively and said Soviet economic reforms make it easier for him to promote radical economic change in Poland.    Insisted Poland needs new Western credits if it is to repay its foreign debt and accused the U.S. of blocking rescheduling of that debt.    Said that for the first time in 40 years, the Soviet leader is more popular in Poland than the American president-a remarkable statement for what he is saying about the past as well as the present. (This is so, he indicated, because Mr. Reagan is seen in Poland as blocking that nation's economic recovery.)    Accused the U.S. of fanning pan-Germanism, especially with President Reagan's recent speech in West Berlin challenging East Germany to tear down the Berlin Wall and open its borders. Poland, he said, is especially fearful of German reunification under the West German constitution, which claims borders that include about 30% of Poland's present territory. &quot;The demands which can be heard presented beyond the Elbe River cannot do anything apart from arousing our concern,&quot; he said.    The Polish president has been a somewhat enigmatic figure within Poland and abroad since he assumed power. His past, most of it spent in the Polish army, provides few clues to his policies. He grew up in an upper class Polish home, attending Roman Catholic schools until he was deported to the Soviet Union at the age of 16 when the armies of Stalin and Hitler divided Poland. Many Poles believe he wears tinted glasses because his eyes were damaged by glare from the snows of his Siberian exile where, according to his official biography, he joined a Soviet-run Polish army that became the nucleus of Poland's army after the war.    The main question constantly debated about Gen. Jaruzelski is whether he is more Polish nationalist or more Soviet loyalist. Two hours with the general provide no answer. He is unapologetic about cooperation with the Soviets, insisting his relationship with Moscow is little different from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's with Washington.    &quot;There are a number of countries in the West. Perhaps they are still able to roar like lions and crow like cocks (presumably Britain and France) but they are no longer what they think they are.    &quot;There is no such thing as absolute sovereignty anyway,&quot; he added &quot;Neither the Soviet Union nor the United States enjoy total sovereignty.&quot;    But most of the conversation dealt with the plight of Poland's economy and the general's plans to improve it. Though the economy grew 5% last year, the third consecutive year of growth, output still trails 1978 levels, and growth rates have slipped again this year. During the 1970s, Poland borrowed heavily from the West to finance a misdirected industrial development program, which failed to produce intended exports but swelled foreign debt.    Consumer goods and food supplies diminished, and the resulting protest led by the Solidarity labor movement further weakened the economy. Finally, the martial law crackdown on Solidarity led to sanctions by the U.S. and other Western powers, which aggravated Poland's economic problems.    Like Mr. Gorbachev, Gen. Jaruzelski clearly has decided that Poland's highly bureaucratic and centralized economy can't produce long-term solutions. He said Poland must achieve &quot;economic equilibrium,&quot; by which he means balancing supply and demand -- first by raising prices and eventually by increasing production.    The goal, he said, is a system &quot;where the goods will be waiting for the man to buy them, not the other way around.&quot;    The pending reform plan would, among other things, raise prices and cut subsidies for many goods whose prices currently are unrelated to economic costs. It would also abolish several government agencies, decentralize decision-making, cut some welfare payments and link pay to the quality of work. In brief, it envisions widespread reliance on free-market forces.    Externally, he seeks stronger but revised economic cooperation with the Soviet Union and renewed links with the West. None of this will be easy, he said. &quot;But it will be done. And I am convinced it must turn out a success.&quot;    A main reason for his optimism is that the Soviet Union also is pursuing policies of economic change that he says are &quot;convergent&quot; with his own. Calling Mr. Gorbachev &quot;a great friend of Poland and of me personally,&quot; he said he has total faith in the Soviet leader's prospects for success.    &quot;I exclude any possibility of his failing,&quot; Gen. Jaruzelski said. &quot;It isn't a case of his objective desires. It is a historical principle at work here.&quot; He described the Soviet Union as a nation of enormous potential that has been &quot;simmering under a lid. The cover just had to fly off. The corset had to break.&quot;    He added that &quot;the reason why it {successful reform} was, is and will be possible is that the situation had matured to a point where it had to happen. All kinds of resistance will appear as it has in Poland where we also feel resistance to what we are undertaking. But this is a river that cannot be turned back.&quot;    Gen. Jaruzelski also praised Mr. Gorbachev for wanting Poland to become economically strong and said the Soviets are providing financial backing for projects in Poland that are compatible with both nations' development plans. For example, he said 300 joint projects are under way in Poland that will supply consumer goods not only for Poland but also for the &quot;great and insatiable&quot; Soviet market.    But he cited U.S. policy as an obstacle to Poland's success. He seemed hurt that the U.S., which he called a historical friend, has refused to restore the close economic ties that existed before 1981.    &quot;If the wounds are being covered over by a film, then what we should do is be careful not to damage that film,&quot; he said. &quot;We observe the situation hasn't developed as we thought it would and felt it could.&quot;    Despite the visit to Poland earlier this year by Deputy Secretary of State John Whitehead and the subsequent lifting of U.S. sanctions, Washington, he said, continues to block rescheduling of Poland's debt and hasn't fully reopened its market to Polish goods.    He complained most bitterly about what he called U.S. efforts to block the debt rescheduling. He said servicing that debt at present interest rates would require 75% of Poland's annual $6.5 billion in hard currency earnings. Poland needs to restructure its foreign debt, he said, to permit acceleration of its economic growth so that it can repay its obligations.    &quot;The question is, can a hen that isn't fed actually lay eggs? When no effort is made to meet us half way . . .my conclusion is that all this activity is intentional and masterminded,&quot; he said.    U.S. officials dispute the general's account. They say delays are caused by bureaucratic complexity and the desire to see what specific things Poland will do to help itself before the U.S. commits much assistance. They also deny blocking major debt rescheduling; creditors are waiting to analyze Poland's recovery plans, one diplomat said.    The general also complained about the U.S. Congress appropriating $1 million this year to finance Solidarity social programs in Poland. He said that destroys Solidarity's credibility inside Poland.    &quot;One now is only able to call them {Solidarity leaders} agents of a foreign power,&quot; the general said.    The general accused Solidarity and its leader, Mr. Walesa, of playing politics with the economy. He said Solidarity is proposing that the government &quot;give every Pole a couple thousand zlotys more at a moment when we are still fighting with a lack of equilibrium in the market, which means nothing more than a return to the catastrophic situation that existed in 1981. This is suicidal. Of course it is very easy to win cheap popularity at that price, but that leads nowhere.&quot;    And unlike Soviet leader Gorbachev's telephone call to Russian dissident Andrei Sakharov, inviting him to return from internal exile to Moscow, Gen. Jaruzelski hasn't any intention of making a similar gesture to Poland's leading dissident.    &quot;Nobody has exiled Lech Walesa anywhere,&quot; said Gen. Jaruzelski. &quot;He is living in his apartment in Gdansk. Regrettably, he has no qualifications to be employed by the Polish Academy of Science. The comparison with the fellow called in this case is a bit far-fetched.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>