<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880330-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Los Angeles Seeks Ultimate Weapon in Gang War </HL><AUTHOR> Mark Thompson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Los Angeles is both the gang capital of the U.S. and home to the nation's most imaginative law-enforcement authorities when it comes to thinking up ways to fight gangs. But the creative tactics have amounted to little more than publicity gimmicks. Now the police and public prosecutors finally seem to have learned that what works best is simply enforcing the law.    The array of novel weapons unveiled for use against gangs in the past few years ranges from revival of a long-forgotten 19th century peace bond statute to a six-ton motorized battering ram. Typically, the weapons have been tried a few times and then shelved, once they no longer make the news.    The ram, for example, first went into action before an audience of invited reporters one night in February 1985, with Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl Gates riding shotgun. Chief Gates managed to conceal his chagrin that the raid on the supposedly fortified &quot;rock house&quot; yielded less than one-tenth of a gram of rock cocaine. He vowed to use it &quot;over and over and over and over again.&quot; But police picnics excluded, the device has had just a half-dozen sorties against rock houses in the three years since that night. And while it has chased some dealers out of first-floor quarters, the dealers have simply moved into apartments on higher floors or out onto the streets.    As for the peace bond statute, Los Angeles City Attorney James Hahn announced in 1986 that he would begin using it to force gang members accused of threatening violence either to post a forfeitable &quot;peace bond&quot; of up to $5,000 or go to jail. But the statute hasn't been used even once. &quot;The circumstances under which it could be applied turned out to be rare,&quot; explains Bruce Coplen, head of the gang unit in the city attorney's office.    Meanwhile, gangs in Los Angeles County have more than doubled their membership in the past five years, to what police estimate are 50,000 members of about 500 gangs. In contrast, Chicago, the nation's former gang capital, is home to an estimated 13,000 gang members. With more than 50 gang-related murders recorded in the first nine weeks of the year, 1988 is on a course to eclipsing last year's record toll of 387. To put that level of carnage in perspective, Chicago police counted 47 gang-related murders last year.    No one has ever accused Los Angeles authorities of shirking on the prosecution of murderers and other major felons. But as in many other cities, Los Angeles's overburdened criminal-justice system has devoted little or no attention to those who trespass, disturb the peace, carry illegal weapons or commit the array of misdemeanors that typically fills out a gang member's day. Los Angeles authorities have been highly creative in thinking up ways to prevent these lesser offenses that cumulatively enable gangs to turn neighborhoods into marketplaces for cocaine.    In 1982, for example, then-City Attorney (and current District Attorney) Ira Reiner unleashed a nuisance-abatement action against three gangs for graffiti-writing. &quot;These gangs are just laughing at the law,&quot; Mr. Reiner said at a news conference announcing the lawsuit, &quot;and we intend to wipe the smile off their face.&quot; Prosecutors won a precedent-setting injunction against the gang-related graffiti used to mark territory and needle rival gangs. Community leaders hailed the cleanup drive, but city prosecutors lost interest in it once it dropped out of the headlines and they began hitting a few problems in implementing the injunction. Several gang members voluntarily painted over one graffiti-marred wall, but the campaign died a year later when the last of the handful of defendants hel d in contempt for defying the injunction turned out not to be a gang member.    One of the latest -- and most inventive -- weapons against gangs was unsheathed by the city attorney's office late last year: a nuisance-abatement action aimed at the activities of members of one gang, the Playboy Gangster Crips, one of the most violent gangs and the one with the tightest stranglehold on a neighborhood, police say. The Playboy Gangster Crips, which dominates a lower-middle-class neighborhood near Beverly Hills, is an &quot;unincorporated association&quot; whose purpose, selling crack cocaine, is a public nuisance, the city's lawsuit contended.    Prosecutors later acknowledged that they were shooting for the moon when they initially sought an injunction against 23 types of conduct, including being &quot;boisterous&quot; and remaining &quot;in any place open to public view for more than five minutes at a time.&quot; But Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Warren Deering bought the unincorporated association theory, making all proven members of the 200-strong Playboy Gangster Crips parties to the lawsuit, even though only five were notified and none appeared in court. Judge Deering also handed down an injunction against six types of conduct-trespassing, scrawling graffiti, blocking streets or sidewalks, littering or doing anything to &quot;annoy, harass, intimidate, threaten or molest&quot; the residents of their turf.    Robert Ferber, the deputy Los Angeles city attorney assigned to the task of enforcing the order, says the injunction will enable police to arrest gang members for conduct that would not otherwise have been a crime. Now &quot;a gang member can walk up to a citizen and say, 'I'm going to blow your head off,' and all the cop can say is, 'I have to wait until they blow your head off,'&quot; Mr. Ferber explains. Once the injuction is enforced &quot;they won't have to wait.&quot;    Those who violate the injunction could be held in contempt of court and detained for five days. Or they could be jailed for up to six months under an ordinance that makes it a misdemeanor to violate a court order, Mr. Ferber says. Though the jail terms aren't particularly long, prosecutors and police note that they could be imposed widely and frequently enough to seriously disrupt a phenomenally profitable drug trade.    In practice, however, during the three months since it was handed down, the injunction hasn't disrupted much of anything. No arrests have been made. The police precinct encompassing the Playboy Gangster Crips' domain faced a rotation of officers early this year and the new cops have had to start from scratch in learning who the gang members are, explains Mr. Coplen.    Many of the new ideas have given hope to the residents of vast stretches of Los Angeles who cower behind the barred windows and doors of their homes while the gangs rule the streets. Some of the novel tactics might have worked, if the authorities had followed through with them. But as each of the crusades has collapsed, the gangs have tightened their grip on vast stretches of the city, seeming all the more invincible. The residents of the Playboy Gangster Crips' domain, for example, live in &quot;junglelike conditions,&quot; Mr. Coplen said in a declaration filed in the latest legal campaign. Shots are fired virtually every day. The neighbors have good reason to fear for their lives if they disturb the drug trade thriving on their curb, Mr. Coplen said.    Responding to that characterization of just how lawless some areas of the city have become, and reflecting on the efforts expended on ever more clever anti-gang crusades, Joan Howarth, a police-practices attorney for the American Civil Liberties Union in Los Angeles, observes, &quot;One wonders why they don't put this energy into simply enforcing the laws?&quot;    Indeed, why not? The spate of slaughter early this year forced police to consider doing just that in a more concerted way than had ever been attempted before. On every weekend evening since late February, 200 officers, in an operation dubbed &quot;the hammer,&quot; have swept through South Los Angeles shadowing those wearing gang garb and arresting them for any reason possible, even jaywalking. Many of the gang members caught up in the sweep are released within hours, but the campaign is keeping them on the run. In the first three weekends, the task force recorded 721 arrests and impounded more than 250 cars. And gang killings -- though still occurring at the rate of several a week -- have declined sharply since the police flooded the streets.    The police campaign is no panacea. While it may help quell the most serious symptoms of the gang rampage, it makes no pretense of addressing the conditions that enable gangs to thrive -- widespread drug abuse, poor school performance, unemployment. The campaign must also overcome some hurdles. Gang members aren't always easy to identify, for example. The difficulty was illustrated recently when security officials at a Los Angeles amusement center stopped and frisked eight black youths because they were wearing &quot;known gang identifiers,&quot; only to discover that they belonged to Youth for Christ.    But if innocent citizens have been swept up in the recent weekend anti-gang sweeps, few have complained. In the neighborhoods of South Los Angeles, support runs very high for &quot;the hammer,&quot; press accounts indicate. The beleaguered residents rate the police intrusion a vast improvement over the reign of the drug gangs. Their primary concern is that the latest campaign, like many others before it, will soon wither away, leaving the gangs firmly in control and more contemptuous of the law than ever.    ---   Mr. Thompson is a senior writer for California Lawyer magazine. </TEXT></DOC>