<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880420-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Use Star Wars Weapons in Ground Wars </HL><AUTHOR> Sam Cohen </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST MDEST </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> DEF </G><TEXT>   Perhaps the most controversial point made by the recent Ikle-Wohlstetter study of long-term defense strategy is that the U.S. should place less emphasis on the &quot;extreme-case&quot; scenario of a massive Warsaw Pact attack in Europe and more on protecting U.S. interests in the Third World.    The report, citing in particular the Soviet threat in the Persian Gulf, noted that the highly discriminate application of advanced conventional-weapons technology held great promise.    What the Ikle-Wohlstetter commission might also have considered, but apparently didn't, is the application of certain SDI technologies -- especially advanced lasers and their associated means for the detection and destruction of Soviet ICBMs. These hold the potential for considerably more discriminate and effective application in a large-scale Persian Gulf conflict.    One of the ways to destroy ICBM boosters with lasers involves sending a laser beam from a ground-based station toward a mirror orbiting in space, which would reflect and direct the beam toward an ICBM during its boost phase, when the missile is most easily targetable and most vulnerable to destruction. Toward exploring this concept, the Pentagon has scheduled experiments beginning this summer in which a laser atop Mount Haleakala on the Hawaiian island of Maui will direct a beam at a two-foot orbiting mirror overhead, which will redirect the beam to a station 12 miles away.    While the application of these experiments to SDI appears highly promising, its implications for blunting Soviet ground attack on the Persian Gulf (where the quick and discriminate use of non-nuclear firepower would be critical) may be considerably more promising. SDI technology holds revolutionary potential for being able to deliver devastating attacks on tactical targets, more discriminately and effectively than advanced high-tech conventional weapons, and almost infinitely more quickly -- literally with the speed of light. Moreover, it could eliminate U.S. dependency on overseas bases, since the lasers would be based on U.S. terra firma and the targeting systems would be space-based.    The extended-range, ultra-accurate conventional weapons heralded by the Ikle-Wohlstetter commission have one serious limitation: They are effective principally against fixed targets such as fuel and maintenance facilities, command and control facilities, bridges, surface-to-air missile sites, and so on. Their primary value is to impede the enemy ground attack, thereby allowing time for the defenses to be deployed.    However, considering the Soviet emphasis on surprise, blitzkrieg-style offensive operations, the decisive element of a Soviet attack may well be the moving targets (tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, etc.). It is to this purpose that SDI laser technology can be uniquely directed, where moving targets can be attacked almost immediately after they are detected. Moreover, it offers the prospect of substituting exotic weapons for American bodies since forces would not have to be deployed to the combat area. This ought to lend greater U.S. support for fighting more overseas wars.    The U.S. military has resisted the commission's recommendations on advanced conventional weapons on the grounds that they tend to be inordinately expensive. Perhaps so, but the real point is whether they would be more effective than the &quot;conventional&quot; conventional weapons now in the arsenal.    Wars fought with these weapons are also tremendously expensive: The Pentagon estimates that a war with the Soviets in the Persian Gulf would cost more than a trillion dollars a year. Were one to attack SDI laser technology because of its probable great expense, it should be realized that the weapons we now plan to use in a conflict probably would be substantially more costly.    Finally, there is the possibility this concept might have value for counterterrorist operations in the Middle East. Even when it is possible to determine the precise location of terrorists, there is the frustrating problem of being able to conduct surprise attacks against them, before they can be alerted. But with the ability to attack them with essentially zero warning time, terrorists would live in terror. And then there is the unmentionable -- political assassination. Were we (or the Israelis, for that matter) to have such a capability in hand, terrorist chiefs might have cause to think twice about their operations.    How feasible is this concept? Well, we don't know and we won't know unless we fully explore the idea. What can be said, however, is that unless we hobble ourselves as we did in signing the ABM Treaty, there would be no bounds on the scope of testing the concept. In fact, if we insist in crippling our SDI effort through an unrealistic interpretation of the treaty, we might be able to accomplish a good deal of space testing under the permissible aegis of ground-war application.    ---   Mr. Cohen is a physicist and the inventor of the neutron bomb. </TEXT></DOC>