<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0012 </DOCNO><HL> IBM's Next PC Line May Put Industry at Turning Point---Competitors, Customers Face ChoiceIf IBM Diverges From Standard---By Paul B. Carroll and Hank GilmanStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> IBMCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   International Business Machines Corp. and the personal computer industry are approaching an important crossroads.    Next month, the computer giant is widely expected to unveil a new line of PCs that will diverge from the industry standard. The new products will present a painful choice for other computer makers, software companies and customers, who will have to decide whether to stick with the existing standard, which was itself developed by IBM, or to follow Big Blue into new territory.    The new line will be IBM's shot at reasserting its leadership in the personal computer market. Though the company is still by far the biggest single seller of personal computers, it has been losing market share to makers of lower-priced IBM clones. Some competitors have also introduced machines that are more technologically advanced than IBM's.    But the new products are hardly risk-free for IBM. The company can't afford to alienate customers who have spent billions of dollars on IBM machines and the software that operates on them. If IBM goes too far afield, its position in the personal computer market could erode further.    Whatever happens, industry analysts and officials say IBM's new PCs will have a profound impact on the industry and serve notice to clone manufacturers that they won't be able to market easily copycat machines at IBM's expense. &quot;There's potential for significant turmoil in the marketplace,&quot; says Charles Wolf, a First Boston Corp. analyst. &quot;The days of picking off the sitting duck will be gone.&quot;    The new products are already having an effect. Donald H. Putnam Jr., chief operating officer of Inference Corp., a software company, says, &quot;We're all frozen now waiting to see what IBM will do.&quot;    IBM is characteristically mum on its new products. &quot;We don't speculate on products we may or may not introduce,&quot; a spokesman said. But industry officials and analysts believe the company will introduce an inexpensive machine for the education market, products similar to its current AT and products based on the extremely powerful Intel Corp. 80386 chip.    Moreover, IBM is expected to modify the internal workings of its machines and make the computers more difficult to clone. Such steps would include proprietary chips to upgrade graphics and improve the machines' ability to communicate with other IBM computers. As part of that -- a crucial part -- software written for the new machines won't run on existing models, though all existing software should be usable on the new models.    The company is already preparing its dealers for the big announcement, which many expect on April 2. Some dealers, for instance, have been asked to sign nondisclosure agreements in anticipation of briefings, and IBM is rumored to have scheduled a dealers meeting in Miami in the next few weeks. &quot;They're trying to hype us up for it,&quot; one retailer says.    The blow will likely fall hardest on such companies as Leading Edge Products Inc. and Blue Chip Electronics, which essentially copy the IBM machine and sell it at lower prices, analysts say.    &quot;These products will reduce the incentive for dealers to carry straight clones and the users' need to buy them,&quot; says Michele Preston, a Salomon Brothers Inc. analyst.    In fact, some of the weaker clone makers and manufacturers of add-on products could disappear, says Aaron Goldberg, an analyst with International Data Corp. The IBM announcement &quot;will make it at least a little more difficult to just jump into the PC market and have a salable product,&quot; he says. &quot;It'll require an increase in engineering capability.&quot;    The impact should be less severe on companies like Tandy Corp. and Compaq Computer Corp., computer makers that sell more than bare-bones clones. &quot;I don't think IBM minds competing fiercely with Tandy, Compaq and Apple,&quot; says Graham Beachum, Tandy's vice president for business products and a former IBM employee. But IBM, he adds, wants to make sure that &quot;the transient no-names . . . can't just buy buckets of parts and put them together in their garages.&quot;    For one thing, companies such as Compaq and Tandy already have a large base of loyal customers for their products that in many cases have more features than similar IBM models. In addition, these manufacturers have the engineering resources to duplicate the functions of the new IBM machines.    Compaq, however, faces an additional risk because of its bold decision last fall to become the first major manufacturer to introduce a computer based on Intel's 80386 chip. Though the computer's sales have exceeded the company's expectations, Compaq could be forced to redesign the machine if IBM, as it's expected to, comes out with a 386 machine that sets a standard in the industry.    Apple Computer Inc. looks to be the one sure winner. While the IBM-compatible world sorts itself out, Apple will probably add to its recent successes in the corporate marketplace. Besides the momentum it has been building, Apple recently introduced new versions of the Macintosh that addressed many of its shortcomings and can offer users the stability that IBM-compatible makers cannot.    Other companies, however, will have to spend time chasing IBM. Makers of add-on products, such as AST Research Inc., say simpler adaptations for the new machines would take it eight to 10 weeks, but add that IBM could buy itself as much as nine months of lead time if it does something radically new. Phoenix Technologies Ltd., which makes a chip that almost all clone makers use to make themselves IBM-compatible, says it will probably need four to six months to produce a new version of that chip.    Michael Dell, chairman of PC's Limited, which sells PC clones by phone and mail, says, &quot;It would take us six to nine months&quot; to make a machine &quot;that functioned in a similar and better manner.&quot;    Most software companies also will face a difficult choice. The biggest companies can simply write programs that work both with the existing standard and with the new IBM hardware, but the thousands of other companies have too few resources for that.    Fred Gibbons, president of Software Publishing Corp., says that his inclination is to follow IBM, but that he has doubts. He says he expects to have to spend $2 million, or 20 man-years, to update his product line to deal with some of the features he expects, &quot;and I've got a lot better things to do with 20 man-years than just stay in place. That's not a big investment by Ashton-Tate or Lotus standards, but it's big for me, and I'm in the top 1% of this industry.&quot;    Software companies say they'll decide which standard to follow based on how much work is required to adapt to IBM's products, on the development tools that IBM provides to ease the transition -- and most importantly, on how successful they think the product will be.    &quot;The industry is going to move real damn fast,&quot; Mr. Gibbons says. &quot;Everybody is watching and waiting. We're all poised to make the move.&quot;    Because it will be months before IBM can provide an operating system that taps its machines' full potential, and because the software development cycle can be long, it will take one to three years before significant application software appears. Because of the long lead time, the early decisions by software companies could be crucial.    Customers largely indicate they'll sit this one out until the situation is clarified. Only 10% to 15% of a company's costs come from the price of the hardware, with the rest coming from software and training, so companies need to go slowly. They need to be sure that enough good software will be written for the IBM products and to make sure that they don't wind up having to provide training for two types of software, one written for the current standard and one written for IBM's new machines.    Many customers seem to be willing to give IBM the benefit of the doubt, at least for the moment. Danielle Barr, vice president of corporate systems at Bank of New England, says improved graphics would help her a great deal and welcomes the talk that IBM will incorporate into the new products a version of Microsoft Windows, a software product designed to make a PC easier to use. She also says improving the machines' capacity for talking to each other and to minicomputers and mainframes would be crucial. &quot;Connection is the issue of the future,&quot; she says.    Rule Johnson-Morris, director of office automation at the SSCandamp;B advertising agency, a division of Interpublic Group of Cos., takes a more short-term view. He just wants to be sure the machines run his existing software and wants to see how much computer prices drop because of the announcement.    &quot;I'll take a look and then make a decision very fast,&quot; says Mr. Johnson-Morris, who has been waiting since January to order 70 PCs because he wants to see what IBM announces. &quot;I'm basically holding up the agency's office-automation plans at the moment.&quot;    Dealers and consultants say many customers have started to slow purchases recently because the IBM announcement is finally approaching. Steve Malisewski, vice president of marketing at MicroAge Computer Stores Inc., a big chain, says he's only seen a slight drop so far, but worries that the confusion may persist.    &quot;Things could really get ugly,&quot; he says. &quot;If this really drags out, I think I'll just go on vacation.&quot;    While it isn't certain exactly what form the new IBM PCs will take, the speculation is becoming more consistent.    Salomon Brothers analysts, for example, figure IBM will unveil three PCs based on Intel's 80286 chip, which is utilized in certain models of IBM's XT and is used in its AT computers; four machines based on Intel's powerful 80386 chip; and possibly an inexpensive machine for the education market.    Analysts and other industry officials believe IBM will include customized chips for enhanced graphics, will give machines the ability to communicate more easily with other computers and may use a version of Microsoft Windows to make the PCs easier to use.    Such features are consistent with messages IBM is sending out to the industry. William Lowe, president of IBM's Entry Systems division, said in a speech last fall that the unit is &quot;currently investing more than half of our research and development budget for personal computing in the development of new software which emphasizes connectivity, ease of use, multi-tasking, enhanced graphicss . . .&quot;    Mark Schulman, a Salomon Brothers analyst, also figures the new IBM machines will include a proprietary &quot;bus,&quot; the data path along which certain parts of the computer and external products talk to each other. This would allow IBM, at least initially, to control which add-on manufacturers make products for its new computers.    However, as Mr. Lowe made clear last fall and as IBM has indicated since then, the new product line will be designed so IBM won't isolate its current customers or prevent software makers from writing programs for the new machines.    It will take the industry a while, even after the details come out, to assess just how much IBM has done to be different and how much it has done to raise the performance available in PCs. At the same time, though the rumors about details will finally abate, people will have new fuel for speculation on whether IBM can regain control of the industry standard.    &quot;I think this talk is one of the great sports of our time,&quot; says Dan Mandresh, an analyst at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. </TEXT></DOC>