<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Other Producers May Follow---By Youssef M. IbrahimStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST EUROPPETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> ROTTERDAM, the Netherlands  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Most of the Dutch motoristspulling off a leafy suburban road here don't know and don'tcare who owns the gleaming yellow and orange service stationunder the Q8 sign.   One driver thinks the gasoline filling her motorbike's tiny tank &quot;comes from Colombia&quot; or somewhere else in South America. To another, it is &quot;just another gas station -- maybe bigger, nicer, more service.&quot;    Europeans routinely patronize in growing numbers the nearly 5,000 Q8 outlets of the state-owned Kuwait Petroleum Co. that have spread across Western Europe in the past three years. But industry analysts, competing oil companies and other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries find Q8's high-powered European presence anything but routine.    As the first major move by an OPEC country into overseas refining and marketing, KPC's shift &quot;downstream&quot; could someday make it &quot;one of the biggest, most successful and powerful oil companies in the world,&quot; says Nordine Ait-Laouissine, a former official of Algeria's oil company. (The 11 Kuwaiti tankers that the U.S. plans to protect in the gulf, as well as 11 others, are operated by a KPC subsidiary.)    The Kuwaitis have &quot;the financial resources to support their ambitions, and imaginative leadership and aggressive talented management,&quot; says the Algerian, who managed a KPC subsidiary until last year. He adds: &quot;They have more oil than all the oil companies put together. The future is theirs.&quot;    Kuwait's move has already spurred plans by Venezuela and Saudi Arabia to follow KPC downstream. Most industry analysts see that as a long-term plus for stability. &quot;As more OPEC producers get involved in day-to-day sales down to the consumer level,&quot; says Robert De Bauw, the director for oil and gas at the European Commission, &quot;they will have less interest in rocking the boat on prices.&quot;    The downstream shift is raising new questions, however, about OPEC's long-term ability to fix prices and limit members' production. Some 90% of the million barrels of crude oil Kuwait produces daily is sold through Q8's downstream network as competitively priced products, skirting OPEC's fixed-price agreement. &quot;Many of us don't think the Kuwaitis are playing by the rules,&quot; says one African delegate to OPEC.    Meanwhile, Western oil companies operating in Europe have watched KPC take growing bites of their territory. As the first new brand in Europe in 18 years, Q8 has captured market shares of 15% in Sweden, 25% in Denmark, 7% in Holland, 15% in Belgium, 14% in Luxembourg, 5% in Italy and 2% in Britain. KPC is also negotiating to buy service stations in Spain, France and West Germany. Longer-term plans target Asia and North America.    &quot;We want to diversify world-wide. We want to put some eggs in every basket,&quot; says Nader Sultan, the president of Kuwait Petroleum International, the KPC subsidiary that spearheads the downstream effort.    To these ends, KPC enjoys a huge economic advantage. It costs Kuwait about a dollar to pump a barrel of oil and another 50 cents to bring it to Europe. The production cost of North Sea oil, by contrast, runs between $8 and $13 a barrel. The big difference disturbs European oil men.    &quot;Kuwait's objective {has been} to gain outlets,&quot; says the chief marketer of a major European oil company. &quot;Clearly we're worried about what they will do next. They have all the oil they need. If they want, they can maximize sales,&quot; with little concern for short-run profit.    European energy watchers acknowledge, however, that KPC hasn't been grabbing market share by discounting. &quot;There is no evidence they undercut the price&quot; of oil, says Jacques Michaux, the energy director general for the European Commission.    Instead, the Kuwaitis have won customers by innovative service and marketing. They were the first in Europe to introduce lead-free gasoline, free self-service oil-change machines, and a whole range of new lubricants. They created attractive service stations with bright colors and spacious layouts, then backed them with a big television advertising campaign touting Q8 as &quot;the place for new ideas.&quot;    The wordplay Q8 (for Ku-wait) was originated by one of Britain's top corporate-image makers, Wolff Olins. For a $500,000 fee, the British firm also created the Q8 logo: the brand name above two colorful striped sails symbolizing the traditional Kuwaiti dhows that still ply the Persian Gulf.    The foundation for Q8's success was laid as far back as the 1960s when oil wealth began flowing into the gulf region and Kuwait made some crucial choices. Members of a merchant society with a sharp instinct for commerce, the Kuwaitis -- unlike their Saudi neighbors, for instance -- refused to park their money in staid investments such as U.S. Treasury bonds. Instead, they invested aggressively in industrial ventures, real estate and tourist resorts in the U.S., Western Europe, Asia and the Arab world.    &quot;What they're doing with oil in the '80s they've done with their money ever since the '60s,&quot; says the chairman of one major oil company. &quot;Taking their venture money overseas isn't new to them.&quot;    Kuwait also resisted the temptation, which beset many other developing countries with petrodollars, to throw billions at domestic industrial projects that turned into white elephants. The Kuwaitis &quot;realized very early in the game,&quot; says Mr. AitLaouissine, the former KPC manager, that with a population under two million, &quot;there wasn't very much to do at home.&quot; They saw that growth lay in &quot;taking the business they know best -- oil -- abroad where the customers are.&quot;    Thus, in 1980, the Kuwaiti oil minister, Sheik Ali Khalifa Al Sabah, began organizing KPC to consolidate Kuwaiti drilling, exploration, transportation, storage, product development, marketing, and sales under one holding company. Subsidiaries sprouted, including a tanker company to control the global movement of Kuwaiti oil. A finance company was born. Kuwait Petroleum International was formed with wholly owned retail operations and a world-wide exploration company that has discovered oil and gas in China, Egypt, Indonesia and Australia and is exploring in Sudan, Sicily, Congo, Pakistan, Tunisia and Yemen.    Subsidiaries were also set up for domestic exploration and petrochemicals. In 1981, Kuwait purchased Santa Fe International Corp., a U.S.-based global exploration and drilling company, for $2.5 billion, sparking controversy both in the U.S. and in Kuwait over charges of insider trading in Santa Fe stock.    Sheik Ali could assemble such an enterprise relatively quickly because he is not only Kuwait's oil minister but also a senior member of the ruling family and chief of a handpicked team of two dozen technocrats who have run Kuwait's oil industry for years. He wanders often through their offices, listening to policy debates, urging dissenters to speak their minds and encouraging all to call him at any time. &quot;Our decision-making lines are as short as the time it takes to dial his number,&quot; says Abulsamad Al-Awadi, the London-based marketing manager for KPC.    The stage was set, then, in October 1981, for Edward Walker III, the president of the now-defunct Gulf Oil Corp., to make Kuwait an offer it couldn't easily refuse. &quot;How would you like to buy all our assets in Europe for one dollar?&quot; he asked Sheik Ali one afternoon in Geneva during an OPEC-meeting recess.    The Kuwaitis would have to buy the inventories, too, but the assets would be theirs for a mere dollar. Still, by some calculations, Mr. Walker was pushing a pig in a poke. It would cost KPC hundreds of millions of dollars to upgrade the facilities and tailor them to its needs.    A glance at Gulf's corporate map showed two refineries, a string of more than 2,000 poorly maintained service stations, a network of dealers, pipelines and storage tanks scattered across the continent, and a thoroughly demoralized staff of about 600. World-wide demand for oil, moreover, was sliding, prices had begun their long fall, and the industry was entering a wrenching period of layoffs, bankruptcies and losses.    But for Kuwait, a lean and hungry oil producer, Gulf's offer was a passport from the world of one-dimensional raw-material exporters, where many OPEC members remain, into the world of multinational enterprise. It didn't take Sheik Ali and his team of youthful technocrats long to decide. &quot;We said, 'How can a deal like this come our way again?'&quot; recalls Mr. Sultan, the president of Kuwait Petroleum International.    KPC's subsequent rapid expansion gives Kuwait something of a split personality in OPEC. When the cartel was created in 1960, all 13 members lived by exporting a single raw material -- crude oil. Today, as Kuwait and, to a lesser extent, Venezuela shift to exporting refined products, their interests diverge from those of the majority.    Unlike Iran, Saudi Arabia, Gabon, Qatar and most others in the cartel, Kuwait exports only 10% of its production today as crude oil tied to the official OPEC price of about $18 a barrel. It sells the rest as products at competitive prices without reference to the OPEC price. Many in the cartel want to plug this Kuwaiti loophole by extending OPEC price regulation to refined products. Kuwait and Venezuela have vowed to fight such a move.    &quot;In only five years they moved from being a crude-oil producer to an integrated mini-major oil company,&quot; says Andrew Avramedes, an independent oil consultant based in London. &quot;They realized they can make a lot more money by selling products rather than raw material, and they aren't about to give up their freedom to do it.&quot;    One practical effect of this within the cartel is that Kuwait continues to sell its full production quota regardless of OPEC's gyrations, disagreements and fights over the official price. Others, by contrast, depend for their livelihoods on OPEC's setting an economic price. Qatar lost substantial income last March, for example, when buyers would take only 20% of its daily output of 300,000 barrels at the OPEC price. Saudi Arabia likewise saw its output fall by more than a million barrels a day.    Kuwait, meanwhile, sailed through that slump in demand virtually unaffected.    This doesn't mean that Kuwait is indifferent to OPEC. Since all Kuwait's wealth resides in its oil reserves -- second only to Saudi Arabia's -- it cares about anything OPEC says and does that affects oil's future. Today it is struggling within OPEC against a push for higher prices by countries with smaller reserves, such as Algeria, Libya, Iran and Ecuador. Kuwait wants lower prices to encourage more consumption and keep demand as high as possible into the next century. Higher prices, Kuwait argues, push users to alternative energy sources such as nuclear power and natural gas.    While other OPEC members recognize the advantage of going downstream, most lack Kuwait's money, small population and ability to move fast. &quot;We can't argue that strongly for spending billions abroad to buy downstream facilities,&quot; says a Venezuelan oil official. &quot;Our people are still hungry and our domestic economy needs the money more.&quot;    By contrast Kuwait has financial reserves of nearly $100 billion, a small population and no political opposition since it dissolved its parliament last year. &quot;Kuwait is living proof of what well-managed Arab business can do unimpeded by bureaucracy,&quot; says Fakhry Abdelnour, the president of African Middle East Petroleum, a Geneva-based group doing business with several OPEC countries. &quot;For KPC,&quot; he says, &quot;the sky is the limit.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>