<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880205-0066 </DOCNO><HL> An Antitrust 'Bill of Goods' </HL><AUTHOR> Charles F. Rule </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> RET </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   With barely a peep of opposition, Congress is on the verge of passing legislation that promises relief but in fact spells trouble for the American consumer. The &quot;Freedom From Vertical Price Fixing Act of 1987&quot; already has passed the House and a similar measure, S.430, faces an imminent vote in the Senate.    Supporters claim the legislation would protect discount retailers from the current &quot;lax&quot; interpretation of the antitrust laws. In fact, this legislation would hinder the ability of retailers and manufacturers to devise innovative ways to distribute their products. It would reduce competition and could actually increase the price consumers have to pay for many products.    The legislation purports to do two things. One is codification of what is known in antitrust parlance as the &quot;per se rule against resale price maintenance.&quot; That rule, simply stated, makes illegal any agreement between a manufacturer and its distributor with respect to the distributor's resale price. In fact, the legislation would go far beyond a mere codification of the rule. It would ban many agreements that actually benefit consumers, often in the form of lower prices.    Second, the legislation would make it much easier for a distributor that is terminated by its supplier to get to a jury when the termination is alleged to be the result of an illegal resale price maintenance agreement (rather than of unilateral action by the supplier, which is legal). This provision would make it much more difficult for suppliers to get rid of distributors for legitimate reasons -- for example, because they provide inadequate service to customers or even fail to pay their bills.    Unlike current law, the bills appear designed to condemn virtually all distribution agreements that merely affect price competition, even if they make no reference to resale prices. As the official report on the House bill makes clear, &quot;Quite simply, if the purpose or effect of concerted activity is to affect or stifle price competition in any manner, then vertical price fixing is at issue; and the per se rule is the applicable test.&quot;    The Supreme Court has in recent years rejected such a rigid and sweeping approach to distribution agreements. Under the current &quot;rule of reason&quot; that reflects the scholarship of the University of Chicago generally and Robert Bork in particular, a manufacturer may legally restrict competition among its distributors in order to ensure that the manufacturer's brand is distributed in the most cost-effective and attractive way. As a result of the current flexible rules, manufacturers and their distributors have the freedom to innovate in their methods of distribution and thereby to obtain an edge on the competition.    At best, these bills call into question the legality of virtually any restriction in a distribution agreement; at worst, they make such restrictions absolutely illegal even when those restrictions actually increase the desirability of products or directly lower the product's price to customers. Two of the actual cases that illustrate this potential effect are these:   --GTE Sylvania, a U.S.-based manufacturer of TV sets with a national market share of 1% to 2%, wanted to better compete against other brands. In order to attract more aggressive and competent retailers willing to promote the product, it limited the number of franchises in any given territory. The distributors were able to invest heavily in showrooms and sales force. With competition among retailers regulated, prices could be kept at levels low enough to compete with the stronger brands but high enough to provide an adequate return to retailers. Using this mechanism, Sylvania was able to triple its market share and become the nation's eighth-largest television maker.    A distributor not allowed to open a new store near one of Sylvania's other franchises sued. The Supreme Court, recognizing that the motivation for this restriction and for resale price maintenance may often be identical, nevertheless refused to outlaw the practice. Agreements such as Sylvania's are thus legal today, but might be condemned under the pending legislation.    --Mack Trucks Inc., an American maker, allowed its distributors to participate in a &quot;sales assistance program&quot; that lowered the effective wholesale prices charged to dealers having a hard time competing against other manufacturers. Mack wanted its dealers to discount the trucks, so it made them available at the normal price and rebated enough money to guarantee the dealer a margin on a reduced sticker price. But if the dealer gouged the customer by charging a higher price, Mack would deny the rebate.    When one of Mack's dealers challenged the program, claiming that it was a form of resale price maintenance, a federal court of appeals held the practice perfectly legal. Other courts have sensibly upheld similar agreements. But, because the scheme in the Mack example &quot;affects&quot; price competition -- that is, cuts the price the distributor would otherwise charge -- the agreement would be illegal under the pending legislation. Yet the sponsors maintain their bills are pro-consumer.    I don't mean to suggest that all distribution schemes increase competition or benefit consumers; they do not. Rather, the point is that restrictions in distribution agreements, even those that &quot;affect&quot; price competition, may often benefit consumers. Currently, the courts recognize this economic reality and attempt, with fair success, to distinguish the competitively beneficial from the harmful. The vice of the legislation at hand is that it lumps together good and bad; even if it is obvious that a distribution agreement, like the two examples above, benefits competition, courts would be required to condemn it.    Proponents have been able to sell this &quot;bill of goods&quot; with vague rhetoric about the need to protect discounters. To hear their arguments, one might believe that discounters are on the verge of extinction. Again, the facts belie the argument.    Discounters are thriving under existing law. According to one survey, the dollar volume of sales made by discounters increased 3,400% from 1960 to 1985. The number of discount stores has been steadily increasing since 1976; and during the first five months of 1987, sales by full-line discount department stores outpaced sales by all other types of department stores with a volume of $23.6 billion.    Ironically, by creating legal uncertainty and outright legal prohibitions, the legislation will hurt many small businesses -- manufacturers and distributors alike. Without the agreements that the bills would ban, the manufacturer may be unable to market its product effectively, or may simply be unwilling to deal with small, independent distributors.    Whose interest, then, does this bill promote? The only clear beneficiaries seem to be out-of-work antitrust lawyers. Not only will plaintiff attorneys have a field day filing challenges to existing distribution agreements, but antitrust counselors will have to work overtime puzzling through the bill's traps and ambiguities. As usual, consumers will be stuck with the tab: higher prices and less choice.    ---   Mr. Rule is the assistant U.S. attorney general in charge of antitrust. </TEXT></DOC>