<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870701-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Safe at Home:How Indiana ShieldedA Firm and ChangedThe Takeover Business---Many States Try to MaintainStatus Quo and Get NodFrom the Supreme Court---Arvin vs. Belzberg Family---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ARV FCY T.FCYTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> COLUMBUS, Ind.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   One day in December 1985, James K. Baker, the chairman of Arvin Industries Inc., summoned his friend Robert Garton to lunch and let him in on a startling secret. Arvin Industries, an auto-parts giant, had received a letter from Canada's Belzberg family threatening a takeover.    Jim Baker and Bob Garton, the president of the Indiana Senate, went back a long way together in Columbus, a town of tree-lined streets and gingerbread storefronts. They were fellow Rotarians, members of the same gourmet cooking club and parents of former classmates at Southside Junior High School. Now, Mr. Baker asked his old friend to help stop the takeover and save Arvin Industries and Columbus from wrenching change.    Mr. Garton didn't let him down. Within four weeks, he had steered a tough anti-takeover bill, drafted by Arvin's own lawyers, through the Indiana Legislature and onto the governor's desk, where it was promptly signed. The bill, in effect, outlawed most hostile takeovers in the Hoosier State.    Twenty-one states restrict takeovers, and most of the laws sprang from the same impulse that moved Mr. Baker and Mr. Garton: to preserve small company towns and their ways. For many years, judges across the country deemed those laws touching but unconstitutional. The courts said the states were meddling illegally in the nationwide securities market.    That changed last spring. In a ruling on a second Indiana law -- also backed by Arvin -- the Supreme Court upheld the right of states to regulate takeovers.    The decision promises to have a sweeping impact on the takeover game, hobbling corporate raiders and giving management a powerful new defensive weapon. It will give state takeover laws unprecedented power and spur states that don't yet have them on their books to consider them.    Last month, two giant companies threatened by hostile bids, Dayton Hudson Corp. of Minneapolis and Gillette Co. of Boston, lobbied for emergency anti-takeover legislation from their state legislatures. (Minnesota passed a bill last week; Massachusetts is expected to act soon.) Delaware, which is home to about half of the Fortune 500 companies, has drafted an anti-takeover law, although the bill has been tabled until autumn. Among other reasons, Delaware wants to see what Congress will do with the various takeover measures it is considering.    The roots of the Supreme Court's landmark decision are here in Indiana, where Arvin, a company listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and the Belzberg family squared off in a corporate drama whose details have been a carefully guarded secret until now.    Arvin's board-room battle and its legislative victory shed light on the origins of a major shift in business law. They also show how economic exigencies, together with human emotions, give birth to state takeover laws.    At the heart of the saga lie some far-reaching economic issues: How much power should a community have to prevent economic upheavals within its borders? And will towns use this power to preserve harmony and stability or to fossilize aging industrial and social structures?    The assault on Arvin began Dec. 3, 1985, when the Belzberg family wrote the company that it had amassed a 4.9% shareholding and was considering buying the remaining shares. The Belzbergs are a powerful Canadian family, immensely wealthy and well-scarred after a decade of tumultuous takeover attempts.    Their rise began when Abraham Belzberg, a Polish fish peddler, migrated to Canada in 1919 and built a successful used-furniture business. His three sons, Samuel, William and Hyman, moved the family into the real-estate, banking and energy businesses. By the mid-1970s, their flagship company, First City Financial Corp. of Vancouver, oversaw an empire worth billions of dollars.    About eight years ago, the Belzberg sons started showing up on the doorsteps of large U.S. companies, brandishing minority shareholdings in the companies and threatening to take over. They gained a reputation as raiders who could be bought off, and one company after another paid the Belzbergs greenmail -- buying back the shares at a juicy premium over the market price.    The Belzbergs confronted a dozen companies, extracting large payments from Ashland Oil Inc., USG Corp., Potlatch Corp. and others. In 1985, they surprised Wall Street by actually following through on a raid, buying Scovill Inc. The family likes to work in secret and, through a spokesman, refused to be interviewed for this article.    The Belzbergs are exactly the sort of takeover artists chief executives have in mind when they bemoan the excesses of merger mania. But people in Columbus (population 30,200) weren't only worried about the Belzbergs' brand of corporate raiding. They had grave misgivings about how their town would fare if Arvin was ever taken over.    The fortunes of Columbus have been closely bound to Arvin since 1931, when Q.G. Noblitt moved the company's forerunner, Indianapolis Air Pump Co., into town. Last year, Arvin had sales of nearly $1 billion and a profit of $41 million. It makes mufflers, exhaust pipes, catalytic converters, and scores of other industrial and electronic products; it employs about 2,000 people in Columbus, making it the town's second-largest employer, after Cummins Engine Co.    Arvin is the kind of company that chambers of commerce adore. Hundreds of Columbus children go to a pair of schools that Mr. Noblitt donated to the town in the 1950s. In the summers, they play in a 70-acre wooded youth camp, another Noblitt donation.    When Columbus needed a new superintendent of schools two years ago, Arvin executives helped in the nationwide search. Then the company donated money to help the town lure its top prospect to south-central Indiana. A few years ago, Shirley Lyster, an English teacher at Columbus North High School, called Chairman Baker and told him she wished her class could read Homer in the out-of-print George Herbert Palmer translation. Arvin printed a special edition for her.    Columbus is a town with a social fabric so tight-knit that people joke, &quot;You have to pull the blinds to change your mind in Columbus.&quot; When the Belzbergs loomed, the town fathers believed a takeover would shatter the town's long, cozy relationship with Arvin. And it raised the specter of a fate local residents dreaded: Columbus as a mere branch-plant town.    &quot;Had {the Belzbergs} bought Arvin, you'd see that company's personality change overnight,&quot; says Brooke Tuttle, an official at the Columbus Chamber of Commerce. &quot;There's a kind of attitude you get from an out-of-town owner -- the focus is on the bottom line and the return to shareholders.&quot;    &quot;Communities don't become great just being branch-plant towns,&quot; declares Robert Stewart, the mayor of Columbus.    But the town's staunch support of Arvin also springs from some emotional biases, including a deep mistrust of outsiders. &quot;The farther away from Columbus you get,&quot; says Mr. Baker, &quot;the more we look at them with the suspicion that they're not coming from the same place as us.&quot;    It also glosses over a fact that has been painfully clear in Columbus in the 1980s: No matter how hard the town and the state work to keep Arvin, economic necessities are forcing the company to stray far from its beloved hometown. Arvin, the company that doesn't want to become a branch plant, has its own branches in dozens of U.S. cities. In 1970, it opened an electronics factory in Taiwan, which now employs 1,500 people. Meanwhile, unemployment in Bartholomew County, which Columbus dominates, has been nearly 9% in the 1980s, up from about 5% in the '70s. Today one out of six Columbus households lives on an income at or below the poverty level.    In short, Indiana and Columbus were fighting to stay wedded to an industry of the past.    &quot;It used to be that when you got out of high school here, you could always get a job at Cummins or Arvin, no problem,&quot; says Mayor Stewart. &quot;Those days are gone.&quot;    The Belzbergs' advances threw Arvin's management into turmoil. In December 1985, Marc Belzberg, Samuel's son, was calling the company as often as three times a day, vowing to launch a hostile tender offer for Arvin, company officials say. Arvin managed to extract a promise from the Belzbergs to keep their intentions secret, and Mr. Baker and his top aides jetted back and forth to New York for frantic meetings with their investment banker, Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    At first, the deep personal tension between the two camps smoldered quietly. But then they erupted: The Belzbergs threatened to mount a tender offer on the day before Christmas.    It was a strategy they had used successfully a year earlier in their bid for Scovill. The days before Christmas are generally the hardest time of the year for a company to line up a takeover defense.    Under the threat, Arvin's executives lost their cool-and their manners. &quot;We said, 'We're all good gentiles here,'&quot; Mr. Baker recalls. &quot;'We like to be with our families on Dec. 24.'&quot;    Christmas passed -- the Belzbergs didn't come through on their threat -- and a new session was about to get under way in the Indiana Legislature. &quot;We decided we'd better bring Brother Garton {the Senate president} into the fold,&quot; says Mr. Baker.    As Mr. Baker saw it, the stock market values companies inefficiently, making them vulnerable to raiders. It was, he thought, an inequity so deep that only new laws could remedy it.    A lawyer working for Arvin, James Strain, quickly drafted just such a law and sent it to Sen. Garton. Modeled on laws in New York and other states, it banned hostile business combinations for five years after an investor buys 10% of a company.    Sen. Garton made the anti-takeover bill the state Senate's first bill of the session, a slot reserved for matters of pressing importance. The bill was officially declared &quot;emergency legislation,&quot; and it went into effect as soon as the governor signed it. The Legislature's haste drew a scolding from the Indianapolis Star: &quot;This is not a topic to be whipped through the Legislature with a smile and a prayer and no debate.&quot;    Two months later, the Indiana Legislature passed a second anti-takeover statute as part of a major revision of the state's corporate code. Arvin's lawyer, Mr. Strain, was one of three Indianapolis attorneys who drafted it.    With that law, the trio came up with a novel way to thwart a hostile bidder. The law springs a booby trap on an investor who acquires 20% of an Indiana company: He loses his shares' voting rights unless the other shareholders move to reinstate them.    Arvin says the new laws helped repel the Belzbergs' takeover attempt. Shortly after the second law passed, the two sides settled. Arvin agreed to buy for $39 million a Belzberg-owned tire-valve company it had declined to purchase just one year earlier. (Arvin says the Belzbergs lowered the price to a reasonable level.) It also bought for $20.4 million the Belzbergs' Arvin shares, paying $25.25 each, which was below the market price at the time but still gave the raiders a handsome profit, according to Arvin officials.    Indiana's booby-trap law, formally known as the Control Share Acquisition Chapter, was quickly challenged by Dynamics Corp. of America, a Connecticut electronics firm that bumped up against the law when it tried to buy part of an Indiana company, CTS Corp. Last fall the Supreme Court agreed to consider the law.    A slew of lower courts had struck down similar state laws, mostly on the grounds that they blocked interstate commerce. The U.S. Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission filed a brief urging the Supreme Court to do the same. So did Texas takeover artist T. Boone Pickens, who warned that Indiana's law &quot;would lead inexorably to a Balkanization of the nation's corporate economy.&quot;    But on April 21, one year after the Belzbergs backed off from Arvin, the Supreme Court rejected the challenge by a 6-3 vote. Four justices who rarely side together joined in retiring Justice Lewis Powell's majority opinion: Justices William Rehnquist, Sandra Day O'Connor, William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall.    Their opinion dismissed the Indiana law's effect on interstate commerce as &quot;limited.&quot; And it declared that the law fell well within states' rights to regulate their corporations and define the kinds of stock they can issue.    The decision came on the heels of Wall Street's insider-trading scandals and amid a national uproar against takeovers. While the justices didn't directly acknowledge that background, their tone indicated that they, too, believed the merger game had gone too far.    The law, according to the court, would allow &quot;shareholders collectively to determine whether the takeover is advantageous to their interests {which} may be especially beneficial where a hostile tender offer may coerce shareholders into tendering their shares.&quot;    Justice Antonin Scalia also upheld the law, but he would not sign his name to Justice Powell's broad endorsement of state takeover laws. A law &quot;can be both economic folly and constitutional,&quot; he wrote. &quot;The Indiana Control Shares Acquisition Chapter is at least the latter.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>