<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890802-0079 </DOCNO><DD> = 890802 </DD><AN> 890802-0079. </AN><HL> Commodities:@  Fears of Another Soybean Squeeze Are Easing;@  Ferruzzi Apparently Has Sold Some Holdings@  ----@  By Sue Shellenbarger@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/02/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Fears of another &quot;squeeze&quot; in soybean futures are easing, as Ferruzzi Finanziaria S.p.A. apparently has sold some of its holdings.    Traders affiliated with the big Italian merchant and soybean processor have been selling soybean futures for August delivery in recent days on the Chicago Board of Trade, traders and analysts said. Ferruzzi is also believed to have made a major sale on the export market. The sales have helped spur a decline of more than 40 cents a bushel in soybeans for August delivery on the Chicago Board of Trade in the past three trading days. Soybean futures were mixed, with the contract for delivery this month tumbling 11 cents a bushel to $6.135.    Many traders anticipated another showdown this month between Ferruzzi and the Board of Trade. The CBOT issued an emergency order last month forcing traders to close out positions in July soybean futures, saying later that Ferruzzi's big holdings on cash and futures markets threatened a default. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the federal futures watchdog, also pressed Ferruzzi to close out its futures positions.    In a squeeze, one or a few traders holding a commanding position on cash and futures markets during a period of short supply can force prices sharply higher. Soybeans are unusually scarce as a result of last summer's drought, which slashed the harvest by hundreds of millions of bushels.    It isn't clear that the problem has passed. Contracts covering delivery of more than 70 million bushels of soybeans were still outstanding on the Chicago Board of Trade as of late Monday, according to the most recent figures available, and only 10.7 million bushels of soybeans are on hand in exchange-certified warehouses.    Nevertheless, the August soybean futures' former unusually wide price premium over other months has narrowed sharply in recent days, reflecting a widespread easing of tension in the market. U.S. farmers have stepped up soybean sales recently, and beans from the Brazilian harvest have flowed onto world markets as well.    &quot;We certainly don't believe there's going to be a problem with the August contract,&quot; David Swanson, a Ferruzzi executive and president of Central Soya Inc., Ferruzzi's U.S. soybean-processing arm, said. &quot;Of course, we don't think there should have been a problem with the July contract, either.&quot; Ferruzzi has sharply criticized the Board of Trade's action, calling it unnecessary and prejudicial.    Mr. Swanson said Central Soya has been active on cash markets, both to feed its processing plants and to meet its export commitments. The company needs about 40% fewer soybeans than it did during July, he said.    &quot;We have crushed through {processed} our July needs and shipped our July export contracts,&quot; he said. He reiterated that all of the company's activities on cash and futures markets have been aimed at meeting its needs as a processor and merchant, not at making a speculative profit.    In other developments, corn and wheat prices were mostly higher in a rebound from Monday's session, when corn set new life-of-contract lows. Many traders bought contracts to cover short, or selling, positions. Analysts said technical factors also played a part as prices &quot;backed and filled&quot; the gaps left on price charts by Monday's steep drop.    Weather conditions in corn and soybean-growing states continue to favor big crops. The National Weather Service's outlook for the next six to 10 days, released late Monday, predicts mild temperatures in much of the Corn Belt, and state-by-state reports are showing general improvements in crop conditions. If favorable weather continues, corn and soybean prices could decline going into the harvest, said Steve Freed, a senior analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil prices tumbled as the threat of a supply disruption from violent weather in the Gulf of Mexico subsided. Hurricane Chantal, the first major storm of the season, hit the Texas coast yesterday but soon lost force. It was quickly apparent that neither coastal refineries nor offshore production platforms suffered damage. Meanwhile, concern over Mideast turmoil eased as the deadline for the threatened execution of a second U.S. hostage was extended. Oil prices rose in early trading, then started to slip back. By the close, crude oil was down 28 cents a barrel at $18.03, gasoline was off 1.27 cents a gallon, and heating oil fell 0.11 cent a gallon. The price of gasoline took a beating when the hurricane-caused &quot;buying hype&quot; faded, said Stephen McKiernan, president of McKiernan andamp; Co., New York. Gasoline is currently the most market-sensitive of the oil products because U.S. refiners can't make enough of it to satisfy summer driving demand and so marketers depend on imports. But the overall oil price outlook is expected to remain bearish. Industry strategists say members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, despite recent agreements to control output, are collectively producing about two million barrels of oil more than their daily quota. Even if the hostage situation resulted in some military retaliation against Iran that would limit its oil output, other OPEC members would probably step in and pick up Iran's share, one industry official said.    COFFEE: Futures prices rose in reaction to a prolonged decline that has cost them more than a third of their value since mid-June. The September contract ended with a gain of 3.38 cents a pound at 82.37 cents. Analysts had been saying the market was greatly oversold but that the pressure from producing countries selling green coffee was too strong for a technical recovery to take place. Some of that pressure may have subsided. When the September contract traded at a new life-of-contract low of 78.50 cents yesterday, some support buying appeared, one analyst said. Increased buying by coffee roasters also was a factor, the analyst said. A dealer said active demand appeared from an overseas fund and from two major New York trade firms. Another dealer said great unhappiness about the severe drop in prices was expressed at a meeting last weekend in Colombia attended by representatives from that nation, Brazil and Mexico. Those major coffee-producing nations reportedly tended to blame the U.S. and certain other countries for the collapse of talks on a new international coffee agreement. As a result, the dealer said, rumors circulated early yesterday that Brazil and Colombia might close registrations of coffee sales. This contributed to the market's firmness. Brazil and Colombia later denied the rumors, the dealer said. There also was a forecast of cooler weather in Brazil toward the end of the week. Peter Leavitt, meteorologist and vice president of Weather Services Corp., Bedford, Mass., said: &quot;Cooler temperatures are expected this weekend, particularly on Saturday, but they don't look dangerous for the coffee crops in Brazil. This has been a season of mild temperatures which have lacked a major freeze threat.&quot; It was too early to be more specific about the temperatures expected for the coffee-growing areas, he said.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices were narrowly mixed. Gold for August delivery ended with a gain of 30 cents an ounce at $370.80, while September silver was off two cents an ounce, to $5.293. October platinum advanced $2 an ounce, to $504.70. &quot;It was a very anemic response to a weak dollar, particularly in gold,&quot; one analyst said. He also said there was a drop in open interest for gold, while silver's open interest rose. Open interest is the number of contracts that remain to be liquidated by delivery of the commodity or by an offsetting trade. &quot;It could be that the spread between gold and silver was getting a little too big and traders decided to get out of gold and into silver,&quot; he said. Stock and bond markets were active, and this could have drawn away some trading, he said. The analyst also said increased tensions in the Middle East may have stimulated buying of precious metals from that area. Another analyst, however, said bullion market demand was practically nonexistent and that its weakness was the principal reason that futures prices failed to respond to weakness in the dollar. &quot;What we get is these little bulges of shortcovering that lack follow-through and extend the pattern of failed rallies,&quot; he said. While the Middle East situation didn't trigger any significant demand in futures, it did contribute to a cautious mood that tended to moderate selling, he said. </TEXT></DOC>