<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890802-0097 </DOCNO><DD> = 890802 </DD><AN> 890802-0097. </AN><HL> Communism's Uneasy Generals@  ----@  By Stephen Sestanovich </HL><DD> 08/02/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><TEXT>   &quot;We still have the army,&quot; Deng Xiaoping said, with obvious relief, after the bloody clearing of Tiananmen Square. Having the army, of course, is nothing new for communist governments. In China and elsewhere, armed force has often been the party's insurance against reforms that spin out of control.    Yet no insurance policy lasts forever. A look at several key communist countries, in fact, shows a pattern of party-military estrangement that may soon come to dominate their politics. Military men are having to position themselves between restive societies and embattled leaderships, and they have not found it particularly easy.    Soviet Gen. Igor Rodionov has been called a murderer for his part in the April massacre of demonstrators in Georgia, and faces demands that he be expelled from the new Congress of People's Deputies. Asked whether his own men would implement a crackdown, Hungarian Gen. Janos Seboek insists that they are no longer a &quot;party army,&quot; and that orders to fire on an unarmed crowd would be disobeyed.    The Polish example shows that soldiers who come to the party's rescue have not one but many decisions to make. Although Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski and his lieutenants imposed martial law in 1981 to uphold communist rule, since then the strength of their commitment has come into question. Already a handful of military men control the central political authority in Poland; they take civilian party officials into their inner circle, not the other way around. When strikes threatened public order last year, Gen. Jaruzelski authorized Gen. Czeslaw Kiszczak, then the interior minister (and now the Communist Party's prime minister-designate), to open talks with Solidarity.    The government agreed to recognize the union as a legitimate party and to hold elections in which, even though ultimate political control would not be at stake, many party leaders were certain to be humiliated. Gen. Jaruzelski made it known that he would resign if the communist hierarchy rejected the deal. In the end, the electoral experiment humiliated the party and the military leadership alike. Generals were swept aside with others on the Communist Party slate, and Gen. Jaruzelski had to lobby for support among both Solidarity moderates and disaffected communist hard-liners before becoming president. He has since resigned all his party posts.    The episode carries a chastening message: To make the new system work, the Polish military needs greater popular loyalty than it has been able to regain since martial law. The generals' own reforms have put them under intense pressure to show which side they are really on.    The Polish pattern, like the Chinese, puts enormous responsibility on the military. Politically exposed and disliked, generals become a symbol of the old order just as it seems to be giving way.    This is why, in several other communist countries, military officers have sought to keep themselves on the sidelines as the regime copes with popular challenges. In Hungary, the army seems to be taking itself successfully out of politics. Since the end of last year, the Central Committee department overseeing the army has been abolished; &quot;comrade&quot; is no longer to be the standard form of address among officers; the institution of party commissars in military units is also under challenge, with some suggesting that as Hungary moves toward pluralism soldiers should be allowed to join rival parties.    Because Hungary faces no imminent threat of disorder, its reformist leadership can quite easily accept the weakening of party control over the military. In the Soviet Union, by contrast, Mikhail Gorbachev faces near weekly outbreaks of violence, and the military's role in containing them has become a highly charged issue. Early sessions of the new legislature were devoted in considerable part to debating who was responsible for the deaths of 19 Georgian demonstrators last spring, and Gen. Rodionov, who commanded the troops in Tbilisi, had to take the podium to rebut the charges against him. Oddly enough, his defense echoed the anti-military rhetoric of the reformers. Keeping the peace at home, he said, is not the army's job, and he claims to have resisted repeated efforts by local party officials for an even earlier crackdown.    Mr. Gorbachev himself has agreed that the army should be allowed to &quot;do its own job&quot; -- that is, assuring security from external, rather than internal, threats. According to Vladmir Lapygin, chairman of the new Supreme Soviet committee overseeing the armed forces, draft legislation has been prepared to confirm this assignment of duties. Already the Georgian affair has had an impact. When ethnic violence broke out in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan in June, Moscow avoided calling out any regular military units to handle it, staging a large airlift of police troops instead, even though soldiers from local army garrisons might well have gotten to the scene earlier.    The trend toward violence in the Soviet Union means Mr. Gorbachev cannot afford to absolve the generals of all responsibility for maintaining public order. As his unusual nationwide TV address of July 1 made clear, violent incidents are spreading and can no longer be considered wholly isolated. Food shortages and worker unrest, moreover, mean that violence may not be confined to areas of ethnic tension. Meanwhile, the charge that &quot;perestroika&quot; is creating chaos has become the principal conservative critique of reform (more so than questions of ideological purity). With this complaint in mind, Mr. Gorbachev told the new Congress that the army must be available as a crowd-control tool of last resort: &quot;To maintain stability when necessary, we will employ all forces: political, organizational, the militia, {party} activists, the people -- all of them.&quot;    Because he may have to turn to the military in a future crisis, letting a general be made the scapegoat for the Georgian massacre is risky for Mr. Gorbachev. The high command has begun to say as much. The new commander of Soviet ground forces, Gen. Valentin Varennikov, expressed support for Gen. Rodionov at the Congress and added that &quot;no one can say for sure how events would have turned out&quot; without the army's help in a series of hotspots -- Kazakhstan in 1986, Armenia and Azerbaijan in 1988, Georgia in 1989.    More pointedly, Gen. V.K. Pankin of the Interior Ministry claimed after the Uzbek riots in June that some of his men hesitated to use force because they worried about whether they would enjoy &quot;legal protection&quot; for their actions. They were &quot;scared&quot; to shoot. &quot;We totally lack the necessary legal norms,&quot; he said, &quot;in cases where it is necessary not only to display courage and resolve but also to employ the most extreme means.&quot; Translation: We suspect Mr. Gorbachev won't stand behind those he assigns to keep order.    Andrei Sakharov and others have raised the specter of a military takeover in the Soviet Union, and the possibility should not be laughed off. Mr. Gorbachev has done very little to win the generals' loyalty and much to diminish their prestige in popular eyes. He has cut their budget, re-written their doctrine, interfered with promotions, and subjected them to civilian harassment. Most recently he publicly overruled Defense Minister Gen. Dmitri Yazov by granting new draft deferments.    In reply, military officers have regularly taken advantage of the new openness of Soviet debate to voice law-and-order positions that are implicitly critical of Mr. Gorbachev. Yet these criticisms don't mean the army is eager for a larger role. To the contrary, they are the complaints of a group that is reluctant to take responsibility, wary of further damage to its prestige, and resentful of Mr. Gorbachev because he has created conditions in which too much may be asked of it. These are not the classic grievances of coup-makers.    Elsewhere in the communist world, there are traces of the Soviet military's outlook: concern over the disorder that reform has created but reluctance to deal with it. Yugoslav military men have warned the country's fractious political leadership to get its house in order, but they are also said to want relief from their largest current assignment -- policing nationalist unrest in the largely Albanian province of Kosovo.    Even in China, party-military cooperation may start to show some strains. Western analysts seem to have exaggerated the danger of open warfare between military units after the June 4 crackdown, but there is no question that beforehand military leaders were divided about how to handle the unrest. Many active and retired officers signed a declaration opposing the use of force in Tiananmen Square, and this group will in all likelihood be the target of a purge in military ranks. Because Deng Xiaoping's modernization strategy -- economic reform without political freedoms -- virtually guarantees cyclical blow-ups, he needs to be sure that next time around the army will again stand firm and do its brutal work if needed.    As the foundations of communist power begin to crumble world-wide, it is hardly surprising that party leaderships should hope that military force can shore them up. Sometimes it clearly will. Yet it would be even more surprising if the system's broader crisis were not also taking a toll on relations between politicians and generals. The growing estrangement between them is, in fact, one of the most striking features of contemporary communism.    Military men are being pulled into the turbulent process of reform politics, and they don't like it. In the future, they will probably like it even less. What is asked of them will vary, as will their willingness to comply. But their unhappiness with the role of enforcer has already become an important new element in the effort of party leaders to modernize the communist system of power.    ---   Mr. Sestanovich is director of Soviet studies at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. </TEXT></DOC>