<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880822-0054 </DOCNO><HL> State of the State: Texas Sees First Signs Of Recovery, but It Faces Painful Changes --- With Energy Firms Shrinking And Bank Loans Curbed, Rampant Growth Is Over --- Some Investors Start Buying ---- This article was prepared by Wall Street Journal staff reporters Hal Lancaster, Michael Totty, Leonard M. Apcar and Caleb Solomon </HL><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT TAXES </CO><IN> BNK REL PET CON FIN ECO </IN><TEXT>   For a change, the economic news from deep in the heart of you-know-where hasn't been all heartburn.    The biggest banking company in Texas has been hauled back from the brink, buoying confidence in a state ravaged by failures of financial institutions. Oil prices have stabilized at $14 to $16 a barrel, enough for the stripped-down industry to earn solid profits. The declining dollar has bolstered exports and revived manufacturing. The free fall in rents for top-grade commercial real estate seems to have halted. Unemployment has dropped to 6.3% from 8.4% in the past year.    So, is a Texas-sized economic recovery in the making?    Along with just about all the state's residents, thousands of big-bucks investors would like to know. A few brave plungers are again putting their money into Texas corporations, banks and real estate. Many more are poised on the sidelines, waiting for clearer signs that the bottom has finally been reached after an epic bust.    But even if it has been reached, as many observers believe, Texans are awakening to a bitter reality: With the energy industry shrinking and battered financial institutions restricting their once-freewheeling lending practices, the state may never again bask in the flashy economic growth that made it famous.    How could this happen to mighty Texas, the third-most-populous, fastest-growing state in the U.S.? Its 1986 gross state product, at $300.8 billion, would rank it 10th in industrial output among the world's nations, ahead of such countries as Brazil, India and Poland. Moreover, Texas never had seemed to suffer even if the rest of the U.S. was mired in a recession. The state just had kept pumping its abundant oil, shipping its rich agricultural products and building, building, building.    But now, Texas, as a major oil-producing state, is gradually going dry. Most people think the state's big oil fields have already been found, Alaska is outproducing Texas, and as much as half of major U.S. oil companies' exploration budgets are going overseas.    After oil prices plunged to less than $9 a barrel in 1986 and employment shriveled, the grossly overbuilt real-estate market imploded, and it took with it a wide swath of financial institutions. All but two of the 10 largest Texas banks have been involved in some form of takeover or rescue. As many as 150 of the state's savings and loan associations are expected to be swept up in the so-called Southwest Plan, the federal government's ambitious thrift-industry bailout program. Late last week, federal regulators announced two government-assisted bailouts involving 20 ailing Texas thrifts.    From late 1981 to early 1987, the state lost 262,000 jobs. In Houston and Dallas, the state's two largest metropolitan areas, personal income from rents, royalties, dividends and interest plunged from $16.7 billion in 1984 to $8.4 billion in 1986, according to Internal Revenue Service figures. To fill the 95.1 million square feet of vacant offices in the state's four largest office markets, Texas would need to generate about 380,000 new jobs.    &quot;This was much more severe than anything the Midwest went through in the '70s, and it occurred in a shorter time frame. So, it was more disruptive,&quot; says Bernard L. Weinstein, a Southern Methodist University economist.    Now, Texas has taken on the look of a giant fire sale: commercial properties selling for as little as 10 cents on the dollar, some housing going for less than construction costs, companies fetching a fraction of what they once were considered worth. In rescuing First RepublicBank Corp., the state's largest banking company, NCNB Corp. of North Carolina entered a market with a deposit base of $150 million for about 107% of First RepublicBank's book value. By contrast, NCNB was paying as much as twice book value for banks in the Southeast, even though Texas' deposit base is twice that in NCNB's three core states, the Carolinas and Florida.    Other investors also are rising to the bait. Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. has acquired two downtown Dallas office buildings, for itself and for private investors. Boston-based Aldrich, Easton andamp; Waltch Inc. has been buying retail properties in Dallas. Minneapolis banker Carl Pohlad picked up, with government assistance, two of Texas' top 10 banks recently, and banking companies from Los Angeles, New York and Chicago, as well as North Carolina, also have invaded Texas.    In oil, Elf Aquitaine of France bought out Roy Huffington, an independent oil man, for an estimated $60 million, and the Saudis picked up a half-interest in Texaco Inc.'s Port Arthur, Texas, refinery, one of the world's largest. Japanese investors bought a 3,000-acre parcel of ranchland and are seeking 10,000 more, says Angelos Angelou, the chief economist for the Austin Chamber of Commerce.    However, the lookers still far outnumber the buyers. Roy Herberger, the dean of the Southern Methodist University business school, says brokers for large foreign investment pools have been visiting the school regularly to ask about the Texas economy. Their interest is encouraging, he says, but he adds: &quot;Don't get me wrong: That money is still on the sideline.&quot;    Why? Because where some now see opportunity, others still see a black hole. At a recent real-estate seminar titled &quot;Bottom Fishing in the Oil Patch,&quot; Boston investor Edward Callan said this is the time to purchase top-quality, depressed commercial real estate in Houston. His strategy: &quot;Buy in the central core of the city, pay 10 cents to 12 cents on the dollar in cash, clean it up and wait.&quot;    But Sol Rabin, a member of the same panel, can't imagine investing in real estate in Houston, in view of its 31% vacancy rate in commercial buildings. A senior partner with TCW Realty Advisers in Los Angeles, Mr. Rabin estimated that Houston's surplus office space won't be filled for 16 years -- even assuming that itchy developers don't add to the current inventory. &quot;It's dangerous when you invest in a one-horse economy,&quot; he explains. &quot;We don't see any light at the end of the tunnel for Houston.&quot;    The plungers, analysts say, are nervy contrarians convinced that Texas hasn't seen the last of empire building in the style of H.L. Hunt and rich enough to ride out any storms. &quot;The people who are going to be rich in five years are buying properties right now,&quot; says J. Reid McTaggart, a researcher at the Rice Center, a Houston-based think tank.    Maybe. But in a state where one over-enthusiastic economic guru has been chided for predicting 10 of the last two turnarounds, investors have been burned before, and most are still nervous. If oil goes down to $10 a barrel, says Maxwell Drever, a San Francisco investor who has been buying Houston apartment buildings, &quot;I'm going to have the same problems as the people I'm buying from.&quot;    Poorly timed plunges into real estate have already pushed under some Texas luminaries: Among those filing bankruptcy petitions were John Connally, the former governor, and Denton Cooley, the famed heart surgeon. In June 1987, optimistic investors snapped up $100 million of notes offered by First RepublicBank, a new company created by the merger of the two largest banks in Dallas. A year and nearly $3 billion in losses later, its government-assisted takeover left the note holders with little but a chastening experience.    Another horror story: While other developers were licking their wounds in 1984, Wortham andamp; Van Liew boldly broke ground for the $200 million, 53-story Heritage Plaza in Houston. The partnership was confident that the lavish, glass-and-granite office building would be the only such tower coming on line in the midst of a bustling 1987 recovery. The building was completed, but the recovery didn't arrive. Today, more than 90% of Heritage Plaza is unoccupied. The opportunity &quot;we anticipated will probably occur one to two years later,&quot; says David Horn, the building's chagrined project manager.    The state will recover, just about everybody agrees. Texas is too big and too wealthy to stay down forever. Last year, about $9.1 billion of goods was shipped overseas through the Port of Houston, up from $8.1 billion in 1986. Aided by the weak dollar, the big gainers were petrochemicals, industrial machinery, synthetic resins and rubbers, and grain.    But most economists agree that the current economic malaise has permanently changed the state. With the growth of its service and technology industries, the Texas economy will become more like the national economy and, like it, will experience slower, if steadier, growth.    Never again will Texas be so dependent on the oil industry. At its peak, state controller Bob Bullock says, oil generated 27 cents of every dollar of state taxes; now, it yields 8.5 cents of every dollar.    Faced with the prospect of persistently low energy prices, oil companies have changed, too. They have kissed goodbye the highflying days of corporate hunting lodges and gone through fundamental restructurings -- starting at the top. Aggressive oil seekers have been replaced at corporate helms by accountants, who have swiftly cut spending. Once, oil companies might wait 15 years for a drilling project to pay off; today, Phillips Petroleum Co. won't sink a well unlikely to pay for itself within three years. Some companies have closed regional operations in the state.    In addition, many of the independent oilmen who largely forged the Texas get-rich-quick legend were mortally wounded, not only by low oil prices but also by tax reform, which wrecked the good-old-boy network of hunting buddies and rich doctors who had bankrolled much of the wildcatting. To remain active, Roy Cullen, grandson of legendary wildcatter Hugh Roy Cullen, recently became the operator of a $180 million drilling venture with an unlikely partner: Harvard University.    Oil's decline hit hardest at Houston, whose economy routinely grew at a 6% to 7% annual clip in the boom days; it will grow 2.3% annually in the next five years, the Rice Center predicts. &quot;If the price of oil rose 100%, I don't think it would do Houston any harm,&quot; comments James P. Gaines, a vice president at the center, &quot;but it wouldn't necessarily throw the city back into a boom.&quot; Even if oil prices again top $25 a barrel or so, Texas wouldn't benefit a lot. Little exploring is left to do in its depleted onshore areas, and most of the benefit from the hot Gulf of Mexico oil play goes to Louisiana.    The problems in oil exacerbate the problems in Texas agriculture. Many farms and ranches have producing oil and gas wells and were devastated by low energy prices. And in Texas as in much of the U.S., overproduction has kept crop prices well below production costs for several years, even after federal subsidies. Diversification into other crops was hampered by the cutbacks in bank lending.    So the hints of recovery elsewhere in the state haven't reached the farm sector, which has been further devastated by drought. Texas farmers and ranchers have lost about $1.4 billion in crops and livestock so far this year. And farmers haven't benefited much from increased grain exports; most of those gains have gone to the shippers. Texas had 156,000 farms and ranches on June 1, down from 184,000 three years earlier, the state agriculture department estimates.    The trouble in oil didn't affect Dallas until 1985, when petroleum prices stopped dropping and started plunging. The grotesque overbuilding in Dallas and the vulnerability of its financial institutions were suddenly exposed; so was the myth that the city needn't worry about oil-related recessions. Austin's overbuilding was fueled by high-tech fever, which soared in 1983 when the city became home to Microelectronics andamp; Computer Technology Corp., a coveted new research consortium. But Austin boosters didn't realize that the highly proprietary results of the consortium's research would go back to the members' operations and do little for Texas.    Nevertheless, economists still see the state's future growth coming from the high-technology, defense and service industries, but the future hasn't arrived just yet. The percentage of energy-related jobs in Houston declined to 65% from 81% in the past five years, but two out of three workers there still rely on the industry, directly or indirectly, for employment.    In the past five years, four high-tech areas -- electronics, aircraft, instrumentation and non-oil-field, non-electrical machinery, including computers -- provided Texas with only 4,000 net new jobs. The employment gains were restricted, until this past year, by the strong dollar, which hurt electronics exports, and by worldwide overcapacity in semiconductors. Several major high-tech employers, including Texas Instruments Inc., slashed employment, and several small to medium-sized companies collapsed. Meanwhile, 216,500 oil-related jobs, generally paying far more than most high-tech work, were lost.    As reliance on oil ebbs, however, some have questioned Texas' ability to compete for new jobs. Until 1984, Houston, relying on oil, didn't even have an economic development commission. Now, the city, as well as the state, has been hurled into competition with more experienced rivals.    The state's fragile recovery could also be waylaid by rising interest rates or a national recession. And despite the psychological boost from the NCNB deal, many still worry that the state's financial institutions haven't stanched the bleeding and won't lend aggressively enough to fuel growth. The state's woebegone thrift institutions lost $2.1 billion in June alone, and the Southwest Plan, critics contend, is moving far too slowly, increasing the cost of the bailout and discouraging potential investors who could bring in fresh capital.    The new owners of the state's big banks, eager to avoid more huge loan losses, have tightened up lending policies. Some are emphasizing consumer business over most commercial loans, which, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas estimates, already fell 28.7% in the past two years.    While banks are competing furiously for blue-chip borrowers, they are rejecting anything smacking of an entrepreneurial loan. When Sysco Corp., a solidly profitable food distributor, sought an $800 million credit facility, it was deluged with offers and got a below-prime interest rate. But a Dallas printing company searched for a year for a loan to finance its receivables. &quot;The collateral they expect is absolutely ridiculous,&quot; the owner says. &quot;They are looking down your throats and taking every penny you don't have pledged. If the banks don't change, we're going into a depressed state in Dallas.&quot;    If that happens, another batch of bottom fishers may see a buying opportunity. And eventually, some of them will time the turn correctly. &quot;A lot of money will still be made here,&quot; says Thomas R. Plaut, senior economist in the state controller's office, &quot;but it will require a lot more sophistication, a lot more recognition and sensitivity about what's happening in the national and international economy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>