<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0146 </DOCNO><HL> When Institute of Medicine Speaks, People Listen,Because Newest President Won't Let It Be Ignored---By Alan L. OttenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congress has asked it to suggest ways to provide health care for the homeless. The Social Security Administration wants it to figure out whether physical pain can be measured with sufficient precision to serve as a basis for disability payments.    Its recent report on the dimensions of the AIDS crisis has become a starting point for most subsequent discussion of policies for research, education and prevention, patient care and other aspects of the epidemic.    After more than 15 years of comparative obscurity, the Institute of Medicine -- a private, nonprofit organization created to provide the federal government with authoritative and disinterested advice on health policy and health-care delivery -- finally seems to be gaining visibility and clout in Washington. And an energetic, politically sensitive new president, former Yale Medical School professor Samuel O. Thier, is getting much of the credit.    &quot;He has clearly brought a sense of purpose and vigor to an organization that badly needed both,&quot; says Harvey Fineberg, dean of the Harvard School of Public Health. Robert Blendon, senior vice president of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, agrees: &quot;Almost uniquely, he knows medicine and research but also knows how Washington institutions work and the importance of the media.&quot;    The institute's emergence comes at an opportune time, when new technology, increasing health costs, the escalating number of older people and other factors are making health care a critical area of government policy.    The Institute of Medicine was set up in late 1970 as a component of the National Academy of Sciences, a private organization that was chartered by Congress in 1863 to advise the government on science and technology. Its members, elected on the basis of professional achievement, are mainly doctors and other health professionals but at least 25% must be lawyers, economists, social scientists and other nonmedical professionals.    In return for the honor of belonging, members serve without pay on study committees the institute sets up to examine important health issues or to answer specific congressional and agency requests for help. There are 428 active members and 262 senior members over the age limit of 66 for active status.    From the start, the institute had major problems. &quot;It was considered a prestigious but not very effective organization,&quot; says Marion Ein Lewin, director of health-policy research at the American Enterprise Institute.    The National Academy of Sciences provided start-up funds but little in sustained support; the institute was constantly forced to scramble for money, having its program set by what federal clients were willing to finance and unable to undertake much on its own initiative.    A rapid turnover in presidents -- four in the 15 years before Dr. Thier took over at the end of 1985 -- undermined any sense of stability and continuity. Studies often took two years or more to complete, and &quot;by the time a study was done, the war was over,&quot; says Rashi Fein, a Harvard health-policy specialist. The need to reach committee consensus made many reports mushy, and little effort was put into publicizing study findings.    Finally, foundations that had been providing some support began drawing back. &quot;They didn't want to make further commitments until they knew (the institute) was alive and well,&quot; Ms. Lewin says.    Into this rather unpromising situation came Dr. Thier, chairman of the department of internal medicine at Yale and a ranking renal specialist. He exacted a larger annual contribution from the academy, and was given a free hand to raise an outside endowment, he says, &quot;so we could have an agenda of our own as well as responding to requests from the government.&quot; So far, his obvious determination to heighten the Institute of Medicine's profile has persuaded a number of foundations to supply more than $10 million toward what he hopes will eventually be a $20 million to $25 million endowment.    Another early decision was to launch the study of acquired immune deficiency syndrome, a subject Dr. Thier thought the institute could address with particular authority and so provide evidence of its new sense of purpose. He has also pushed for quicker turnaround on studies, providing more money and people for some and narrowing the scope of others. The AIDS report, for example, was done in less than seven months by dividing the work among a steering committee and two study panels -- one on research and the others on prevention and care.    The report, issued last fall, estimated that by the end of the decade as much as $2 billion would be needed annually for public health measures and AIDS-related research. It made dozens of specific recommendations on how the money could best be used.    Study groups now at work are exploring such diverse areas as the new demands public-health agencies are likely to face in the coming decades, ways to increase the supply of geriatric specialists, and measures to increase the availability and use of pre-natal care.    The 49-year-old Dr. Thier preaches the importance of reaching wider audiences with the institute's reports. Not only are findings more aggressively promoted when first released, but follow-up efforts also include distribution in book form and even videotape for university use. &quot;Dissemination is our current buzz word,&quot; says communications director Wallace Waterfall.    From time to time, the institute organizes workshops of one or two days in which several dozen specialists kick around an emerging health-care problem, often with agency and congressional staff members in the audience. For example, when the House and Senate Commerce committees sought advice on how to deal with vaccine shortages, the institute quickly organized a two-day conference of experts.    Dr. Thier regularly makes the rounds of Capitol Hill and agency offices, stressing the institute's desire to provide honest, impartial analysis. The agencies and lawmakers are ordering more studies by the institute, bills are being introduced to carry out institute recommendations, chairmen of institute study committees are being asked to testify at hearings, and IOM findings are constantly being cited in congressional debates and agency reports.    &quot;We are getting calls for help regularly now from people in Congress and the agencies,&quot; Dr. Thier says. &quot;They are beginning to sense we truly mean to be a resource to them.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>