<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870317-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A CONGRESSMAN WAS INDICTED on bribery and conspiracy charges.    Democratic Rep. Biaggi of New York and the former leader of the Democratic Party in Brooklyn, Meade Esposito, were indicted for attempting to obtain favorable treatment from the Navy for Coastal Dry Dock, a ship-repair company. Esposito held a financial stake in the firm. The seven-count indictment, filed in U.S. court in Brooklyn, accused Biaggi of taking bribes and, at the party leader's behest, of trying to influence various officials to help the company.    Biaggi, a congressman for 18 years, told a news conference that he was innocent and wouldn't resign, saying &quot;I know I'll be exonerated.&quot;    ---   Reagan received two messages from arms broker Ghorbanifar since the Iran-Contra scandal erupted. A spokesman wouldn't disclose the contents or whether they came through TV journalist Barbara Walters, who confirmed passing data to Reagan. ABC said Walters had violated &quot;a literal interpretation&quot; of network policy.    House and Senate investigators neared agreement on a timetable for granting limited immunity to central figures in the Iran affair, congressional sources said. The panels plan to take the proposal to the independent counsel as early as today.    ---   A senior U.S. official opened two days of talks in Moscow with Kremlin officials, the highest level U.S.-Soviet contact since October's summit in Iceland. Undersecretary of State Armacost was expected to discuss a range of regional issues, as well as plans for Shultz's trip to Moscow next month to discuss arms control with Shevardnadze.    U.S. and Soviet negotiators resumed talks in Geneva on nuclear testing, with Moscow apparently seeking a full ban on such blasts and Washington focusing on verification of existing treaties that limit the size of test explosions.    ---   Defense Minister Rabin denied that Israel is still spying on the U.S. in the aftermath of the espionage operation involving American intelligence analyst Jonathan Pollard. State radio, meanwhile, said the Israeli government has paid $80,000 to a Washington lawyer, apparently to help cover legal expenses incurred by Pollard.    ---   The U.S. and Turkey signed a five-year defense and economic assistance pact that provides for U.S. military bases on Turkish soil through 1990. Under the accord, Ankara will receive nearly $720 million in assistance this year. The agreement came amid deteriorating U.S. ties with Greece, which has accused the U.S. of favoring Turkey.    ---   Weinberger met with officials in Madrid and discussed cutting the American military presence in Spain. The U.S. currently has about 12,500 troops stationed at four bases in Spain. The defense secretary's talks with Prime Minister Gonzalez and Defense Minister Serra also covered NATO and other bilateral issues, U.S. officials said.    ---   The Reagan administration issued proposed regulations that would charge a fee of $185 to illegal aliens who apply for legal status beginning May 5 under amnesty provisions of the new immigration law. Those who are unable to pay or are on public assistance won't be eligible to become U.S. citizens, the INS commissioner said.    ---   A deadline passed with the fate of a French hostage in Lebanon uncertain. A pro-Iranian group threatened to kill the Frenchman over Paris's Mideast policy. Separately, the archbishop of Canterbury offered to try to determine the whereabouts of an Iranian missing in Lebanon, and Tehran said it would help find Terry Waite.    ---   Philippine President Aquino ordered the immediate disbanding of private militias, including a paramilitary force established under Marcos that was linked to human-rights abuses during fighting against communist rebels. Some officials said the move risked offending the country's restive military.    ---   Massachusetts Gov. Dukakis said he intends to seek the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination, calling himself a long shot. Dukakis announced in Boston the formation of a campaign committee, saying he would formally enter the race May 4.    ---   Election officials in Finland said parliamentary election results from Sunday and yesterday showed that opposition conservatives won nine of 200 seats and appeared set to join the government for the first time in 21 years. The results indicated it may take weeks to form a governing coalition.    ---   Beijing warned Communist Party officials in factories against using the Chinese government's current campaign against capitalist tendencies to obstruct economic changes. Separately, an explosion Sunday ripped through a linen mill in the city of Harbin, killing at least 47 workers and injuring 179 others, officials said.    ---   Federal health officials want AIDS tests administered to people who received transfusions from 1977 through 1985, a period before the nation's blood supply was routinely screened for the disease. Voluntary tests are expected to be recommended.    ---   A dam collapsed in the Soviet republic of Tadzhikistan, near the Afghan border, and at least 19 people were killed in the ensuing mud slide, the news agency Tass reported. Nine people were missing. About 50 houses were destroyed, railway lines damaged and communications lines disrupted.    ---   Deaver's attorneys asked a federal appeals court in Washington to promptly decide whether the independent counsel law is constitutional. The court is expected to rule today on the motion by the former White House aide, who filed the request to block his indictment for perjury.    ---   Students in Ecuador clashed with police during protests in Quito against austerity measures imposed by the government to confront an economic crisis caused by earthquakes March 5-6. Bus fares and gasoline prices were increased following the quakes, in which about 1,000 people were killed. </TEXT></DOC>