<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Most of Iran-Contra Affair Remains a Mystery,Including Israel's Role, Arms-Sales Suspension---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Since the outset of the controversy over our policies relating to Iran,&quot; President Reagan has declared, &quot;I've done everything in my power to make all the facts concerning this matter known to the American people. I can appreciate why some of these things are difficult to comprehend. And you're entitled to have your questions answered.&quot;    But in the two months since the public learned the startling news about secret U.S. arms sales to Iran and the diversion of some of the proceeds to Nicaragua rebels, most questions have remained unanswered. Instead, the former principal White House operators of the policies, Vice Adm. John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North, have refused to testify before Congress and the Reagan administration has offered conflicting statements on those policies, including Israel's role in the arms shipments.    Now, a special prosecutor and two select congressional investigating committees will try to piece together the Iran-Contra puzzle. As they prepare to begin work in earnest, here are some of the central issues that must be examined:    How did Israel's arms sales to Iran start in 1985 and did the U.S. approve them?    Information so far suggests that the pattern of arms sales to Iran and sporadic hostage releases began in August 1985, after meetings between senior Israeli officials and top White House aides, including Robert McFarlane, then the president's national security adviser. But much about the U.S.-Israel sales remains unclear. It isn't known, for instance, whether Israel was selling military gear to Iran from 1982 to mid-1985, a period when Mr. Reagan had rescinded an earlier tacit approval of Israeli sales in 1981 and early 1982.    Another goal will be to determine who said what in Jerusalem in the spring of 1985 when Michael Ledeen, a National Security Council consultant, first discussed an Iran opening, the hostages being held by pro-Iranian terrorists in Lebanon and arms sales with then-Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres and other top Israeli officials. By some U.S. accounts, it was the Israelis who proposed selling arms to Iran through Israel. But Israeli officials have anonymously told U.S. journalists that the initiative was Mr. Ledeen's, a request for help they assumed came from President Reagan.    In July and August of 1985, Mr. McFarlane followed up the Ledeen discussions by meeting at least twice with David Kimche, director-general of Israel's foreign ministry, who is said to have advised new arms sales. These talks bolstered policy papers by the Central Intelligence Agency and by the NSC calling for an opening to Iran. Israel, in fact, resumed arms shipments to Iran in August and September of 1985, and that September one of the six hostages, the Rev. Benjamin Weir, was freed.    But just when the U.S. approved the 1985 sales is a major point of contention. Israeli officials say that, before they made the August shipment, Mr. Kimche made sure it was approved by President Reagan and that the U.S. would replace any arms Israel sold. Mr. McFarlane has secretly testified to the Senate Intelligence Committee that Mr. Reagan did, indeed, orally authorize him to tell the Israelis in advance that the U.S. approved the 1985 shipments and would replenish Israeli stocks.    Mr. McFarlane's testimony contradicts a public statement by Attorney General Edwin Meese on Nov. 25 that the president learned of the Israeli sales only after the fact. And, on Dec. 16, White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan sided with Mr. Meese, testifying secretly that the president didn't approve the Israeli sales in advance and condoned them only later.    The dispute is important because, by some interpretations, the law requires a presidential &quot;finding&quot; before such a policy change is made. Mr. McFarlane has referred to the oral authorization he says he received as an oral finding. Some congressional sources say Mr. McFarlane's account rests on a personal conversation with Mr. Reagan that Mr. Meese and Mr. Regan may not know about, and that the president may have forgotten.    Why were the Iran sales resumed in January 1986 after ending in December 1985?    By all accounts so far, Mr. Reagan and his top national security advisers decided in meetings on Dec. 6 and Dec. 11, 1985, to call off the arms sales to Iran from Israel. They were disappointed that only one hostage had been freed, mistrustful of Israel's Iranian intermediary, Manoucher Gharbonifar, and upset with Iran's rejection of a November arms shipment on the ground it contained obsolete gear. And Secretary of State George Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger had opposed any arms sales to Iran all along.    But, only a month later, on Jan. 7, 1986, the president and his advisers reopened the issue. And on Jan. 17, a formal written finding was signed by Mr. Reagan resuming the sales -- this time directly from U.S. weapons stocks -- and directing that the decision be kept from Congress.    A major task of investigators will be to figure out exactly what happened during that five-week interregnum. Why was the policy changed so dramatically? Why was the U.S. assuming a more direct role? Why was the change to be kept from Congress?    In his nationally televised address on Nov. 13, Mr. Reagan played down the hostages as a factor, saying that winning their release was only a subsidiary goal. The arms sales to Iran, he said, were made &quot;to send a signal that the United States was prepared to replace the animosity between us with a new relationship.&quot;    But there is evidence that the hostages were weighing heavily on the president's mind over the 1985 Christmas holiday period, a time when there had once been hope in the White House they might be freed in response to the Israeli sales. Another factor may have been the promotion of Vice Adm. Poindexter to national security adviser after the unrelated resignation of Mr. McFarlane, who says he had come to vehemently oppose the arms sales. And a nudge was provided by fresh signals from Iran about a willingness to do business.    How and by whom was the Contra funds diversion begun?    By resuming the arms sales, and giving the U.S. a direct role as the provider of the weapons, a source of funds was generated under U.S. control from which the Nicaraguan rebels could be financed. Shortly after the Jan. 17 finding was signed, Lt. Col. North as a member of the NSC staff is said to have presented the Israelis with an inflated price list for the weapons and the number of a Swiss bank account in which to deposit the proceeds.    The White House account is that the diversion of funds to the Contras was an unauthorized operation by Lt. Col. North, with some knowledge shared by Vice Adm. Poindexter, but no knowledge by the president, Vice President George Bush or other senior officials. Attorney General Meese said on Nov. 25 that Central Intelligence Agency Director &quot;(William) Casey, Secretary of State Shultz, Secretary of Defense Weinberger, myself, the other members of the NSC, none of us knew&quot; until the Justice Department stumbled onto the diversion in November 1986.    Since then, however, it has been learned that Mr. Casey, now hospitalized after a brain tumor operation, was told of the possibility of a diversion as early as Oct. 7 by Roy Furmark, a New York businessman who was representing Canadian financiers involved in the arms sales. What's more, Mr. Casey and Lt. Col. North met often to discuss the hostages and the Contras, and Mr. Casey's deputy, Robert Gates, has testified in secret that Lt. Col. North mentioned a link between the arms sales and the Contras at a lunch in early October with the CIA chief. Some of the funds from the sales were also believed to have resided briefly in a CIA-controlled bank account.    The date of Attorney General Meese's knowledge of the diversion was thrown into dispute by the disclosure that, at the request of Vice Adm. Poindexter, his Justice Department got the Federal Bureau of Investigation to delay an investigation of an airline involved in Contra arms shipments. The FBI was told in late October that the probe of Southern Air Transport could endanger hostage negotiations in the Middle East, suggesting some knowledge of a link.    Investigators must also determine whether the Contra funds diversion could have been carried out by the low-ranking Lt. Col. North without the knowledge of Vice President Bush or of Chief of Staff Regan, who exercises tight control over the White House. Mr. Bush, a former CIA director, is deeply involved in national security matters and his national security adviser, Donald Gregg, maintains close ties to Contra leaders. Both Mr. Regan and the vice president say they knew nothing of the diversion. Vice Adm. Poindexter and Lt. Col. North have refused to testify, citing their Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination.    Another question that must be resolved is whose idea it was to divert funds to the Contras. Lt. Col. North has reportedly said the Israelis came up with the funds-diversion idea. But Israel denies that it knew anything about the diversion.    Also of interest is whether the diversion of funds began before 1986. A memo found in Lt. Col. North's files suggests he considered the idea of diverting arms sales funds to the Contras in 1985.    Where did the money go?    Despite weeks of preliminary congressional hearings, it is still unclear how much money was generated by the arms sales to Iran, and where it went. Some Justice Department investigators say that as much as $40 million in profits may be involved, but others who have studied the case say that, even if that's so, nothing like $30 million or $40 million appears to have gone to the Contras. Contra leader Adolfo Calero insists the rebels never saw any of the millions of dollars supposedly sent their way by Lt. Col. North.    If the investigators determine that the Contras didn't get most of the &quot;profits,&quot; they will have to try to find out who did. The funds flowed through a dauntingly complex web of hands and secret bank accounts that still isn't fully understood. Along the way, some of the cash may have been siphoned off.    One suspicion is that the many middlemen in the deals, on both the Iran and Nicaragua ends, may have skimmed off the fat fees customary in the secret world arms trade. But Saudi financier Adnan Khashoggi, Iranian go-between Mr. Gharbonifar and Israeli arms dealer Jacob Nimorodi have all denied making any money. Another intermediary, retired U.S. Air Force Gen. Richard Secord, has refused to testify before Congress about his role in the sales or the Contra funding, also citing his right against self-incrimination.    Then there is the question of why it was necessary for Mr. Khashoggi to assemble a sort of financing syndicate involving Canadian investors for the deals. And a mysterious $10 million payment from the Sultan of Brunei may somehow have figured into the arrangement.    Another issue is whether any funds were used to finance other secret U.S. military or intelligence operations around the world, in Angola, Afghanistan, Ethiopia or elsewhere.    There also have been charges in the Lowell (Mass.) Sun that Lt. Col. North diverted some of the funds into independent conservative political campaigns that sought the defeat of members of Congress opposed to the Contras. The conservative activists deny any Iran funds went to them, and there hasn't been any substantiation of the newspaper's story.    Has there been a cover-up, and what did the president know?    President Reagan moved swiftly to demonstrate that he has nothing to hide in the scandal. He fired Lt. Col. North from the NSC, accepted Vice Adm. Poindexter's resignation, named a commission to revamp NSC activities and recently appointed a cabinet-level aide whose sole job will be to handle investigators' requests for information.    But there is some evidence that, as the Iran and Contra gambits threatened to unravel last October, efforts were made to keep the truth from getting out.    The catalyst was the Oct. 5 downing of a private cargo plane in Nicaragua ferrying arms to the Contras and the capture of a crew member, Eugene Hasenfus. After the crash, Lt. Col. North flew to Central America, in part, sources say, to try to limit disclosure about the whole Contra supply effort. At Vice Adm. Poindexter's request, top Justice Department officials halted for 26 days an FBI investigation into the air supply operation, citing the threat to Mideast hostage talks.    But the twin operations were also threatened from other quarters. On Oct. 7, at Mr. Casey's meeting with New York businessman Roy Furmark, the CIA director was warned that the unhappy Canadian investors, fearing their profits were being diverted elsewhere, might sue the U.S. and expose the operation, Mr. Casey has testified that he told Vice Adm. Poindexter. The Los Angeles Times says that later in October it was prepared to print a story exposing the Iranian arms sales, but agreed to withhold publication out of concern for the hostages. When a Lebanese magazine finally did break the Iran arms-sales story Nov. 3, Mr. Reagan still said the story had &quot;no foundation.&quot;    Officials have since relied on a private White House chronology of events, prepared in part by Lt. Col. North, that seems to contradict other testimony or evidence on strategic points. For instance, it says the U.S. didn't approve the 1985 Israeli shipments, despite Mr. McFarlane's testimony and other testimony that the CIA actually helped obtain a plane for the November 1985 shipment.    There isn't any evidence to date that the president was in on the diversion of funds to the Contras, or that he knew the bizarre details of the Iranian arms sales. But investigators will be trying to resolve several fundamental questions about the president's actions:    What authority did Mr. Reagan give to Mr. McFarlane, Lt. Col. North and others acting in his name in the 1985 Israeli sales? What were the president's orders to the NSC regarding the funding of the Contra rebels during the period beginning in 1984 when Congress cut off official U.S. funds? And finally, at any of the meetings on the Iran arms sales, was there ever a hint to the president that the arms-sales proceeds could be applied toward other foreign-policy goals? </TEXT></DOC>