<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870127-0130 </DOCNO><HL> On AeromaybeAnd Pam Lam---By Robert L. Bartley</HL><DD> 01/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> TORREON, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;If we could order some mineral water, we could brush our teeth,&quot; the haggard hijack victim sighs, surveying the Palacio Real, the grandest hotel in all Torreon.    The hijackers struck Aeromexico 179 as it was on its final approach to Monterrey. Taking tactical advantage of the time provided by a three-hour delay in Houston, they blinded the pilot with ground fog, forced him into a steep climb and shouted over the loudspeakers in strange tongues. One word stood out, &quot;Guadalajara,&quot; and the plane banked into a new course. Apparently, landing permission was denied at Guadalajara, and after aimless circling the pilot found a landing strip in Torreon, a northern desert town unmarred by the tourist invasion. With the plane isolated on the runway and the hostages locked inside, the negotiations began.    The sticking point soon emerged: Hostages cannot be released without clearing immigration, which in Torreon isn't open at 10 p.m. With lengthy haggling at each stage, the victims are herded off the plane, crowded into a small room behind bars, and rubber-stamped by officials so sullen you'd think they were dragged out of bed. Freed from the bars, the captives join another group of hostages from a plane forced down on a Cancun-Los Angeles flight. All are kept in line with threats.    &quot;There are snowstorms in these parts tonight and ice on the roads, and once you leave the airport, Aeromexico is no longer responsible for you,&quot; explains the blonde from the Cancun flight translating at the ticket counter. A bus arrives bound for Monterrey, but thoughts of bravery are dispelled by a whiff of its kerosene and nicotine interior. The captives storm the barricades of the ticket counter to sign up for hotel rooms.    At 11 p.m. in Torreon, baggage service is also problematic, but in time a man and his boy come pulling a cart full of suitcases. The captives breach the final doors to the tarmac to claim bags. With much gesticulating, the problem of two missing bags is resolved with a walk to the plane and a personal tour of the baggage hold. Clearly, the bags never got on in Houston. The hostages stand sullenly in the fog as two taxis ferry them downtown to the Palacio Real, whose room service is good enough to provide the mineral water even at 2:30 a.m.    The hostages are awakened to a breakfast of hot peppers diluted with eggs, and told they can't be freed until 2 p.m. They are kept from communicating with the outside world by having the hotel operator censor outgoing calls. By the time the hostages are herded into a fleet of taxis and delivered back to the airport, 2 p.m. has become 5:30. Two parties of well-heeled gringos stage an escape, bribing a native to drive them four hours across the desert to Monterrey. Free at last, and arriving in Monterrey after 24 hours of captivity. The hijackers still hold a ransom of two bags, but these are liberated over the next two days thanks to the intervention of the energetic and courageous Monterrey newspaper El Norte.    A week later, on Pan Am 456 from Mexico City to New York, the hijackers are even more ambitious, staging a snowstorm to black out the entire Eastern Seaboard. The plane is diverted to Pittsburgh. Then the loudspeaker says Pittsburgh customs is full, so &quot;for your convenience,&quot; the flight will go to Cleveland. Finally, it finds a parking spot in the far reaches of Chicago's O'Hare. On the ground about 4 p.m., hijackers again blame customs, saying they hope to take the hostages to New York. About 6 they abruptly change their minds, herding the captives into buses and imprisoning them between immigration and customs, where they join an even more bedraggled group of hostages from Pan Am 91, en route to New York from Zurich.    The customs inspectors look downright friendly as they wait, like food dangled just out of reach of the starving prisoner. The hijackers move the psychological torture into high gear. No phones are available in this area, one of them brags. Pan Am, he deviously announces, does not have the equipment in O'Hare to unload the 747 from Zurich, and other airlines have their equipment busy with diverted flights. Flights from American, TWA, Swissair and even Mexicana come and go as 7 becomes 8 and heads for 9.    At times the cruelty is too much even for some of the hijackers. As Flight 91 luggage finally rumbles around the carrousel, one of them pleads with her supervisor, &quot;. . . it's loose in there. Can't we open the plane, Mr. McNamara?&quot; Let's see, an eight-hour flight from Zurich to New York, two hours more to Chicago, a seven-hour time change, four hours trapped between immigration and customs, but now hope is arriving with the luggage. As Winston Smith learned in Orwell's &quot;1984,&quot; this is just the time for the coup de grace. One of the captives has been completely broken: Tears are streaming down her face as she stands before a hijacker gesturing to a box in her hand. He coolly savors the moment: &quot;Now let me understand. The cat cage arrived, but the cat isn't in it?&quot;    Other ploys include imprisonment in a time-warp hotel where the ghost of Al Capone threatens to appear, starvation by timing the arrival at midnight just when food service is closing, and sleep deprivation. At 5:30 a.m., a phone call warns, &quot;You have a 5:00 wake call. Baggage is due in the lobby at 5:45. The bus is at 7.&quot; At 7, three busloads of people and baggage cram into two buses, arriving at the Pan Am ticket counter at 7:50.    Winston Smith would guess: No one is there. Hostages storm the barricades, throwing open doors behind the ticket counter searching for life. But Pan Am is on the lam.    Skipping the details: Everyone from the two flights is finally loaded on Flight 91's 747 and it pulls away from the gate, turning back when its gyros go out. Hostages are herded into buses to the Flight 459 Airbus. The Airbus heads for New York, but the baggage remains on the 747. Touch down in New York at 4 p.m., 20 minutes short of a 24-hour captivity, with only three bags held as ransom to be liberated later. </TEXT></DOC>