<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870915-0008 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Shades of Dickens and Woolf---By Richard Locke</HL><DD> 09/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Like English society itself, English fiction since the end of World War II has not been especially rich: Many of the best writers were born abroad, while those natives who have carried on seem considerably less distinguished than such earlier masters as Lawrence, Woolf, Forster or Waugh. Most of the writers who have emerged over the past two decades are not especially well-known here. Though Ian McEwan's first novel, &quot;The Cement Garden,&quot; and short stories, &quot;In Between the Sheets,&quot; established him as a young English writer of promise when they appeared here in the late '70s, I doubt many American readers are prepared for the accomplishment of his new novel, &quot;The Child in Time&quot; (Houghton Mifflin, 263 pages, $16.95).    In this, his eighth book, Mr. McEwan writes as if Dickens, Lawrence and Woolf were in his bones, giving strength to his own deceptively modest -- and original -- English narrative voice. He is a masterful social satirist, to be sure:    &quot;The official Commission on Child Care, known to be a pet concern of the prime minister's, had spawned fourteen subcommittees whose task was to make recommendations to the parent body. Their real function, it was said cynically, was to satisfy the disparate ideals of myriad interest groups -- the sugar and fast-food lobbies; the garment, toy, formula milk, and firework manufacturers; the charities; the women's organizations; the pedestrian-controlled crosswalk pressure group people -- who pressed in on all sides. Few among the opinion-forming classes declined their services. It was generally agreed that the country was full of the wrong sort of people. There were strong opinions about what constituted a desirable citizenry and what should be done to children to procure one for the future. Everyone was on a subcommittee. Even Stephen Lewis, an author of children's books, was on one . . . the Subcommittee on Reading and Writing, under the reptilian Lord Parmenter . . .    &quot;Lord Parmenter presided with dignified and artful banality, indicating chosen speakers with a flickering swivel of his hooded, lashless eyes, raising a feathery limb to subdue passions, making his rare . . . pronouncements with dry, speckled tongue. Only the dark double-breasted suit betrayed a humanoid provenance. He had an aristocratic way with a commonplace. A long and fractious discussion concerning child development theory had been brought to a useful standstill by his weighty intervention -- 'Boys will be boys.' . . . Parmenter's banality was disdainful, fearless in proclaiming a man too important, too intact, to care how stupid he sounded. There was no one he needed to impress. He would not stoop to being merely interesting. Stephen did not doubt that he was a very clever man.&quot;    The quiet, ironic modulations of this passage -- pet concern, spawned, parent body, procure, reptilian Lord Parmenter -- imply a narrator of waspish satire in the line of Waugh. But what surprises the reader is how Mr. McEwan can also plunge into a stream of consciousness -- full of intense sexual and family passions -- or render the physical world (both London and the lush southern countryside) with easy, almost extravagant precision. This is much more than a matter of style, of local verbal felicity; what separates his novel from so many others, both here and in England, is its structure, which owes much to recent Continental fiction. Mr. McEwan has placed himself beyond the usual stereotypes: He combines a gift for satire and domestic intensity with a formalist's dexterity with literary architecture.    He's also funny and unsentimentally passionate. &quot;The Child in Time&quot; follows 10 months in the life of Stephen Lewis, a worldly 43-year-old children's-book author whose own child, a three-year-old daughter, was stolen in a South London supermarket 2 1/2 years before the novel begins. This loss has destroyed his marriage and most of his present life. He lives on hum, daydreaming in the committee room, taking Arabic and tennis lessons, always on the lookout for his daughter. His closest friend -- now that his wife has moved out -- is his publisher, Charles Darke (shades of Hawthornian fable here), a hugely successful MP who suddenly abandons his career and retreats to the countryside where he can recover, in an odd way, his own lost boyhood.    The theme is -- clearly -- the remembrance of things past: recovery, re-creation, redemption or reconciliation to the loss of children, childhood, time itself. Stephen's own childhood, his marriage, his love and mourning for his daughter -- and his wife -- are the center of the book. As present events move from spring through summer to winter and back to spring, we experience Stephen's own seasonal transformation and renewal. This is done without a shred of mythic (or psychoanalytic) jargon. It's often poignant and vivid; and, of course, the book is shot through with a counterpoint of social satire, in which child care of a different sort is much discussed.    Lastly, I must emphasize that the sexual dynamics and descriptions are -- unlike so many in our randy time -- the work of a writer who thinks of sex as more than an aerobic exhibition. The book, like any novel, has its flaws, but it's a great pleasure to read so joyously conservative a work of fiction that steers clear of cant and never has to stoop to conquer our affections.    ---   Mr. Locke teaches English and comparative literature at Columbia University. </TEXT></DOC>