<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0084 </DOCNO><HL> GM ProposesA Pact BasedOn Performance---Its Opening Offer to UAWWould Tie Pay, SecurityTo Productivity, Quality---By Jacob M. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GM LABOR FAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   General Motors Corp., in its opening contract proposal to the United Auto Workers union, said it wants the performance of individual plants to determine pay and job security for all hourly workers.    While the auto maker is expected to push for more direct incentives for higher productivity and quality, the sweeping nature of its proposal strongly signals a bid by GM to seek far-reaching breaks from past practices in the current national contract negotiations.    &quot;These are difficult times and they call for drastic means,&quot; Alfred S. Warren Jr., GM's chief labor negotiator, said at a news conference after making the proposal.    GM also said it is considering asking to eliminate pay increases pegged to inflation for at least some workers, an item the union continually says is sacred. The company also said it wants to replace base-wage increases with lump-sum payments.    GM's opening offer would radically alter the rules that have long governed labor relations, where compensation and other major contract provisions generally apply equally to workers at all plants, and apply regardless of the company's performance. While that traditional pattern has weakened at other companies, it has until now held strongly in the auto industry. Some labor analysts said the proposal would lead to unprecedented flexibility in a major U.S. union contract.    The UAW immediately branded the package as unacceptable, saying it doesn't enhance what the union wants most -- job security. Donald F. Ephlin, the UAW vice president leading the negotiations, said the union would consider more variation in compensation, but only in addition to what he called a fair base wage and guaranteed pay increase.    And the proposed changes in cost-of-living adjustments could force a strike, Mr. Ephlin warned. &quot;The last time someone tinkered with the COLA formula it cost us here at GM 67 days of wages and 67 days of production to correct that error,&quot; Mr. Ephlin said, referring to the bitter 1970 walkout.    But the union seemed perplexed about the real implications in the sweeping-yet-vague proposal. &quot;I'm not really sure what this means,&quot; Mr. Ephlin said. He said the union would offer a more detailed response after studying the proposal.    The current national contract expires Sept. 14. Ford Motor Co. is also holding negotiations with the UAW, but hasn't yet made a specific proposal.    GM specifically called for management at each plant to establish quality and productivity targets jointly with union locals. Plants meeting those goals would receive &quot;enhanced&quot; job security in the second and third years of the contract. While the program is being set up in the first year, Mr. Warren said, the company is considering offering an outright moratorium on the transfer of work to other companies, a practice known as outsourcing.    Mr. Ephlin called the job security proposal &quot;much ado about nothing&quot; because it didn't address the union's demand to protect workers from market downturns.    As expected, GM proposed freezing the base wage over the three-year contract and offering lump-sum payments instead of wage increases. Base-wage increases raise pension and other benefits. In the second and third years, the size of the lump-sum payments, if any, would be determined by whether the plants met their performance targets. In the first year, all workers would receive a lump-sum payment, but workers in components and defense-related plants would receive a smaller payment.    GM also asked for several substantial changes in cost-of-living payments. Traditionally, it has agreed to roll inflation adjustments accumulated in the previous contract into the base wage. But GM now wants to pay the 86 cents an hour accrued since 1984, the beginning of the present contract, as a lump sum that won't increase the base wage.    It also said workers in plants that don't meet performance goals wouldn't get any higher inflation-related pay, not even a lump sum. GM didn't say how much inflation-pegged pay, if any, it will offer workers in plants that perform well.    In other job security-related proposals, GM said it would agree to adjustments in current job-protection programs, would sweeten incentives for workers to leave the company, and expand its notification to the union of contemplated outsourcing.    The GM proposal would create the strongest link yet between the national contract and the local contracts negotiated at each of GM's major facilities. Those pacts cover work rules, and changes there provide the company with its largest potential productivity increases, but winning worker ratification could be difficult. Mr. Ephlin, in response to a question, also acknowledged it would be difficult to get workers to support a contract that pegged pay to unknown performance targets.    GM is also apparently seeking to widen cracks in the tradition of similar contracts for the auto makers. Mr. Warren, in making his presentation, repeatedly stressed the differences between GM and Ford this year. Ford has been more profitable than GM, and makes fewer parts in-house. GM also broke with the tradition of making its initial offer at the same time as Ford. Ford is expected to make its first proposal next week at the earliest. </TEXT></DOC>