<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871112-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Protecting Friends:Trade Bill Is LoadedWith Import CurbsAiding Local Interests---Lamb, Sugar and Wire MeshWould Get Special Aid;Major Fight Is Looming---Effect of the Market Crash---By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LATAM SVANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Sen. Max Baucus worries that congressional passage of protectionist trade legislation &quot;could cause uncertainty in the market. . . . We want fair trade, but we must make sure we're not too restrictive.&quot;    Except when it comes to lamb imports. Then the Montana Democrat isn't at all sheepish about favoring restriction. He is pushing a provision for the pending trade bill that would protect the U.S. lamb industry from a surge in imports. He acknowledges that it could restrict trade, but says, &quot;It's good for my state.&quot;    The Democratic leadership still insists that a trade measure will emerge from the conference committee that is trying to fashion a bill from differing House and Senate versions. But the stock-market crash has made a sweepingly protectionist bill less and less likely. For instance, lawmakers will almost surely scrap the controversial Gephardt amendment, which would authorize presidential retaliation against countries that don't remove market barriers to reduce huge trade surpluses with the U.S. The amendment's author, Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt, is finding himself increasingly on the defensive about the issue as he pursues the Democratic presidential nomination.    Meanwhile, the international market turmoil strengthens the administration's efforts to water down the bill -- or sustain a potential veto -- by scaring lawmakers who don't want to go down in history as another Smoot or Hawley.    &quot;We want to work with Congress on a constructive, market-opening bill,&quot; says Alan F. Holmer, the general counsel for the U.S. trade representative. &quot;But with recent market developments, now is certainly not the time to enact a bill that even has a whiff of Smoot-Hawley,&quot; the notorious 1930 high-tariff law widely blamed for helping turn a recession into the Depression.    Although the Oct. 19 stock-market crash has clearly cooled much of the fervor for a strongly protectionist bill, it has done little to curb congressional appetites for specific provisions that help home-state industries and special interests. The result is a kind of piecemeal protectionism.    The inclusion of such provisions in any final bill could trigger a presidential veto, and many of them may be dropped. &quot;If Congress really wants a trade law, any out-and-out pork-barrel protectionism will have to go,&quot; says Republican Sen. John Danforth of Missouri, a strong proponent of the trade bill.    But getting the provisions out of the bill is no certain thing. Backers of the dozens of special-interest measures won't give up without a fight; they feel constituent anger over the Reagan administration's failure to stem the record trade deficit and to help beleaguered domestic industries. As a result, says GOP Sen. Bob Packwood of Oregon, the provisions may &quot;put a taint&quot; on the entire bill.    Among the coming battles, lawmakers must decide, for example, whether to set import quotas on lamb, whether to refund hundreds of millions of dollars to a few big sugar refiners, and whether to limit imports of steel wire mesh and fence panels. A look at these three provisions and the controversies surrounding them illustrates what Congress must grapple with in coming weeks.    LAMB   Montana Sen. Baucus's amendment would set a floating ceiling on lamb imports to prevent a surge from Australia and New Zealand. It would put lamb on the same footing as beef, veal and mutton under the Meat Import Act, which controls imports in relation to domestic production and consumption. When the Finance Committee considered the amendment, even GOP Sen. Malcolm Wallop of Wyoming, an avid free-trader, went along in the interest of his sheep-producing state.    Sen. Baucus didn't tell his Senate colleagues that he owns stock in a family ranch that has more than 6,000 sheep in Helena, Mont. He expects opponents of his amendment to use the appearance of a conflict of interest to fight it, but he says, &quot;It's totally above-board. I represent a sheep-producing state, and that's why I offered the amendment.&quot;    Australia and New Zealand have made the proposed lamb-import restriction a priority with their embassies here. Australia -- whose unofficial anthem, &quot;Waltzing Matilda,&quot; is about the theft of a sheep -- fears that under the Baucus amendment American lamb producers would steal its share of the U.S. market.    &quot;This provision is highly protectionist, totally unjustified and against a country the U.S. actually has a trade surplus with,&quot; complains Gregory Wood, the Australian embassy's commercial minister. &quot;What message does that give the rest of the world?&quot; He warns, &quot;If Congress puts politics before policy, they clearly have to be aware it will cause problems with important allies.&quot;    The Reagan administration sides with the foreign lamb producers, arguing that the proposed restriction runs counter to its push in the new round of trade talks to phase out such barriers. The administration also notes that lamb prices are close to record levels -- hardly indicative of an industry in trouble.    However, Sen. Baucus sees an &quot;excellent&quot; chance that the House will accept his lamb-import amendment as part of the trade package. And as a conferee on the legislation, he will be able to promote it himself. In a recent meeting, he told U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter that he has three priorities in the trade conference: &quot;Lamb, lamb and lamb.&quot;    SUGAR   In years past, U.S. sugar refiners have paid tariffs on imported sugar they refine and then re-export. Currently, they can claim refunds for duties paid during the five years immediately preceding the date of export. But a provision being pushed primarily by Louisiana Democratic Sens. John Breaux and J. Bennett Johnston would extend the refunds to duties paid more than a decade ago -- even though U.S. Customs records that far back have been destroyed and can't be used to verify the refund claims, technically called &quot;drawbacks.&quot;    If the new provision stays in the law, the Treasury will have to write refund checks to a few large sugar refiners. Just how much is in some dispute: The Congressional Budget Office sees the 1988-92 cost ranging from $260 million to as much as $600 million, while the administration says refunds could reach $800 million.    No one, though, disputes that a few large refiners would profit handsomely. The principal beneficiaries would be Amstar Corp. of New York, which would get at least $135 million; Savannah Foods andamp; Industries Inc. of Savannah, Ga., at least $91 million; and Imperial Sugar Co. of Sugar Land, Texas, at least $38 million.    &quot;No wonder they are all over this building,&quot; exclaimed Sen. John Chafee during the floor debate last summer. The Rhode Island Republican, who led the floor fight against the provision, calls it &quot;purely a government handout of the most outrageous kind.&quot;    Supporters say the provision is needed to keep U.S. sugar refiners competitive and to save thousands of American jobs. Sugar refining is an important business in Louisiana; Sen. Johnston notes that Amstar's refinery in his state employs 500 workers. To help drive home the point, the sugar refiners have lined up an impressive list of backers, ranging from the International Longshoremen's Association to the Chocolate Manufacturers Association.    &quot;We don't feel we're costing the taxpayers anything because it was our money in the first place,&quot; says William Sprague, the president of Savannah Foods.    The provision had a tough ride on the Senate floor, with opponents calling it a windfall for a few companies. At one point, some opponents noted that the provision would help only cane-sugar interests, and they wondered aloud whether sugar-beet growers were opposed. Sen. Breaux sprang into action. His office quickly called the Sugarbeet Growers Association, he recalls, &quot;and had them dictate letters stating their positions&quot; -- which were that they &quot;did not oppose&quot; the provision. Sen. Johnston then introduced the letter on the Senate floor, ensuring that senators from sugar-beet states wouldn't vote against it.    When the vote was taken, the provision survived, 49-44. Sugar-industry executives who had been lobbying furiously rushed to the reception area off the Senate floor, where they backslapped and shook the hands of the Louisiana senators who had led the charge for them. Defeated administration officials went to the Monocle, a nearby restaurant; one recalls seeing some sugar executives and lobbyists celebrating in the front of the dining room. &quot;To cap off a terrible defeat, we were pushed to a back corner,&quot; he grumps.    Both the House and the Senate versions of the trade bill contain the sugar-refund provision, which ought to ensure its inclusion in the final legislation. Because of the uncertain cost, however, there is growing support to limit the amount these companies can receive. Montana Democratic Sen. John Melcher plans to hold a hearing on the potential cost of the refunds this month.    STEEL   At first, Oklahoma Steel andamp; Wire Co. tried to get the administration to impose quotas or tariffs on foreign steel wire mesh and fence panels. But after the trade representative's office said it didn't have a case, the Madill, Okla., company withdrew its petition. Then, recalls B.L. Moore, the president of the family-run company, &quot;we decided to get help from Congress&quot; -- from Democratic Sen. David Boren.    After losing business to cheaper Mexican imports in recent years, Mr. Moore admits, &quot;We just cannot compete with them.&quot; He adds, &quot;I realize a trade war can mean higher prices or a shortage of products, but now is the time to protect our domestic industries. All we need is a little bit of relief to get back on track.&quot;    Mr. Moore broached his problem in a visit to Sen. Boren's Oklahoma office. &quot;The senator is very close to the grass roots -- he wasn't hard to get in to see,&quot; Mr. Moore says. Soon, his company and the senator's office were working together on an amendment that would expand the coverage of bilateral steel agreements to include steel wire mesh and fence panels.    The U.S. has voluntary restraint agreements with 20 countries, including Mexico, limiting the export into the U.S. of certain steel products. But wire mesh and fence panels aren't subject to those limits. The Reagan administration says the Boren amendment could force the U.S. to reopen all 20 of the steel-restraint agreements, a development that could result in the U.S. giving up previously won concessions.    &quot;It's very hard if one senator has one provision he's pushing no matter what price,&quot; laments Stephen Lande, who represents a Mexican company that exports these products to the U.S.    For now, at least, the Reagan administration seems willing to pay the price. In what officials term an effort to persuade Sen. Boren to drop his amendment, the U.S. trade representative has quietly been negotiating with Mexico to include the wire mesh and fence panels as an addendum to the existing U.S.-Mexico restraint agreement, which hasn't been made final.    But Mr. Boren hasn't yet decided on the fate of his amendment. &quot;While I'm encouraged by the progress the trade representative has made with Mexico, Mexico isn't the whole problem,&quot; he says, noting that Venezuela also exports the products to this country. </TEXT></DOC>