<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0049 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Superconductor 'Battery' GetsA Boost From Star Wars Role---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ENSUTILITIES (UTI)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   YOU MIGHT CALL it a plan for the world's largest battery, although technically it isn't a battery but a novel kind of energy-storage system. The $1 billion doughnut-shaped structure would be more than half a mile in diameter and 20 yards thick. It would be charged with as much as five million kilowatt hours of electrical energy, which could be drawn off gradually to light a city or released in quick, powerful bursts.    For more than a decade, Roger W. Boom, a metallurgist and nuclear engineer at the University of Wisconsin, has been trying to convince utilities that this unusual &quot;battery&quot; could save the industry countless millions of dollars. It could be charged at night when demand for electricity is low and there is excess generating capacity. During the day, a utility could draw on the huge ring to meet peak electrical demand.    Utilities have shown enough interest over the years to keep Prof. Boom's idea alive with a small but steady stream of research funds. None, however, has ever wanted to chance tens of millions of dollars on a test model.    But suddenly Prof. Boom's storage system has taken a leap toward reality. The Pentagon's Defense Nuclear Agency recently awarded $14 million two-year contracts to two competing industrial teams to design an experimental model. One team is headed by Enserch Corp.'s Ebasco Services Inc. subsidiary, a New York engineering concern; the other is led by Bechtel Group Inc., a San Francisco engineering and construction company. The winner likely will get a three-year contract, estimated at $50 million to $100 million, to build a prototype. The model, to be built for a utility that hasn't been selected yet, would be capable of storing 15,000 to 30,000 kilowatt hours of electrical energy.    WHY IS THE PENTAGON interested? The ground-based laser and other weapons proposed for the Star Wars missile defense need the kind of quick bursts of energy such a battery could provide. The storage ring could be switched to a discharge state in 30 thousandths of a second, compared with 15 minutes to prepare a conventional generator, Mr. Boom says. If utilities around the country built the systems for their own use, the Pentagon could turn to them in the event of a missile attack and instantly divert the stored energy to the Star Wars defense.    The huge storage doughnut would consist of a coil of superconducting electrical wire wound around a metal core. The wire hasn't any resistance to the flow of electricity. Once a current is put into the big coil, or solenoid, it will circulate almost indefinitely without loss of energy, until someone decides to tap the coil and draw off the current. Since the doughnut becomes a huge magnet, the concept is known as superconducting magnetic energy storage, or SMES.    MR. BOOM HAS ATTEMPTED to convince utilities that SMES is an economical use of superconductivity. &quot;There have been 400 (technical) papers published, and I've appeared four times before congressional committees,&quot; he says. Now that he's finally persuaded the utilities and the Pentagon to at least test the idea, the announcement has been overshadowed by -- and confused with -- a separate development in superconductors.    Since early this year, headlines have been hailing the discovery of some ceramic materials that become superconductors when cooled to about 300 degrees below zero Fahrenheit. Although quite frigid, this temperature is considerably warmer than needed to bring previous materials into a superconducting state. As a result, the new materials, which can be cooled by cheap liquid nitrogen, have been touted as the key to making superconductors practical for industrial use within the next several years.    But Prof. Boom says SMES is practical even with the older superconductors, specifically a wire of niobium-titanium alloy that was developed more than two decades ago. It becomes a superconductor when chilled by liquid helium to around 420 degrees below zero. In a full-scale utility installation capable of storing five million kilowatt hours of electricity, the huge coil would be kept in a bath of 10 million liters of liquid helium.    ELECTRIC UTILITIES are interested in SMES because it may offer a money-saving solution to an old problem for power plants. Because electric demand rises and falls throughout the day, generating plants spend much of the time operating at less than the level that is most efficient and least costly. To avoid this, utilities have tried all sorts of storage gimmicks. Pump-storage, for instance, keeps the generators running at their optimum level at night to pump water to a hilltop pond. In the day, the water is released to run turbines to meet the peak demand of daylight hours.    But pump-storage recovers only about 70% of the stored energy. By contrast, the SMES coil, being a superconductor, is as much as 98% efficient in returning the energy stored in it during the night, Prof. Boom says. The 2% loss comes from transmitting the current into and out of the coil over ordinary copper wires, which aren't superconducting.    The coil, moreover, is non-polluting, has no moving parts and is highly reliable. Also, since the coil can be switched almost instantly to discharge, it eliminates the need to have standby generators constantly warmed up for emergency use. &quot;With a few of these things sitting around, New York City couldn't have a blackout or a brownout,&quot; Prof. Boom says. </TEXT></DOC>