<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880120-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Belgium Battles Takeover Attempt by Italian Financier --- De Benedetti Would Use Societe Generale As His European Springboard --- This article was prepared by Mark M. Nelson and Martin du Bois in Brussels And Laura Colby in Rome </HL><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> TNM FIN INS </IN><TEXT>   Carlo De Benedetti, the great Italian acquisitor, tried this week to take over Belgium, but Belgium didn't want to be taken.    &quot;Belgium is against De Benedetti,&quot; a Finance Ministry official declared only Monday.    Yet the Milan entrepreneur may win the battle anyway. He appears to be on the verge of gaining effective control, if not of Belgium proper, then of its huge and by far most powerful enterprise, Societe Generale de Belgique S.A., which owns parts of some 1,200 other businesses. Despite resistance from company and government, Mr. De Benedetti plans soon to own nearly 25% of Generale de Belgique's shares, and he says that is enough to let him pick its management and set its policies.    If so, he would gain great influence over most parts of the Belgian economy. More than that, he would have parlayed his relatively small Paris holding company into a truly European-size venture in time for 1992, the target date set by the 12-nation European Community for abolishing all internal trade barriers.    In short, Mr. De Benedetti has embarked on one of continental Europe's most significant financial battles in years.    The outcome isn't certain. Generale de Belgique is fighting back on all fronts, and Mr. De Benedetti may be surprised at the power of the group to defend itself. The company already has issued 16 million new shares, a 60% increase that greatly will dilute Mr. De Benedetti's holding. Even though the commercial court of Brussels belatedly issued a temporary injunction yesterday seeking to block the issue, many observers expect the courts eventually to rule in Generale de Belgique's favor.    In talks yesterday in Brussels, Mark Eyskens, the Belgian finance minister, did manage to persuade Mr. De Benedetti to lower his sights from obtaining control of 33.6% of Generale de Belgique to just less than the 25% needed to block major corporate decisions.    But in return, Mr. De Benedetti said he will proceed with his planned bid to increase his holding above the present 18.6% that he controls through Cerus S.A., his French investment arm. And he said he will turn over any shares tendered in excess of 25% to Belgian partners of his own choosing. This provision, many analysts say, will give Mr. De Benedetti the opportunity to choose friendly partners, even from among Belgian subsidiaries of his own companies.    In the eyes of many Belgians, a takeover of Generale de Belgique would be no less than a coup d'etat. The company is so deeply woven into the economic and historical fabric of Belgium that even its many foes worry about the implications of its falling into foreign hands.    For years, it was Belgium's central bank, and the king of Belgium was its principal shareholder. Until 1850, it minted its own money. The supply of capital that it poured into the economy in Belgium's early years helped turn the rich Belgian deposits of coal and iron ore into the cradle of the European continent's industrial revolution in the 19th century.    &quot;I am a European. I'm not against foreign takeovers,&quot; says Andre Leysen, chairman of the Belgian holding company Gevaert N.V., which has a small stake in Generale de Belgique. &quot;But Societe Generale is such a part of Belgium's structure, this must be treated as a special case.&quot;    In many ways, Generale de Belgique brought trouble on itself. By failing to move more quickly to restructure, it has weakened its share price and made itself an easy target, analysts say.    &quot;What am I looking for?&quot; a confident Mr. De Benedetti asked a packed news conference in Brussels yesterday. &quot;For the advantage of the shareholders of the Generale de Belgique -- period.&quot;    Among brokers, investors and journalists, the company is considered a secretive group run by aristocrats who lack an industrial vision. &quot;It has been wandering around like a blind man,&quot; says Jean Capiau, an analyst at the Ghent-based brokerage De Maertelaere andamp; Co.    Rene Lamy, president of Generale de Belgique, didn't return numerous phone calls yesterday seeking comment.    Input from Mr. De Benedetti could be just what the company and the country need to change their ways. Says Patrick Vermeulen, analyst at brokerage Dewaay, Sebille, Servais andamp; Cie.: &quot;Considering Mr. De Benedetti's management qualities, his taking control of Generale de Belgique will be a good thing for the company and probably won't be a bad thing for shareholders. He will awaken quite a few people at Generale de Belgique. They ought to be grateful for it.&quot;    In Italy, the financial press calls Mr. De Benedetti &quot;Carlo Grab-It-All&quot; because of his frequent buying sprees. One of the first to turn sour on the stock market, he sold many of his holdings in August and September and avoided the big losses sustained by many investors in the world-wide market crash.    Yet Mr. De Benedetti has always maintained that he is a builder, not a raider, and analysts and business partners concur. &quot;He's not the type of raider who buys companies and takes them apart just to make money for himself,&quot; says Michel Leemans, a Belgian financier based in Milan who has done business with Mr. De Benedetti. &quot;Once he has control, he keeps the operations, and he improves them.&quot; He is perhaps best known for his transformation of Olivetti S.p.A. from a maker of mechanical typewriters into an innovative electronics giant.    But before Mr. De Benedetti makes Societe Generale part of his empire, he will have some unfinished business to attend to. Major portions of the company are slipping deeper into trouble. Its major holdings in the electro-mechanical firm ACEC S.A., the chemicals firm Gechem S.A. and the weapons maker FN S.A. have all posted losses in 1986. &quot;The words that come to mind are modernization and rationalization,&quot; Mr. De Benedetti says.    He will have to convince Belgian unions and lawmakers that the Belgian economy is straddled with too much regulation and taxation and is falling further behind its neighbors. His plan is to forge alliances across borders that will save some of Generale de Belgique's underperforming companies that could become viable in a more competitive, international arena.    Generale de Belgique would bring Mr. De Benedetti into several lines of business new to his empire, which so far has concentrated on computers, auto parts, food, luxury goods and financial services. The Belgian company's interests in diamonds, energy, steel, cement and telecommunications &quot;offer enormous possibilities for development,&quot; says an official of Cie. Industriali Riunite, or CIR, which groups Mr. De Benedetti's Italian industrial interests, including control of Cerus.    But the real interest for Mr. De Benedetti may lie in Societe Generale's vast financial holdings. The CIR official notes that the areas where the two groups' interests overlap -- insurance, financial services, banking -- are those that will be most affected by changes in European Community rules in 1992.    &quot;A lot of Italian financial services companies aren't used to having to compete,&quot; says Chris Moore, an analyst at investment bank SIGE S.p.A. in Milan. But when the barriers drop, he adds, &quot;De Benedetti will be at the avant-garde.&quot;    The takeover of Generale de Belgique is just the first in what in expected to become an increasing tempo of consolidations and other massive corporate restructurings that will take place as Europe prepares for the creation of a giant free market of 320 million Europeans. &quot;This is just a prelude,&quot; says Roland Leuschel, economic adviser to Banque Bruxelles Lambert in Brussels. </TEXT></DOC>