<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881109-0075 </DOCNO><HL> International: For Taiwan, Independence Is a Non-Issue --- Affluence Makes Reunification With China Less Likely </HL><AUTHOR> Jonathan Kandell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> TAIPEI, Taiwan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It was the annual celebration of the October 1911 Chinese Revolution, and for the first time in years Taiwan bared its teeth. Tanks and heavy artillery rumbled past, while fighter jets screamed overhead. President Lee Tenghui reminded thousands of troops present their mission was still &quot;recovery of the mainland.&quot;    The intended audience probably wasn't the Communists in Beijing, but the aging hard-liners in Taipei's own ruling Kuomintang, who fear their island of exile is now too prosperous and complacent to accomplish the late Chiang Kai-shek's vision of reuniting China under the Kuomintang.    The Kuomintang curmudgeons have reason for concern. Not only are they being replaced by younger politicians without roots on the mainland, but Taiwan's recently eased political atmosphere has cooled the obsession with reunification.    As more Taiwan residents are allowed to visit the mainland and do business there, the Communist regime seems less threatening. What really riles the oldtimers is the realization that many people here think it would be folly for Taiwan to endanger its affluence by joining a billion poor mainlanders -- even in the unlikely event Beijing embraced capitalism and surrendered power to the Kuomintang.    &quot;If they invited us back tomorrow to govern the mainland, frankly we would hesitate,&quot; Vice Foreign Minister John H. Chang told a U.S. governor's delegation.    Officially it is still considered seditious here and in China to promote independence for Taiwan. Mainland leaders have long said they would invade Taiwan if it declared independence. But Mr. Chang, grandson of Chiang Kai-shek, suggests that pragmatism, not ideology or military threat, rules out separate nationhood:   &quot;In my ministry, we have discussed the alternatives of independence. There are already two Germanys and two Koreas. But after close study, we concluded that independence is a dead end. Who would recognize us? And in that case, what's the use of declaring independence?&quot;    In the years that followed the 1949 defeat of the Kuomintang and the exile of its Republic of China government to Taiwan, both Beijing and Taipei insisted other nations accept the notion of only one China, with Taiwan as its province and not a separate entity. For 30 years, the U.S. continued to recognize Taipei as the sole government of China, but by 1979, even it had joined most of the world in giving the Communists that legitimacy.    Meanwhile, as China wallowed for decades in a dogma-induced economic stupor, Taipei engineered one of the world's most successful development programs. Today, this island of 20 million inhabitants may lack much diplomatic recognition but its economic clout surpasses China's. Its trade is expected to reach $110 billion this year, $30 billion above the mainland's. Per-capita income exceeding $6,000 a year is a startling 25 times that in China.    Mainland and island are dropping their guard a bit. But their relationship resembles that between developing and industrialized countries. Consider travel.    Since last year when Taipei allowed its citizens to visit the mainland, supposedly to see relatives, more than 200,000 have been to China. Yet Taiwan until recently wouldn't let mainlanders visit here -- not for security reasons but because of fears Taiwan's economy will entice many to stay. It recently relaxed the ban, but only so mainlanders can visit sick relatives on Taiwan or attend a funeral.    &quot;We already have a population problem,&quot; says vice minister Chang. &quot;What if they refused to leave? It would be too embarrassing for us to force them back.&quot;    The Taiwan residents who visit the mainland can see clearly the vast gap in living standards. Indeed, that gap, especially in wages, is an inducement for Taiwan businessmen such as Eric Lin, president of a children's-clothing company. Mr. Lin, a 43-year-old Taiwan-born entrepreneur without relatives in China, went to the mainland in search of cheap labor.    &quot;Wages have gotten out of hand in Taiwan,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm looking to set up a plant, maybe more than one, inland in places like Sichuan and Hunan.&quot; China's coastal provinces, says Mr. Lin, are already crowded with Hong Kong manufacturers and production costs are rising.    While not officially blessing Taiwan subsidiaries on the mainland, Taipei does nothing to impede them. It has a similar policy on trade with China, carried out mainly through Hong Kong, which this year is expected to soar past $2.5 billion. The exchange of mainland raw materials and agricultural products for Taiwan manufactured goods underlines the disparity between the two economies.    Taiwan may have started out to prove its economic model superior to the mainland's, but the island nowadays looks to South Korea as its real competitor. Thus when South Korea began building up its trade and investments in China, Taipei felt compelled to follow suit. Taiwanese economic missions to East Europe and the Soviet Union came close on the heels of South Korean initiatives there. And Taipei could hardly continue authoritarianism after Seoul shed its military dictatorship.    Yet while in South Korea the combination of economic boom and political liberalization has stirred a longing for unification with North Korea, the same formula is cementing an identity for Taiwan distinct from mainland China. The difference: An ever wealthier South Korea can imagine absorbing the poorer, less-populated Communist North, but Taiwan, no matter how rich, would be swallowed whole by the massive Chinese mainland.    When Chiang Kai-shek took control of the island after World War II, he brutally suppressed an uprising by the local Taiwanese. And when he moved his government here in 1949, he transferred a two-body legislature that continues to maintain it represents all of China. Legislative membership has been frozen under the excuse that new elections couldn't be held as long as the mainland remained in Communist hands. The Kuomintang was also the only legal party. Thus native Taiwanese, more than 80% of the population, had little political voice.    But in recent years, the Kuomintang has tried to short-circuit any separatist movement by opening its ranks to Taiwanese, now more than two-thirds of party membership. President Lee and numerous members of his cabinet are native Taiwanese. The Taiwanese scaling the Kuomintang ranks aren't secret separatists, but neither do they thrill at the notion of recovering the mainland.    &quot;Mainland China is a poor, remote foreign country,&quot; says Eugene Chien, 42, a native Taiwanese who is director-general of the Environmental Protection Administration and a rising political star. &quot;I think most people my age feel that way.&quot;    Some months before his death early this year, President Chiang Ching-kuo, the son of Chiang Kai-shek, lifted martial law for the first time since 1949. One of the beneficiaries was Yao Chia-wen, freed after eight years' imprisonment for, among other things, advocating independence.    Mr. Yao's Democratic Progressive Party, or DPP, has emerged as the Kuomintang's chief opposition, but it hasn't been able to capitalize on the independence issue. Mr. Yao, a former DPP chairman, says his party is divided into three factions: those who support independence, those against it, and those who don't want to waste time on the matter.    &quot;So as a compromise, we say that the future of Taiwan should be decided by the people of Taiwan, and go no further than that,&quot; says Mr. Yao. The same factions exist in the Kuomintang, he says, though the ruling party continues to espouse recovery of the mainland.    Since martial law ended, the island has been rocked by more than 1,800 public demonstrations -- though few were related to the island-versus-mainland issue, indicating that Taiwan's preoccupations lie elsewhere. Dissidents and journalists can speak out freely. &quot;There isn't much we aren't allowed to say, except to advocate Communist rule for Taiwan -- and nobody's interested in that,&quot; says Mr. Yao.    But political liberalization won't be complete until all legislative seats are opened for election and the president is chosen by direct vote rather than by the National Assembly. Aging mainlanders still occupy 90% of the National Assembly and 80% of the Legislative Yuan, the main lawmaking body. &quot;They will be pushed to retire,&quot; says Mr. Chien, the environmental official. &quot;You will see a lot of younger people being elected in their place.&quot; Direct presidential elections will inevitably follow, he adds.    Left unsaid by younger Kuomintang leaders is whether the &quot;recovery of the mainland&quot; slogan will be buried. Opposition leaders have no doubt it will.    &quot;The lack of democracy here has been tied to the confusion over national identity within the Kuomintang,&quot; says Chiou I-Jen, deputy secretary-general of the DPP. &quot;A freely elected government will recognize the reality that Taiwan already is an independent country.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>