<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870217-0037 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If it isn't already clear that the insider-trading abuses to which nine people already have pleaded guilty were more than aberrations, it'll be a lot clearer in the weeks ahead.    Concern is growing among Wall Street professionals that in addition to Messrs. Robert F. Freeman, Timothy L. Tabor and Richard B. Wigton, whose cases are still pending, the list of insider-trading defendants will expand to include more blue-ribbon investment bankers, traders and takeover lawyers as well as financial institution executives and corporate raiders.    That the abuse of inside information in the takeovers game is endemic and has grown systematic over the past half-decade already was known on Wall Street; and thanks to the most vigorous federal securities enforcement ever, it shortly will be known on Main Street, too.    Less clear, though, are the answers to some suddenly burning questions about the scandal. Just how did insider trading so permeate the street? What will happen now to the firms employing the wrongdoers? To the way Wall Street operates? The answer to the first question suggests answers to the others.    In a nutshell, systematic abuse of inside information came with the change in merger-advisory services from a highly profitable sideline for the major Wall Street firms in the late 1970s to the backbone of many of their businesses in the 1980s. In the process, it provided a huge new source of capital in an industry that judged capital to be the decisive weapon for competing effectively in the global marketplace of the future.    The change came so rapidly because the deals game offered so much money so fast to so many constituencies. For securities firms, there were both the advisory fees being raked in by their investment bankers and huge additional returns from investing firm capital in takeover stocks. For professional money managers lucky enough to hold the &quot;right&quot; stocks in their portfolios, there was superior investment performance that translated into wider fame and higher pay. And for ordinary shareholders, the deals game offered a shortcut to a bigger boat, a summer home, a child's education.    It was hardly surprising in such a climate that the specialty of trading takeover target companies' stocks -- risk arbitrage -- expanded dramatically. Beginning with a cadre of a dozen or so firms and individuals investing a hundred million dollars or so in the mid-1970s, the risk arbitragers grew to an army now estimated at more than 200, with aggregate capital of as much as $15 billion.    To be sure, some veteran investment bankers and clients alike saw warning signs in the growing deals hysteria. Felix Rohatyn at Lazard Freres andamp; Co., whose greatest deal-making exploits dated to his role in assembling the great conglomerates of the 1960s, began to mutter over lunches about excessive fees and ill-considered deals. Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. corporate finance department veterans, aghast at client consternation over the mergers and acqusitions division's aggressive tactics, quietly arranged to bring the unit to heel at the start of this decade.    But at other firms, Mandamp;A remained king. To their top managements, grousing among the veterans sometimes seemed tinged with envy. It was, after all, the hard-charging young Mandamp;A bankers and arbitrage traders, working seven-day, 70-hour weeks, who were bringing home the precious capital the firms so desperately sought. Early in the 1980s, First Boston Corp. built a $16 million bond-trading floor chiefly with the sweat of its then-preeminent mergers group, which sometimes accounted for as much as half of the firm's earnings.    There have been other attempts at reform, too.    The excesses of the tangled and dangerous takeover battle between Bendix Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. frightened many corporate officers across the country and led to strident calls for deals-curbing legislation in Washington. Wall Street's solution was to buy off its critics with golden parachutes and leveraged-buyout structures that made acquiescent target-company managers rich beyond their wildest dreams.    In recent years, the critical mass of arbitrage capital seeking new targets and the adaptation of junk-bond financing to takeovers have acted in combination to keep the deals machine humming. These days, arbitrager buying can be so huge that it can destabilize almost any company, even those concerns that formerly were exempt from takeover threats because of their size. Meanwhile, junk-bond financing -- often backed by the target company's assets or cash flow -- makes it possible for even small-time raiders to pay for the blue-chip concerns that arbitrage buying has, in effect, placed on the selling block.    With these developments, the deals game became a &quot;can't lose&quot; proposition for the street. Ironically, the stronger the target financially, the easier the financing would be. Indeed, the only reasonably effective defense against well-orchestrated junk-bond takeovers has been for the target to partly self-destruct in a restructuring. And of course the bankers get the fees for the restructuring, while the arbs get most of the financial booty.    By last year, when there were more than 3,300 takeover transactions involving more than $175 billion, it seemed that Wall Street and corporate America had in effect switched roles. The street in some cases now seemed to be the &quot;principal&quot; in the deals, and acquiescent or helpless corporate managers seemed to be the &quot;agents&quot; facilitating them; all thanks to the wonders of leverage and the awesome power of all that arbitrage capital.    It's not hard to see why such a climate bred all-too-familiar contacts among arbitragers, investment bankers, takeover lawyers and corporate raiders. Thus, last November when arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky agreed to pay $100 million to settle insider trading charges, one of Wall Street's brightest deal-making stars, who has yet to be implicated in the scandal, was near despair. &quot;Nearly every investment banker on Wall Street talks to arbs,&quot; he said. &quot;You try to do it in a way that doesn't give anything away, but the plain fact is you're being paid by your client to win, and arbs can help you win.&quot;    From this position, it was but a half-step further for some deal-making professionals to rationalize that there wasn't really much wrong with enriching themselves as they helped their clients. Indeed, the only unforgivable sins to some Wall Street professionals were those inside-information abuses that compromised, rather than aided, client interests.    Whatever specific numbers come out in the unfolding federal probe, it's probably a safe bet they'll vastly understate the total losses incurred by stock-market investors, as well as many target companies that no longer exist and their acquirers, who doubtless paid too dearly for them.    How the federal securities regulators interpret their ultimate mission is likely to determine just how much blood money flows out of Wall Street to damaged parties in the years ahead. To many, their role would suggest they file the minimum number of specific charges needed to bag their quarries in order to ensure the survival of a strong securities industry and liquid markets.    Yet to others, restraint seems unnecessary. They reason that if the quest for capital is really the villain here, then maybe the authorities should let the chips -- and firms -- fall where they may. Congress might then repeal the law separating investment and commercial banking, and capital-rich commercial bankers would be more than happy to wade into Wall Street and pick up the pieces. </TEXT></DOC>