<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861230-0015 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Orange Juice PricesPlunge as WeatherIs Mild in Florida---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/30/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   Orange juice futures prices, which have risen sharply in recent months, plunged yesterday amid forecasts of moderate temperatures in Florida.    Many traders bought futures contracts before the holiday weekend on the chance of a freeze in the major citrus-growing areas of Florida, analysts said. The region has been hit by freezes in four of the past five years.    &quot;A lot of traders remember the worst freeze of the century on Christmas 1983 and expected a duplication,&quot; said Judith Weissman, analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., New York.    But no freeze occurred and many speculators then liquidated their long, or buying, positions. &quot;When traders walk in Monday morning after a long weekend with no freeze, some just walk out the door,&quot; said Seth Diamond, futures trading adviser for Advest Inc., New York.    Meteorologists, noting unusually warm Florida weather for November and most of this month, said the absence of cold weather likely will continue. &quot;There's really no frost or freeze in sight,&quot; said Peter Leavitt, executive vice president of Weather Services Corp., Bedford, Mass. Added James Roemer, a meteorologist for Weather Trades Inc., Ankeny, Iowa: &quot;It may not happen for the entire month of January.&quot;    The orange juice contract for January delivery on the New York Cotton Exchange, which trades without daily limits, plummeted 6.15 cents, to $1.23 a pound. All other contracts fell the daily permissible limit of five cents a pound. During the four months prior to yesterday, orange juice futures prices had risen about 30 cents a pound, or more than 30%.    Traders see a bigger possible price windfall from a Florida freeze this year than last, some analysts say. In recent years, reports of freezes haven't sparked much buying in the orange-juice pit in part because of increased exports by Brazil. A year ago, in fact, prices plunged after a mild freeze because traders figured supplies wouldn't be greatly affected.    But the Commerce Department in October ruled that Brazil has been exporting frozen concentrated orange juice to the U.S. at unfairly low prices. The department could ultimately assess penalty duties to offset the dumping, which could lead to a decline in Brazilian imports, some analysts have said.    Moreover, some market forecasters say that domestic supplies of frozen concentrated orange juice will continue to lag consumption. Any significant Florida freeze damage, therefore, could potentially affect the market more than in the recent past.    Analysts said yesterday's price plunge was exacerbated by trade selling and chart-motivated technical selling. Said one trader in New York: &quot;The bubble just broke today.&quot;    But a major downward move is unlikely, traders and analysts said. &quot;We've rallied so sharply, we were bound to have a correction,&quot; one trader in New York said, adding: &quot;But the fundamentals haven't changed.&quot;    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil prices rose sharply on spot and futures markets in a continuing response to the recent production-cutting accord by the oil cartel. Bullish sentiment &quot;is gathering steam,&quot; said Edward Dellamonte, oil analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Ten days ago the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries agreed to cut output about 7% and return to a fixed price of $18 a barrel. In line with the agreement, Saudi Arabia advised its European customers that it will begin charging the new official prices Feb. 1. Prices also were boosted by indications that non-OPEC members were following the cartel's lead on pricing. For example, European oil industry sources told the Dow Jones International Petroleum Report newswire that the Soviet Union has dropped its netback crude oil pricing policy and set the price of its Urals export blend at $18.30 a barrel for Mediterranean destinations. Under netbacks, producers offer crude oil at prices tied to quotes for refined products. Because refined product prices have been weak due to a world-wide glut, netbacks have depressed prices this year. Crude oil futures for February delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange rose 38 cents, to $17.65 a barrel. Most heating oil and unleaded gasoline contracts rose more than a penny a gallon. And the spot price of North Sea Brent, the barometer of European prices, rose 50 cents, to $17.55 a barrel. Some brokers expect that near-term profit-taking temporarily will interrupt the oil price climb. Oil prices are &quot;developing a momentum of their own,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc., New York.    CURRENCIES: Major foreign currencies futures prices rose in quiet trading, with the West German mark setting a new life-of-contract high. A statement by an official of the Bank of Japan, that nation's central bank, that he was pleased with the current exchange rate of about 159 yen to the U.S. dollar, helped depress the dollar; the official said he didn't foresee any reduction in Japan's discount rate, further fueling buying in foreign-currency futures. The statement shattered hopes among some traders for a Japanese rate reduction that would trigger a similar cut by West Germany, said Dennis Gartman, president of Gartman Financial Services Inc., Portsmouth, Va. Rising oil prices also helped buoy foreign currency contracts. Trading was quiet, with many banks curtailing trading on the interbank market because of the U.S. holidays.    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices on the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index fell, partly in response to rising oil prices, which were seen as a portent of rising inflation. Falling bond prices spurred further selling amid anticipation of rising interest rates. Both factors were unnerving to stock-index traders, said Gerald Walsh, a stock-index analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Year-end tax-related selling of stocks was another factor. The Sandamp;P 500 stock-index futures contract for March delivery tumbled below the cash index, spurring selling in stocks, analysts said. The March contract closed 1.02 points below the index, raising the prospect of further selling in stocks today.    LIVESTOCK AND MEAT: Pork belly and hog futures prices declined as weakness in cash market prices and lackluster wholesale demand continue to pressure the market, analysts said. Anticipation of tax-related increased marketings of both cattle and hogs after the first of the year also helped the market to close lower, analysts said. Weak cash prices and a continued lockout at IBP Inc.'s Dakota City, Neb., meat packing plant pushed cattle prices lower. </TEXT></DOC>