<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870706-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   PROTESTS RESUMED in South Korea following the death of a student.    About 2,000 students battled riot police in Seoul following the death yesterday of a student struck in the head by a tear gas cannister June 9. It was the first large protest since President Chun's acceptance last week of direct presidential elections and other changes. Though the government is moving with uncharacteristic haste to implement some of the reforms, suspicion and impatience continue.    Students trampled and set ablaze a memorial wreath sent by ruling party chairman Roh to the hospital room of Lee Han Yul, the student who died.    ---   BAKER SAID the U.S. might withdraw Persian Gulf warships if the Soviets did.    The White House chief of staff's statement came two days after Moscow on Friday called for withdrawal of all foreign warships in the gulf and condemned the U.S. military buildup there. The Soviets are escorting three Kuwaiti oil tankers to protect them from Iranian attacks, while the U.S. plans to escort 11. Meanwhile, 12 U.S. congressmen met with Iraq's foreign minister to discuss U.S. operations in the gulf.    Iran has begun to place its Chinese-made Silkworm anti-ship missiles on launchers at the gulf's southern entrance, marine salvage officials said.    ---   Bork faces a filibuster by Sen. Packwood (R., Ore.) if the Supreme Court nominee doesn't agree to abide by the court's abortion ruling, the senator said Friday. Benjamin Hooks, NAACP director, also said yesterday that his group would fight the conservative U.S. Appeals Court judge's nomination &quot;all the way.&quot;    ---   Haiti's electoral council halted talks with the government after accusing it of brutality in the deaths of at least 24 people during anti-government protests last week. The protests began after the government of Lt. Gen. Namphy imposed restrictions -- later withdrawn -- on the council, which is setting guidelines for November national elections.    ---   A former finance minister emerged as the front-runner to succeed Japan's Prime Minister Nakasone in October. Noboru Takeshita, secretary-general of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, established his faction as the party's largest and drew 113 members of parliament or their proxies to a &quot;flag-raising&quot; ceremony.    ---   A series of bombs killed seven people in Lahore, Pakistan, as opposition groups held rallies on the 10th anniversary of the coup that brought President Zia ul-Haq to power. There was no immediate indication that the three bombings, two at a train station and one at a bus terminal, were linked to opposition activities.    ---   Panama's president ordered an investigation into charges against military strongman Noriega, the country's de facto ruler. President Delvalle, appearing on national television, also called for a truce among Panamanians in the wake of street protests against both Noriega and the U.S.    ---   Klaus Barbie was sentenced to life in prison for crimes committed while serving as Gestapo chief in Lyon, France, in World War II. The sentence, handed down Saturday, is France's maximum. Barbie's lawyers plan to appeal his conviction on charges of sending hundreds of Jews and resistance fighters to death camps.    ---   A Kuwaiti newspaper claimed missing hostage negotiator Terry Waite has died, but Lebanese and Syrian officials in Beirut discounted the report. Al-Anbaa quoted an unnamed Lebanese political official as saying the Church of England envoy died of natural causes last week. A church official said the report couldn't be confirmed.    ---   Canada announced a tentative settlement Saturday in a sometimes violent three-week strike by letter carriers, and deliveries are expected to be back to normal today. Letter Carriers Union President Robert McGarry said his 20,000 members won their battle over concessions Ottawa had termed necessary to stem mounting losses.    ---   Voters in Palau rejected semi-independence from U.S. trusteeship as the proposal was approved by only about 68% of those voting in a referendum. A 75% majority was needed for passage. The defeat canceled a U.S. aid package and caused the government, the Pacific island nation's main employer, to lay off two-thirds of its workers.    ---   Defense Minister Rabin said the U.S. has offered to allow Israel to spend more of its annual $1.8 billion in military aid on cancellation costs if it agrees to scrap its Lavi fighter-bomber project and buy F-16s instead. The Lavi's costs have doubled over original estimates. An Israeli cabinet decision isn't expected for at least a week.    ---   Australian Pat Cash won the men's tennis final at Wimbledon, England, defeating Ivan Lendl of Czechoslovakia in straight sets. Martina Navratilova of the U.S. won her sixth consecutive women's title Saturday, a tournament record, beating West German Steffi Graf in straight sets. </TEXT></DOC>