<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870603-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Abrams Testifies That He Didn't AskNorth About Fund-Raising for Contras---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams testified that he repeatedly failed to question Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North about his involvement with Nicaraguan insurgents -- even though Secretary of State George Shultz instructed him to &quot;monitor Ollie.&quot;    Mr. Abrams recalled that in September 1985 Mr. Shultz told him that &quot;you've got to know&quot; what Col. North's activities were. Yet the assistant secretary testified that he never specifically questioned the former White House aide about what he was doing with respect to fund-raising for the Contras.    Even when a plane with an American crew was shot down last October while flying arms to the insurgents, Mr. Abrams said, he didn't question Col. North directly about his involvement with the airlift before assuring Mr. Shultz and Congress that the operation had no connection to the U.S. government.    &quot;I was careful not to ask Col. North what questions I thought I did not need to know the answers to,&quot; Mr. Abrams said. But he rejected suggestions he had sought to shield the Marine officer and the covert arms network. In a sharp exchange, the assistant secretary also denied he had withheld information from Congress last fall regarding a Swiss bank account linked to Col. North.    Mr. Abrams is the highest ranking official in the Reagan administration yet to testify before House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, and his interrogation was full of details and sometimes combative. On a series of separate points, the assistant secretary found himself at odds with the testimony of prior witnesses.    Accompanied by his wife and mother, he reminded members in opening remarks of his past ties to prominent Democrats. But in his carefully crafted answers to questions, he was forced more often to fall back on his Harvard legal education.    Appointed assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs in July 1985, Mr. Abrams was a lead figure in guiding the administration's Central America policy during the last 15 months of a two-year ban on U.S. military aid to the Nicaraguan insurgents. Telephone logs examined by investigators show Mr. Abrams was in frequent contact with Col. North during this period.    The fired National Security Council aide was part of the Restricted Interagency Group, or RIG, of which Mr. Abrams was chairman. The assistant secretary played down the importance of the group. But records cited by the committees show that in the first six months of 1986, there were as many as 11 meetings of RIG, or a smaller subgroup, that included Mr. Abrams, Col. North and the head of the Central Intelligence Agency's Central America Task Force.    Other witnesses previously have suggested this smaller group was a focal point for Col. North's efforts, but Mr. Abrams portrayed himself as having only tangential knowledge of the Contra supply network's activities.    He said he knew as early as August or September 1985 about plans to build an airstrip in Costa Rica to help furnish arms to the Contras. But he denied that he knew that the U.S. ambassador to Costa Rica was involved in negotiating an agreement with that country's government regarding use of the land.    Contradicting the testimony of former Ambassador Lewis Tambs, Mr. Abrams said he didn't recall discussing the airstrip with the Costa Rica envoy in 1985. He also denied ever being told that Col. North instructed the U.S. Embassy in San Jose to work secretly to open a new Contra military front in southern Nicaragua.    The assistant secretary said that in 1986 he participated in two events linked to fund-raising efforts by Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell. But he insisted he wasn't aware that Mr. Channell's organization was funneling money to support the covert air operation running arms to the Contras.    Mr. Abrams's assessment of Col. North often appeared ambivalent. He dismissed criticism that the former aide was a &quot;loose cannon,&quot; but complained that the Marine officer hadn't kept him better informed.    In one episode carrying echoes of Vietnam, the assistant secretary said Col. North proposed last year that the Contras stage their own &quot;Khe Sanh&quot; by capturing a major province on Nicaragua's Atlantic coast, and then forcing a desperate standoff with government forces. Mr. Abrams said the plan, though never accepted, was seen by Col. North as a dramatic way to win public support for the Contras by showing the rebels fighting and dying in a standoff similar to the Marine battle two decades ago.    Months later, Mr. Abrams said, he chose Col. North, rather than the CIA, as the conduit for a foreign contribution to the Contras. The assistant secretary said he met in August 1986 with a representative of the Sultan of Brunei in a London park. Using the pseudonym &quot;Kennilworth,&quot; he said he solicited $10 million in &quot;humanitarian&quot; aid for the Contras. He said the goal was to provide funds to carry the insurgent forces over to the fall, when U.S. military aid would resume. But rather than use an account offered by the CIA, Mr. Abrams passed on the number of a Swiss account given to him by Col. North.    But Mr. Abrams said he never questioned Col. North about the origin of the account number or about who controlled it. While he understood the account was linked to the Contras, he never asked the insurgent leaders if they knew about the account, which also proved to be a conduit for the profits of U.S. arms sales to Iran.    Through an apparently innocent error, the money was deposited in the wrong account in Switzerland. &quot;There's $10 million of missing money that you say was supposed to go into a bank account owned by the Contras, and you never asked them if they got the money?&quot; asked House counsel John Nields.    &quot;I repeatedly asked Col. North, whom I trusted implicitly,&quot; Mr. Abrams answered, but he bristled when Mr. Nields's added, &quot;Because it was Col. North's Swiss account . . . and you knew that, didn't you, sir?&quot;    &quot;Mr. Nields, you can state that 45 times,&quot; Mr. Abrams replied. &quot;It wouldn't be any truer than it is the first time. . . It is false.&quot; The money has since been found, and the Sultan reportedly is seeking to reclaim it.    Mr. Abrams conceded that he misled three congressional committees last fall about the promised donation to the Contras from Brunei. But he asserted he had done so because he &quot;lacked authority&quot; to reveal the gift, and said he later apologized to the Senate Intelligence Committee.    On Nov. 25, 1986, the day Attorney General Edwin Meese disclosed that funds from secret Iranian arms sales had been diverted to the Contras, Mr. Abrams told the Senate Intelligence panel that he'd never discussed &quot;the problems of fund-raising by the Contras with members of the (National Security Council) staff.&quot; Yesterday, Mr. Abrams conceded that he'd discussed the Brunei donation with Col. North, but hadn't disclosed it because that was fund-raising &quot;for&quot; the Contras, not &quot;by&quot; them.    He also said he told the Senate Intelligence panel that &quot;there was no foreign government contributing&quot; to the Contras because the $10 million promised by the Sultan of Brunei hadn't actually reached the insurgents. Those answers, he admitted, were &quot;technically correct and perhaps misleading.&quot;    &quot;I consider this testimony to have been a great mistake; it was the worst day I had in six years as an assistant secretary,&quot; Mr. Abrams said. &quot;And that is precisely why I went back to the committee to tell them about the solicitation and then apologized to the committee.&quot; He made the apology last Dec. 8.    Mr. Abrams said he got the first inkling that U.S. officials were supporting the Contra airlift more than two weeks after the supply plane was shot down in October 1986. He said the CIA's chief of operations for Latin America told him that the agency suspected its station chief in Costa Rica was involved with the resupply effort. The CIA official said the station chief was trying to destroy telephone records linking him to the airlift, Mr. Abrams said. The CIA's deputy director of operations, Clair George, &quot;was livid,&quot; the assistant secretary claimed. The station chief, who gave testimony in closed-door session Friday, said his superiors knew what he was doing and never firmly ordered him to stop.    Mr. Abrams's appearance came as the investigating committees neared a vote on whether to grant immunity to Col. North to compel him to testify. The panels previously agreed with independent counsel Lawrence Walsh that they wouldn't vote on immunity for the fired NSC aide before this week. But Mr. Walsh is expected to seek a further delay when he meets with the lawmakers at a lunch scheduled for today. </TEXT></DOC>