<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870630-0037 </DOCNO><HL> Bold Stroke:Korean Move DefusesThe Immediate Crisis,But Pitfalls Remain---Direct-Elections Plan PleasesMany but Could ArouseAppetite for More Change---What Will the Military Do?---By Bernard Wysocki Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With a single bold stroke, Roh Tae Woo has transformed the face of Korean politics.    The ruling party leader's call for direct presidential elections, the change demanded by tens of thousands of demonstrators over the past few weeks, has defused the immediate crisis threatening Chun Doo Hwan's government. It has made it possible, even likely, that South Korea will soon see its first peaceful transition of power to a popularly elected president. And Mr. Roh, as a candidate for the presidency, has changed his own image overnight from that of a Chun crony with withering support into that of a man whom many Koreans regard as a hero.    President Chun met with Mr. Roh Tuesday to discuss the proposals, and the state-run Korea Broadcasting System said he would respond to the proposals Wednesday. He is expected to publicly approve replacing an electoral-college system that favors the ruling party with direct popular election of the person who will lead South Korea after next February, when he has promised to step down. Sources say the president privately approved a direct election even before Mr. Roh, who heads the governing Democratic Justice Party, proposed it.    That proposal, issued on national television over the weekend, has drawn praise for its political timing. &quot;It is a remarkably statesmanlike conciliatory gesture that was a stroke of political genius,&quot; says Horace Underwood, associate dean at Yonsei University and a longtime Korean resident.    Yet a number of pitfalls remain for the Roh proposals, which include greater press freedom and restoration of political rights for Korea's longtime opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung. Chief among them is the unanswerable question of whether Korea's frequently meddlesome military will remain on the sidelines and allow democracy to bloom, even if the flower proves imperfect.    Another big question is the conduct of the opposition from here on out. Having taken the battle for direct election to the streets and then won, Mr. Chun's political opponents might simply raise the stakes even higher. The best guessing by Korean officials is that Mr. Roh's remarkable gesture won't end the street demonstrations, though their violence seems likely to lessen.    The resolution of these and other uncertainties is critically important not only to the Koreans but to the U.S. as well. With some 40,000 troops stationed in South Korea, America has sought to press for greater democracy without raising hopes and tempers among protesters who have been in the streets demanding more democracy more quickly.    But Washington is taking little credit for the sudden turn of events. The State Department has expressed cautious optimism and added that if more democracy results in Korea, all the credit belongs to the Koreans. William Glysteen, the U.S. ambassador to South Korea from 1979 to 1981, suggests that the pressure applied by the Reagan administration has differed little from that tried under Jimmy Carter. But now, he says, &quot;The Koreans are concerned about the fate of the {1988} Olympics, what happened in the Philippines, and the public unhappiness that the demonstrations uncovered.&quot;    The prospects for peaceful and democratic political transition are unquestionably better now than at any time since June 10, when Mr. Roh was announced as the ruling party's candidate to succeed President Chun. Unsurprising as that news was, it nonetheless sparked nearly three weeks of street protests met by volley after volley of tear gas. In a country accustomed to demonstrations, these proved more violent than past ones. And even more troublesome to the government, middle-class Koreans in unprecedented numbers joined in.    Following Mr. Roh's proposals, a great calm seemed to descend on Seoul yesterday. A waiter in a downtown hotel said happily, &quot;I'll drink tonight.&quot; Students at Yonsei University, the site of numerous rallies and clashes with police, called the proposals a &quot;victory&quot; of their movement. C.K. Yun, a faculty member at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, said, &quot;Things are beginning to change. I'm optimistic.&quot;    Yet the way the government has been cornered by the governed suggests how volatile the situation still may be. Despite the immediate reaction of elation, an underlying rage remains. South Korean society is patriarchal and hierarchical, and there is always the possibility that new-found freedom could spur a new round of anti-government protest, a lessening of discipline on the economic front, and perhaps development of an anti-government trade-union movement.    The chief wild card is the armed forces. The Korean military is an institution that has great esprit de corps but is isolated and secretive. Determining its reaction to the concessions is difficult.    On the one hand, Western diplomats say they detect within the military a moderate faction that rejects imposing martial law or taking other extraordinary measures against civilians. This faction might accept conciliation with the opposition.    But the Korean military as a whole remains a strong, authoritarian force that is intolerant of social unrest and uncomfortable with any show of weakness in a political leader. The threat from the north remains paramount in the minds of military leaders, who argue that the country cannot risk being distracted from the goal of defense. As such, it could view Mr. Roh's plan and Mr. Chun's apparent acquiescence as capitulation -- and move to depose Mr. Chun in a coup.    Nor is Mr. Roh's plan risk-free in the political arena. He may have disarmed the government's many critics by adopting their political platform, but in doing so, he risks further abetting the opposition's appetite for change. In his televised speech, the 54-year-old Mr. Roh called not only for direct presidential elections and press freedoms but also for a release of political prisoners, more autonomy for cities and provinces, and lessened control over the affairs of colleges and universities. He said he would resign his posts, including the party chairmanship, if his proposals weren't accepted.    To some observers, this abrupt turn in the Korean crisis has seemed to fit a pattern. &quot;Korean politics historically have been characterized by long periods of apparent deadlock, occasionally punctuated by major unexpected events,&quot; says John Bernson, Citibank's corporate manager in Korea. &quot;And that's what we got. One of the things this situation demonstrates is just how remarkably practical the Korean people are: When you're cornered, take drastic action.&quot;    Among Korean observers of the political scene, there is admiration for what they deem Mr. Roh's political masterstroke. It is true, they note, that without Mr. Chun's backing, the whole exercise would have been either impossible or an act of political suicide for Mr. Roh. Yet having apparently won Mr. Chun's acceptance, Mr. Roh has succeeded in distancing himself from his mentor.    As the candidate of the ruling party, Mr. Roh was in position to take over the presidency next February if the system remained unchanged -- and the situation in the streets permitted. However, in recent days Mr. Roh appeared on the verge of being dumped by a party worried about its own standing with the public. By coming out for direct presidential election instead of the parliamentary system the government preferred, Mr. Roh, despite being part of the same clique of unpopular military and ex-military men led by President Chun, may now be able to generate genuine political appeal.    Urbane and personable, more moderate than he was in his earlier hard-line days, Mr. Roh could be a serious contender even in a free, popular election. And if elected this way, he would gain a far stronger mandate than if simply ushered into power as Mr. Chun's hand-picked successor.    The initiatives amount to a bold gamble. Though there is still likely to be considerable skepticism about Mr. Roh, he could emerge as the leading presidential contender if he can steal the &quot;democratization&quot; thunder from one of the leading opposition figures, Kim Young Sam, and if the other, Kim Dae Jung, abides by his vow not to run.    On June 10, the day Mr. Roh was nominated by the ruling party, Koreans from all walks of life quickly took to the streets in protest. During the next 18 days, stories of violent clashes with the police appeared almost daily in U.S. newspapers and evening news programs, besides taking center stage in Korea.    Middle-class Koreans turned more and more sympathetic to the demonstrators. Cab drivers and steelworkers joined them. Even some conservative lawyers, doctors and businessmen grew disenchanted with the government's behavior, especially after a full week of rioting brought no concessions from the Blue House, the presidential compound.    Early last week, Mr. Chun did offer concessions. He said he would reopen National Assembly debate on constitutional revision, which in April he had suspended until after the 1988 Olympics. The opposition rejected the gesture as &quot;too little, too late.&quot;    Meanwhile, the U.S. government was stepping up pressure on Mr. Chun. On two consecutive days, State Department spokesmen cautioned against using military force to quell what Washington considered a political problem. In addition, last week Assistant Secretary of State Gaston Sigur flew to Seoul and met with President Chun, Mr. Roh, opposition leaders and others. Whether Mr. Sigur had a role in Mr. Roh's surprise package of concessions isn't clear. He didn't refer to it in a news conference when he left after three days.    The day after Mr. Sigur left, last Friday, opposition leaders decided to go ahead with a &quot;grand march for peace&quot; despite severe warnings by Korean government officials that they would act aggressively to break it up. Another severe bout of rioting left a cloud of tear gas over parts of Seoul -- and a widespread feeling that the crisis wouldn't subside.    &quot;Public disaffection was so high and the government's credibility so low,&quot; says one diplomat in Seoul, &quot;that they had to do something fairly dramatic if they were going to save the situation at all.&quot;    Meanwhile, as leaders of the ruling Democratic Justice Party grew increasingly upset by the crisis, Mr. Roh found himself being blamed for many of the problems. As the rank-and-file were becoming impatient with his hard-line stance, party leaders said, Mr. Roh was turning into a liability. At the same time, they thought the people were primarily upset with the government, and they staged a quiet revolt against it -- hoping they could save the day, bring democracy to Korea and be regarded as heroes.    In his address to Koreans, Mr. Roh spent much of his time trying to convince them of his desire to lead the country toward democratic change. At one point he said that while he still preferred a parliamentary system, &quot;if the majority of the people don't want it, even the best-conceived system will alienate the public. And the government that is born under it will not be able to dream and suffer together with the people.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>