<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870818-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   INVESTIGATORS SOUGHT to determine the cause of a plane crash near Detroit.    At least 154 people were killed when the Northwest Airlines jet crashed on an interstate highway shortly after takeoff from Detroit Metropolitan Airport on a flight to Phoenix. Two motorists reportedly were among the dead. While a number of possible causes for the accident were under scrutiny, engine failure appeared to be the likely reason. According to FAA records, the aircraft was involved in two incidents of engine failure in the past two years. Both the flight and cockpit voice recorders were recovered from the crash site.    Airline experts said the accident, the first major air crash in the U.S. in nearly a year, could have a broad range of effects on the airline industry.    ---   THE WHITE HOUSE IS PREPARING to propose an arms sale to Saudi Arabia.    A Reagan spokesman said the administration expects to send the package to Congress within the next few months. Congressional and other sources said the sale proposal would include 1,600 air-to-ground missiles, as many as 14 jet fighters, and certain ground equipment, including upgrading for M-60 tanks. The administration has linked the $1 billion sale to tensions in the Persian Gulf, where the Navy prepared another escort convoy of Kuwait ships with warships that for the first time would carry mine-sweeping helicopters.    Tehran said its forces shelled &quot;military and industrial targets&quot; in Iraq in retaliation for Baghdad's bombing raids on oil facilities inside Iran.    ---   The FDA has approved human clinical tests of an experimental AIDS vaccine being developed by a Connecticut firm. The vaccine, the first approved for testing in the U.S., reportedly uses a synthetic version of the outer coat of the AIDS virus to &quot;trick&quot; the body into mounting an immune defense against the real virus.    ---   A U.S. journalist escaped from his captors in Beirut, the Christian-controlled Voice of Lebanon radio station reported. The station said Charles Glass, who was kidnapped June 17, walked into a West Beirut hotel early today and later was taken to an undisclosed location by Syrian soldiers. Police said they couldn't confirm the report.    ---   Thousands of Hyundai workers clashed with South Korean riot police in the southern industrial city of Ulsan in a sharp escalation of labor unrest. As the three-week protest worsened, Seoul launched a massive military training exercise that a cabinet minister said was to cope with threats from &quot;within and without.&quot;    South Korea accepted proposals by the International Olympic Committee to give North Korea a larger share of the 1988 Games. The IOC plan calls for Pyongyang to host women's volleyball, a 60-mile bicycle race and eight other events.    ---   South Africa's black miners' union met with officials of Anglo American Corp., and urged the country's largest mining concern to keep police out of mine compounds as a step toward curbing violence. About 240 strikers have been injured during the eight-day strike. Meanwhile, the chemical workers' union abandoned strike plans.    ---   Astronaut Sally Ride urged a detailed examination of the Earth from orbit and the human exploration of Mars early in the next century. Her 63-page report represents NASA's latest effort to get the U.S. space program back on track following last year's shuttle explosion.    ---   Scotland Yard said anti-terrorist police arrested a suspected PLO member and uncovered a cache of explosives and arms believed destined for use in terrorist attacks across Europe. The discovery came during an investigation of the July 22 shooting of a Kuwaiti political cartoonist in London.    ---   A special grand jury convened in Charlotte, N.C., reportedly to study whether deposed PTL founders Jim and Tammy Bakker or their top aides at the ministry violated any federal laws. The 23-member panel, which is investigating possible mail fraud and tax evasion, has subpoenaed a number of PTL financial records.    ---   Four senior CIA officials denied any knowledge of U.S. involvement in arms shipments to Iran and the Nicaraguan rebels in 1985 and 1986, United Press International reported. The news service quoted congressional sources for the classified testimony.    ---   French health officials said radioactive isotopes released into the atmosphere after a Soviet nuclear test Aug. 2 have been detected in the U.S. and Scandinavia. A Soviet official conceded that the underground test could have caused some slightly higher radioactivity. The U.S. said the test violated the 1963 Limited Test Ban Treaty.    ---   Afghanistan has encountered difficulties over its policy of national reconciliation for ending the war against Moslem guerrillas, the Soviet party newspaper Pravda reported. It said that some rebels have refused to negotiate with the Kabul government and that confusion over the plan had developed within the ruling Afghan party.    ---   The AFL-CIO formally joined a coalition of civil-rights activists, civil libertarians and women's groups in opposing Reagan's nomination of Bork to the Supreme Court. The labor group's 35-member executive council said Bork &quot;has never shown concern for working people, minorities, the poor.&quot;    ---   Most businesses opened as usual in Panama, despite an opposition call for a nationwide general strike aimed at forcing the ouster of the country's top military leader, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. The government ordered thousands of extra police and soliders to patrol the capital. It was the fourth strike call in two months.    ---   Died: Rudolf Hess, 93, former Nazi leader, in West Berlin. </TEXT></DOC>