<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0132 </DOCNO><HL> The Pacific:Nuclear Protests Spin Out of Control---By Peter Samuel</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROP GOVMTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><TEXT>   American standing in the South Pacific was enhanced considerably in October by the signing of a fishing agreement that ended a longstanding jurisdictional dispute with the island states. Now the U.S. is being urged to sign the protocols of a South Pacific nuclear-free zone (SPNFZ) that local nations have proclaimed. Some in the State Department want to make it a &quot;double winner&quot; for American diplomacy by announcing the U.S. will sign on to &quot;Spinfizz,&quot; as it is known. The protocols open to U.S. signature today.    With Spinfizz, the U.S. finds itself torn between allies. France, which tests its nuclear weapons in the region, is adamant that the U.S. must not join the anti-nuclear chorus that threatens the future of its force de frappe, while the Labor governments of Australia and New Zealand and the governments of most of the island ministates just as passionately demand an American signature.    The regional governments do not have any substantial interests or arguments for the anti-nuclear treaty, but are trying instead to appease an emotional political movement run by local activists with a hidden agenda. If the U.S. signs Spinfizz, it runs the risk of legitimizing an essentially pro-Soviet security policy and an anti-Western political movement, the same neutralist and anti-alliance movement that has already wrecked the U.S. defense relationship with New Zealand.    The Spinfizz treaty has its origins in the anti-nuclear movement in New Zealand in the early 1970s, when the French still did atmospheric tests in their Polynesian territory. After the French shifted to underground testing and the 1970s New Zealand Labor government got beaten at the polls, Spinfizz languished until the early 1980s when Australia revived it. Still almost completely unheard of by the majority of the Australian public, it has been revived by the current Labor government as a diversion for its activist left wing.    The U.S. State Department is tempted to help Mr. Hawke and the moderate leaders of the South Pacific states by signing Spinfizz. At the same time, though, it is worried about the damage an American signature would do to relations with France. One Spinfizz protocol that the U.S. is being asked to sign would pledge it &quot;not to take any action to assist&quot; nuclear testing in the region, a clause aimed squarely at France. This could inhibit U.S.-French nuclear-weapons cooperation that may be very important for deterring the Soviets in Europe.    In addition, the Spinfizz treaty would foreclose future options of stationing, even temporarily, nuclear weapons in any South Pacific island, including the U.S. islands of American Samoa. More worrisome, a U.S. signature on Spinfizz would depreciate the value of lands the Pentagon has leased for possible future military bases in American-associated Micronesia, especially in Palau and Tinian. The U.S. has already agonized over an anti-nuclear clause in the Palau constitution, insisting this must be removed before it gains independence -- an insistence that would be hard to maintain if the U.S. were endorsing an anti-nuclear treaty for the whole region just to the south and east.    There are already some moves in the four new Micronesian states to join the Pacific Forum and sign Spinfizz, moves that would close off major options for dispersing nuclear-equipped forces from the Philippines. Nothing would suit the Soviets better than to force the U.S. to concentrate all its Pacific nuclear weapons on the tiny island of Guam.    The Australian opposition, which currently leads the Labor government in opinion polls and is likely to form the next government in Canberra, has criticized Spinfizz, noting that only the Soviets have greeted it with enthusiasm. &quot;It restricts the United States, yet the Soviet Union's power base at Cam Ranh Bay will be unaffected,&quot; said Andrew Peacock, opposition foreign affairs spokesman, in a recent speech in Parliament. Spinfizz could &quot;straitjacket successive Australian governments from offering home porting facilities to the U.S. Navy, or base facilities to nuclear-capable aircraft or ground units,&quot; he said.    By signing the Spinfizz treaty, the U.S. would be getting itself stuck in an interlocking set of national and international anti-nuclear laws, treaties and policies. Moreover, each treaty of this kind legitimizes the idea of unilateral denuclearization and establishes precedents for other such treaties. Spinfizz might promote moves for nuclear-free zones in Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean and encourage &quot;peace&quot; groups in Japan, further limiting the scope for deploying Western nuclear-deterrent forces.    To avoid a confrontation with the U.S., Australia insisted that the contentious issue of port visits by nuclear warships be left to the discretion of individual signatories. But there is a major political problem here. New Zealand and many other signatories say that the nuclear-free zone is absurd without a ban on port transit, and some (the Soviets, for example) say it needs to exclude even transit through the region's seas. And they have a logical point. If the South Pacific is made safer by banning nuclear weapons from the land of the South Pacific, then wouldn't it be safer still to ban them from harbors and regional waters? Once one nuclear ban is achieved, the political pressure will build for others -- and with American legitimization, it will build faster.    The deepest objection to nuclear-free zones such as Spinfizz is the implication that American, French and British nuclear weapons are as threatening as Soviet nuclear weapons. A further problem is that such treaties by their nature favor the Soviets, because they set up an unfair competition in duplicity. The Soviets, as they extend their naval reach into the South Pacific, are declaring with straight faces that all their warships are completely free of nuclear weapons, although of course for security reasons they will be unable to allow anyone to look into their ammunition magazines. The U.S. is institutionally constrained against barefaced lies and has to insist on its evasive &quot;neither confirm nor deny&quot; response to all questions about the presence of nuclear weapons. The U.S. allows itself to be excluded by those who insist on being nuclear-free, while the Soviets can come in.    Spinfizz, like all nuclear-free zones, is a fraud, offering no guarantee whatever that the region will be safe from nuclear weapons -- which can of course be fired at South Pacific countries from anywhere else in the world, given the existence of missiles and bombers with intercontinental range. The Spinfizz treaty cannot prevent nuclear-armed warships and planes from exercising their right of passage through international waters and airspace, so even tactical nuclear weapons can continue to be brought into the region.    The invitation to the U.S. to sign this dangerous treaty provides American diplomats with an opportunity to point out the principled reasons why the U.S. carries nuclear weapons in its warships there as elsewhere, and to tell the people of the South Pacific that declaring themselves &quot;nuclear free&quot; will be about as effective as declaring their islands &quot;hurricane free.&quot;    ---   Mr. Samuel is the Washington correspondent of The Australian, a national newspaper in Australia. </TEXT></DOC>