<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881101-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Politics andamp; Policy: Taxes, AIDS, Nuclear Power Plants Lead List Of Questions on the Ballot in States This Year ---- A Wall Street Journal News Roundup </HL><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES BSE GOVMT </CO><IN> NUK UTI INS FIN REL CMD BON MIN ENV PHA </IN><TEXT>   The presidential race has claimed the most attention this election year, but voters also will be deciding issues ranging from rolling back property taxes in Colorado to closing nuclear power plants in Massachusetts to divulging the names of AIDS patients in California.    The issue of taxes, as might be expected, dominates the field, with more than a dozen states planning ballot measures on state levies. But in the 41 states that have constitutional amendments, initiatives and referendums on the ballot, variety is the keyword.    Here's a roundup, by no means all-inclusive, of crucial issues that will be decided Election Day:   Taxes   The hottest ballot question in the Southwest and Rocky Mountain states is Colorado's Amendment 6, a comprehensive tax proposal to reduce income and property taxes, increase agricultural property taxes and require voters to approve virtually every tax increase in the state.    The measure, placed on the ballot in a drive led by Colorado Springs investor Douglas Bruce, would also require approval by two-thirds of the voters for any new debt issue. Government spending could rise only at the same rate as the Consumer Price Index, unless two-thirds of the voters approve a higher rate. Income taxes would be cut by 10%, to 90% of the 1987 level; property taxes would be limited to 1% of assessed value.    The state estimates that these measures would reduce taxes by more than $700 million. Agricultural land would be taxed at its market value rather than its production value, which would rearrange state aid to all of Colorado's schools.    Business groups, who favor state spending on economic development for the troubled region, have pledged to raise $250,000 to fight the measure and the state's current and former governors have come out against it. Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. has put about $2 billion in Colorado agencies' general obligation and certificate of participation issues on CreditWatch with negative implications because of the proposal.    At one time, polls showed about 60% of voters favored Amendment 6, but support is now about 51%. A similar, but less severe proposal was defeated in 1986.    In South Dakota, Proposition 2 would limit property taxes to 1% of the 1984 full value of farm land, and to 2.5% of the 1984 full value of non-agricultural land. Also, it would require two-thirds approval of the state legislature for any state or local property tax increases.    A similar ballot question in Arkansas would require a 60% vote of both houses of the legislature to approve any tax increase. Sales-tax increases now require only majority approval while all other tax increases require a 75% approval.    Insurance   California has four propositions on auto insurance, with each partly or completely contradicting the others. The one with the most votes prevails, but other winning propositions with provisions that don't contradict those of the most popular measure could become law.    Proposition 104, backed by the insurance industry, would establish no-fault insurance in California.    Proposition 101, also backed by the insurance industry, would cut the bodily injury portion of automobile insurance claims 50%, but would also limit claims for non-economic damages to 25% of economic losses, and limit attorney contingent fees to 25% of economic losses.    Proposition 100, backed by trial lawyers, would reduce insurance rates for good drivers 20%, allow banks to sell insurance and eliminate the state antitrust exemption for insurers.    Proposition 103, backed by consumer groups, would slash rates for all drivers 20% for two years and require future rate increases to be approved by an elected insurance commissioner.    According to the latest California Poll, conducted by the Field Research Organization of San Francisco, voters continue to be confused by the welter of proposals. Still, they favor 103 by the widest margin, 45% to 26%. They also favor 100 by 38% to 29%. They oppose 104, 35% to 32%, as well as 101, 36% to 25%.    Some insurers say approval of Proposition 103 would drive them either out of business or out of the state. Lawyers are deeply concerned about Proposition 101's call for cuts of their contingency fees. But they are even more worried about another proposition, 106, that would limit contingency fees in injury awards to only 10% of amounts above $100,000, compared with the 30% to 40% range common now. Voters favored that measure by a 37% to 30% margin in an Oct. 24 poll.    Health Care   California's hotly contested Proposition 102 would require doctors to report to public health authorities the names of anyone carrying the AIDS virus. It would also require anyone who has or is &quot;reasonably believed&quot; to have the virus to divulge a list of sex partners or face misdemeanor charges. Willful transmission of the disease would be a crime. Insurance companies would be allowed to test applicants for the virus, and doctors could test for the virus without the patient's permission.    Opponents say the measure represents the most sweeping legal backlash in the nation against the disease's carriers, and they fear similar measures could be placed on other states' ballots in the future. But voters apparently approve of Proposition 102's core provisions: reporting and contact tracing. An Oct. 25 California poll showed the provisions were favored by 44% of those sampled and opposed by 32%; 24% were undecided.    In a less-controversial question on the ballot in Missouri, citizens have initiated a proposal to create a $296 million trust fund called MedAssist, which would provide health coverage for people with catastrophic or high-risk illnesses, as well as to assist low or moderate income people who may be underinsured or uninsured. It would be funded by a tax that would amount to 0.6% of gross wages.    Official Language   Florida, Arizona and Colorado each have a ballot proposal to make English the official language of the state. The issue is particularly hot in Florida, where a coalition of civic leaders, civil libertarians and Hispanic groups went to federal court recently in an unsuccessful attempt to knock the proposed amendment off the ballot.    With the constant flow of Hispanic immigrants into the state, official English enjoys widespread popular support, especially in northern Florida. Backers of the amendment argue that it is not covered by federal law, and deny that they are trying to limit First Amendment rights.    But many Hispanics and civic leaders, particularly in the Miami area, find the amendment offensive. They fear that it could kindle ethnic bigotry against thousands of immigrants and political exiles who have come to South Florida in search of opportunity and freedom.    Abortion   In Michigan, Proposal A is the most controversial on the ballot. It would make abortions ineligible for Medicaid funds. The state says it anticipates it will have spent $5.8 million on abortions this fiscal year, but that its expenditures for maternity-related medical expenses will increase by $25 million if the proposal is approved. The increase would go for additional Medicaid payments to hospitals and postnatal care for welfare recipients.    Colorado voters will face a vaguely worded proposal supported by pro-choice groups when they go to the polls. It calls for allowing the use of state funds whether or not a woman chooses to continue with her pregnancy. It would overturn an amendment approved two years ago that bans the use of state funds for abortions.    Utilities   Massachusetts voters will be asked to decide whether, in effect, to shut down the state's two nuclear power plants in a binding ballot question that would ban the operation of any power plant that generates nuclear wastes.    The two plants are Boston Edison Co.'s Pilgrim plant in Plymouth and Yankee plant in Rowe, which is owned by a consortium of 10 New England utilities. Pilgrim has been closed for repairs since April 1986, but Boston Edison has asked for permission to restart it.    Proponents of the initiative contend that the plants are unsafe, while the anti-shutdown forces and plant owners maintain that the power generated by the plants is needed to meet the region's surging demand and that replacement power would be extremely costly. Plant owners also say the shutdowns would amount to a property taking by the state.    Environment   A Minnesota ballot proposal would create a state environmental trust fund, with money used for such activities as preservation and conservation. A lottery proposal to fund the trust is also on the ballot.    South Dakota voters will consider the Mining Reclamation Act, which requires the restoration to approximate original contours of all big sites where metals have been strip-mined.    Since 1984, Missouri has had an additional 0.1% sales tax, which is used to fund soil and water conservation and state parks. Voters will decide whether to extend it for 10 years.    A Michigan proposal seeks authorization for $660 million in bonds to pay for cleaning up toxic and environmental contamination sites, of which the state has 1,700, according to its Department of Natural Resources.    Legal   Michigan's Proposal B asks voters to amend the state constitution to give crime victims greater rights to privacy and security before, during and after trial. Opponents argue that these rights are already adequately protected.    Maryland voters have a chance to turn thumbs up or down on a law passed this year that, in effect, bans the sale of small, inexpensive handguns known as Saturday night specials. The National Rifle Association lobbied hard for the law to be put to referendum, and is campaigning now for its repeal.    The issue of elected versus appointed judges is on the ballot in New Mexico. They are currently elected there, but the ballot measure calls for incumbents to run without opposition in the future, with voters allowed to express only approval or disapproval. If the judge is ousted or a vacancy occurs, a nominating committee would recommend a successor to the governor. The amendment would also create such committees and stiffen the qualification requirements for judges.    In Minnesota, juries smaller than the standard 12-person model are being proposed for civil and non-felony cases.    Lotteries   Kentucky, Indiana and Minnesota are seeking permission to run lotteries. If the Minnesota proposal passes, half of the proceeds would be earmarked for the environmental trust fund, explained above, that is also on the ballot. The rest would go for rural economic development. </TEXT></DOC>