<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880628-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Switzerland's 'Glasnost' Has Roots in the USA </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> STK SCR BNK </IN><G> SEC CNG </G><TEXT>   Switzerland is normally quiet in June as bankers and brokers seek hideaways to view nothing more disturbing that the sharp uptrends and downtrends of their country's spectacular mountains. But such is not the case this year.    A highly controversial insider-trading law, passed by parliament in December, is due to take effect Friday. But defenders of Switzerland's ancient tradition of banking secrecy are making a last-ditch effort to block it in the courts. Knowing full well that Swiss voters in the past have normally opposed any abridgement of banking secrecy, they have been seeking a national referendum on the issue. Thursday, the Swiss Supreme Court in Lausanne issued a stay of the new law but the federal chancellery appears to be resisting the court's authority on grounds too technical for description here. Bern is expected to take an official position tomorrow.    Anton Keller, secretary of the Swiss Investors Protection Association, one of the groups fighting for a referendum, calls the new law the &quot;lex Americanus,&quot; a characterization well calculated to raise the hackles of Swiss voters. But it is not an inappropriate description. The Swiss were put under heavy pressure to criminalize insider trading, thus making it possible for U.S. investigators to crack Swiss banking secrecy, by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.    Pushing the SEC is the U.S. Congress. Early this month, for example, the staff of a subcommittee headed by Rep. Doug Barnard (D., Ga.) publicly criticized the SEC for not following up on what the staff called &quot;conclusive indications&quot; that insiders, working through seven Swiss banks, had bought stock of Sheller-Globe Corp. in February 1986, shortly before a takeover by General Felt Industries Inc. The staff quoted an SEC attorney as having said the agency hadn't wanted to &quot;wear out its welcome&quot; with the Swiss.    Folks like Mr. Keller accuse the major Swiss banks of, in effect, selling out to the Americans. He goes so far as to say they are &quot;no longer Swiss banks in that they are more and more oriented abroad, doing the work of foreign agents&quot; with regard to Swiss law.    Andreas Hubschmid, secretary and legal affairs counsel of the Swiss Bankers Association, was in New York not long ago and, in an interview, defended the large banks, Swiss authorities and the Swiss parliament for their willingness to go along with the SEC. The Swiss banks decided some time ago that if they are going to operate in the U.S. market, which is far larger than their own, they will have to pay some heed to the wishes of U.S. regulators. They at least tried to draft a law that, unlike U.S. regulations, has some precision of meaning.    Said Mr. Hubschmid: &quot;Banking secrecy is not absolute. It has always been limited by criminal investigation and the prosecutor. We thought insider dealing should be criminalized for internal reasons because if the public should get the impression that you can only make profits with insider knowledge, that would harm the functioning of the stock exchange and the whole economy. But then, of course, there is the international aspect. With banks so very international, Swiss banks are suffering from problems rising out of different legal systems.    &quot;That's why we are interested in providing solutions, solutions that may satisfy the interests of the Swiss banks and their clients on one side, and also the interests of, for instance, your authorities such as the Securities and Exchange Commission, so that we can continue to trade securities on your markets, providing banking secrecy to the 99% of our clients who are honest. We can offer them the combination of U.S. securities facilities and Swiss banking secrecy.    &quot;We understand that the Americans want to enforce their own legislation on their own markets, especially if they feel that an American may be behind an illegal transaction. If he hides behind the Swiss banks, we understand perfectly that they don't consider it appropriate to accept that, so we had to find solutions. Our solution has always been to cooperate in mutual assistance in criminal matters. We do not cooperate in any administrative assistance, for instance in tax matters.&quot;    The Swiss insider-trading law is indeed explicit, following the lines of U.S. insider rules that existed before the SEC and courts began attempting to broaden the definition of insider trading. It says: &quot;Whoever, as a member of the board of administration, the management, the auditing body, or as an agent of a stock company, or of a company controlling it or depending on it, as a member of an authority or as an official or as their assistant, is in possession of confidential information which, if made public, would in a foreseeable way considerably influence the price of shares, or other securities, book entry transactions, or options on such securities of the stock company traded in pre-market dealing or on the stock exchange, and by taking advantage of this information produces a gain for himself or a third party or who passes such information to a third party with the intent to produce a gain for himself or a third party, will be punished with imprisonment or a fine.&quot;    Receivers of such information can be punished with imprisonment up to one year or with a fine. The law specifically cites impending stock issues and mergers as events having sufficient importance to justify application of the law.    &quot;So to us it seems quite well defined,&quot; says Mr. Hubschmid. &quot;We hope it will work in practice. But the important element is, we want to sanction nonspeculative trading. Just to take one example, if Sterling Drug is traded at 50 dollars, and if some person knows that Hoffmann-La Roche is offering $75 the next day, that's not a speculation and that's the insider trading we want to nail.&quot;    Of course, the Sterling Drug case is not merely hypothetical. It was one of the cases where the SEC asked the Swiss for further information under an agreement, called Convention 16, with the Swiss Bankers Association.    &quot;There is no problem with the well-informed investor or the well-informed broker with good information. That is not a crime. If we only sanction the kind of behavior the law describes I don't think we are changing an element of banking secrecy.&quot;    Mr. Keller does not agree. He thinks that the new law, in effect, prevents hostile takeovers by criminalizing stock purchases in advance of a takeover bid. But at least the law has greater precision than the definition of insider trading the SEC has been trying to apply in the U.S., which refers vaguely to information &quot;not available to the general public.&quot; There is a legitimate suspicion that the SEC wants to keep the definition vague to allow maximum regulatory freedom.    In the final analysis, however, Mr. Hubschmid says the insider-trading law is a Swiss matter. If the requests from the U.S. don't fit the Swiss definition they can be refused. The new law will supersede Convention 16. But clearly, the big banks have appeased the SEC and the U.S. Congress at some expense. Otherwise, there would be no governmental crisis threatening the quietude of Switzerland's mountains and lakes this balmy June. </TEXT></DOC>