<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0065 </DOCNO><HL> HMOs' Incentives: A Prescription for Failure---By William H. Anderson</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Health maintenance organizations are new systems for the delivery of health care in a service-rationed and cost-controlled manner. They enjoy increasing public acceptance and corresponding market share of insurance programs. They now claim to provide care for more than 25 million people. Current enthusiasm obscures certain internal contradictions that may make HMOs unstable in the long run. Both managers and &quot;providers&quot; (hospitals and physicians) have their behaviors shaped by incentive systems that are antagonistic to actual health-care delivery. Unless these incentives are modified, the HMO structure will not endure.    Health-care planners have embraced the HMO concept for more than 15 years. Unfortunately, they started with two erroneous assumptions. First, they thought that HMOs would be aggressive proponents of preventive medicine. But the most important preventive measures are under the control of the patients and not the physicians. The best preventives are avoidance of smoking, drinking, obesity and indolence. The HMO doctor has little power to alter these.    Second, the planners assumed that managers are altruists. The initial design did not require the HMO to be stable in the long run. Managers by training and inclination do not consider long-term stability as a high priority. The planners failed to design incentives for managers that would encourage such stability.    Managers decide the policies and strategy of each competing HMO. A manager's most important incentive is generous compensation, which requires a large positive cash flow for the organization. This situation is satisfied only by increasing the number of healthy subscribers and by minimizing the expenditures for delivery of service.    The manager's strategy is to attract subscribers who will not use services, to avoid enlisting those who might, and to extrude those who have become sick. Managers are not encumbered by a need to develop a stable long-term delivery system, since their skills (unlike those of the providers) are easily transferred to other industries.    What management strategies would seem most attractive? Three rules immediately become apparent:    1) Increase the advertising budget. This ensures an adequate flow of applicants from which the desired healthy people and low resource users may be recruited. Modern marketing methods will be highly effective in attracting demographic subgroups that can be expected to yield the least demand for services. Kevin Higgins reported in Marketing News this year that a major Midwestern HMO increased its subscribers from 41,000 to 500,000 in an 18-month period in 1984-85 by use of a $12 million advertising budget.    2) Construct barriers to services so as to create dissatisfied subscribers more frequently among those who utilize services the most. It is beneficial if resource users are sufficiently annoyed by the lack of available care that they drop out of the plan, thereby taking their demands for service to a competitor. Waiting time, geographical inconvenience and reduced service may be some of the means employed. A well-established and prestigious New England HMO with 200,000 members gained 100,000 new ones but lost 81,000 of the original members in a recent 12-month period. This is an annual turnover rate of 40%.    3) Create disincentives to the providers. Of course, it is necessary to have physicians and hospitals identified as care providers for the HMO plan. But once having enrolled them, their compensation should be marginally lower than that awarded by other insurance carriers. This will tend to make the providers marginally less interested in serving your subscribers and so will create another barrier to care delivery. Two major Boston area HMOs have reduced physician compensation this year by failing to redistribute a contingency reserve.    In an environment of physician and hospital surplus there are always new providers available, and those who are most &quot;manageable&quot; may be selected. In the past 20 years the physician-to-patient ratio in the U.S. has increased 48%.    Thus, the incentives for the managers, however well-intentioned they might be, are skewed toward the pretense of care delivery. There is a clear disincentive actually to provide care. Managers trained to seek short-run solutions cannot be blamed for pursuing their own self-interest. It is up to us to design incentives for them that provide for long-term stability.    We usually choose a particular medical insurance when we are healthy. Thus the potential subscriber need only be shown a &quot;Potemkin village&quot; of physicians and hospitals. Those who later become sick and hope to use resources may be disappointed by a lack of convenient or quality service. They may then take their business to a competitor.    How does this incentive system impinge on physicians and hospitals? In an HMO that pays them marginally less than they receive from competitors, these providers may suggest that sick subscribers change to other HMOs. In those with a capitation-fee model, providers are encouraged to keep users satisfied, somehow, by any means except provision of expensive care. In this case hospitals and physicians are rewarded for satisfying subscribers' wants, but not necessarily their needs. Those who remain scrupulous in their duty to the patient will advise the sickest to go to the HMO with the best record of care delivery. This will further unbalance the system in favor of the HMO with the least real service.    Thus the HMO as now structured, and in an oligopolistic environment, essentially depends on the continued infusion of new healthy subscribers at a rate that equals or exceeds the number of sick dropouts. It identifies the sickest members and encourages them to leave the plan. It demands the continued recruitment of ever more passive and compliant providers in order to obscure the reduced quantity and quality of service delivered.    The scheme, in whatever guise, is unstable. Eventually it exhausts its pool of potential new subscribers. This time may come soon or late depending on demographic factors.    Some will argue that this pessimistic view is not supported by current observation, and that HMOs provide needed and wanted care at competitive prices. But the future behavior of individuals and organizations is best predicted by the structure of their incentives. Good intentions are eventually eroded by a relentless gradient of self-interest. The advertising budgets, dropout rates and provider surpluses are real. And the incentive structure of HMOs is now clearly visible. The end-stage HMO environment will consist of a predominant organization in each geographical area having a membership consisting of the young and the healthy. Advertising will be ubiquitous and creative. For those subscribers who insist on care, service will be provided at a necessary minimum. The system will benefit no one but the managers, and then only for a limited time. But it may be a bit less expensive than its former competitors.    At this point the managers of the HMO will look for more challenging positions in other industries. Their replacements will be less experienced and probably less skilled. Eventually the lack of service will be visible to all and the structure will collapse, leaving a void in the health-care system and large numbers of demoralized physicians and disillusioned patients awaiting the construction of another delivery mechanism.    What is to be done? We must build a new structure using valid assumptions: that the patients are responsible for preventive measures and that managers and providers primarily pursue self-interest. Then it may be possible to develop incentives for physicians, hospitals and managers that are congruent with promotion of health in an enduring system of quality, equity and tolerable cost.    This prescription requires that we face a plain but unpleasant fact: that healthcare resources are finite, and limited by our desires to spend money for other things. We have become accustomed to use of our resources for wants rather than dreary needs. Yet we cannot expect perfection in medicine, sue to enforce this expectation, and then ask that it be cheap, or that others pay for it. Quality, equity and cost are related variables. We cannot determine each arbitrarily by law.    ---   Dr. Anderson is an academic physician teaching at Harvard and Tufts universities. His special interests are connections among biology, psychology and politics. </TEXT></DOC>