<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870407-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN AGREED to consider a treaty with Canada to combat acid rain.    In a speech before the Canadian Parliament, the president said there weren't any &quot;quick and easy answers&quot; to resolving the environmental issue, but said he would consider Ottawa's proposal for a pact requiring lower pollution levels. Reagan's statement was hailed by Canadian officials as &quot;an important step forward.&quot; During his two-day trip to Ottawa, Reagan and Canadian Prime Minister Mulroney also discussed trade and territorial issues. It was their third annual summit.    U.S. and Canadian negotiators are to meet Thursday in Washington to discuss a free-trade accord, which Reagan pledged would become &quot;a reality.&quot;    ---   The State Department said it would take &quot;whatever action is necessary&quot; to make sure the new U.S. Embassy in Moscow is spy-proof. The department, however, stopped short of endorsing congressional suggestions that the building be demolished out of fear that it had been bugged.    A congressman said 10 U.S. missions have come under investigation in a widening examination of security problems following the spy arrests of two Marines once stationed in Moscow. Rep. Mica (D., Fla.), who toured the Moscow facility, said it had been &quot;fully compromised&quot; by KGB agents.    ---   Pope John Paul II arrived in Buenos Aires after ending a six-day visit to Chile with a plea for a dialogue to overcome political turmoil in the military-ruled nation. The pope was met in Argentina by President Raul Alfonsin. He is to spend seven days in the South American nation, the last leg of a two-week, three-nation tour.    ---   Justice Thurgood Marshall blocked the deportation to Moscow of Karl Linnas, who faces a Soviet death sentence on charges of supervising mass executions at a Nazi concentration camp. Marshall granted the emergency request aimed at keeping the New York resident in the U.S. until the full Supreme Court considers his appeal.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres said he received assurances from government leaders in Spain that Madrid supported a proposed international Mideast peace conference. In Tel Aviv, a newspaper quoted Peres as saying the Soviet Union must let 30,000 Jews emigrate annually if it wants to participate in the international forum.    Two senior Jordanian officials opened talks in Washington on prospects for Mideast peace talks and on U.S. aid to the Arab kingdom and to Palestinians under Israeli rule. In Brussels, King Hussein arrived for talks that were expected to give fresh impetus to peace negotiations in the Mideast.    ---   Egyptians voted in parliamentary elections marred by opposition charges of fraud and violence that reportedly left one person dead, at least 64 injured and hundreds in police custody. President Mubarak's ruling centrist party was expected to keep a majority in the 448-seat legislature. Results weren't expected until midweek.    ---   Authorities in Manila charged a former minister in the cabinet of deposed Philippine ruler Marcos with the 1983 murder of opposition leader Benigno Aquino, husband of the current president. Ten others also were charged. Separately, the military braced for attacks by communist rebels following reports that insurgents had entered Manila.    ---   Rep. Jack Kemp declared his candidacy for the 1988 GOP presidential nomination. In a three-state campaign swing, the Buffalo, N.Y., Republican sought to identify himself with a range of conservative causes while staking out a strong position on developing, testing and deploying a space-based antimissile system.    ---   Retired Maj. Gen. Secord told a federal judge in Washington that giving Senate Iran-Contra investigators access to his foreign bank accounts would violate the Constitution and break a U.S.-Swiss treaty. The former Air Force officer, considered a central figure in the arms affair, has refused to grant access to the secret accounts.    ---   Iranian forces downed two Iraqi warplanes that were trying to attack Iran's oil installations in the Persian Gulf, Tehran's official news agency reported. In Washington, defense officials said Kuwait has rejected, at least temporarily, a U.S. offer to escort Kuwaiti tankers in the gulf.    ---   Sweden's prime minister said his country won't begin any &quot;large, long-term&quot; aid projects in Vietnam until Stockholm is satisfied that Hanoi will withdraw its troops from Cambodia by 1990. Ingvar Carlsson said Sweden would continue to provide aid to Vietnam for &quot;humanitarian reasons.&quot;    ---   Rebels in Northern Ireland planted at least five bombs, hijacked nearly 50 buses and cars and caused dozens of buildings in Belfast to be evacuated because of more than 50 phony bomb threats, officials said. The action by the Irish Republican Army was a protest against a police crackdown that forced the delay of an IRA funeral.    ---   Libya has been attempting to undermine U.S. interests in the Caribbean by financing leftist groups in pro-Western countries and, in some cases, urging them to carry out terrorist activities, U.S. officials said. France also is increasingly concerned about possible Libyan-backed attacks in the region, following Libyan setbacks in Chad. </TEXT></DOC>