<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870716-0072 </DOCNO><HL> GOP's Legacy:From Grant to Reagan,Scandals Seem to HitRepublican Presidents---Are Links to Business a Cause?Or Dislike of Government?Or Is the Premise Faulty?---The Role of a Hostile Congress---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After Warren Harding's Republican administration was marred by the Teapot Dome scandal and other corruption, some observers thought his father might have put his finger on the problem.    &quot;Warren,&quot; he once told his son, &quot;it's a lucky thing you weren't born a girl, because you can't say no.&quot;    An inability to say no to questionable activities scarred Mr. Harding's administration. It brought down Richard Nixon's. And now it plagues yet another Republican administration. Besides the Iran-Contra imbroglio, Ronald Reagan's presidency is bedeviled by charges of improper favors for Wedtech Corp. and other unethical behavior.    Big scandals seem to hit Republican administrations harder and more often than Democratic ones, many presidential scholars say. &quot;You don't only get scandals during Republican administrations, but there is a pattern,&quot; says Fred Greenstein, a presidential scholar at Princeton University.    William Leuchtenberg, a historian at the University of North Carolina who once helped compile a history of charges of executive-branch misconduct, says, &quot;If you were to look at corruption in national administrations in the past century, if we're talking about financial corruption, 90% of it would be on the Republican side and 10% on Democrats.&quot;    The experts' explanations for this range from the amount of money floating around Republicans to the leadership style of many Republican presidents. Above all, the experts think the trend is explained by the philosophical bent of those who tend to work for Republican presidents -- a bent that often leads them afoul of the guidelines of government work.    &quot;Typically, Republican administrations draw people out from the world of big business, a world not necessarily corrupt but one where they are operating under the rules of business,&quot; says James MacGregor Burns, a noted presidential scholar. &quot;And they draw people who often are free enterprisers, individualists, people who accept the notion that one has to climb up the greasy ladder and don't have to worry about the rules so much to do it.&quot;    Moreover, many Republicans view government with disdain and &quot;hold their noses&quot; while they serve in government posts, says Richard Neustadt, a presidential expert at Harvard University. Such an attitude can translate into lack of respect for the intricate rules and regulations that are supposed to steer government employees away from conflicts and ethical breaches.    Not all scholars buy the notion that Republicans misbehave any more than Democrats do. &quot;I'm not sure it's a phenomenon,&quot; says Dennis Thompson, the director of an ethics program at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government. He argues that the conduct of the Vietnam War by Lyndon Johnson's Democratic administration was &quot;full of abuses.&quot; Certainly, Harry Truman's Democratic administration was clouded by a series of small financial scandals, and Gary Hart just departed as a Democratic presidential candidate under the cloud of a sexual scandal.    Similarly, some argue that Republican presidents only seem to suffer more scandals because Democrats are well positioned to whip up trouble for them. &quot;Democrats usually control Congress and they control the investigating committees,&quot; says Stephen Ambrose, a historian who has just completed a book on Richard Nixon.    Indeed, President Eisenhower had his worst problems with scandals after Democrats recaptured control of the Senate in the 1954 elections, and the Iran-Contra affair began growing into a full-blown scandal just after Democrats retook the Senate last fall. Richard Viguerie, a conservative fund-raiser, suggests another factor is that &quot;Democrats have more friends in the media than Republicans.&quot;    In any event, executive-branch ethics have emerged as a hot topic that is likely to figure prominently among both Democrats and Republicans in the 1988 election campaign. Presidential scandals tend to fall into two broad categories: financial scandals involving aides using their jobs to benefit themselves or their business friends, and abuse-of-power scandals that involve officials overstepping their constitutional powers to carry out national policy.    In general, presidential historians regard the administrations of Ulysses S. Grant, Mr. Harding and Mr. Nixon -- all Republicans -- as the most scandal-ridden in American history. Under Mr. Grant, officials in virtually every executive-branch department were accused of financial corruption; the charges climaxed in the big Whiskey Ring scandal, in which a presidential appointee went to jail for helping distillers avoid taxes. In Mr. Harding's administration, three presidential appointees eventually went to jail; in the splashy Teapot Dome scandal -- named after a federally owned oil field in Wyoming -- Interior Secretary Albert Fall was convicted of accepting a bribe in return for oil leases on federal lands.    Later, President Eisenhower's administration was dogged by revelations that his chief of staff, Sherman Adams, had accepted a vicuna coat and other favors from a businessman friend. And Air Force Secretary Harold Talbott resigned after disclosures that he had used his position to help a business in which he held an interest.    Then, of course, Mr. Nixon was driven from office by Watergate, and Mr. Reagan has been hit by such a variety of scandals that historian Arthur Schlesinger says &quot;sleaze&quot; has been added to the American political vocabulary.    By contrast, Democrat Franklin Roosevelt served more than 12 years and oversaw the expenditure of unprecedented amounts of federal funds, yet his administration was &quot;largely free of scandal,&quot; says Mr. Leuchtenberg of North Carolina, who has studied the Roosevelt presidency extensively.    While the Republican Party's natural ties to the business community and the resulting temptations for financial misconduct are obvious explanations, more subtle explanations are also offered.    For one thing, because Democrats are more inclined to believe in the value of government, some political scientists believe, they are more likely to make careers of public service. Thus, scholars suggest, they know more about the ethics of government service when they take White House jobs. For example, Harry Hopkins, Franklin Roosevelt's point man in distributing billions of dollars in New Deal funds, was a former social worker.    Republican officeholders, by contrast, often are less schooled in the ways of government when they take top-level jobs. In the Teapot Dome, Watergate and Iran-Contra scandals, key roles were played by &quot;relative amateurs, a bunch of people out of the private sector without much experience or perhaps none,&quot; Mr. Neustadt asserts. He says that officials like H.R. Haldeman, a former advertising man who served as President Nixon's chief of staff, &quot;just didn't understand the fine print.&quot; Much the same can be said of Donald Regan, a former Wall Street executive who was President Reagan's chief of staff, Mr. Neustadt adds, although Mr. Regan, unlike Mr. Haldeman, wasn't charged with any wrongdoing.    Moreover, because Congress has been controlled by Democrats for much of this century and because the federal bureaucracy is widely viewed as being friendlier to Democrats, Republicans often feel they have to operate behind the backs of Congress and career bureaucrats. Scandals like Watergate and the Iran-Contra affair indicate a belief among top officials that governing is &quot;best done by a little group in secret,&quot; says James David Barber, a political scientist and presidential historian at Duke University.    Such problems are exacerbated by the tendency of many recent Republican presidents to adopt a chairman-of-the-board management style that gives loyal subordinates too much rein, some historians say. Republican presidents -- Messrs. Eisenhower, Harding, Reagan -- have tended to give &quot;more leeway to their associates,&quot; says Doris Kearns Goodwin, a presidential biographer. &quot;It has been a Republican tendency to have a chief of staff in the White House, whereas Kennedy knocked that down and became his own chief of staff and Johnson certainly was his own chief of staff.&quot; (Mr. Nixon, although he had a strong chief of staff and rigid hierarchy, did stay atop the details of most issues, she observes.)    Moreover, Republicans often come into office preaching what Mr. Burns calls &quot;Horatio Alger stuff&quot; -- that is, a philosophy that all goals can be reached through hard work and enterprising behavior. Such a philosophy, scholars suggest, may create an environment in which presidential aides are inspired to strike out on their own to either implement policy or to look out for their own financial interests.    More broadly, the same public mood that brings Republicans into office may create an environment where financial corruption has a good chance to grow. Mr. Schlesinger, the historian, has written that America alternates between &quot;public interest&quot; periods, when Americans want activist governments, and &quot;private interest&quot; eras, when they concentrate more on their private lives. When private interest dominates, he wrote in a recent book on historical cycles, Americans tend to pick conservative presidents and &quot;public morals are very different.&quot;    Of course, Democrats also are accused of abusing the presidency. But they tend to get into hot water more often by appearing to overstep their powers as presidents. Franklin Roosevelt, for instance, often acted covertly in giving military aid to Britain at the outset of World War II, and the Johnson administration often sidestepped Congress in escalating the Vietnam War.    In any event, many of the troubling trends that experts see in Republican presidencies seem to have come together in the Reagan administration. By the Justice Department's count, at least seven special counsels have been appointed to investigate charges of wrongdoing among administration officials. Two of the counsels have looked into charges involving the attorney general himself, Edwin Meese.    The charges have involved abuse of power in carrying out foreign policies (the Iran-Contra affair); charges that presidential associates helped business friends get government contracts (the Wedtech affair); and accusations that government aides tried to reap private gain from their government service (the investigation of former presidential adviser Michael Deaver).    Many of the accusations of misconduct haven't been proved, of course. Administration defenders argue that a large portion of them may have arisen simply because President Reagan is the first president to operate from the beginning of his term under the tough 1978 Ethics in Government Act. But even political scientists who are skeptical that Republicans are more scandal-ridden than Democrats agree that the Reagan administration has had unusually serious problems.    More people seem to be using public office as a means of gaining exposure and opportunity for use later in their own careers and businesses, says Joel Fleishman, a professor of law and public policy at Duke University. &quot;That happens all the time in the public sector, but it seems to me to happen a whole lot more in this administration than in previous administrations.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>