<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870406-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN ARRIVED in Ottawa and began talks with Prime Minister Mulroney.    The president, on his first foreign trip since the Iran-Contra affair erupted in November, lauded U.S.-Canadian relations as &quot;an example of peace and harmony to the all-too-troubled world.&quot; The Reagan-Mulroney summit, their third such meeting, is expected to focus on acid rain, trade and territorial issues. During their first 35-minute session, the two leaders also discussed the fight against AIDS. Both sides said pacts or joint statements wouldn't be produced.    Reagan will address a joint session of Canada's Parliament today and is to meet with opposition leader John Turner during the 24-hour official visit.    ---   Sen. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.) said the new $191 million U.S. Embassy in Moscow is riddled with hidden KGB listening devices, will never be secure and should be torn down and replaced at Soviet cost. The remarks by the Senate Intelligence panel's ex-chairman came amid concern over the spy arrests of two Marines once stationed in Moscow.    ---   NASA said Reagan approved a plan dividing the proposed U.S. space station project into two phases and giving the space agency permission to proceed only with a more modest version of the station in the first stage. Before beginning the second phase, NASA would have to win the approval of a future president.    The FBI is conducting a criminal investigation of Morton Thiokol Inc., focusing in part on the solid rocket boosters that were implicated in the January 1986 explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, law enforcement officials said.    ---   Soviet space experts aborted the docking of a research module with the manned orbiting station Mir because of a problem with the module's directional systems. The Tass news agency said the Kvant module, carrying scientific gear, was within 200 yards of Mir when the docking was called off.    ---   The Kremlin accused France of indulging in &quot;spy mania,&quot; and ordered Saturday that four French diplomats and two businessmen leave the Soviet Union. Paris, meanwhile, said it told three Soviets to leave France in addition to the three diplomats ordered out last week. The moves follow discovery of a spy operation on the Ariane rocket.    ---   The Soviet Politburo has ordered a &quot;radical&quot; improvement in the accuracy of statistical reporting on the nation's economy. The action, taken by the country's supreme policy-making body, comes after unprecedented critical references in the Soviet press to falsification of official economic data.    ---   Gorbachev postponed a visit to Czechoslovakia because of a &quot;slight cold,&quot; the Tass news agency said. A Czech official dismissed speculation that the visit, which was to have begun today, was delayed because of differences over the Soviet leader's drive for political and economic changes.    ---   Pope John Paul II expressed support for workers' calls for more jobs and higher pay during an outdoor Mass attended by more than 250,000 in Concepcion, Chile. Organizers and police had tightened security to prevent renewed violence. Over the weekend, at least 261 people were injured in a clash in Santiago at a Mass by the pontiff.    ---   An opposition alliance in Egypt said hundreds of its members had been arrested as the country's voters prepared for today's parliamentary elections, which are expected to be won by President Mubarak's party. Cairo, disputing the opposition's arrest figures, said those detained had been charged with breaking campaign laws.    ---   West German election results showed that the Christian Democrats and their allies wrested control of the central state of Hesse from the Social Democratic Party, which had governed it for 40 years.    ---   Swiss voters approved by a 2-to-1 margin a proposal to tighten asylum laws, rejecting arguments by human-rights groups that refugees could suffer as a result. Voters also rejected a plan allowing citizens to challenge certain defense budget decisions.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres arrived in Spain at the start of a five-day European visit that will include a stop in Italy. Peres is expected to seek support for an international Mideast peace conference, despite opposition to such a forum from Prime Minister Shamir and the right-wing Likud bloc.    ---   Libya has launched intensive bombing raids in northern Chad in an attempt to destroy aircraft and other military equipment abandoned by its forces, according to a French official in N'Djamena. Chadian forces had overrun a post at Ouadi Doum last month, prompting a Libyan retreat.    ---   Authorities in the Philippines arrested a suspected communist rebel, armed with a grenade and a pistol, shortly before President Aquino spoke at a political rally in Tacloban, about 360 miles southeast of Manila. It wasn't known if the suspect had planned to attack Aquino at the gathering. </TEXT></DOC>