<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881013-0146 </DOCNO><HL> New Welfare Bill, New Welfare Cheats </HL><AUTHOR> Charles Murray </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT LABOR </CO><IN> FIN </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   The last weekend before the welfare-reform bill passed at the end of last month, the conference committee was still wrangling about that old bugaboo, the Welfare Cheat. Under the new legislation, which President Reagan is scheduled to sign today, welfare recipients who go to work will get a year of continued Medicaid and day-care benefits. What is to prevent a woman who has worked for a year from going back into the welfare system and re-establishing her eligibility? The conference committee solemnly devised a system whereby the secretary for health and human services must keep an eye on whether this is happening, so he can tell the Congress about it if it does, and then Congress can fix things.    What was ignored then, ignored during the earlier congressional debate, and continues to be ignored now except by a few die-hard right-wing pessimists, is that recycling into the system is not the biggest problem; the first cycle is. The problem lies not in the openings it will give to welfare cheats, but the trap it sets for the very opposite kind of person: the single mother who is working, supporting her family, and has managed to stay off the welfare rolls.    The intention of the provision of Medicaid and day-care benefits is to remove the disincentives for women who are already on welfare to get jobs. The provision uses exactly the same logic as the &quot;30 and a third rule&quot; adopted in 1967 that permitted welfare mothers who got a job to keep some of their welfare benefits as they earned money from jobs. In both cases, it is assumed that the best way to get people off welfare is through a material incentive. Why should a welfare mother get a job if it means giving up income or benefits?    The reason why the &quot;30 and a third rule&quot; backfired, and so will the provision of Medicaid and day-care benefits, is that there is no way to make it easier to get off welfare without also making it more attractive to get on welfare in the first place. Once again, we have adopted a policy on the basis of the people who already exhibit the problem we want to solve, while being blind to the effects of the policy on people who do not yet exhibit the problem.    The welfare-reform bill makes it easier for a woman already on welfare to take a job; that much is undisputed. This will have a positive effect on the subpopulation of welfare mothers who actively want to work full-time (not just answer &quot;I want to work&quot; when asked by a television reporter or social worker) and are job-ready (have the work habits that will enable them to keep a job once they get one).    Unfortunately, this profile of a hard-working, responsible woman who knows her way around the workplace is not typical of the chronic welfare recipient, who is likely to be a very young woman who has never worked and never had a husband. The hard-working, responsible women who are single mothers tend right now to be much more concentrated among another group, those who are already working and not on welfare. And therein lies the potential for backfire.    Consider such a woman. She is working and making do, even though it is not easy for her. She is rightly proud of maintaining her independence and she teaches her children to be proud of it, too. Under the former welfare law, whenever she lost her job she went out and got a new one as soon as possible -- motivated both by her pride and by the fact that she was better off that way.    What happens under the new law when she loses her job? She has a choice. Either she can rush out as before to search for a new job. Or, if only she will swallow her pride and spend just a few months on welfare, then get a job, she can get both day-care and Medicaid benefits. It will take a very strong-minded woman indeed to avoid this seductive reasoning: &quot;I will still be just as before, working for my living. The only difference will be that I'll have gotten these extra benefits. Nothing else will have changed.&quot;    But it is much easier to get into the welfare system than to get out of it, and many women who expect to go back to work will find that, for one reason or another, they're going to put it off a little. When they do get jobs, they will find it easier to quit. When they work long enough to come to the end of their child-care and Medicaid, the arguments for conveniently losing their jobs at that point and beginning the cycle over again will be self-evident -- and it will turn out they can do so, because neither the Congress nor the secretary of health and human services is going to cut off benefits to a woman with children under any circumstances. It has never happened, never will.    On a pragmatic level, the implication is that the number of AFDC families, which has been moving within a narrow range of 3.6 million to 3.8 million during the 1980s, may be expected to rise. It will rise in part just because of the requirement in the welfare-reform bill that makes two-parent families eligible for AFDC payments in all 50 states, but I will venture the more specific prediction that the number of female-headed families receiving AFDC will increase as well, and increase out of proportion to the growth of the general population.    In 1986, about 3.5 million single mothers were on the welfare rolls. Everything we know about the past results of training programs for chronic welfare recipients tells us that very few of them will be moved off the rolls by the new bill. In that same year of 1986, 2.6 million single mothers were not on the welfare rolls. All except the firmly middle class of those 2.6 million will become potential new recruits to welfare as a means of qualifying for a year of very valuable benefits.    Much more important than the numbers: The woman who thinks &quot;nothing else will have changed&quot; if she goes on welfare and then goes back to work will find she was wrong. She formerly was accomplishing something very important, for both herself and her children, the accomplishment of being a competent, independent adult. Now she will have become another game-player. The lesson she passes on to her children will no longer be, &quot;Stand on your own two feet,&quot; but, &quot;Beat the system.&quot;    The social-democratic solution is to get rid of such disincentives by making free day-care available to everyone, making free medical coverage available to everyone, and ultimately making the concept of a &quot;competent, independent adult&quot; as fuzzy as possible. In this regard, a second specific prediction is in order. Within a few years it will become politically intolerable that women lose these benefits just because they have been off welfare for more than a year, and both benefits will become entitlements for all women up to the borders of the middle class.    In the grand scheme of things, these predictions do not spell disaster. They will constitute changes in degree, not in kind. But for those of us who believe that the welfare system has been moving in the wrong direction since 1932, the prospect is nonetheless depressing. The reason why welfare is bad is not because it costs too much, not because it &quot;undermines the work ethic,&quot; but because it is intrinsically at odds with the way human beings come to live satisfying lives. The welfare reformers wanted to validate this truth, but will succeed only in obscuring it.    ---   Mr. Murray, a Bradley fellow at the Manhattan Institute, just had published &quot;In Pursuit of Happiness and Good Government&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster). </TEXT></DOC>