<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871222-0132 </DOCNO><HL> A Trucker's Road to Safety and Sanity---By Timothy Barton</HL><DD> 12/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN><TEXT>   As a truck driver I write this article at risk. But having logged a million miles on the highway, I know that voicing criticism is less risky than climbing behind the wheel. A professional who makes his living driving a hundred thousand miles or more a year is put in constant jeopardy, not only by the nature of his work, but by shippers who demand delivery without regard for Department of Transportation driving-hour regulations, and by employers who then require excessive hours of driving.    In 10 years of driving I have had no employer who expected less than twice the legally allotted number of hours. Many drivers, probably the majority, find themselves in similar binds. They must constantly break the law to keep their jobs. The resulting fatigue is the truck driver's real enemy and the true killer on the highway. A driver who lives in his truck for days, or weeks, at a time, transporting 20 tons of freight in a highly unstable 20-ton truck on highways clogged with private vehicles, is always battling fatigue. He drives as much as 1,000 miles a day. He juggles miles and hours in his log book to create a believable lie.    Consider this true log: A driver leaves Imokolee, Fla., with 45,000 pounds of watermelons. His truck is a ton overweight; he's had no sleep since the four hours he got between 2 and 6 that morning. He has 36 hours to meet his 7 a.m. Wednesday appointment in Boston, 1,500 miles and 11 states away. He has a vented van with no insulation; he's worried the melons will explode in the heat. There's no time for Department of Transportation checks, weigh stations, decent food, sleep, or roadside urinalysis tests. He will drive 30 of the next 36 hours.    Truck drivers complain about the protection of profit at the cost of safety, the lip service paid to safety, but in the end we accept them as the price we pay to keep our jobs. We accept fatigue as an occupational syndrome, believing that to drive farther faster is a proof of manhood. Our attitudes keep the freight moving and the coffers of government awash in cash from fines and penalties. We support those who exploit us. We are outlaws and proud of it.    Despite the use of roadside drug testing, some drivers do use drugs to cope with unrealistic schedules. Amphetamine use has declined in the past decade. Marijuana is the drug of choice; the Institute for Highway Safety found that 27 of 300 drivers tested used marijuana, while other experts quote figures of 30%. Whatever drugs truck drivers use, roadside testing is insufficient to prevent their widespread use. Such testing is an example of misdirected regulatory zeal.    About 4,500 people died last year in traffic accidents involving trucks. If the same official zeal were focused on shippers and employers who demand outlawry from drivers, the first step will have been taken toward reducing that number. Until then, shippers will expect 68-hour trips from California to Boston, and profit will be made because drivers disregarded the law. More important, public safety will continue to be jeopardized.    Problems must be attacked where they begin. Drug use, for instance, is more likely to be decreased if employers administer drug scans to all prospective employees and retest at unannounced intervals. Drivers will then have to refrain from drug use completely. Fatigue-related accidents are more difficult to eradicate. It is impossible to police the industry efficiently; log books are too easily doctored. Violations might be reduced, however, if companies were held liable when it can be shown that delivery schedules cannot be met within legal time limits; if teams were required on trips not legally possible for one driver; if all states were required to give safety inspections of the high quality found in Connecticut, Pennsylvania and California.    On a broader scale, the trucking industry should become a leader in highway safety. The public needs to be educated about trucks and the special circumstances that affect driving when trucks are present. Driver-training seminars, focused on sharing the road with trucks, can be created for high school driver-training classes. Truck drivers also need continuing education; they might be required to graduate from a driving school with a state- or federally approved curriculum.    Finally, professional and nonprofessional drivers alike need reminders about the effects of belligerence and lack of courtesy on highway-accident statistics. Drivers can replace the outlaw mentality with professionalism and help to reform an ailing industry if they will sacrifice a portion of their egos for the sake of preserving life on the highway. But as long as truckers are at the mercy of shippers, employers and ill-conceived regulations, the driving public will be the loser.    ---   Mr. Barton is a long-distance truck driver based in Newport, R.I. </TEXT></DOC>