<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880208-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: Corporate Baby Sitting </HL><AUTHOR> Susan Schiffer Stautberg </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   American businesses, in general, still resist the notion that their employees' family lives play an important part in the companies' profitability and future growth. But on Capitol Hill and in the courts there is movement -- that will result in increasing pressure on corporations -- to develop better &quot;family life&quot; programs. For example, in January 1987, the Supreme Court upheld a California law that requires employers to offer four months' unpaid leave to pregnant employees, with a guarantee of the same or similar job upon their return.    This sort of legislation traditionally has been opposed by business as discriminatory against other workers and unfairly expensive to implement. However, consider that almost 55% of the mothers of children under six are employed. The effects of stress, lost productivity and days absent for child care from this large employee group has a significant bottom-line impact. If for no other than the most self-interested motivations, corporations will need to be more responsive to the needs of these working mothers and their families.    With parents largely on their own when it comes to problems of where to find reliable child care, corporations often reap a negative harvest of parental stress, anxiety and absenteeism. Programs that companies can implement to alleviate this situation include: on-site child-care centers, informational seminars, referral services and financial aid to parents for child care. Leading-edge and Fortune 500 companies such as Procter andamp; Gamble and IBM have implemented creative programs for child care, elder care, pregnancy benefits, parental leaves, benefit options and flexible work schedules. Many of these organizations have taken research and educational initiatives.    One of the most successful and least expensive programs is a referral service that provides counseling to parents in search of reliable child care. About 500 corporations nationwide offer this service, which can take a variety of forms.    The company I work for, Touche Ross, refers employees, at no charge, to a reliable child-care counseling service in New York. In addition, employees who must travel to other Touche Ross national offices, or clients with their children in tow, have found facilities available that provide temporary child care.    IBM offers a free child-care referral service, using a network of 200 community-based organizations. BankAmerica Foundation of San Francisco sponsored the work of child-care agencies throughout the state that trained and then helped get licenses for 230 new child-care workers.    Campbell Soup Co. subsidizes 50% of the child-care fees at an on-site day-care center. Gordon McGovern, Campbell's president, says the center is &quot;enormously successful,&quot; and &quot;we started hiring people we couldn't hire before, because they were able to bring their children to the center.&quot;    Other corporations -- Corning Glass and Levi Strauss and Merck andamp; Co., for instance -- established on-site centers, with mixed results. These centers are very expensive to operate and sometimes cause resentment from employees who have no need of them. Parents seem wary of institutional care, and less than 10% of employees use them at any one time. In a recent survey, Summa Associates, a Los Angeles-based child-care benefit planning organization, reports that of the 2,300 employers providing child-care benefits of some type, only 150 have on-site centers.    Rather than use on-site day-care centers, some parents prefer the programs that provide open options. They receive financial aid or counseling from the employer and choose their child-care systems themselves, like the subsidy program at Baxter Travenol Laboratories. Family and neighborhood day-care training and referrals are offered at Southland Corp. in Dallas and the American Express Foundation in New York.    In the future, consortiums may be the most popular form of day care. In Tysons Corner, Va., 20 companies recently contributed a total of $100,000 to start a day-care center when they discovered that each parent of a preschooler was actually costing their employers $1,800 a year in lost time on the phone or away from the office on child-related problems. To raise money for their portion of the $100,000, each company paid $1,500 for each reservation for a child, with the unused slots available to the public. A child-care company was contracted to hire teachers and to manage the independent, non-profit facility, thus relieving the companies of any potential liability. This type of arrangement offers distinct advantages to smaller companies and to those who wish to provide child-care options without actually getting into the business of providing on-site day care.    Another significant benefit that corporations are beginning to offer is the flexible or &quot;Cafeteria Benefits&quot; package, which enables the employee to select options that best suit family needs. For instance, a couple may find that duplicate health-insurance coverage is a waste of company (and employee) paid premiums. Some corporations allow employees to swap equivalent benefits (additional child care instead of dental insurance, for example). Chemical Bank and Primerica already have flexible benefits programs, although there is a variance in the specific packages offered by each.    Part-time employment can be a solution for those who want to be at home during the child's early years, yet do not want to dissociate completely from the job scene. However, most companies that permit part-time work for their senior staff view the arrangement as strictly temporary.    Two-gender work force issues such as pregnancy benefits, parental leave, child care, cafeteria benefit plans and restructured work schedules are very important to families trying to combine work and parenting. But they've also become bottom-line issues for corporations. They can affect recruiting/relocation, employee benefits, retention and productivity.    Those corporations not yet affected by dual-career issues will be. If one organization does not take steps to respond to the issues, others will. Policies more in step with the needs of the changing work force will give the progressive company the competitive edge.    ---   Ms. Stautberg is director of communications for Touche Ross andamp; Co., New York. Her most recent book is &quot;The Pregnancy and Motherhood Diary&quot; (MasterMedia, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>