<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. PLANS to delay the reopening of the Savannah River weapons plant.    The Energy Department said the closing of the plant's three aging reactors means it will be three months before the U.S. again produces tritium, a component of nuclear weapons. The three reactors at the plant in South Carolina, the sole source of U.S. tritium, have been closed for safety reasons since August. The department said a four-week &quot;phased restart&quot; would begin in December.    A congressional committee heard evidence that lax security has allowed foreign intelligence agents to gain access to the nuclear weapons laboratories.    ---   Czechoslovakia's government resigned as Prague's Communist Party leadership made changes at a two-day Central Committee meeting that expressed clear opposition to sweeping economic or political changes. President Husak accepted the resignations. The moves came a day after the nation's premier and his deputy stepped down.    ---   Yugoslav Communist leaders called a crisis meeting in strife-torn Kosovo province that is expected to pave the way for a purge of the provincial party leadership, sources said. The meeting was scheduled as unrest escalated between minority Serbs and ethnic Albanians in the province, where strikes and protests have mounted in recent weeks.    ---   About 10,000 students in Poland held rallies throughout the country to demand legalization of their union, which was outlawed after the government's martial law crackdown in December 1981. They also sought recognition for Solidarity. Warsaw accused the students of trying to &quot;torpedo&quot; talks between the government and opposition.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide the extent to which the First Amendment protects the news media against criminal prosecutions and civil lawsuits for publishing the name of a rape victim in violation of state law. The case raises the question of whether it is an unconstitutional prior restraint to bar such publication.    ---   Reagan appears reluctant to authorize the prosecution of Marcos, even though the Justice Department has decided to recommend seeking criminal charges against the deposed Philippine leader. Senior department officials want to seek fraud, conspiracy and other felony charges against Marcos.    ---   Hundreds of demonstrators blocked entrances to the FDA's headquarters in Rockville, Md. and demanded easier access to experimental drugs for people with AIDS. Police, who closed the building to arriving employees, arrested about 175 protesters.    ---   Protesters in Algeria remained off the streets after a week of violence in which more than 400 people were killed. Troops guarded areas most affected by the riots, and a communique by the president's office announced that a state of emergency, imposed last week, would be lifted today.    ---   Prince Sihanouk received assurances from Reagan that the U.S. supports the former Cambodian ruler's quest for a negotiated settlement of the Asian nation's conflict, the White House said. Sihanouk said Reagan agreed that an international peacekeeping force is needed in Cambodia, which is governed by a Vietnam-backed regime.    ---   Pope John Paul II urged a common political structure for a united Europe, but his speech before the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France, was disrupted by the Rev. Ian Paisley. The militant Protestant leader from Northern Ireland shouted that the pope was &quot;the anti-Christ.&quot;    ---   Apartheid foes violated emergency regulations by urging people in South Africa to boycott nationwide municipal elections. About 38 academics and clergymen urged the boycott. While the elections are scheduled to begin Oct. 26, balloting began Monday under a system of &quot;prior voting.&quot;    ---   Bush vowed to crack down on white-collar crime, including insider trading. The GOP candidate also accused Dukakis of &quot;protectionist demagoguery&quot; for his criticism of foreign ownership of U.S. firms. The Democrat proposed an $810 million scientific program to help firms compete overseas.    ---   Israeli troops seized the body of a Palestinian teen-ager after mourners at a funeral in Bethlehem began hurling stones to protest the killing of the youth by soldiers. The Arab reportedly was killed by a plastic bullet. Dozens of Palestinians then called a strike in the city, demanding that shops close. </TEXT></DOC>