<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870106-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SUBMITTED a $1.024 trillion budget for fiscal 1988.    The request would meet the Gramm-Rudman requirement to narrow the deficit to $108 billion, but calls for billions of dollars in tax increases in the year starting Oct. 1, 1987. Much of the savings would be achieved by the sale of federal assets and specialized revenue-raising measures. The president's request shows signs that the administration is taking a conciliatory tone in shaping its approach to the nation's fiscal problems.    The Democrat-controlled Congress remains unlikely to accept Reagan's priorities of raising military spending and shrinking the size of domestic government.    ---   THE PRESIDENT'S DOCTORS FOUND him in &quot;excellent&quot; condition.    Following Reagan's hour-long surgical operation for an enlarged prostate gland, White House physician Col. John Hutton said preliminary medical analysis showed no new &quot;suspicion of cancer.&quot; Reagan spokesman Larry Speakes said the 75-year-old president was cracking jokes before and after the prostate procedure. Speakes reaffirmed earlier reports that four tiny polyps removed from the president's colon Sunday were noncancerous. The president will need a catheter while recovering in Bethesda Naval Hospital, but Speakes said the president would need no medication other than routine antibiotics and perhaps aspirin.    Today the president will undergo a CAT scan, Speakes said. He predicted Reagan will return to the White House after &quot;three or four days.&quot;    ---   The Senate intelligence panel rejected a White House request to release a report on the panel's probe into the Iran-Contra arms affair. The 7-6 vote in the Republican-controlled panel reflected bipartisan sentiment to wait until new select committees begin their inquiries.    ---   Emergency workers reported 15 people were killed and 176 injured when an Amtrak passenger train collided with Conrail freight locomotives. Federal investigators, saying it was too early to determine the cause, intensified their probe of the accident, focusing on possible human error or equipment failure.    ---   The Soviet Union intensified its efforts to win a share of the international commercial satellite launch business. Soviet Premier Nikolai I. Ryzhkov said foreign firms wishing to have satellites launched on Soviet rockets could ship them into the country in sealed containers without inspection by Soviet customs officials.    ---   Investigators in Puerto Rico suspect arsonists used flammable chemical substances to set fire to the Dupont Plaza Hotel, killing at least 96 people. An American International Group Inc. unit is the sole property and liability insurer of the hotel in San Juan. The firm didn't specify the amount of coverage involved.    ---   French Prime Minister Chirac ruled out pay concessions to rail workers on a 20-day strike. If Chirac faces down the strikers, some observers say, he will cement his leadership of the conservative coalition and become the main rival to Socialist President Francois Mitterrand in next year's presidential elections.    ---   Libyan leader Gadhafi acknowledged he has &quot;a few hundred&quot; soldiers operating in Chad, dropping a previous position that fighting there was only between rebels and the government of the Central African nation. Chad said it shot down a Libyan MiG-23 warplane that was conducting &quot;blind bombardments&quot; of civilians.    ---   Rep. Marvin Leath's bid to oust Chairman Les Aspin of the House Armed Services Committee in the Democratic caucus this week was endorsed by five of the panel's seven subcommittee chairmen. Mr. Aspin remains favored to retain his post, but the endorsement circulated yesterday shows the opposition he faces.    ---   Investigators located the flight recorders of the Brazilian airliner that crashed Saturday near Abidjan, Ivory Coast, killing 49. The Boeing 707 jet was en route to Rio de Janeiro and had reported engine trouble shortly after takeoff.    ---   A Philippine official predicted &quot;long and tortuous&quot; negotiations would be needed to end a Moslem insurgency. Aquilino Pimentel, an adviser to President Aquino, made the forecast after the largest Islamic group, which has fought the government for nearly 15 years, agreed to drop demands for independence in favor of a form of self-rule.    ---   New York's Cardinal O'Connor left Israel for Rome, ending a controversial five-day visit. After a meeting with Israeli Foreign Minister Peres, the Roman Catholic prelate said he was impressed by Peres's desire to move the peace process forward.    ---   Students in Peking openly burned copies of various official newspapers, which they accused of malicious and inaccurate reporting, during demonstrations on the grounds of Peking University. The protest attracted several hundred students who pledged support for Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping. </TEXT></DOC>