<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Enterprise Lost:How a Black BusinessFinds That Selling OutIs One Way to Profit---Newark, N.J., Cable-TV FirmSadly Cashes In Its ChipsWhen Financing Tightens---The Cash-Customer Hazards---By Elliot D. Lee and Udayan GuptaStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> NEWARK, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Barry Washington is glad to have time now for a leisurely lunch. Last December, the black businessman sold the cable-TV company he had begun operating here in 1982 with $9.5 million in mostly borrowed money. He sold out for $33 million.    The sale of Connections Communications Corp. made the 39-year-old Mr. Washington a millionaire and earned a 115% annual return on equity for his minority-group investors.    It also cooled, at least temporarily, his entrepreneurial ardor. &quot;I'm anxious to go skiing, take a few vacations, do all the things I haven't done in years,&quot; he says.    Nevertheless, the sale gnaws at Mr. Washington and some of his backers. They spent years building a company that many people in this predominantly black city had hoped would anchor a strong black business sector. The company still serves the community, but the new owner is white.    &quot;We had shown we could create value. But we also discovered it was too much trouble&quot; to continue operating, says Terry L. Jones, the senior vice president of Syndicated Communications Inc. or Syncom, a venture-capital company that invested in Connections. &quot;The founders and investors realized that the franchise was more valuable&quot; to a larger cable company, he adds.    The history of Connections as a black company shows that minority-group business development efforts like Syncom can create successful enterprises and wealthy individuals. But it also suggests that entrepreneurs' goal of keeping those businesses black-owned can be hard to accomplish in industries in which small business in general is weak -- and black business is even weaker.    For Connections, being a small urban cable company meant paying more per subscriber for programming and operations than do larger, suburban cable companies. And operating in a black community like Newark meant having a lot of trouble borrowing money. By the time a long-delayed refinancing was finished last fall, the owners, needing still more infusions of cash for expansion, felt it wasn't worthwhile to run the show themselves any longer. On Dec. 31, they sold Connections to cable operator Peter Gilbert. The minority venture-capitalists made a $5 million profit; so did Mr. Washington and the other shareholders.    It is common, of course, for owners of viable but hard-up small companies to cash in their chips. &quot;Turnover is part of the marketplace,&quot; says Andrew F. Brimmer, a Washington, D.C., economics and business consultant and former Federal Reserve Board governor. He says it is to be expected that black entrepreneurs will sell their businesses if they can make more money than by keeping them.    But other small-business experts say that while white-owned companies can often sell shares to the public without giving up control, that hasn't generally happened for black-owned concerns.    &quot;It's a rare black company that has been able to raise money in the public markets,&quot; says Herbert Wilkins, the president of Syncom. &quot;The only option to cash-strapped black entrepreneurs is selling out. And while that may create a profit, it usually ends the vision.&quot;    Minority-group business development programs were created after the 1960s urban riots as a way to bring blacks and Hispanics into the economic mainstream. Such progams vary greatly, but most try to offset minority entrepreneurs' relative lack of capital and experience with financing and consulting services. The goal is to reduce the risks that lead conventional financiers to shun minority businesses.    Many programs designed to foster black businesses think they are building an enduring base of minority enterprises. But that view might ignore certain economic realities.    &quot;Black companies aren't sacrosanct,&quot; says Mr. Brimmer, the economist. Many of the minority business programs, he says, operate &quot;on the erroneous assumption that the businesses belong to the community rather than to the people who bear the risk to start them.&quot;    In the late 1970s, some people concluded that the cable-TV industry offered special opportunities to minority-owned companies. The industry had neglected to bid for franchises in certain urban markets where potential profits appeared weakest but minority political clout was strongest. The inner city, therefore, looked like an opportunity for minority entrepreneurs to buy urban franchises and develop their own programming.    Things haven't worked that way, though. Political haggling delayed the awarding of cable franchises in such cities as Washington, D.C., and Detroit. Cleveland and most of New York City still aren't wired for cable.    Moreover, the industry has consolidated. The 60 biggest operators account for 80% of cable subscribers (40 million households last year). The 10 or so minority operators account for less than 0.5% of all subscribers.    Finally, says Mr. Gilbert, the new owner of the Newark franchise, small operators have to pay 30% to 40% more for programming such as Home Box Office than do large operators. HBO, a unit of Time Inc., says cable systems with at least 100,000 HBO subscribers usually pay 20% to 25% less for HBO than smaller systems like Newark's that have fewer than 25,000 HBO subscribers. &quot;It isn't race, it's size that's the problem&quot; facing urban cable systems, Mr. Gilbert says.    But others say race does play at least an indirect role. &quot;We have been relegated to urban communities with large inner cities,&quot; where unemployment is high and incomes are low, says Ben Davis, the black owner of the cable franchise in Dayton, Ohio. Cable operators in these areas, he adds, &quot;are going to be more troubled&quot; than most other owners.    Mr. Washington and three other black Newark residents -- Clarence Lilley, Melvin LuSane and Calvin Reed -- didn't concentrate on problems when they conceived Connections in 1978. All were active in Newark business circles and had the backing of the city council, including Sharpe James, a member who has since become Newark's mayor. The council awarded the cable franchise to Connections over a white-owned bidder in 1980.    Still, the founders had no money of their own, little management experience and few ties to banks that regularly finance cable-television franchises.    They hired the small, black-owned Wall Street investment-banking firm Daniels andamp; Bell to line up financing. But nearly all of the 20 institutions they approached declined to participate, saying that they didn't put up money for start-ups or for cable television, according to Travis Bell Jr., the president of Daniels andamp; Bell.    Connections then brought in Syncom, a Washington, D.C., black-owned venture-capital firm that finances many minority businesses. It developed a plan calling for experienced cable engineers to build the system in exchange for shares in Connections. Syncom then assembled nine &quot;minority enterprise small business investment companies,&quot; known as Mesbics, that along with Syncom agreed to invest $2.5 million -- $150,000 in venture capital and $2.35 million in subordinated debt -- in return for a 49% stake in the company. (Senior lenders get first claim to a company's assets in the event of bankruptcy; subordinated lenders get second claim.)    Syncom then persuaded Philadelphia National Bank, which had worked with Syncom on a previous cable deal, to provide $4 million of senior debt, and Newark-based Prudential Insurance Co. of America to kick in $3 million of senior debt. Each senior lender was to receive 5% of the gross sales price if Connections ever was sold.    Philadelphia National saw Connections purely as an investment. &quot;We knew it was risky but felt the numbers justified our participation,&quot; says Peter Davis, the senior vice president in charge of the bank's communications unit. &quot;It was a straight business deal as far as we were concerned.&quot;    Prudential would only finance Connections through its special &quot;social investment&quot; program. Prudential itself had a policy against financing cable operations, and it felt that the founders' lack of management experience and funds of their own violated the usual &quot;risk-reward criteria,&quot; says Alex Plinio, the head of the social investing unit. But &quot;a credit-worthy minority entrepreneur doing business in our home city&quot; fit Prudential's social investment criteria, Mr. Plinio says.    Connections built its system within its budget and on schedule and began service in June 1982. By mid-1983, the company had signed up more than 17,000 subscribers paying an average of $33 a month. Business seemed to be going well.    But it wasn't. Rapid growth, management inexperience and bad luck had allowed bad-debt and equipment problems to fester. The company hadn't anticipated, for example, that its mostly low-income subscribers would pay their monthly bills in cash and in person. &quot;We had people lined up in our offices and down the block waiting to pay,&quot; remembers Mr. Washington. &quot;That didn't make anybody happy.&quot;    The company also had to replace hundreds of defective signal converters that attach to subscribers' television sets. Most devastating was an undetected computer-system problem that meant &quot;we hadn't been billing 3,000 subscribers,&quot; Mr. Washington says.    Even though most cable start-ups lose money in the first three or four years, Connections had projected a profit of $600,000 on revenue of $4.4 million for its first fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 1983. But the cost of correcting the billing system, disconnecting deadbeats and replacing defective equipment resulted in a loss of about $300,000 on revenue of $3.2 million, says Syncom's Mr. Jones.    The company decided it needed $2 million more from the senior lenders to solve its problems and keep growing. &quot;We had done the hard thing, which was get started,&quot; says Mr. Jones, and &quot;we had created value that would secure the extra money.&quot;    Accepting that logic, each senior lender early in 1984 agreed to put up $1 million, if the other did. But in early April, Prudential balked, citing doubts about Connections' management. The insurer asked that the franchise be appraised. But even when the market value was estimated at $25 million by a Washington, D.C., cable consultant, Prudential still refused to lend more money.    &quot;We were stalled in the water,&quot; says Mr. Washington. The company needed money to provide customer service and to pay program suppliers and other creditors. At the suggestion of financiers, Mr. Washington hired a white general manager, to shore up investor confidence in the company's management. (Mr. Jones of Syncom says that having an experienced white cable manager added credibility to Connections.) And Syncom offered to find another lender to take Prudential's place. Prudential said it would agree to be replaced but wanted to keep its 5% equity interest.    &quot;It was as if Prudential wanted to see the company sold rather than keep it going,&quot; says Syncom's Mr. Jones.    Prudential sees it differently. &quot;With Connections, we ended up with a credit-worthy deal that ran into problems,&quot; says Mr. Plinio. &quot;We don't think {refinancing} would have moved along as fast if it hadn't been for our involvement,&quot; which he suggests protected the owners from angry creditors.    Negotiations between Prudential and Connections dragged into 1986, with the company living off an additional $1.3 million put up by the Mesbics in exchange for preferred stock. Prudential finally did agree to be bought out last October by Hundred East Credit Corp., a New York-based investment concern, in a deal that brought $3 million in financing to Connections.    By then, however, Connections and its Mesbic investors had decided to sell. As time passed, the company needed infusions of more and more money to keep going, let alone grow. Most of the new money it obtained had to be used just to pay off debt.    Moreover, Connections had received good offers from large cable operators who presumably could run the Newark franchise at much lower cost than Connections could, thanks to economies of scale. Since taking over the Newark franchise in January, Mr. Gilbert says, he has instituted 24-hour repair service, improved the system's signal quality and streamlined operations without cutting the staff of 48.    Proceeds from Connections' sale repaid the senior lenders -- including their equity interests -- creditors and lawyers, and left about $10 million for the company's founders.    In addition to receiving $353,000 from the sale, Prudential got its loan repaid, with interest. Still, Mr. Plinio says the return &quot;doesn't justify what we put into the deal.&quot;    However, he adds, &quot;Now we have minorities who went into business, got wealthy and can initiate deals more easily than the first time around.&quot;    Barry Washington agrees. He says that once he recharges his batteries, he will be &quot;putting together a team to do real-estate development in Newark.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>