<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870604-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH ALTERED a memo urging that Reagan be briefed on Contra aid.    According to administration officials and other sources, North and his secretary, Fawn Hall, altered an April 11, 1985, memo in which he urged that the president be given details of private efforts to aid Nicaraguan rebels. North withdrew the memo and three others from the NSC last Nov. 21. Separately, businessman Albert Hakim told congressional panels that $6.7 million from the Iran-Contra affair -- including more than $1 million allocated to Secord and a $200,000 &quot;benefit&quot; for North -- currently is privately invested in London.    Independent counsel Walsh asked the congressional Iran-Contra committees to refuse granting immunity to North, saying he didn't deserve protection.    ---   SULLIVAN URGED a mass U.S. corporate exodus from South Africa.    After a decade of crusading for U.S. companies to follow a fair-employment code for doing business in South Africa, the Rev. Sullivan called for all American firms to leave within nine months. The black Baptist minister also urged trade sanctions against Pretoria, the end of all South African imports by the U.S. including gold and diamonds, and the cutoff of all diplomatic ties until apartheid is abolished.    South Africa announced a budget for the 1987-88 fiscal year that calls for spending increases of 30% for the military and 43% for the police.    ---   IRAQ SAID the USS Stark was in a war zone when attacked last month.    According to a Navy report on the May 17 missile strike, in which 37 U.S. sailors died, Baghdad told U.S. investigators that its pilot assumed the frigate was an Iranian vessel or a ship supporting the Iranian war effort in the Persian Gulf. Iraq also said the pilot didn't receive any warnings from the Stark. U.S. officials, however, insist the frigate was 10 to 15 nautical miles outside the declared war zone.    The Navy report didn't provide the Pentagon's assessment of the Stark's defensive systems or of the performance of the frigate's captain.    ---   Rep. Mario Biaggi was indicted by a federal grand jury in New York on a range of racketeering charges related to his involvement with Wedtech Corp., a New York-based defense contractor. Also named in the 58-count indictment were six other people, including the New York Democrat's son.    ---   A settlement is expected to be announced today in former Sen. Paul Laxalt's $250 million libel suit against the Sacramento Bee and other McClatchy papers. The Nevada Republican's suit came after a 1983 article reporting that the IRS had evidence of a skimming operation at a casino controlled by the Laxalt family.    ---   Reagan arrived in Venice, Italy, for a seven-nation economic summit next week that he said would lead to &quot;strengthened Western solidarity.&quot; At a White House ceremony prior to his departure, the president called for an end to trade and monetary imbalances. He is to meet Saturday with Pope John Paul II at the Vatican.    ---   Sri Lanka's government said a flotilla of Indian fishing boats carrying relief supplies for Tamils in the Jaffna peninsula was stopped by the island nation's navy. The convoy was turned back to India after a five-hour standoff. The Tamil-dominated northern peninsula has been under an army assault for more than a week.    ---   A federal health official said mandatory AIDS testing for certain groups could undermine efforts to halt the disease's spread because the &quot;terrible stigma&quot; linked to AIDS would &quot;reduce the number of persons&quot; who seek counseling. The remarks by the deputy director of the Centers for Disease Control came at an AIDS parley in Washington.    The Army announced the court-martial of a soldier for having sex with others while knowingly carrying the AIDS virus. An Army spokesman said it would be the first such case in military or civilian courts.    ---   Prime Minister Mulroney signed a constitutional accord that recognizes Quebec as &quot;a distinct society&quot; within Canada. The document, which was signed by Canada's 10 provincial leaders, also gives the provinces more say in determining national programs and local jurisdiction.    ---   A federal grand jury in Houston indicted two Saudi nationals on charges of racketeering and wire fraud in connection with the alleged theft of more than $35 million from a Saudi educational-assistance program. Officials said the money was used to amass U.S. real estate.    ---   A Soviet newspaper said the West German pilot who landed in Red Square last week would be held responsible for his &quot;illegal acts.&quot; The Moscow News report was a further indication that the Soviets may put 19-year-old Mathias Rust on trial. Bonn's embassy, meanwhile, accelerated diplomatic efforts to secure Rust's release.    ---   South Korean students clashed with police in campus protests, and opposition lawmakers said they planned to disrupt a special session of the National Assembly over an alleged cover-up in the death of a student while in police custody. In Seoul, the ruling party endorsed Chun's choice, Roh Tae Woo, as its presidential candidate.    ---   French police arrested 57 people of Mideast and North African origin in response to threats of renewed terrorist attacks in Paris. Authorities said as many as 30 of those detained might be expelled.    ---   Died: Andres Segovia, 94, classical guitarist, in Madrid, Spain, of a heart attack. . . . Sammy Kaye, 77, bandleader, Tuesday, in Ridgewood, N.J., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>