<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880325-0025 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. WELCOMED a cease-fire accord between Nicaragua and the Contras.    The White House called the nine-point truce agreement, signed after three days of talks in the Nicaraguan border town of Sapoa, &quot;an important step&quot; in the peace process. The accord calls for a 60-day cease-fire beginning April 1, amnesty for political prisoners and guarantees of freedom of expression. Sandinista and Contra negotiators are to meet again April 6 in Managua to work out a permanent truce. In the interim, a cease-fire that took effect Monday is to remain in force.    Congress rushed to approve renewed &quot;nonlethal&quot; aid for the Contras, and Shultz urged an end to Soviet bloc weapons shipments to the Sandinistas.    ---   North and Poindexter pleaded innocent to criminal charges of fraud, theft and conspiracy related to the Iran-Contra affair. The two other defendants in the case, Secord and Hakim, also entered innocent pleas before a federal judge in Washington. All four were released on their personal recognizance. A trial date wasn't scheduled.    ---   Pakistan withdrew its demand for the formation of an interim Afghan government to oversee the proposed withdrawal of Soviet troops, removing a major obstacle to a settlement of the war in Afghanistan, a senior U.S. official said. The U.S., however, is still pressing its demand that Moscow cease military assistance to the Kabul government.    ---   A leading opposition figure returned to Panama and rejoined the opposition seeking Noriega's ouster. Ricardo Arias Calderon called for the military leader to give way to a government of national reconciliation. But as a nationwide strike entered its fourth day, Noriega defied the opposition and the U.S., saying he wouldn't be overthrown.    ---   Gore's campaign confirmed that more than $1 million in bank loans, pivotal to the Tennessee senator's victories in Super Tuesday's Democratic contests, were made largely without collateral. Separately, Hart won federal approval to use whatever is left in his 1988 campaign coffers to pay debts from his 1984 bid.    ---   A former Wedtech Corp. executive said he gave at least $30,000 under different names to Sen. D'Amato to evade election contribution laws. The New York Republican helped Wedtech win a federal contract without competitive bidding, Mario Moreno, the company's former vice chairman, said at Rep. Biaggi's corruption trial.    ---   An Israeli court convicted former nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu of treason and espionage for telling a British newspaper that his country possessed nuclear weapons. Sentencing is scheduled for Sunday, and he could receive a life prison term.    ---   Two Palestinians were killed by Israelis in the West Bank as troops swept through the occupied territories in a mass arrest of Arabs. In southern Lebanon, Israeli jets bombed Palestinian targets on the outskirts of the port city of Sidon for the second consecutive day. Lebanese police said at least nine people were killed in the raids.    ---   Soviet troops were sent to the Armenian capital of Yerevan, and police were brought in from other republics to enforce a ban on spontaneous demonstrations, local dissidents said. Army helicopters reportedly were circling the city to prevent unrest. A mass protest is planned for tomorrow to demand annexation of a disputed area in Azerbaijan.    ---   China's annual parliament is to begin today, and is expected to focus on ways of implementing far-reaching economic changes without igniting inflation. The man primarily responsible for resolving the dilemma is Li Peng, who will be named premier during the three-week National People's Congress.    ---   South Africa's Botha issued a sharp criticism of the country's anti-apartheid clergymen, accusing them of praising guerrillas who commit &quot;horrendous atrocities.&quot; The president's remarks, in a letter to an official of the country's Council of Churches, was the latest move in an escalating confrontation between the state and clergy.    ---   Yugoslavia's ruling body called for a &quot;radical&quot; reduction of state interference in the economy. The statement, issued in Belgrade, also urged new regulations on joint ventures with foreign partners, more private business and changes in the country's tax policy to stimulate economic growth.    ---   Iran and Iraq traded missile strikes, with many casualties reported in both Tehran and Baghdad. In the ground war, Iran claimed its troops routed two Iraqi commando brigades in the latest phase of its nine-day-old offensive in northeastern Iraq.    ---   Two passenger trains collided in a Shanghai suburb, killing 12 people and injuring more than 40, the state-run news agency said. The cause of the head-on crash wasn't immediately known. It was China's fourth train accident in three months, in which more than 130 people have been killed.    ---   The Senate prepared to convene an unusual closed-door session early next week over a superpower treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear weapons. The senators are to explore allegations that the Soviet Union may have more SS-20 missiles than declared and may attempt to hide a covert force after ratification of the pact.    ---   About 10,000 Salvadorans marched through the capital to commemorate the 1980 assassination of Archbishop Romero. Meanwhile, the rightist Arena party accused the ruling Christian Democrats of using fraud to cut its gains in Sunday's elections, which resulted in a comeback for D'Aubuisson, accused of ordering the murder.    ---   Researchers in Minnesota found that women may have a better chance of being cured of breast cancer by surgery if they undergo the operation just before or during ovulation. The study of tumors, described at a science writers conference in Florida, was based on experiments with mice.    ---   Died: Elliott &quot;Pete&quot; Estes, 72, former president of General Motors, in Chicago, of an apparent heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>