<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CONTRA REBELS LAUNCHED an offensive in eastern Nicaragua.    On the eve of today's peace talks in the Dominican Republic, a spokesman for the insurgents said about 7,000 rebels began hitting targets in Nicaragua's Zelaya province. The spokesman called the operation the largest Contra offensive in the seven-year-old war against the government, and said it was intended to press the Sandinistas into an acceptable cease-fire. Managua's official radio confirmed the pre-dawn attack in the mining region, but didn't give details.    House Speaker Wright predicted that Reagan would approve a tentative agreement to send the Contras about $8 million in nonmilitary aid.    ---   ISRAELI TROOPS BATTLED Arab protesters in the occupied territories.    As Israel's cabinet debated ways to quell the nearly two weeks of often-violent unrest, Arab reports said eight protesters were wounded by gunfire when soldiers clashed with Palestinian protesters in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In Bethlehem, the town's mayor said he was being pressured to cancel some Christmas activities because of the violence, which had spread over the weekend to eastern Jerusalem.    Thousands of Palestinians and Lebanese marched through the streets of Sidon as anger mounted in the Arab world over Israel's handling of the unrest.    ---   U.S. officials said there are strong indications that China, despite previous U.S. protests, recently shipped new Silkworm missiles to Iran. The officials are concerned because the anti-ship missiles that are believed to be en route to Iran are an improved version of the weapon and can be launched from ships.    Iraq said its forces repulsed a border offensive by Iranian soldiers, but Tehran claimed to have killed hundreds of Iraqis in a hit-and-run raid. In Amman, Jordanian officials said King Hussein is expected to press the Soviet Union to back a U.N. arms embargo against Iran. The monarch is to begin a visit to Moscow today.    ---   A Manila-bound passenger ship with 1,500 people aboard collided with a tanker near the island of Marinduque and sank, officials said. There was no word on deaths or injuries. Other vessels in the vicinity had picked up 24 survivors and many people had been seen in the water.    ---   South Korean students clashed with riot police in the southern city of Kwangju, but calls for protests against Roh Tae Woo's victory in last week's presidential election drew little response elsewhere. In Seoul, feuding opposition leaders hoped to rally their supporters for more political battles early next year.    ---   Gary Hart jumped to the lead of the Democratic presidential field in Iowa, capturing much of the support for previous poll front-runner Sen. Paul Simon of Illinois, according to a telephone survey by the Des Moines Register. Democratic and GOP candidates, however, dismissed Hart's chances of getting the 1988 Democratic nomination.    ---   NASA officials said engineers for the space agency and Morton Thiokol attempted to unravel a series of breakdowns that forced the postponement Saturday of the second full-scale test-firing of a redesigned space shuttle booster rocket. The test, which had been delayed twice before, is to be rescheduled, perhaps for as early as today.    ---   A GAO report found that Northrop Corp. falsified test results involving parts for the air-launched cruise missile. The congressional report said the Justice Department has begun investigating the tests. Northrop had been faulted earlier this year for falsifying tests of the MX missile's guidance equipment.    ---   The House approved a reprimand of Rep. Murphy (D., Pa.) for absentee voting, payroll abuse and diversion of office resources. Meanwhile, the House Ethics Committee considered a staff recommendation to move for expulsion of Rep. Biaggi (D., N.Y.) because of a criminal conviction for accepting an illegal payment.    ---   Two teen-age girls were trampled to death and at least 23 other people were injured as a crowd stampeded in a Nashville, Tenn., auditorium after a rap music concert. Authorities said the Saturday melee began as the audience filed through a passageway into a separate dance hall.    ---   Sri Lanka's president vowed to kill Sinhalese extremists who have assassinated as many as 150 supporters in an effort to thwart the Colombo government's July cease-fire accord with Tamil rebels. In the island's northern and eastern provinces, Indian peacekeeping forces captured about 35 Tamil separatists over the weekend.    ---   The U.S. Embassy in Dhaka said President Ershad and his political opponents should open talks in an effort to end six weeks of unrest in Bangladesh. The statement was issued as Ershad freed six more political detainees in a continuing attempt to mollify those demanding his ouster.    ---   Gary Kasparov defeated Anatoly Karpov to retain the World Chess Championship. The 24-game match between the fellow Soviets ended Saturday in Seville, Spain.    ---   Died: Marguerite Yourcenar, 84, French writer and scholar, Thursday, in Northeast Harbor, Maine, of complications from a stroke. . . . John F. O'Leary, 61, chairman of General Public Utilities Corp., Saturday, in Philadelphia, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>