<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Open Door:Mexican Youths FloodInto University AimedAt Educating Masses---As in Many Poor Countries,Their Big Numbers HurtQuality of Such Schools---After Graduation, Few Jobs---By Mary Williams WalshStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY </DATELINE><TEXT>   Against all odds, Juan Carlos Hernandez wants to be a lawyer.    Each school day, the high-school student's mother gets up at 4:30 a.m. to start heating his bath water on the stove. At 5, Juan Carlos rises, bathes and catches the bus for the 1 1/2-hour ride from their village into town. On recent days when he has needed money for a textbook, the family has gone without meat.    &quot;I serve zucchini sandwiches, spinach sandwiches,&quot; says his mother, a cleaning lady raising five children alone.    For years, any cleaning lady's son growing up in one of the scruffy cinderblock houses that rim Mexico City has had the same access to the national university as a president's son does. Undergraduate tuition runs about 20 cents a year. Entrance requirements are nil.    Not long ago, university and government officials thought that a &quot;university of the masses&quot; could educate entire generations of Juan Carloses, who would then take government jobs -- once reserved for the elite -- and develop the nation.    The strategy hasn't worked. Today, more than 300,000 students choke the sprawling National Autonomous Metropolitan University, called UNAM, in Mexico City. Students sit on the floors, craning to hear. They take their reading lists over to UNAM's famous mosaic-covered library and can't find many books. They wait all day for moonlighting professors. Hopes that graduates would hasten development have been crushed under a mountain of bureaucrats who add more to government costs than to social welfare.    Mexico isn't alone. France opened its state university doors after &quot;les evenements&quot; of 1968. Nigeria used its oil wealth in the 1970s to build new campuses and give free cafeteria food to a flood of students. In Argentina, the populist Peron government invited the sons of the working class to become scholars. Socialists in Chile experimented with a &quot;university for all&quot; before the 1973 coup.    &quot;It seems strange to most people in the United States, but public universities in most parts of the world don't charge tuition,&quot; says Daniel C. Levy, a professor of educational policy and Latin American studies at the State University of New York in Albany.    But in many countries, the results look a lot like Mexico's: too many students, too many bureaucrats, and too many young people such as Juan Carlos Hernandez with overly optimistic expectations.    The street in front of Ladislao Alviso's house tells a story of blighted hopes. It is paved with broken cars and auto parts, and the tattoo of a pneumatic wrench rips the air. The 29-year-old Mr. Alviso is a government-educated agricultural engineer, but he and his brother run a curbside auto-repair business.    &quot;My problems started when I finished school,&quot; Mr. Alviso says. He spent five years getting his degree, dreaming all the while of someday managing a country gentleman's ranch. Only after graduation did he discover that Mexican country gentlemen like to hire cheap, uneducated peons. There were no private-sector jobs.    But that was in 1978. The government had found vast offshore oil deposits the year before and had plenty of money to give people such as Mr. Alviso government jobs. Hired by the agricultural ministry, Mr. Alviso was packed off to a tiny farming village to carry out a census. As the months went by, however, a painful truth began to dawn on him: He could collect census data forever, but no one back at the ministry would ever use his findings.    &quot;On every farm,&quot; he says, &quot;the people would ask, 'Why do you need all this information?'&quot; He would tell the farmers that if the government knew their needs, it could lend them money. The farmers smirked. He couldn't blame them.    &quot;I was there for a whole year, and in all that time, I never saw a single result of anything I had done,&quot; he says.    The schools and the state scooped up thousands of Mr. Alvisos in the 1970s in answer to the student protests of the 1960s. The economy had been growing in the 1960s, and the urban public had the means to step back and think about the way the country was run. Many didn't like what they saw: a single party, a grotesque maldistribution of wealth, and an inability for anyone without the right political ties to say anything and be heard.    Tens of thousands of protesters, many of them students, turned out in Mexico City streets in 1968. The demonstrations grew bigger and bigger. Eventually, government troops opened fire on one. Some 200 to 300 are believed to have been killed.    The marching stopped, but the anti-government sentiment didn't fade. In the decade that followed, the government embarked on a &quot;democratic opening&quot; to win back public trust. It lowered the voting age. It let opposition parties operate above ground. It opened up registries at UNAM and branch campuses.    Jose Leal was a working-class youth caught up in the democratic opening. Until the early 1970s, he never would have dreamed of going to a university or getting a government job. His father was a butcher who had worked out his life in an open-air market. But when UNAM beckoned, Mr. Leal jumped. He spent five years studying mechanical engineering.    Almost all his professors were government employees teaching on the side, he says. Almost all his friends planned to work in the government when they graduated. Mr. Leal never even considered the private sector.    &quot;My interest wasn't so much the work itself,&quot; he admits. &quot;In those days, going into the government was like buying a life-insurance policy.&quot;    The government was growing furiously. Even in the early 1970s, before the new oil deposits were found, inflation-adjusted government spending grew more than 14% a year, nearly triple the growth rate of the economy. State-run enterprises sprang up by the hundreds. The government built a huge steel mill. It carved glittery resorts out of coastal wilderness. It hired bureaucrats to promote production of edible cactus and palm-frond hats. It built a high-rise ministry of fishing in Mexico City.    &quot;Most African countries have worked along this same track,&quot; says Tyler Biggs, a development economist at the Harvard Institute for International Development. &quot;The governments set up not only civil-service jobs but also public corporations in agriculture and industry. They were very inefficient. All of it became a drain on public funds.&quot;    Mr. Leal finished his engineering degree and got his government job. He rose through Mexico's planning and budget ministry, and by 1980 he was evaluating a program to make Mexico self-sufficient in grain. He reviewed farm achievements in the countryside, then briefed state governors. Once the governors could recite his statistics, they would guide the president on fact-finding tours.    The job didn't have much to do with mechanical engineering. On a day-to-day level, it didn't even have much to do with producing more grain. But to Mr. Leal, it meant that at least one poor butcher's son had arrived.    &quot;I was part of a public-sector jet set,&quot; he says. &quot;I got to see the president up close. Governors would come pick me up in their planes. I lived power.&quot;    Then, in 1982, the economy crashed. The food program vanished in a wave of budget cuts. But Mr. Leal wasn't cut -- he was just moved. He wound up in a government personnel office, taking pictures for ID badges. &quot;From talking to the president to telling middle-level functionaries, 'Say cheese!'&quot; he says. &quot;It was like something out of Kafka.&quot;    So much for Mr. Leal's lofty visions of mass education and state-led development. From his new vantage point, he says, he saw a lot of overqualified, ill-deployed professionals like himself. &quot;We were creating an enormous inefficiency,&quot; he says. Today, he is back at the national university, this time studying for a master's degree in civil engineering. He hasn't any intention of working in government again.    &quot;That's a luxury we allow ourselves in underdeveloped countries,&quot; he says.    Some social critics argue that the government buildup in the 1970s wasn't meant so much to foment democracy and development as to hide the failure to provide enough real jobs. They see UNAM as a place to put the young on a shelf -- not to give them equal opportunity. There aren't any cafeterias or student unions at UNAM; all were closed after 1968 to keep students from sitting together and hatching plots.    &quot;Students are brought here to keep them out of the job market,&quot; says Joel Ortega, an economics professor. &quot;Their professional development is almost zero. It's a big hoax, public education in Mexico.&quot;    As academic standards have fallen, many children of the rich have fled to private universities and foreign schools. And those that remain haven't really been threatened. Rich and poor students lead very different lives at UNAM. The rich drive to class in the morning, make promising contacts at cafes in the afternoon and study at night. The poor work all day, come to evening classes on the bus and never have enough time to study.    &quot;It's the thing I hate most about this place,&quot; says Manuel Vazquez, a 26-year-old Spanish-literature student.    Neither of Mr. Vazquez's parents finished grade school. The only &quot;books&quot; in his house while he was growing were Spanish editions of Reader's Digest. Now, at UNAM, he finds himself jammed into classrooms with 70 other students. The only way to be noticed, he says, is to sip coffee in the afternoon at a nearby literary cafe. He can't, because he works all day.    Mr. Vazquez sits on the front step of the philosophy and letters college, watching the morning students leave. He smokes Marlboros and grinds out the butts with his work boots.    &quot;They're all trying to be the apostles of those damned poets,&quot; he complains. &quot;They come here to play, to pose, to show off their culture. They're people who feel different from the rest of society.&quot;    The Mexican government is now trying to scale back some of the bloat of the 1970s. It isn't just that there isn't enough money anymore. There is also growing sentiment that in a poor country, the public shouldn't have to subsidize so many students and bureaucrats. The government has sold some state enterprises and has laid off bureaucrats. University officials are trying to raise academic standards.    But they are working against nearly 20 years of social-justice rhetoric, which has built up powerful expectations in the young. Last fall, officials tried to raise tuition, restrict enrollment and limit the number of times a student could flunk. Over the winter, students struck UNAM and closed it. The officials backed off and said students could help fix the tuition and academic standards.    Educational-policy specialists aren't surprised.    &quot;It sounds very close to what I remember in Nigeria,&quot; says Mr. Biggs, the Harvard economist, who taught at public universities in Nigeria and Kenya. Nigeria ran into financial problems in the early 1980s and tried to start charging for food in its student cafeterias. &quot;The students rioted and tried to kill people,&quot; he says.    The French and Spanish governments recently tried to raise academic standards and also ran into violent opposition. Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela and Ecuador have all tried in vain to trade access for excellence in recent years, says Mr. Levy, the educational-policy specialist.    The only Latin American country that has been able to restore tuition is Chile, he notes, and Chile did it with guns. </TEXT></DOC>