<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880808-0096 </DOCNO><HL> British Airways Throws Its Weight Around --- Privatized Last Year, It Still Acts Like a Flag Car </HL><AUTHOR> John Marcom Jr. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> BAB EUROP </CO><IN> AIR PRO </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When British Airways PLC was sold by the United Kingdom government last year, it marked a triumph for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's privatization drive.    It also marked the unleashing of a bully.    Within months of joining the private sector, the airline moved to gobble its only significant domestic competitor, British Caledonian Airways. Lord King, British Airways' feisty 70-year-old chairman, argued the takeover would protect Britain's national interest from U.S. &quot;megacarriers.&quot; When another European carrier, Scandinavian Airlines System, offered to rescue British Caledonian, BA and its supporters fumed. &quot;Viking pillage,&quot; cried Norman Tebbitt, former chairman of the ruling Conservative Party.    BA got its way, and now rules the roost at London's Heathrow and Gatwick airports, the two busiest crossroads in global aviation. Indeed, British Airways emerged from privatization as an industry powerhouse, the largest international airline and one of the most profitable. It stands to become even more formidable.    The carrier wields awesome strengths, beginning with a dazzling overhaul of its service and marketing in recent years. But equally, the airline relies on the regulatory and political advantages conferred by its former status as a state-owned carrier, rarely missing a chance to throw its hefty weight around.    As Britain's flag carrier, the airline inherited a vast route network. British Caledonian brought routes to the southern U.S., the Middle East and Africa, as well as lucrative flights to East Asia. British Airways gave up only a few routes from Gatwick to European cities, which in most cases it already served from Heathrow.    The airline is well along in adjusting schedules to create the world's strongest hub-and-spoke network, making London to the world something like what Chicago or Dallas is to the U.S. As the European Community gradually loosens rules restricting aviation, British Airways hopes to widen its lead over European rivals, who are smaller, often less efficient and mostly still under the thumb of government owners.    With government restrictions on traffic growth at crowded Heathrow and Gatwick, BA faces few worries about competitors invading its turf. It plans to boost its own capacity significantly by substituting larger planes when it can't add flights. Outside Europe, the intricate web of cartels and treaties that govern aviation serve to protect BA's London stronghold and keep fare wars under control.    In the year ended March 31, the airline claimed the biggest operating profit of any airline: #255 million ($439.7 million), excluding British Caledonian results. Only six years before, it posted a loss of #541 million, probably the world's largest-ever airline loss. This year's fiscal first quarter saw a slight year-to-year profit decline, reflecting lingering problems from the British Caledonian takeover. But Lord King is confident the takeover will pay off.    BA's rivals complain that the British government has been unduly kind to its former charge. The decision to allow the British Caledonian takeover &quot;totally reflected the BA point of view,&quot; says Michael Bishop, chairman of Airlines of Britain Holdings PLC, a competitor.    &quot;John King and Colin Marshall deserve tremendous credit for what they've done&quot; as chairman and chief executive of BA, Mr. Bishop says. &quot;The problem is they've assumed they can carry into the private sector the public privileges they used to enjoy. They've pushed it a bit too far.&quot;    Pushing hard is very much in character for Lord King. After his 1981 appointment by Mrs. Thatcher, he faced down the airline's slothful labor unions, slashing the payroll to 36,000 by 1985 from 56,000 in 1980. Then he laid on the sorts of incentives favored in the new entrepreneurial Britain. Today, airline workers own shares in their employer and reap profit-sharing bonuses that last year totaled more than three weeks' pay. And they smile.    Lord King manages to be both imperious and lovable, as perhaps only an elderly Englishman can. He &quot;blasts a hole through the front,&quot; says Mr. Bishop. &quot;The staff love him. No company could have a finer chairman to look after it.&quot;    Sir Colin, 54, is softer-spoken but equally steely. He learned to be nice to passengers in his first job as a cruise-ship steward, and he learned to compete in a career spent mostly at Avis and Hertz. He has overseen a near-miraculous transformation of the airline's marketing, aided by intensive market research and courtesy campaigns.    Last year Sir Colin hired a team of candy-bar marketers to &quot;brand&quot; classes of service with psychological attributes. A revamped first-class service is in the works. Business class is promoted as a &quot;success tool&quot; in a widely imitated television ad showing how flying Club class gives an edge in corporate in-fighting. Lord King says the growth in high-fare business-class traffic raised revenue in the latest quarter, even though overall load factors fell from last year's records.    The business-class changes were intended to strengthen BA against its strongest rivals: a handful of well-regarded international carriers like Swissair, Lufthansa, Singapore Airlines and American Airlines that are known for coddling full-fare passengers.    There's more to their rivalry than champagne and smiles. American, a unit of AMR Corp., and BA only just settled an acrimonious dispute over computer-reservations systems, a critical component of airline success. When American began flying to the U.K. several years ago, it discovered the British Airways computers, used by 97% of computerized U.K. travel agents, buried rivals' flight schedules.    But BA blocked American's efforts to sell its advanced Sabre reservations system in the U.K. It refused to let American computers issue BA tickets, even though American long had issued BA tickets in the U.S.    American filed suit in Britain and protested to U.S. regulators, accusing BA of &quot;predatory and anticompetitive conduct.&quot; BA relented in June, facing the possibility of U.S. retaliation.    Competition on the North Atlantic is likely to remain brutal, however. At Heathrow, BA faces only the U.S.'s two relative weaklings, Pan Am Corp.'s Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines Inc. But the stronger &quot;megacarriers,&quot; including Delta Air Lines, American, NWA Inc.'s Northwest Airlines, and Texas Air Corp.'s Continental Airlines, all serve Gatwick, and one day may snap up Pan Am's or TWA's valuable routes.    The British airline operates U.K. flights to 19 U.S. cities, far more than any single U.S. airline does. But regulations won't let British Airways pick up passengers all over the U.S. The solution is an alliance with UAL Corp.'s United Airlines, the only big U.S. carrier without European service. Under a &quot;code-sharing&quot; agreement, British Airways connections with United are labeled as United flights, getting better display on travel agents' computer screens. The two airlines also plan to combine terminals at major gateways.    In Europe, smaller rivals hope to benefit from European Community wariness of BA's power. Virgin Atlantic Airways, founded by record-industry entrepreneur Richard Branson, wants to add flights to Tokyo and Los Angeles next year.    British Midland Airways, an Airlines of Britain unit, already flies between Heathrow and Amsterdam at fares about 20% cheaper than on similar routes. It plans a careful expansion. Mr. Bishop predicts British Airways will face problems because of its higher costs as well as its haughty attitudes. &quot;They aren't invincible,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>