<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870305-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Arbitragers FaceInvestors' SuitsOn Inside Trades---By John R. DorfmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Individual investors have filed at least eight lawsuits against arbitragers and investment bankers implicated in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal, and more are expected to follow.    The plaintiffs in these cases sold stocks just before their prices surged on takeover news. The suits argue, in effect, that certain buyers -- who have admitted or been charged with using illegally obtained inside information -- took unfair advantage of the plaintiffs.    Securities lawyers are divided on the plaintiffs' prospects. Moss vs. Morgan Stanley, a 1983 insider-trading suit in which no damages were awarded, presents an obstacle. But some lawyers say that decision was too narrow to serve as a precedent for many of the current cases.    The Moss suit involved trading in Deseret Pharmaceutical Co. stock before a Warner-Lambert Co. tender offer for the company became public. In that case, the trading involved a tip from an employee of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., which was advising Warner-Lambert on the offer. Michael Moss sued in federal court in Manhattan on behalf of himself and others who sold Deseret stock on the same day that the defendants were buying shares.    The court ruled that because the source of the alleged tip worked for a firm advising the suitor, the defendants had no fiduciary duty to Mr. Moss or other shareholders of the target company -- and thus didn't have to pay damages.    Plaintiffs' lawyers in the current insider-trading lawsuits say these cases differ in important ways from the Moss case. In many of the suits, the lawyers say, defendants or people who leaked them information worked for advisers to the target concern in a takeover situation, and thus the parties breached a fiduciary duty to the company and its shareholders.    Michael Asimow makes this argument in a suit in federal court in Manhattan. The class action seeks unspecified damages on behalf of people who sold stock in Bendix Corp., Carnation Co., Continental Group Inc., Getty Oil Co., Natomas Inc., Storer Communications Corp. and Unocal Corp. on certain dates in 1983, 1984 and 1985.    In the case of Carnation, the suit alleges that Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., the financial adviser to Carnation, and Martin A. Siegel, then a Kidder Peabody investment banker, breached their fiduciary duty to Mr. Asimow and other Carnation stockholders when Mr. Siegel allegedly leaked word to Ivan F. Boesky of a pending takeover offer by Nestle S.A. of Switzerland.    Some lawyers are trying to distinguish their cases from the Moss ruling by accusing defendants of violating the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act as well as insider-trading laws. One such suit is a class action brought by Richard C. Goodwin and three other plaintiffs against Mr. Boesky, Dennis B. Levine, and several others, including Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which employed Mr. Levine.    In federal court in Manhattan, the plaintiffs are seeking unspecified damages on behalf of investors who sold shares of any of six firms -- American Natural Resources Co., FMC Corp., General Foods Corp., Houston Natural Gas Corp., Nabisco Brands Inc. and Union Carbide Corp. -- on certain dates in 1985 and early 1986. Messrs. Boesky and Levine bought those stocks on those dates, allegedly using inside information from Mr. Levine.    &quot;My concept is that this was more than just insider trading,&quot; says David Berger, a partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Berger andamp; Montague and a lawyer for the plaintiffs. &quot;This was a tremendous racket. I don't think Moss was ever intended to cover this kind of massive fraud.&quot;    Most of the other current suits involve trading in one or more of the stocks cited in the Asimow and Goodwin cases.    Still, some securities lawyers, citing a lack of positive precedents, are uncertain about the prospects for such investor suits. Robert M. Romano, a partner at the New York office of the law firm Morgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius, says plaintiffs may have good chances in cases where they can clearly establish that a tip came from someone with a fiduciary duty to the target firm.    But Mr. Romano, a former Securities and Exchange Commission official and a former Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. official, says the recent trend in RICO cases has been to narrow, not expand, the applicability of the RICO statute. Some judges, he says, believe that RICO is being overused.    The best hope for individual investors, Mr. Romano says, may lie in applying to administrators of &quot;disgorgement pools&quot; being set up by the SEC to compensate investors. These pools contain funds put into escrow accounts by defendants under settlements with the SEC -- $50 million in the Boesky case, for example. The funds will be distributed under plans to be proposed by the SEC and approved by a court. </TEXT></DOC>