<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese Firms Export U.S.-Made Goods---Lower Dollar PromptsGrowth by Units Here---By Douglas R. SeaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Who says Japanese manufacturers aren't doing their part to lower the U.S.'s big trade deficit?    Each month, 2,000 Ricoh photocopiers made in Irvine, Calif., are loaded aboard a ship bound for Europe. In San Diego, the local Sony factory crates color television sets for shipment to South America. And in Seattle, 75 Honda automobiles made in Marysville, Ohio, are driven aboard a ship headed for Taiwan. All those products -- made in Japanese-owned factories in the U.S. -- get counted as U.S. exports.    But before anyone starts calculating how fast the U.S. trade deficit is going to shrink because of those exports, they should consider where the products are going and why. Although about 90% of the parts in the Ricoh copiers come from Japan, the &quot;Made in the U.S.A.&quot; label on them may help Ricoh Co. avoid protectionist tariffs in Europe. The Hondas are being shipped to Taiwan because Taiwan won't allow the import of cars made in Japan. And the Sony television sets are, in effect, what's left over after U.S. consumers buy what they want.    Altogether, exports from Japanese-owned factories in the U.S. are a small part of their overall production, mostly surpluses that aren't bought by American consumers, or products that can't be exported from Japan because of trade barriers.    Nonetheless, the economics of manufacturing in the U.S. are changing rapidly as the dollar weakens against the Japanese yen and most major European currencies. The weaker dollar means U.S.-made goods cost less abroad, and some Japanese executives suggest that may prompt Japanese companies to view the U.S. not just as a lucrative market in which to make and sell products, but as a manufacturing center for Japanese products to be exported around the world.    &quot;The dollar is weak, the price of land is low, many raw materials are cheaper, and you can achieve the same levels of quality and productivity as you get in Japan,&quot; says Koji Hirao, manager of the New York office of the Long Term Credit Bank of Japan. Although it isn't likely that Japanese exports will ever play a major role in the overall U.S. trade picture, he suggests that &quot;eventually Japanese investment in the U.S. could help revitalize some American export industries.&quot;    Ricoh's efforts to avoid anti-dumping penalties being levied by the European Economic Community against Japanese-made copiers are part of the company's overall strategy of building factories in markets Ricoh serves. The strategy is aimed, in part, at avoiding precisely the kinds of protectionist measures that the EEC is imposing. Indeed, Keiji Endoh, chairman of Ricoh's U.S. operations, says the company plans to build a copier factory in Europe to supply additional models to that market, although a decision on where and when hasn't been made yet.    Meantime, Ricoh has doubled the size of its assembly operations in Irvine to 4,000 copiers per month to supply the European market from the U.S. So far, the company has hired an additional 100 employees and plans to hire 50 more, bringing the total employment in Irvine to 800. Although EEC officials indicate they will accept the copiers as U.S.-made, Mr. Endoh nevertheless worries about the high Japanese content of the Irvine machines.    &quot;If they investigate closely they may decide the products aren't made in the U.S.,&quot; says Mr. Endoh. But he emphasizes that the photo conductor, a critical part of the machines, is manufactured entirely in the U.S. and that Ricoh's goal is to boost the U.S. content of its machines to 50%.    Ricoh's exports to Europe, as a proportion of its total U.S. production, put it in the forefront of Japanese exporters in the U.S. But Japanese manufacturers have been building products in the U.S. for years, and some of their wares naturally found their way across international borders. Honda Motor Co., for instance, began manufacturing motorcycles in Marysville in September 1979. Its Goldwing model, aimed principally at the U.S. market for big motorcycles, has become popular enough to be shipped to 13 countries.    When Honda began assembling automobiles in Marysville, it shipped about 300 a month to Canada. Those shipments ceased late last year when Honda's Canadian assembly plant began making cars. But the excess U.S. production isn't going to waste. Since Taiwan forbids the import of Japanese-made cars, Honda is shipping 75 U.S.-made automobiles to Taiwan each month and hopes to double that number if Taiwanese consumers take a fancy to the cars. Although Honda's net exports from the U.S. will be down this year from previous years when Canada absorbed 300 cars a month, a Honda spokesman suggests that more cars may eventually be exported from Marysville.    'With our North American production capacity up and our quality equal to that in Japan, it's natural for us to look for export markets,&quot; the Honda spokesman says.    Getting around trade barriers isn't the only reason to export from the U.S. Factories here are logical bases from which to supply Canada and South America. Although it is a modest part of Sony Corp.'s U.S. business, the company does ship color television sets from its San Diego factory to South America and Canada. And when Sony doesn't sell all of the output of its big audio and videotape factory in Dothan, Ala., the surplus is sold abroad. But Robert Dillon, executive vice president of Sony Corp. of America, says that &quot;the U.S. is Sony's first priority.&quot;    During the first part of this decade, the strong U.S. dollar was a powerful barrier to exporting from the U.S. But now, the weakened U.S. currency has lowered relative production costs in the U.S. When the value of the dollar fell to 180 yen early last year, Sumitomo Electric Corp. officials in Tokyo began to consider the economics of exporting fiber optics manufactured in North Carolina to Japan and other countries. Now that the dollar is down to 152 yen, Sumitomo calculates that the fiber optics coming out of North Carolina are 15% cheaper than those made in Japan. With demand in the U.S. slack and several manufacturers vying for the domestic business, Kozo Fajita, president of Sumitomo Electric U.S.A., says his company will soon start shipping fibers to Japan and Southeast Asia, where demand is much stronger.    Cheaper materials can be an incentive to export from the U.S. Yasuo Sasaki, executive vice president of Sanyo Industries America, says the cost of plastic, an important material in Sanyo's fans and vacuum cleaners, is lower here than in Japan. With the dollar falling, he suggests that &quot;very, very probably&quot; Sanyo Electric Co. will expand its U.S. export operations beyond the South American market.    Japanese companies also are becoming a more potent force in mergers and acquisitions in the U.S. Often the companies they buy here already have export operations. Sumitomo Rubber Industries Ltd., for example, is exporting tires from the U.S. through its Dunlop Tire andamp; Rubber Co. unit, and Sony exports some professional audio products from a company it acquired.    Technologically sophisticated products may also play an increasing role in Japanese exports from the U.S. Mitsubishi Electric Sales America bought the rights to a video telephone from Atari Corp. and continued to develop the product. Now, says Ken Kitamura, president of the U.S. subsidiary of Mitsubishi Electric Corp., the product is ready to be marketed around the world. He expects police departments in Britain, West Germany and Japan, as well as the U.S., to become major customers for the product.    Still, any big surge of exporting by Japanese companies in the U.S. will come only after the companies are convinced that the U.S. market is well served. Canon Corp. is building a factory to produce photocopiers in Newport News, Va. A spokesman acknowledges that the lower dollar and European tariffs on copiers make the idea of exporting attractive, but he says that for the time being, Canon &quot;is just thinking about U.S. market demand.&quot; Similarly, TDK Corp. is expanding its capacity to produce video and audio tapes for the U.S. market, not for export. &quot;Right now we're just playing catch-up,&quot; says a spokesman, who notes that U.S. demand for tapes is growing faster than TDK's capacity.    Then there are the Japanese companies that aren't convinced the U.S. is the best place to produce products. Tabata Inc. makes diving masks, snorkels and fins in the U.S. and exports some 30% of its products to Japan, Australia and South Korea. But Tekeuchi Mino, the company's export manager, says Tabata is planning to move all its manufacturing to Taiwan. &quot;It's less expensive to manufacture there than anywhere,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>