<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Telecommunications Tale of Two Companies---By William Fisher</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After two delays, Europe's first direct-broadcast satellite, the German TVSAT-1, finally lifted into orbit Friday on a French Ariane rocket. The launch from a space center in French Guiana was billed as the inauguration of a new era in European television. In fact, the occasion was a showcase for the felicitous progress of the French aerospace industry and the folly of West Germany's state television policy.    For Arianespace S.A., the success of the launch, its 20th mission, was an important step forward. It demonstrated the reliability of the privately owned and operated French program at a time when rival commercial launch programs in both East and West are getting off the ground. For TVSAT-1, however, the two launch delays were stays of execution: West Germany went ahead with the direct-broadcast satellite plans in the certain knowledge that the government-funded and -managed program was obsolete before it even hit the stratosphere. This telecommunications story is worth telling because of what it says about privatization and commercial enterprise in the mixed economy that is Western Europe.    Arianespace S.A. is a commercial spinoff of the European Space Agency, the pan-European program that represents Europe's effort in the space race. In 1980, a private consortium took over these launch operations. The group continues, however, to capitalize on state resources: It is working on Ariane 5 with the European Space Agency, which dreams of using the new rocket to launch a European space station and shuttle. Successful launches this fall could give Arianespace a two- to three-year lead on U.S. companies hoping to regain part of the commercial satellite-launch market, valued at approximately $1 billion a year.    Arianespace's management has succeeded in deftly playing up both the commercial and scientific applications of its program. Having garnered half of the world's commercial satellite-launch market, this public-turned-private enterprise has orders into 1991, with anticipated revenue of more than $2.5 billion.    The consortium will have to step lively, of course, if it is to keep ahead of international competition. Since 1986, Arianespace has profited from a virtual monopoly: The American space-shuttle disaster that year left it dominating the commercial launch market. Now new U.S. private launchers, China's Long March launcher, the Soviet Union's Proton and Japan's H-2 rockets will be competitors.    If the Arianespace launcher represents Europe's private sector spreading its wings, TVSAT-1, the continent's newest generation of bird, promises to be a public-sector turkey. But instead of addressing longstanding critical issues such as the lack of domestically produced TV programming, West German policy makers continue hatching schemes with neither creative nor commercial benefits.    The West German project is the first of a handful of European direct-broadcast satellite systems slated to go into service in the next few years. The project is administered exclusively by the West German Federal Post Office, or Bundespost, which dominates the German telecommunications industry. As a Bundespost program, TVSAT-1 was able to get its act together in advance of the other direct-broadcast satellite programs; it will be followed by its French twin, TDF-1, in April.    The signal from this generation of satellites, 10 to 20 times more powerful than that of conventional communication satellites, can be picked up directly by consumer-owned receiver dishes as small as 12 inches in diameter. For the operating countries, the satellites also were intended to boost their domestic electronic and aerospace industries. The European direct-broadcast satellite programs were conceived in 1977 at the Geneva World Administrative Radio Conference; much has happened in the intervening decade.    An initial lack of interest shown for TVSAT-1 by public and private programmers alike should have been a dead giveaway to the German federal authorities of the project's lack of potential. TVSAT-1 offers four television channels, which currently are split between private and public programmers. It is generally acknowledged that fledgling private programmers signed on expecting preferential treatment when West Germany assigned frequencies for terrestrial broadcast.    The real mystery, though, is why the Bundespost went ahead with direct satellite broadcasting at a time when West Germany's new programmers are concentrating on newly liberalized broadcast and cable markets. Not only will these undercapitalized private programmers have to bear the combined costs of operating in all three markets, they will be in the ludicrous position of competing with themselves: RTL Plus and SAT 1 will be active in broadcast, cable and direct satellite transmissions. German TV viewers ask why they should buy a receiving dish for a new service to start years from now when they often already get the same programs on cable.    Another question German consumers are asking is how much the new receiver equipment for TVSAT will cost. The Bundespost has chosen a transmission and reception format incompatible with current German TV-video standards. The Bundespost's chosen format has some technical advantages. But those who want to get its satellite signal will need to buy both receiver dish and transcoder -- or a completely new system -- at a cost of $1,300.    The Bundespost admits it underestimated the cost of TVSAT-1; as much as $160 million will never be recovered in rentals. Current technical problems with TVSAT-1's solar panels could even mean the satellite will operate at half-power.    The Bundespost isn't alone here. Several European direct-broadcast satellite projects face costs that are likely to far outstrip revenues, a British system being another notable example. Such programs look even less attractive when set side by side with the privately financed, Luxembourg-based ASTRA, a medium-power direct-broadcast satellite to be launched in September. ASTRA's reception will cover most of Europe. Although a slightly larger dish is required to pick up its signal, ASTRA offers 16 channels -- compared with TVSAT-1's four -- including German, French, Scandinavian and British programs.    In short, TVSAT-1 is simply a state-of-the-art, Rube Goldberg-like gizmo. It is, of course, unfair to compare the management of a program like Arianespace with that of TVSAT: Decision making in the satellite-launch industry, with its clear-cut commercial demands, is different from working in a complex public sphere like West Germany's. Too, TVSAT functions in a nation that lacks a tradition of private telecommunications initiative. Nevertheless, the problem is clear. As Arianespace discovered, commercial satellite launches are too important to be left to the European Space Agency. Germany's commercial television industry, likewise, is too important to be left to a post office.    ---   Mr. Fisher is Paris correspondent for Screen International, a British film and television publication. </TEXT></DOC>