<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880129-0143 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: A Protectionist Monster Threatens Brazil's Development </HL><AUTHOR> Roberto Campos </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON ELE EDP </IN><DATELINE> BRASILIA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Brazil's protectionist policy on information technology, even in its recently softened version, is likely to lead to some trade retaliation by the U.S. But the history of Brazil's &quot;informatics&quot; law is little known. It is an object lesson in nationalistic inefficiency and should be required reading for protectionists everywhere -- including retaliators in the U.S.    Passed in 1984, toward the end of our military regime, the law legitimated protectionist practices enforced since 1975. It broadened absurdly the conventional definition of information technology to encompass all &quot;digital electronics based on semiconductors.&quot; This means just about everything in modern industry, from toys to computers, domestic appliances, electromedicine or robotics . . . you name it!    The law was sponsored by a weird coalition, with desperate motivations. The military, about to yield political power, was anxious to grab economic power by controlling the knowledge industry. The political left found it irresistibly attractive to bash multinational enterprises. And it was not difficult to co-opt local entrepreneurs by offering them a sheltered market and lots of subsidies. Nationalist emotions were stirred up effectively to spice this strange brew.    Control of the informatics policy has been centralized in a single federal agency, known by the acronym SEI (Secretaria Especial de Informatica), born under the wing of the Security Services, but now part of the Ministry of Science and Technology. Through its monopoly power of issuing import licenses for vital inputs, SEI wields a life-and-death power over any high-tech venture, indeed over any plant-modernization scheme. It has become a bureaucratic nightmare.    SEI's protectionism extends not only against the competition of imported products, but also against investors that might want to manufacture in Brazil. The market is &quot;reserved&quot; for &quot;national enterprises&quot; -- companies of which 70% of the total capital has to be owned by Brazilians, an absurd requirement in a capital-scarce country. To compound the lunacy, the foreign minority partner cannot transfer technology directly, lest the Brazilian partner lose its technological autonomy. Complex triangular arrangements have had to be made to camouflage this technological dependency.    Defenders of this autarchic policy are proud of the mushroom growth of companies producing microcomputers and peripherals. There was indeed a spectacular boom in production and profits during 1985-86. But by the end of 1987, the market collapsed and all but one of the 10 main producers were in the red. They now are being bailed out by the National Bank of Economic and Social Development, which runs the risk of becoming an electronics hospital, to the detriment of investment in basic infrastructure projects.    Of course, in a market worth $3.5 billion (about 1% of the world market), no fewer than 80 different brands of micro and minicomputers somehow have sprouted upmost of them disingenuous clones of IBM or Apple models and unable to achieve economies of scale. Internal competition at this level is low, however, the prize going to those that copy the fastest. Mini and super-mini computers also are being produced under licensing arrangements with foreign companies, which are not anxious to transfer &quot;state of the art&quot; technology to non-partners. Whereas the &quot;East Asian Tigers&quot; tested their ability to imitate and innovate in the international marketplace, Brazilian producers are content with the exploitation of the internal market, charging, on the average, three times the international price.    The most utopian aspect of the policy is the attempt to start from scratch a national microchip industry. Given the dizzy pace of change and the meager local research resources, it will be, no doubt, an exercise in planned obsolescence. Both Texas Instruments and Motorola were forbidden to enter the field of integrated circuits. Despite profuse incentives, local industries have failed to take off so far. Ironically, the actual dependency of the country on imported chips has increased since SEI thunderously announced its goal of achieving technological autonomy.    Horror stories of bureaucratic arbitrariness abound. It took a year for Petrobras -- the powerful oil monopoly -- to clear through SEI a license to import an IBM 3090 mainframe. Embrae -- a state aircraft company -- was to become majority partner in a joint venture with Foxborough for the production of Latin American industrial process control equipment. SEI vetoed the project, and Foxborough went on to establish a similar plant in Shanghai. SEI does not allow multinational auto producers to fabricate their own onboard electronics and they understandably are reluctant to transfer proprietary patents to inexperienced local producers. Investments are thus held in abeyance, while local buyers are denied access to computerized vehicles. Academicians, scientists and industrialists have to apply for SEI's permission before they can access data banks abroad. An obscure national-security motivation -- the fear of leakage of secrets through transborder data flows-underlies this cultural self-mutilation.    Despite its inefficiency, the &quot;do-it-yourself&quot; policy is presented as the necessary, indeed the only, road to technological autonomy. &quot;Joint ventures,&quot; which would be the quickest and cheapest road to achieve modernization, are stigmatized as a relapse into &quot;technological colonialism.&quot; The reason for the bovine passivity of personal and industrial users is the efficiency of the contraband market. Until a recent tightening of controls, IBM and Macintosh computers could be ordered by phone at about half the price of local clones. Ironically, smugglers have become the agents of modernization, while self-righteous technocrats promote obsolescence.    Fortunately, popular perception already is changing in a more realistic direction. The slack in the internal market is forcing industrialists again to seek export outlets under the painful realization that Brazil lags well behind its European and Asian competitors in computer-integrated manufacturing. Free riding on pirated technology henceforth will face a bumpier road because of the increasing technological complexity of new computer architectures. Furthermore, the U.S. government's process of trade retaliations against software piracy may affect labor-intensive industries such as shoes, ceramics and furniture, with hundreds of thousands of employees; the entire informatics industry employs no more than 40,000.    By the time SEI's authority to license imports expires in 1992, the market reserve as an instrument of &quot;infant industry protection&quot; will have lasted 17 years, the equivalent of six generations in computer technology. The overall results are meager. Brazil lags behind not only in computer hardware, but also in office automation (except banking services), industrial process controls and robotics. Gravest of all is the fact that only a tiny minority of students in the 10-to-20-year-old bracket have ever seen or handled any of the high-cost local computers. While in a freer, internationally integrated market environment hardware could be modernized fairly quickly, the educational gap is a permanent loss.    ---   Mr. Campos is a Brazilian senator from the state of Mato Grosso. </TEXT></DOC>