<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871111-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Korean Paradox:Seoul's Ruling PartyIs Surprisingly StrongIn Race for Presidency---Retired Gen. Roh Is PolishingHis Image and BenefitingFrom Strikes and Unrest---The Split Between the 2 Kims---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LABOR </IN><DATELINE> SONGJEONG, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A young Korean tosses a tear-gas grenade into the crowd attending the ruling party's campaign rally in this usually sleepy town. It explodes with the jolting sound of a gunshot at presidential candidate Roh Tae Woo's feet.    For the retired four-star general it is a turn of the tables. In 1980, Mr. Roh helped bring President Chun Doo Hwan to power in a military coup, and until this summer he was a key part of a government that suppressed its opposition with torture and imprisonment. But since the campaign began, the tear gas is being turned against Mr. Roh.    &quot;I feel anger and sadness,&quot; Mr. Roh says later, in his campaign bus, his eyes still watering from the gas. &quot;But I also feel more determined than ever.&quot; He soon slumps in his seat and sleeps, the new demands of democracy clearly taking their toll.    Candidate Roh is running in Korea's first presidential race in 16 years. The election in mid-December is crucial not only for this strategically located nation but for the U.S. as well. Some 157,000 Americans were killed or wounded in the Korean War, and 40,000 U.S. troops still serve here as a human tripwire to ensure U.S. intervention if the Communist North threatens South Korea again. If, however, dreams of democracy are shattered by another military coup, pressures would rise for the U.S. to distance itself from the new dictatorship. A 1988 Summer Olympics designed to show off a new democratic friend could become a scene of violent demonstrations and military power.    Mr. Roh, the candidate of the ruling party, is trying to transform his image from military rule's last vestige to democracy's new hope. It is a job made far harder by years of resentment built up among a people fed up with authoritarianism. This emotional resentment against the military rule makes the outcome uncertain. Many voters argue that Mr. Roh is a reluctant democrat who backed direct presidential elections last June 29 only when street protests left him no other course. Yet a surprising number of Koreans credit him with shrewd political instincts, and one senior Western diplomat calls his June decision a &quot;political coup&quot; against President Chun.    Mr. Roh's campaign is helped by government control of television, by pork-barrel politics that lure votes, by some slick Madison Avenue-style image-making and, not incidentally, by the failure of the opposition to unite behind a single candidate.    Mr. Roh is considered likely to get most of the votes of the 600,000 Korean military men, and local government officials are stepping up their campaign help after promises of college scholarships for their children. The Finance Ministry is helping him keep inflation low and the Korean CIA provides its reports regularly to his campaign strategists. With all that going for him, Western diplomats and even many of his opponents say Mr. Roh has made himself the candidate with the most momentum just one month before the polling.    Mr. Roh's surest advantage is the split in opposition ranks -- and votes -- between the more mainstream Kim Young Sam and long-time dissident Kim Dae Jung, who at one time had promised not to run. Kim Young Sam privately argues that Kim Dae Jung's election will only prompt a military coup, while Kim Dae Jung says only he -- the most prominent victim of government repression and enemy of martial law -- can usher in true democracy.    As the election draws nearer, it becomes increasingly unlikely that one of the two Kims will drop out. And as those prospects fade, so does the opposition's one-time certainty of victory.    Opposition National Assembly member Hong Sa Duk now predicts a government triumph. He says the Kims have abandoned the moral high ground gained through years of anti-government struggle. He says voters are forgetting the Kims' &quot;pureness and self-sacrifice&quot; and concentrating on their political egotism. Even Kim Dae Jung concedes that Mr. Roh now has &quot;made himself more palatable to people.&quot;    Certainly, government-controlled television has had a role in that transformation. Mr. Roh's strategists say Koreans have 10 times more television sets -- some 10 million -- than in the last presidential elections in 1971. Thus, a recent Kim Young Sam rally that attracted a crowd of one million at his home town of Pusan was a secondary news item on the nightly news. Several smaller party meetings attended by Mr. Roh led the broadcast.    Also softening his image are new government policies aimed to counter the opposition's claim that only it fights for the workers and farmers. The government raised prices paid rice farmers by 14% last month without passing the increase on to consumers. It also lowered oil prices. In recent weeks, the government has announced the introduction of national health insurance, a minimum wage and other social-welfare programs, although officials insist such moves were planned long before the election was called.    Similarly, Mr. Roh stresses ruling-party accomplishments ranging from sustained economic growth to the plans to hold the 1988 Summer Olympics in South Korea -- strong appeals to a young nation still unsure of its place internationally. His aides note that the ruling party triumphed over corporate lobbies and advocates of police powers to persuade government authorities to back labor's demands for more pay during widespread strikes in August. It was the first time the ruling party has backed labor against management.    These moves damp the attraction of Kim Dae Jung, who has been at the forefront of the fight for greater workers' rights and outright forgiveness of farmers' debts that he says were built up by artificially low prices paid them by the government. In frustration, the opposition now is stepping up its efforts at finding government scandals. It has teams of muckrakers that opposition party members say have found ample stories of corruption that they will release when the campaigning gets hot.    Mr. Roh's strategy for South Korea's university students, his angriest opponents, is to at least persuade them to stay out of the streets. That isn't always a very subtle strategy in a country just awakening from military rule. Indeed, at a rally for the two Kims recently, police seeded the grounds with tear gas, making the students even more resentful.    As befits the ruling party's candidate, Mr. Roh's image makers represent the establishment elite: newspaper editors, polling specialists and a former Korean Central Intelligence Agency official.    Their campaign's central goal is an unspoken one: distancing their candidate from President Chun. Thus Mr. Roh no longer appears in public with his old friend and classmate from the Korean Military Academy. The campaign tries at every turn to paint Mr. Roh as a thoughtful listener -- a clear contrast to the aloof President Chun. He has offered compensation to the families of the victims of a 1980 massacre by troops under the president's command. And in campaign swings around the country, he pointedly promises that the days when the military could rule South Korea are over.    Although President Chun was responsible for his last two stars as a general and for his political rise, Mr. Roh deftly sidesteps an opportunity to praise the president when asked who had influenced his life most. &quot;It is the ordinary people who have influenced me most,&quot; he says, &quot;and it is the ordinary people who have prompted me to take my June 29 decision,&quot; he says, to the smug approval of advisers.    Meanwhile, Mr. Roh's advertising people are flooding the country with the kind of campaign posters previously unseen by South Koreans accustomed to leaders proud of their authoritarian strength. One shows a small girl whispering into the ear of the fatherly candidate under the message: &quot;For a more promising future.&quot;    During June riots, Mr. Roh's advisers say his children -- a daughter who is a graduate student of economics at the University of Chicago and a son who is an undergraduate at the elite Seoul National University -- were key political consultants. His image as the good father, portrayed in women's magazines and on television, is being polished to win votes in this family-oriented country.    However, as Mr. Roh often tells friends, &quot;authoritarianism was much easier.&quot; Security guards have used his soft-sell posters as shields to knock down eggs heading for their candidate. And his attempt to heal wounds at Kwangju, where 200 died in the 1980 uprising at the hands of government troops, went astray. Security police dragged a woman out of a tightly controlled political rally when she began screaming that Mr. Roh had participated in the victims' murder. (He was garrison commander in Seoul at the time and hasn't directly answered accusations that he helped plan the Kwangju action.)    The urgency and scope of the ruling party's campaign shows that the party knows it must overcome the handicap of its years of authoritarianism if it is to win votes.    A campaign manager adroitly compares the campaign to Mr. Roh's efforts to overcome the handicap of a broken finger that prevented him from gripping a tennis racket. He developed an awkward-looking, two-fisted forehand. It's good enough to beat far flashier opponents, the campaign manager quotes Mr. Roh as saying. &quot;The only problem,&quot; he says, &quot;is that it takes twice the energy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>