<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Sports (A Special Report): Doing It --- Europeans Sport a Different Look </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas F. O'Boyle </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><TEXT>   SOMEWHERE BACK IN THE U.S., a coach is implanting in his youthful charges the ethic Vince Lombardi made famous: Winning isn't everything, it's the only thing.    Somewhere in the U.S., a motivational speaker is drawing parallels between sport and business for an audience of managers who are there to learn how to beat back the challenge offered by International Widget. Widget can be beaten, the speaker cries, if our own corporate quarterbacks call the right plays and their minions block.    And everywhere in the U.S., the middle-aged are settling back in their easy chairs before the images of young men and women engaged in competitive sport. Save for a game of golf, a sedate set of doubles tennis at most, their own playing days are long over. They are watchers now, most of them.    But not here.    At the gymnasium of the Bonn-Roettgen Sportverein, or sports club in West Germany, children are gleefully tumbling on the mats. &quot;It's a blast. I love it,&quot; says Ute Huelsemann, who looks like she just might bounce out of her pink tights. &quot;I couldn't wait to come back,&quot; chimes in eight-year-old Hedda Pfenning, returning to the gym for the first time since Christmas break.    Greeting each returning youngster with a firm handshake and a warm smile, Siegfried Vollmer, the gymnastic instructor, beams like a proud father. &quot;I have fun just watching them tumble. It keeps me young,&quot; says Mr. Vollmer, a balding, bespectacled 63-year-old. Elsewhere in the gym other adults, middle-aged and even elderly people, are limbering up.    The scene at this sports club tells a lot about the vast differences between the U.S. and much of the rest of the world in attitudes toward sport and its place in the culture. Here, sport is viewed as a healthful pursuit for people of all ages rather than as an overwhelmingly competitive exercise, tilted toward youth and with winning as the paramount goal.    &quot;The value of exercise is seen differently in our society. We do it to be healthy, to be fit. In the States, it's heavily competition-oriented,&quot; says Peter Masley, a West German physical education teacher in Cologne who has studied in the U.S. &quot;Our goal is exercise and fellowship. Your goal is winning.&quot;    In West Germany, sports are also fun -- something in short supply in a country justly famed for meticulous attention to worrisome detail, and for raising angst to something of an art form. Everyone everywhere is worried about AIDS, for example, but only in West Germany have they proposed a regulation requiring motorists to carry rubber surgical gloves in automobile first-aid kits, just in case someone might have to handle an AIDS victim in a crash. West Germany already requires the kits.    This is the land of Goethe, of dark forests and foreboding thoughts, the land where it's considered unhealthy not to worry. Germans worry about nuclear annihilation and the state of the environment and the fate of the Earth. They worry about heavy things, ponderous things, things that keep you up at night. But in sport they can forget all this for a while, and so they love sports with a great passion -- but in a different way from Americans, a fact reflected in the way sports are organized here.    In America, sports programs are generally tied to the schools. Here, almost all sport activity is conducted through 64,000 sports clubs, or Turnverein. Their membership is all-embracing; one of every three Germans belongs to one. The clubs, some of which date back to the early 19th century, include all ages in their membership, and thus provide an intergenerational social setting unknown in U.S. sports.    Collectively, they also offer a wider range of activities than the usual team sports programs found in American high schools. Dance, table tennis and gymnastics, for instance, are among the most popular activities here, along with swimming, volleyball, tennis and soccer.    But many clubs don't offer team sports at all. This reflects a Germanic distaste for the idea of competition as a goal in itself, and for the American penchant for turning practically everything into a contest. Beauty pageants are rare here, hostile takeovers are unknown in the business world, and the government still fixes prices on many products and strictly regulates store hours.    Membership in West Germany's sports clubs is inexpensive, thanks in part to the direct and indirect assistance of state and local governments. At many clubs, membership for a family of four costs less than $150 a year. And because the club embraces all age groups, a person's activity in sport tends to continue well after his or her school years.    &quot;In America, when you finish high school or college, you're finished with sports,&quot; says Karl Bellmer, spokesman for the German Sportbund, the organization which governs the clubs. &quot;In our system, a person develops a sport his entire life.&quot;    At the 900-member Bonn-Roettgen Sportverein, for example, the oldest club member is 82, the youngest three. Often the old and the young exercise side by side. During one recent tumbling class for three- and four-year-olds, an elderly woman stops by to do some stretching exercises. She winds up joining the tots for their closing activity, when they hold hands and sing songs.    At Bonn-Roettgen, there are picnics in the summer, parties in the winter. And true to German tradition, the club has its own Stammtisch, a table at a local beer hall where club members gather once a week to drink and gab. &quot;One of our goals is to build fellowship,&quot; says Heinz Fenger, chairman of the club's governing board, &quot;and sport is the key to togetherness for the entire year.&quot;    This particular club stresses gymnastics, but offers other activities too. Whatever a member's age or sport, he gets highly organized, no-nonsense instruction from a cadre of 40 part-time instructors. They bark out commands like any American coach, but there is nonetheless a more benevolent and relaxed atmosphere here. Mr. Vollmer, the gymnastics instructor, almost pleads with one girl swinging apelike on the flying rings, the proper form forgotten. &quot;Watch your legs,&quot; he says.    Few pupils drop out. Some children get hooked on gymnastics and come to the gym four or five times a week; those who do yearn for competition can enter a league, but for most the club program is enough. &quot;I come here because I enjoy it,&quot; says 12-year-old Katharina Gabrysch, who, judging from her running somersaults and backflips, appears to have a lot of talent. &quot;People who compete aren't having fun. All they think about is winning.&quot;    Mr. Vollmer, himself a top-flight gymnast once, agrees. &quot;Our main emphasis is not competition but exercise and enjoyment,&quot; he says. &quot;It's better that way.&quot;    ---   Mr. O'Boyle is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Bonn bureau. </TEXT></DOC>