<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871224-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Mozambique and Its People: Pawns in a Brutal Struggle---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 12/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><TEXT>   Of all the horror stories in the world this year, one of the most appalling is that of Mozambique. Four and a half million people, one-third of the population, are near starvation; 100,000 have died of malnutrition. Infant mortality is among the highest in the world: 375 out of every 1,000 children die before the age of five. Clinics, schools, farms and factories have been destroyed throughout most of the country. Water and electricity services are usually disrupted; gasoline is scarce, as are transport vehicles.    Massacres are not uncommon. Women and children have been hacked to death with machetes or burned alive in buses; 424 Mozambicans were slaughtered in the village of Homoine on July 19; 92 in Manjacaze on Aug. 10; 51 in Taninga on Oct. 18. Refugees from the rural areas have fled to the capital, Maputo, or to neighboring countries.    All of these devastations are a result of the decade-long war between Mozambique's Frelimo government and the mercenary force known as MNR, or Renamo. After 400 years of Portuguese rule, Frelimo won independence for Mozambique in 1975. A year later, Portuguese colonists and Rhodesian intelligence agents, angry that Frelimo was supporting guerrillas based in Mozambique and seeking to overthrow the white-settler regime in neighboring Rhodesia, created Renamo.    Though unsuccessful at blocking independence in Zimbabwe, these forces did not abandon their goal of destabilizing both it and Mozambique. Since the death of Mozambican leader Samora Machel, Renamo has formally declared war on Zimbabwe and increasingly carries out brutal attacks on villages there. Last June, 11 villagers were killed at Kgodora near Rushinga, about 12 miles inside Zimbabwe. In October, 13 peasants were killed with machetes at Chiredzi in southeastern Zimbabwe. On Nov. 19, Renamo atacked a school on a tea plantation near Chipinga, killing five children, cutting ears and noses off nine others and abducting 20.    In Mozambique the war is severely undermining the economy. The national debt stands at $4 billion, and the cost of supporting the war equals that. Production is crippled and there is a trade deficit of $447.8 million. Under such circumstances Frelimo's economic-recovery program has little chance of succeeding. Prime Minister Joaquim Chissano has appealed to Britain and other EEC members for humanitarian aid and has called on neighboring countries for assistance.    Meanwhile, South Africa continues to supply Renamo, as it has since 1980, when Zimbabwe gained independence. South Africa perceives the political dislocation and economic dependency of its neighbors as vital to the preservation of apartheid and its own internal security. The familiar rationale that these nations pose a communist threat in the region is used to prolong this war of carnage.    Right-wing politicians in the U.S. -- inter alios Jesse Helms, Robert Dole and Jack Kemp -- and organizations such as the Heritage Foundation and Free the Eagle, are also drumming up support for Renamo's murderers, again with the claim that Mozambique is a Soviet colony. Of course, visitors to Maputo see no evidence of a Soviet presence: no battleships in the harbor, no soldiers in uniform. The right wing might as well be worried about a Scandinavian takeover of Mozambique. Countries from that region and elsewhere in the West send humanitarian aid and relief workers to minister to the victims of South African-backed violence. Britain has sent military officers and advisers to train the armed forces of Frelimo.    In an attempt to recover from a devastating series of natural disasters and to stop South Africa's support for Renamo, Machel signed a nonaggression pact with South Africa in 1984, the Nkomati Accord. He agreed to remove ANC bases from Mozambique in return for South Africa's abandonment of Renamo. Machel carried out his part of the bargain; South Africa did not. And justified repugnance at this flouting of an accord has no doubt fueled suspicions, persisting through several investigations, that the South Africans did after all have a hand in the air crash that killed Machel.    When Zimbabwean/Mozambican forces overran a Renamo base in Gorongosa, they found documents detailing the collaboration of South African military officers and government ministers with the MNR. Witnesses to massacres and escaped prisoners of the mercenaries report seeing South African supplies and military equipment. Guns with serial numbers obscured and bullets traceable to South Africa's military have been captured. Numerous sightings of South African-marked aircraft -- e.g., near the Malawi border when Renamo seized the town of Milanje in Zambezia Province in September 1986 -- have been logged.    The Reagan administration has acted with caution in Mozambique, although it is under steady pressure from the fanatic ultraright to provide military assistance to Renamo. The confirmation of Melissa Wells, the new U.S. ambassador to Mozambique, was opposed by Sen. Helms and others on the issue of whether she would accept the role of mediator between Renamo and Frelimo. Furthermore, considerable propaganda aimed at magically transforming Renamo from an army of mercenaries into &quot;freedom fighters&quot; or &quot;a popular resistance movement&quot; continues to flow from the offices of various senators and congresspersons. Very little, if any, reliable information on Mozambique finds its way into the mainstream press.    There are two stories in Mozambique: extreme human suffering and the country's strategic political and economic importance to South African hegemony in the region. Mozambicans are among the poorest people in the world. Thousands live in abandoned railroad cars, and these are the lucky ones. According to some who were captured by Renamo and have escaped, many soldiers in the MNR are peasants, often children, who have been given a choice, fight or die. There are rumors that Mozambican miners in South Africa are presented with the same choice. They are then trained in military camps inside South Africa and sent back to form the MNR cadres.    Prime Minister Chissano, aware of the way in which men and boys are conscripted into the bandit ranks, is now proposing an amnesty for those who want to lay down their arms. These people have been pawns in a much wider struggle; not that of some imagined East-West confrontation, but the prolonged struggle of colonization, liberation and recolonization that makes such strange allies of Thatcher and Chissano, or Jonas Savimbi and South African general Magnus Malan.    South Africa is hanging on to apartheid by a fascistic military and police apparatus. Its leaders are not really afraid of being slaughtered by black communists but of losing economic and political power over an enormously rich region. Their tactics are spelled out in the language of starvation, mutilation and economic destruction inflicted on Mozambique. That the American right and politicians such as Robert Dole should applaud the agents of these horrors is perhaps the most squalid of all the conservative &quot;crusades&quot; available to us at this season.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. A collection of his writings, &quot;Corruptions of Empire&quot; (Verso) is just out. </TEXT></DOC>