<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870619-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Private Hunting Provides Public Benefits---By Jo Kwong</HL><DD> 06/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The Wisconsin Nature Conservancy has a problem. Rapidly growing deer populations on several of its private preserves are causing the destruction of rare plants. In one case, more than 250 orchids have been reduced to just one -- spared only because the deer can't reach it. To stem the deer population and so save the plants, the organization is selling permits to hunt on the preserves for the fall season, with revenues earmarked for its efforts to protect endangered plant and animal habitats.    The Wisconsin Nature Conservancy is not alone. Across the nation, many ranchers and farmers are beginning to charge fees for hunting on their land. Revenues from hunting not only supplement agricultural incomes but often fund investments to promote wildlife habitats. These private efforts, however, have run into stiff opposition, particularly in such Western states as Montana and Wyoming. This is unfortunate, since private investment in wildlife -- by both profit-making and nonprofit groups -- can provide substantial public benefits.    In most states, landowners can charge trespass fees to hunters who want to hunt on their land. Some states, however, have gone further. They have developed &quot;ranching-for-wildlife&quot; programs that encourage landowners to invest in improving wildlife habitat on their properties in return for certain benefits. Landowners have an incentive to participate because they can increase revenues through fee hunting. State governments have an interest in the programs because they can improve the quality of wildlife.    Basically, landowners, in conjunction with the state fish and game department, indicate how they plan to improve wildlife habitats. The benefits to wildlife from improved food, water, cover and space can dramatically increase animal numbers. For example, landowners might improve brush cover for upland game birds, or plant willows and alder trees for moose, or manage wood lots to provide more food and cover for white-tailed deer. These types of changes have increased the elk population on the Deseret Ranch in Utah from 350 to 2,000 since 1976.    In return, the state allows the modification of hunting regulations on the ranch properties. Landowners can offer fishing and hunting outside of regular seasons; they can raise the hunting limits, sell permits directly to individuals without going through the state lottery system, and qualify for some tax benefits. Since these rules make the ranch lands more attractive to hunters, they are often preferred to free, public lands.    Such legislation has been implemented in several states, including Colorado, California and Utah. But in Montana and Wyoming, similar bills were rejected in legislative sessions this year largely as a result of emotionally based attitudes that don't have much grounding in reality.    Many critics attack this approach simply because it allows landowners to profit from hunting. &quot;Special-interest commercial groups are trying to capitalize on Montana's abundant big-game populations,&quot; says Joe Gutkoski, president of the Gallatin Wildlife Association in Montana. Jeanne Klobnack of the Montana Wildlife Federation claims that ranching -- for -- wildlife legislation will &quot;turn the sport into one for the rich only.&quot;    Others fear that local hunters will have less access to hunting grounds. In some instances landowners who previously let hunters hunt for free have begun to charge a fee. This often happens, however, when a resource increases in value. Many public campgrounds, for example, now charge user fees. But just because a state allows private landowners to charge fees doesn't mean it will reduce public hunting grounds. State officials in Colorado, for example, note that opening more private land to hunting has not reduced the acreage of public hunting grounds.    Critics also charge that improvements in wildlife habitats on private lands will draw animals off public lands. The evidence doesn't support this claim. A pheasant or a moose observes no borders. If a species flourishes on private land, some animals may well move to public lands. The Deseret Ranch in Utah, for example, began an intensive hunting program a decade ago. Local sportsmen report that they have a better chance to find a deer or elk on public lands surrounding the Deseret than on more distant ones. In fact, on one public parcel just south of the ranch, about 25 bull elk were killed recently; before the Deseret program, these lands were not known to have any bulls. In addition, since 1983 the Deseret has transplanted more than 600 cow elk to public lands throughout Utah.    State officials are so impressed by the improved quality and quantity of game on the ranch and on adjacent public lands that a director of the Division of Wildlife Resources has asked other private ranches to accept transplants from the Deseret. Improvement on private ranches should have the indirect effect of increasing wildlife numbers on nearby public lands.    Without private investment in wildlife, many benefits to wildlife habitats, sportsmen and landowners would never have come about. Unfortunately, irrational hostility keeps an enormous pool of resources from being tapped. Even worse, antagonistic attitudes may lead landowners to close off all their land to hunters. We need to look beyond the benefits that go to private landowners to realize that sportsmen and other outdoorsmen can be served by public-private cooperation.    ---   Ms. Kwong is an Earhart Fellow at the Political Economy Research Center in Bozeman, Mont. </TEXT></DOC>