<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0163 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Alvin H. Bernstein</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Raymond Bonner's &quot;Waltzing With a Dictator: The Marcoses and the Making of American Foreign Policy&quot; (Times Books, $19.95) is not -- nor does it pretend to be -- an objective analysis. Its author, a lawyer by training, an investigative journalist by trade, has used his skills as advocate and muckraker to compile a gossipy indictment of America's policy in the Philippines and in the Third World generally.    Appalled by the prospect that a conservative Republican president might get some credit for the timely replacement of an increasingly unpopular dictator by a popular, left-leaning opponent, Mr. Bonner devotes his 533 pages to turning any such idea on its head. Not only are the current problems in the Philippines largely of the U.S.'s making, he says, but Corazon Aquino succeeded Ferdinand Marcos in Manila in spite of, not with the help of, the current U.S. administration. What appeared to many as a success in American foreign policy, in keeping with American ideals, was actually a national disgrace.    Mr. Bonner builds his case with the tools at his disposal. They are not what they should be for the task he has set himself. He admits that he lacks any intimate knowledge or expert understanding of Philippine society. Convinced, nevertheless, of the correctness of his instinctive assumptions, he sallied off to find support for his political argument. What he has learned about his subject comes from skimming the surface.    He has read (mostly American) newspapers and weekly magazines, examined hundreds of U.S. documents declassified at his request, and conducted scores of interviews, mostly with American but occasionally with Philippine officials. Because he understands so little about Philippine society itself he cannot set his diplomatic history into any broader societal context.    Yet diplomatic decisions can be criticized fairly only by comparison with their alternatives. Mr. Bonner does not know enough to have alternatives and tries to argue this deficiency away by insisting that his &quot;is a book about Washington more than about Manila, more about American policy than about Philippine culture and society.&quot;    That is not adequate. If he wants to tell us what U.S. policy for the Philippines should be, he has to take into account the country concerned. Throughout his analysis, he faults U.S. diplomats and policy makers for not having solved the problems of the Philippines by turning the country into a Southeast Asian liberal democracy on the American model. He reveals an arrogant parochialism typical of certain American commentators when he makes it clear that the wishes of the Philippine people should have been disregarded when they conflicted with his own vision for the country.    This book reveals none of the true researcher's passion for the careful use of evidence. In his effort to discredit the policies and politicians he despises, Mr. Bonner claims Ferdinand Marcos declared martial law in 1972 not to meet any emergency but to consolidate his power. President Richard Nixon sanctioned the declaration in advance, he continues. This is a new and important assertion, yet the author substantiates it only by citing two unverified sources.    One is an anonymous person allegedly present at an Oval Office meeting at which Mr. Nixon, Henry Kissinger and our ambassador to the Philippines, Henry Byroade, supposedly discussed the matter. The other is a rumor from a Filipino source that Mr. Nixon gave Mr. Marcos his blessing in two phone calls. Ambassador Byroade says he told Mr. Bonner explicitly, during an interview for the book, that no such meeting took place, and the White House public record reveals neither the meeting nor any calls. If the author wishes to be taken seriously, he needs to find a more solid basis for his controversial allegations.    Otherwise he becomes vulnerable to the charge of shoddy reporting recently made about another section of his book by the associate editor of The New York Times, A.M. Rosenthal: &quot;Some conspiracy-minded nonsense is printed without anybody bothering to check out if there is any truth in it . . . The falsehood sticks in the mind . . . and {it} winds up in a serious book by a serious author reviewed on the front page of The {Times} Book Review.&quot;    There are reasons, however, for concluding that Mr. Bonner is not writing a serious book for a serious audience. Throughout, his work is thickly padded with gratuitous, vulgar gossip. In mind-numbing detail, for example, he describes Imelda Marcos's extravagances. He also provides long and usually unflattering biographies of various American diplomats and policy makers whose positions made them hosts or guests of the Marcoses. Such stuff serves no purpose. There are times when a reader wonders whether this is a study of American foreign policy or a gossip column.    The pity is that U.S.-Philippine relations deserve much better than the treatment Mr. Bonner gives them. We do need a book that would really analyze the complex ties between the two countries and guide us as we face the future. After all, those ties go deeper than the U.S. military facilities at Clark and Subic. One million Filipino emigres to the U.S. remit $1 million a day to Manila and, according to a recent poll, more than 73% of the American electorate thinks the Philippines is of vital interest to the U.S. The revolution there may not yet be over. The economic problems that the Marcos regime exacerbated but did not entirely cause are still unsolved. Indeed, they are so severe and complex as to make it unlikely that even the most generous assistance from the U.S. or the International Monetary Fund, or both combined, can do much to alleviate them.    Prices for Philippine agricultural produce will probably remain severely depressed. The economic base of Mrs. Aquino and her colleagues does not differ from their predecessors' and this may prevent them from enacting real reform. If so, the economic conditions that are making the current communist insurgent movement so attractive to increasing numbers of Filipinos will not change, and the movement will continue to grow. After a temporary setback, it has, in fact, expanded substantially since Mrs. Aquino came to power. Such problems Mr. Bonner's superficial book, however easy to read, does not help us to understand: It is wholly preoccupied with riding a hobbyhorse into the ground.    ---   Mr. Bernstein is chairman of the strategy department at the Naval War College. </TEXT></DOC>