<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0130 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Disturber of the Peace -- on the Left and Right---By R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr.</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In this inaugural collection of Michael Kinsley's recent writings the concerned reader finally has a chance to take the measure of The New Republic's sometimes awkward, sometimes agile editor undistracted by the controversies, surprising in number, that have entoiled his brief career. News stories have echoed with his complaints about his salary and insufficient vacation time. Employers have questioned his ethics: a junket to Lebanon, his choice of manuscripts for publication, his taste. There was the time when Harper's under his editorship called Clare Boothe Luce a &quot;courtesan&quot; in a headline. Later the magazine insulted Susan Sontag, associating her with rock groupies.    Mr. Kinsley is given to put-downs. It is a dispensation allowed him in the grim American media because he presents himself as a moralist, and that he is but in strictly contemporary terms. He is absorbed with the minor peccancies of the moment. Nowhere in &quot;Curse of the Giant Muffins and Other Washington Maladies&quot; (Summit, 286 pages, $17.95) does he demonstrate an acute awareness of our time's great evils: the totalitarian shade now pulled over Southeast Asia, the decline of much of the Third World into barbarism, terrorism's manifold cruelties and dangers, the enduring horror of communism. Mr. Kinsley does not even demonstrate much awareness of the squalor of our slums.    Nonetheless he is celebrated, and the adjective applied to him with curious inveterateness is &quot;smart&quot; -- not intelligent, not thoughtful, just smart. If I were Mr. Kinsley that would make me a little uneasy. His work is strangely devoid of many of the marks of a civilized mind. It is just possible that Mr. Kinsley is beginning to be recognized as a primitive. This should not be too surprising. As he himself indicates in one of this book's few affectionate essays, he once worked for Ralph Nader. From these pages he now emerges as the republic's most sedulous interpreter of the master's work, hence his stunted sensibility and narrowness. The planet Earth might be imperiled by pestilence and flames and Mr. Kinsley would want to make just one more point about Felix Rohatyn's tax write-offs.    Yet I shall fain defend Mr. Kinsley against those who say that he is neither liberal nor conservative, or that he has no higher political principle than jealousy. True, he has little reverence for liberal pieties. And true, he serves up fearsome drubbings to conservatives, discoursing frequently on the sordidness of their black hearts. Still, this does not mean Mr. Kinsley is some sort of jolly nihilist. Close textual analysis of this slim volume reveals that he does adhere to one very important political principle.    Mr. Kinsley believes that it is his moral duty to disturb his neighbor. That, of course, is the surviving principle of modern liberalism. Liberalism has gone off in many contradictory directions. It has moved from prizing a colorblind society to prizing a color-obsessed society. It has exchanged the welfare state for the redistributive hoosegow. Animal rights is rising on the agenda. But one age-old liberal principle endures the erosions of time, and Mr. Kinsley adheres to it lovingly. Today's liberals still believe in disturbing the peace. Modern liberalism is the only political philosophy ever based on a simple misdemeanor. That Mr. Kinsley practices his misdemeanors against liberals and conservatives alike does not make him a nihilist but rather a liberal of the finest metal. He is Eleanor Roosevelt for the 1980s. Perhaps some day he will marry a president.    Mr. Kinsley afflicts liberals differently from the way that he afflicts conservatives. At liberals he merely snickers, leaving them hurt and bemused as to the substance of his complaints. There is none, and he offers none. Consider when he snickers at the Democrats' devotion to Social Security and to agricultural price supports. Aside from chiding these programs because they &quot;benefit people at least as well off as those who are paying for them,&quot; Mr. Kinsley goes no deeper. He simply ignores the liberals' rationale for them. He is no Friedmanite advocate of free markets. Mr. Friedman wants to raise incomes. Mr. Kinsley just wants to begrudge them. He knows it disturbs people. Elsewhere in this volume he will discomfit the peace movement by snickering at its melodrama and urgency. Conscientious readers might recall that in a preceding section on conservatives he blamed them for &quot;helping to spread war fever&quot; in the 1980s. So why is he snickering at the peace movement's worries? Because he is a nuisance. It is a matter of principle.    Mr. Kinsley takes more care in afflicting conservatives. That is not to say that he bothers to refute them. But he does much more than merely snicker. He misrepresents them. He ignores their most telling arguments. For instance, it is untrue to write that &quot;some conservatives speak almost wistfully of the advantages enjoyed by ruthless totalitarians . . . and medieval religious zealots . . .&quot; or that the Reagan administration's &quot;greatest moral outrage is reserved for people who acquire some advantage because they are black.&quot; Has Mr. Kinsley forgotten the administration's moral denunciations of communism? He must realize that &quot;greed&quot; is not admired by supply-siders, that neoconservatives do not &quot;see socialism everywhere,&quot; and that those stone heads who speak of &quot;moral equivalence&quot; between Washington and Moscow are not speaking of the equivalence of the two powers' strategic forces, as Mr. Kinsley claims. They are declaring both regimes morally equivalent, and conservatives are right to complain.    Moreover, Mr. Kinsley can be funny, especially on things that are not all that serious, such as fads, poseurs in politics and business (Mary Cunningham!). If only he could deliver an elbow to the ribs of some figures from history, say Schweitzer, or a literary eminence, say Proust, or Nietzsche or Marx or Beethoven, with all his annoying grievances. But the modern moralist restricts himself to a very narrow range: thy neighbor's tax returns, thy neighbor's police radar detector, his uses of frequent-flier coupons. These have actually been props for this genius's satire.    I have now been in the company of Mr. Kinsley for more than 200 pages, and let me tell you he puts me in mind of a mean little lawyer down in an alcove of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Are there no limits to his absorption with human baseness? Nowadays such petty fellows are called neoliberals, that is to say a liberal who makes his way in the world disarming conservatives by appropriating their arguments against liberals. Then he disarms liberals by reviling his intellectual benefactors on the right. As Mr. Kinsley shows in this volume, such liberals can occasionally have great fun, but that is because they have no honor.    ---   Mr. Tyrrell is editor in chief of The American Spectator and a syndicated columnist. Mr. Kinsley's latest essay appears in today's Viewpoint column. </TEXT></DOC>