<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870915-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Power Plays:Electric Utilities PushNew Marketing PlansTo Meet Competition---After Restraints of the 1970s,They Fight IndependentsAnd Cogeneration Firms---Bitter Battles in Pennsylvania---By Bill PaulStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><CO> SO PE GPE+ </CO><IN> UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like dozens of other electric utilities, Southern Co.'s Georgia Power Co. subsidiary disbanded its marketing department during the conservation-oriented 1970s.    But the department has made a remarkable comeback. In one recent week, a Georgia Power field representative advised officials at a Ford Motor Co. assembly plant how to avoid power interruptions. Another showed an office-park manager how to estimate his monthly bill with a Georgia Power computer program. At the company's Technology Applications Center, engineers evaluated infrared vs. radio-frequency drying machines for a nearby carpet manufacturer.    Utility marketing is back in style, as unprecedented new competition is sending the nation's power representatives knocking on the doors of customers and legislators alike. Their task is not only to sell more electricity but also to protect threatened territorial monopolies. Increasingly, they play hardball.    &quot;Within another year,&quot; says Joel Gilbert of Dames andamp; Moore, a Washington-based utility consulting firm, &quot;aggressive marketing will be commonplace&quot; in the power industry.    Georgia Power's marketing program, which Mr. Gilbert calls &quot;an industry model,&quot; revolves around 110 field representatives scattered across the state. Most are electrical or mechanical engineers, and they work alongside customers as energy problem-solvers, often calling in other Georgia Power engineers expert in specific industries or new technologies. They also steer customers to the utility's new product-testing centers for manufacturing equipment and consumer products.    The newly competitive power industry has its roots in the Public Utilities Regulatory Power Act of 1978. Purpa, as it is known, dealt a blow to electric utilities' monopoly status by requiring them to buy for a reasonable price the electricity generated by independent power producers.    When state regulatory decisions of the early 1980s stalled building of new power plants, the independents rushed to fill the breech. However, many utilities with ample generating capacity, including Georgia Power, fought the newcomers by getting state regulators to maintain price levels and impose fees on the independents to have their power enter the utilities' grids.    The independents quickly found a formidable ally in the electric industry's old nemesis -- the natural-gas industry. Persistently low prices and excess supplies have allowed gas utilities to woo electricity customers by pitching cogeneration -- a process of producing two useful energy forms, such as electricity and steam for heating, from one fuel such as gas or garbage. Even electric-power leaders concede that gas-fired cogeneration can help manufacturers who heat large spaces and who can get a good price for their surplus power because the local utility rates are bloated by a costly nuclear plant.    More recently, some electric utilities have formed cogeneration units and invaded their brethren's turf. Georgia Power, for instance, must worry about Florida Power andamp; Light Co., which plans to join with Combustion Engineering Inc. of Stamford, Conn., to build cogeneration plants in the Southeast, offering the low-cost energy to industrial users.    Moreover, municipal power authorities, which have traditionally subsidized residential ratepayers, have begun offering rate breaks to new and relocating industry instead. Don Stokley of the 48-member Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia explains that politicians who run municipal authorities get more votes by attracting new jobs to their locales. Municipal rates are generally lower because the authorities pay less tax than investor-owned utilities.    One of the nastiest power battles is in Philadelphia, involving the University of Pennsylvania and Amtrak, which plan to build a gas-fueled cogeneration plant, at the expense of Philadelphia Electric Co.    Helen O'Bannon, a former Pennsylvania utility regulator and now the university's official in charge of the project, says senior Philadelphia Electric officials went so far as to call university trustees in an effort to get her fired. She survived, she says, but the trustees were concerned enough to require a second, outside opinion on the feasibility of the project.    A Philadelphia Electric spokesman says he isn't aware of any such telephone calls. He adds that although the utility is willing to work with any potential cogenerator, &quot;we have had a difficult time obtaining information&quot; on the Penn-Amtrak project.    That willingness to work with cogenerators, however, didn't include the Crozer-Chester Medical Center in Chester, Pa. When the hospital last year decided to start taking its electricity from a nearby cogeneration facility, Philadelphia Electric balked at providing the hospital with backup power, arguing that federal and state regulations required it do so only for customers with their own cogeneration facilities. But the cogenerator successfully challenged the utility's decision before the state regulatory commission.    Philadelphia Electric is particularly vulnerable to competition because it is building an expensive and unpopular nuclear power plant. Georgia Power is similarly saddled.    To pay for its 45.7% stake in the nearly completed Plant Vogtle, Georgia Power has asked state regulators to approve a $2.2 billion, or 81%, rate increase to be phased in over 10 years. Utility officials stress that even after that increase, Georgia Power's rates won't be nearly as high as, say, Philadelphia Electric's. But they will be high enough to make independent power production attractive to many more of Georgia Power's biggest industrial customers, says John Kopfle, the secretary of the year-old Georgia Cogeneration Society.    Mr. Kopfle says society members, including the Pratt andamp; Whitney unit of United Technologies Corp., Cummins Engine Co. and Southwire Co., will lobby for the legislature to change a law that allows Georgia Power and other utilities to refuse to transmit power generated by independents and that restricts third-party participation in cogeneration facilities. &quot;Because of Vogtle, a lot of legislators are dissatisfied with Georgia Power,&quot; Mr. Kopfle says hopefully.    Yet Georgia Power remains a formidable foe. Ask Thomas Gutherie, the president of a Greensboro, Ga., lumber firm with an eight-year-old power plant that runs on wood chips. &quot;They,&quot; he says angrily, referring to Georgia Power and other state utilities, &quot;are trying to snuff out us small power producers.&quot;    Mr. Gutherie complains that because Georgia Power and other established utilities control access to the state utility grid, with the help of state regulators, they can keep independents from transmitting power. &quot;It's the way {the utilities} have written the rules,&quot; complains Mr. Gutherie's attorney, Jack Watson, formerly President Carter's chief of staff. Mr. Gutherie unsuccessfully sued the utilities on antitrust grounds, and he is appealing the case.    Georgia Power in its new marketing program, meantime, is relying increasingly on field representatives such as Clayton Penhallegon, a recent mechanical-engineering graduate from Georgia Tech.    Calling on Benjamin Vasa, a power engineer at the Ford Motor assembly plant outside Atlanta recently, Mr. Penhallegon observes that Ford's plant manager plays golf with the president of Georgia Power. &quot;I've really got to do my job with you guys,&quot; he jokes to Mr. Vasa.    But when Mr. Vasa later says that his superiors had suggested hiring Westinghouse Electric Corp. to study, among other things, the electrical service at the plant, Mr. Penhallegon gets edgy, realizing that Westinghouse sells cogeneration plants and might urge one on Ford. Immediately, Mr. Penhallegon suggests that he and another Georgia Power engineer conduct the study instead. Mr. Vasa agrees, heading off the Westinghouse plan.    Mr. Penhallegon calls the same day on Donald Brown, senior facilities engineer at Delta Airlines, to suggest the utility's new flexible billing program, under which a customer can have his monthly meter reading and billing in the middle of the month, say, instead of at the end of the month.    Mr. Brown isn't interested, but Mr. Penhallegon uses the opportunity to go through Delta's maintenance shop, checking all the equipment. &quot;Clayton really knows our business,&quot; Mr. Brown says approvingly.    In the same week, another field representative, George Hoffman, listens intently while William Jeffries, an electrical-engineering consultant, tells him what his client, Unisys, needs in the way of electrical service for its new computer center in suburban Atlanta. &quot;Ten years ago, Georgia Power would have said, 'If you don't like our service, tough.' But now, with competition, they neogotiate rather than dictate,&quot; Mr. Jeffries observes.    Mr. Jeffries says he could have recommended to Unisys that it cogenerate rather than take electricity from Georgia Power. &quot;On paper,&quot; Mr. Jeffries says, &quot;cogeneration looks pretty good -- the gas company is offering some pretty attractive rates.&quot; But Mr. Jeffries questions whether a company building and running a cogeneration plant for Unisys would be as reliable as Georgia Power. &quot;Developers aren't utilities,&quot; he says.    Mr. Jeffries also considers the option of a municipal power authority. But munis, he says, lack engineering expertise. &quot;They want to sign up customers like mad,&quot; he says, &quot;but it's only to make money. They don't give you the long-term assistance Georgia Power does.&quot;    Meanwhile, at the Georgia Power Energy Center in Atlanta, about 50 chefs from an association have been trying out the latest in electric cooking, as had Domino's Pizza officials. To sell electric stoves, says John C. Hemby, Georgia Power's senior vice president for marketing, &quot;you've got to get to the man who's cooking the meat.&quot;    Energy Center visitors do more than cook. In the same week, the center and a local savings and loan association co-sponsor a seminar on financing of multi-family housing. A display features the latest in electric heat pumps. In the &quot;video center,&quot; businessmen thinking about setting up shop in Georgia can punch a button and see every available industrial site in the state that is served by Georgia Powerplus a videotaped introduction to Georgia by Southern Co. Chairman Edward Addison, either in English or dubbed in Japanese or German.    When Georgia Power's Technology Applications Center agreed to test new drying techniques for the carpet maker in Dalton, Ga., it searched as far as Berkshire, England, to find one equipment manufacturer. Then it tried the machine for customers, including a glove manufacturer that wanted to dry his gloves' latex coating faster and a sportswear maker looking for a better way to print numerals on his jerseys -- all free of charge. </TEXT></DOC>