<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Genentech Inc.Loses U.K. CaseFor Drug Patent---Wellcome Wins Decision;U.S. Firm Will AppealRuling on Clot Remedy---By Marilyn Chase and Richard L. HudsonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GENE GENI EUROPPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Wellcome PLC won the first round of a high-stakes patent battle with its U.S. rival, Genentech Inc., over the rights to the clot-dissolving agent TPA, in a court decision revoking Genentech's sweeping claims to the heart-attack drug.    The decision by the British High Court was the second major blow in just over a month for the South San Francisco, Calif., gene-splicing company. On May 29, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration turned down the company's request for market approval in the U.S., asking for data that indicate TPA prolongs life.    London-based Wellcome greeted the High Court decision with &quot;satisfaction&quot; and said it would seek market approval within a year. Genentech's founder and chief executive officer, Robert Swanson, said the company will appeal the decision rather than narrow its patent claims.    In national over-the-counter trading yesterday, Genentech shares closed at $38.625, down $1.375. On the London Stock Exchange, Wellcome traded late yesterday at #4.62 ($7.50), roughly unchanged.    At stake is a British market for thrombolytic, or clot-dissolving, agents valued at an estimated $50 million a year by 1991, of which half is expected to be captured by Beecham Group PLC, of Britain, with its Eminase brand of streptokinase, and half by TPA -- be it Wellcome's or Genentech's.    However, the larger stakes include the general atmosphere in which patent courts world-wide weigh not only TPA -- potentially a $1 billion-a-year product globally -- but other products of biotechnology. In this respect, the British decision is viewed by many as a bellwether, if not a formal legal precedent. U.S. competitors of Genentech cheered the setback for the company that is viewed as the market's dominant force.    If the British High Court decision is upheld, London patent specialists said, it would suggest that British patent courts won't treat products of gene-splicing any differently from conventional drugs -- despite the assertion by biotech firms that their novel technology and high research costs warrant broader claims than, say, a routine antibiotic.    Several Wall Street analysts said the judge struck down 16 of Genentech's 20 patent claims, upholding four that dealt with the plasmid, or particle used to splice TPA producing genes into cell cultures used to manufacture the protein, and the various cell cultures -- both mammalian and bacterial -- thus transformed. Genentech's Mr. Swanson declined comment on the specifics of the ruling, saying he hadn't seen a text of the ruling. He added that he was pleased that the judge recognized three essential elements of Genentech's invention: that it was novel, unobvious, and useful -- keys to any patentable invention.    &quot;Stop being greedy&quot; was the High Court's message to drug companies, in the view of Iain Baillie, a London patent attorney with Ladas andamp; Perry, a New York-based law firm. He said the decision may prompt British and other European companies to narrow their future patent claims. Because of contrasts in U.S. and European patent law, however, the decision holds no legal standing as a precedent on the other side of the Atlantic.    Nevertheless, some U.S. patent attorneys feel the British decision may be a harbinger of things to come, if not an outright precedent. &quot;It's believed to be predictive of whether broad claims will issue in the U.S.,&quot; said Kate Murashige, a patent attorney who specializes in biotechnology in Menlo Park, Calif.    When Genentech's U.K. patent originally was issued, Ms. Murashige said, &quot;it purported to cover any TPA made by means of recombinant DNA. People were concerned.&quot; She added that while much is still uncertain, &quot;What's clear is that it's less likely a company can dominate the whole field&quot; merely by being first to engineer a particular version of a protein.    Others were less sure. Cynthia Robbins-Roth, publisher of BioVenture View, an industry newsletter, said the U.S. patent court may still award some broad patents, judging by its recent issuance of a broad claim for the blood-growth factor erythropoietin to Genetics Institute Inc., of Cambridge, Mass.    U.S. companies striving for a position in the TPA market, which already reap some advantage by virtue of Genentech's setback at the FDA, were further encouraged by the British court's ruling. Said David Kosowsky, chairman of Damon Biotech Inc., Needham Heights, Mass., &quot;It gives us significantly more freedom with our partners -- Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. in Japan, and SmithKline Beckman Corp. in the rest of the world -- to aggressively pursue what we think will be a very large market.&quot;    Under British patent law, an appeal by Genentech would go first to the Court of Appeal and, finally, to the House of Lords. Procedurally, Genentech's Mr. Swanson said the company also had the option of trimming its claims, but rejected that route because &quot;less-broad claims wouldn't give meaningful protection in the U.K.&quot;    Mr. Swanson said the British ruling, while it doesn't affect other patent processes in other countries, &quot;is the first skirmish in what will be many&quot; patent battles yet to engage the biotech industry.    The executive added that the company recently had contacts with the FDA in its continuing effort to put its derailed U.S. market application back on track. But he declined to comment on recently published speculation that FDA approval could come by late summer. Said Mr. Swanson, &quot;We've tried to stay out of the prediction business.&quot;    ---   Genetics Institute's TPA   CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- Genetics Institute Inc. said it developed a new form of tissue plasminogen activator, or TPA, an experimental drug that dissolves blood clots that cause heart attacks.    The biotechnology concern said that in animal tests, its new form of TPA remains in the blood longer than previous versions. It added that that may enable the drug to be administered to a heart-attack patient in a single, smaller dose than earlier versions of TPA, which in clinical tests often are continuously given intravenously to patients over several hours.    The company said it plans to begin clinical tests with the drug next year. </TEXT></DOC>