<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880720-0129 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Re-Mix of Contemporary Political Theory </HL><AUTHOR> Andrew Sullivan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   From Plato on, the central, tired paradox of political philosophy has been that it is an oxymoron. Politics deals in interest, power, pride. Philosophy requires disinterestedness, retreat and a willingness to agree with others if they have the better argument. Combinations of the two -- from Socrates to Gary Hart -- have not proved particularly encouraging.    And then there is political theory: the pretension to discuss politics philosophically. But as Rutgers political scientist Benjamin Barber points out in &quot;The Conquest of Politics: Liberal Philosophy in Democratic Times&quot; (Princeton, 220 pages, $25), this too has a tendency to lapse into contradiction. There is something irredeemably abstract about political philosophers that makes their pronouncements on politics suspect, even meddlesome. As Mr. Barber notes in the first sentence of his book, &quot;Thinking about politics creates a unique dilemma, for it seems inevitably to lead to thinking about thinking; and the more we think about thinking, the less we think about politics.&quot;    In modernity, Burke said this first. These days, in one of the more astonishing reversals of modern political rhetoric, it is primarily the left that feels uncomfortable with the inherently abstract nature of political theorizing. Being &quot;engaged&quot; as a social critic in the late 1980s has come to mean eschewing any discussion of fundamental rights or principles. Michael Walzer refuses to delve outside the language of conventional political discourse. The latest writings of John Rawls defend his theory of justice as one that has resonance only in the Western democratic &quot;tradition.&quot;    Benjamin Barber now joins the chorus with five reprinted, retouched essays on contemporary political theorists. (If this book were a rock album, it would be called a re-mix.) Their theme is the conquest of politics by philosophy. Apart from a mystifying and pretentious essay on Bruce Ackerman (it is in the form of a conversation among a janitor at Yale, David Stockman, Adolf Hitler and Romeo and Juliet), Mr. Barber's case is rigorous, Burkean and not particularly convincing.    The most stimulating essay, and the starting point of the book, is a discussion of the links between Bertrand Russell's empiricism and liberalism. Mr. Barber argues persuasively against rooting political theory in epistemology, the branch of philosophy that studies the origins and nature of human knowledge. Why do we have to ask philosophically, &quot;How do we know?&quot; he asks, before we can answer politically, &quot;What should we do?&quot; The answer of course is: We don't. Most voters do not feel the need to flip through Heidegger's &quot;Being and Time&quot; before pulling the lever for Michael Dukakis, although the book's existential consolations might come in handy afterward. So why are political philosophers concerned with such things?    Mr. Barber suggests it is because they have lost track of politics. His subsequent attacks on the early writings of Harvard philosophers John Rawls and Robert Nozick develop the point. Mr. Rawls's disembodied, disinterested interlocutors are so different from real political actors that their conclusions about justice are irrelevant to politics. Mr. Nozick's abstract arguments about voluntary exchanges ignore the political consequences of such exchanges (inequality) and so miss the most pressing political arguments against them.    Yet it is revealing that in the case of both Messrs. Rawls and Nozick, it was the politicians who dragged the philosophers into public debate. The Old Left and the New Right felt the need for more than a reiteration of interest and &quot;values&quot; and turned to philosophers for arguments. Mr. Barber may be right that such recourse was based on elements of delusion, but it was demanded just the same. Politicians hanker after philosophy, as journalists plan to write books.    It is also true that, pace Barber and Burke, modern, questioning human beings are not merely &quot;citizens&quot; in politics. The answers to existential, even epistemological questions are implicit in their political views even if they are unaware of them. In the life of nations, these jarring calls to abstraction may even be necessary at times to avoid communal immorality.    This book asks the central question political theory must now address, even if it gives no answer to it. What theory can both affirm politics' separateness from philosophy, while recognizing the modern inextricability of the two? As Mr. Barber concedes in a revealingly favorable essay, conservative philosopher Michael Oakeshott comes closest to this by affirming constitutionalism's concern with means as a way of avoiding political argument about ends. In this way, philosophy stays at arm's length from politics, while retaining the freedom it needs to prosper. And that freedom is the key to making this compromise work: America's love affair with liberty is the surest weapon it has against the lure of abstractions that lead to oppression. One senses it is political allegiance rather than philosophical impartiality that keeps Mr. Barber from agreeing with Oakeshott completely.    ---   Mr. Sullivan is associate editor of The New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>