<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Constitution Co-Opted the 'Amerikkan' Dream---By Jonathan D. Weiss</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Besides the Constitution, which is celebrating its 200th anniversary, there's another distinctly American document that is also marking its anniversary this summer. Twenty-five years ago this month, the 59 founders of Students for a Democratic Society -- the organization that would embody campus upheaval in the 1960s -- gathered for five hectic days in Port Huron, Mich., to iron out their group's statement of purpose.    What they produced was a 25,000-word manifesto that became known as the Port Huron Statement. Despite its flaws, it would capture and shape the mood and spirit of a generation of student radicals.    Over the next few years, this statement would become, in effect, the constitution of the new left. Its precocious 22-year-old primary author, Tom Hayden (elected at Port Huron as the first president of SDS) would become a symbol of the movement itself.    In a sense, the Port Huron Statement turned the nation's Constitution on its head. The Founding Fathers focused on society's need for a democratic government that could express the views of &quot;the People&quot; while keeping in check man's natural instincts and the &quot;whims of the majority.&quot; The framers of the Port Huron Statement saw things differently.    &quot;The American political system is not the democratic model of which its glorifiers speak,&quot; the manifesto intoned. &quot;In actuality, it frustrates democracy by confusing the individual citizen, paralyzing policy discussion, and consolidating the irresponsible power of military and business interests.&quot;    Whereas the Constitution focused on the structure of society, the Port Huron Statement focused on the needs of the individual. Whereas the earlier document was based on practicality, the later one was based on moralism. And although each was intended as a &quot;living document,&quot; able to maintain its core while adapting to changing times and attitudes, the Constitution had genius at its core, whereas the Port Huron Statement, however impelling, was fatally flawed.    Mr. Hayden and his cohorts viewed elites and bureaucracy -- in fact, large-scale organization of any kind -- as the focus of blame for alienation in society. What was most needed on all levels, they asserted, was something called &quot;participatory democracy.&quot; This vague ideal was to mean true democracy in action, where individuals would share in those social decisions &quot;determining the quality and direction&quot; of their lives.    While the Port Huron Statement does not subject the Constitution or its framers to strict scrutiny, it is apparent these young idealists would have questioned most fundamentally the distrust shown in the Constitution for unbridled democracy.    There certainly is no doubt that one of the essential purposes of the Constitution was to limit the perceived excesses at large in the 11 years since Independence. James Madison, the primary author of the Constitution, after having studied various political systems and having witnessed the problems under the Articles of the Confederation, believed that representational government would be a practical way not only to allow the public view to be expressed, but also to facilitate its refinement. &quot;If men were angels, no government would be necessary,&quot; he explained following the Constitutional Convention.    Moreover, Madison felt that separating the powers of government among the three branches would balance the human qualities of self-interest that those in each branch would assume: &quot;Ambition must be made to counteract ambition.&quot;    The Port Huron Statement rejected this view of the nature of the man. &quot;We regard men as infinitely precious and possessed of unfulfilled capacities for religion, freedom, and love. The goal of man and society should be human independence.&quot;    If the authors of the Constitution, inspired as they were, were practical to a fault (ignoring, for instance, the moral arguments against slavery), the writers of the SDS manifesto erred in the other direction. To be sure, based on the values expressed in the Port Huron Statement, the new left would go on to spur an extraordinary amount of activism during the '60s and later -- from mobilizing resources against the Vietnam War to spawning a host of other movements intent on combating discrimination and the suppression of civil liberties. But the short-lived existence of the new left as a viable radical movement seemed inevitable given the naivete in the SDS founding document.    As the movement grew and moved toward a revolutionary attack on &quot;the system&quot; during the late '60s, it never really tried to comprehend what constituted that system and its political structure. The rhetoric for &quot;revolution&quot; became a substitute for understanding a system that had a long history of hampering or co-opting radical movements.    At the same time, with all the Port Huron Statement's talk about man's unselfishness, it also reflected a measure of self-interest that drew many students to the movement in the late '60s. Beyond the social, sexual and countercultural rewards the movement offered, it became a way of fighting to stop the Vietnam war so you wouldn't have to go.    With the end of the war in the early 1970s came the end of the movement. For the new left to endure required a more practical intellectual foundation that neither the Port Huron Statement nor any new left &quot;theoretician&quot; was able to offer.    That the movement no longer exists, though, is not just a reflection of a failure by students in Port Huron. It is a paean to the remarkable strength and flexibility of our &quot;living&quot; Constitution and the political system it set forth.    An example of the Constitution's ability to adapt itself was displayed by the passage in 1971 of the 25th Amendment, which lowered the voting age from 21 to 18. The amendment was the ultimate symbolic buyout of what was left of the new left movement. A way was provided to bring young rebels into the system by awarding them the vote.    To see how attractive our electoral system is, just look at Tom Hayden, the former James Madison of the new left. In 1970, he was living in a Berkeley commune and writing of the need for a &quot;new constitutional order&quot; now based on a &quot;socialistic economic system.&quot; His warning: &quot;All of Amerikka will be taken hostage in the vast jailbreak ahead.&quot;    But Tom soon met Jane and politics became his calling (in particular, becoming a California state assemblyman after spending the most money on a campaign in the history of that state's legislature). Of the '60s, Mr. Hayden now says, &quot;I'll never again believe that everything I do is right.&quot;    Twenty-five years ago, Mr. Hayden and a band of students launched a movement that gave the Constitution one of its greatest challenges, and the Constitution did not merely endure. It prevailed.    ---   Mr. Weiss is a law student at the University of Virginia. </TEXT></DOC>