<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871016-0167 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Bork: An Honest Debate</HL><DD> 10/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   I am a liberal and I am dismayed by Robert Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court. I am not dismayed because he is the nominee but because of the knee-jerk, prejudiced reaction that his nomination has provoked.    Although I find a number of results that Judge Bork has reached to be anathema, one is hard pressed to fault the rigor of his opinions. One may disagree with them, and I often do, but I am less concerned with his personal politics than I am with intellectual honesty and reasoned discourse. I haven't decided whether to favor Judge Bork's confirmation. What appalls me is the number who have decided without having given the question much thought. Either side is intellectually defensible -- something Judge Bork's opponents refuse to concede -- but proponents and opponents ought to be convinced after an open-minded consideration of evidence. I am astounded by the number of people who appear to oppose Judge Bork's confirmation on the grounds of his politics without taking the time to consider, much less understand, his criticisms of certain Supreme Court decisions. These critics are unable to understand how one can criticize an opinion and nevertheless respect it.    David Gordon   Attorney   Chicago   ---   Judge Bork is not radical, extreme, dangerous or threatening. He has spent most of his scholarly life developing his philosophy of judicial restraint. That philosophy simply doesn't allow a judge to read his personal views into the Constitution or statutory law.    Why then is he being attacked so viciously? Interest groups attack him because his judicial philosophy won't permit anyone's ideological agenda to be poured into an empty constitutional vessel. He has been branded not because he has an ideological agenda, but rather because his philosophy of judicial restraint deconstructs their goal to use the Constitution as a launching pad for the ideological agenda of the far left. Liberal McCarthyites are guilty of extremism, not Judge Bork.    Richard F. Duncan   Professor of Law   University of Nebraska   Lincoln   ---   Robert Bork, despite his intellect, doesn't appear to have the sensitivity and willingness to recognize the unique task of the Supreme Court in safeguarding the personal liberties of all Americans as have long been recognized under the Constitution. We cannot afford to gamble with those liberties on the possibility that he may or may not change his views.    Elliott D. Hartstein   Attorney   Chicago   ---   With the nomination of Judge Bork, Ronald Reagan is attemping to do exactly what he criticizes the current court of doing -- to achieve by judicial fiat what he has been unable to achieve through the legislative process. Mr. Reagan wishes to form a court that will implement his ideology over the coming decade. It's his prerogative to do so, just as it's the right of those who disagree with his ideology to vigorously oppose the nomination.    Gordon Baumbacher, M.D.   Greenbrae, Calif.   ---   It should come as no surprise that Sens. Biden, Kennedy, Metzenbaum and others have used lies and distortions to smear the good character of Judge Bork.    A basic tenet of modern liberalism is moral relativism. A traditional sense of ethical rightness and fair play doesn't bind the conduct of people who are true to extreme liberal beliefs. Lies are of no great consequence if there are no moral absolutes. Time-honored beliefs that undergird our form of government aren't to be respected; they are to be torn up and replaced with something &quot;better.&quot;    The war against Robert Bork isn't, in the ultimate sense, against President Reagan and his legacy. It is against the very foundations of our liberty. Ronald Reagan just happens to be the most prominent defender of those traditional ideals which liberal politicians find so repugnant.    Timothy P. Kersten   Wausau, Wis.   ---   Judge Bork's testimony at the Judiciary Committee hearings failed to stem the campaign against him because it failed to address the pragmatism of the American people. His judicial restraint is based upon a philosophy of the proper role of courts within our political system. The average American isn't concerned about whether the Supreme Court assumed powers not provided under the Constitution. Instead most people only care whether the result was right. So when the court finds new constitutional rights to strike down a silly Connecticut law about birth control, most people agree with the result and don't worry much about the usurpation of power by judges. They are upset about usurpation only when they don't like the result.    When Judge Bork questioned whether the Supreme Court articulated a persuasive legal theory justifying the overturning of the Connecticut law to the average person he seemed to be supporting a stupid law. His approach makes very good sense in the law-school classroom, but it doesn't win the hearts of the American people. It is hard to make an argument about judicial restraint ring with compassion.    Robert C. Nordvall   Gettysburg   ---   Some of us were lucky enough to be students at Yale Law School in the golden period when Robert Bork was but one of a number of extraordinary professors. We share the distinct recollection of the intelligence with which Prof. Bork laid out antitrust law, showing its inconsistencies, its hidden agendas and the extent to which it did or did not deal effectively with business and commerce. Prof. Bork was also then moving into constitutional law and bringing to it the same extraordinary intellectual energy and capability.    The Senate's review of his nomination reminds one more of a &quot;kangaroo&quot; court than the serious exercise of constitutional procedure.    Perhaps this is the real message of the Bork hearings: Did our Founding Fathers protect minorities and interest groups by having the very best people in government? Or are the freedoms and desires of so many conflicting minorities and special interests best harmonized and protected by mediocre members of the executive, legislature and judiciary? Benjamin Franklin observed that people tend to have the governments they deserve. Perhaps we deserve not to have a Justice Bork.    Alan Roberts McFarland Jr.   New York   ---   As an economist I can point out that the lawyers who testified against Judge Bork on his writings on antitrust law either had absolutely no understanding of the subtleties of his writings or they were motivated only by partisan ideology. If they were representative of the other lawyers who appeared to oppose Judge Bork, then I can only say that the legal profession should be ashamed of its collective self.    Dave M. O'Neill   New York   ---   The Bork controversy boils down to conscience vs. re-election worries. Many senators are thinking that a &quot;no&quot; vote will help their next election hopes. What they don't realize is that a &quot;no&quot; vote might well cost them their Senate seat.    Robert R. Bevans   Indianapolis   ---   The decision on the appointment of Judge Bork is a decision on the continuity of constitutional government -- that is, whether the Senate will be wise enough to confirm a judge who will attempt to interpret law according to constitutional guidelines, irrespective of his own philosophical views, or whether it will allow the Supreme Court to evolve into a nine-member, super-legislative branch of government.    Herb Summers   Galveston   ---   Judge Bork's likely defeat is a turning point in our constitutional history precisely because it is not a turning point. Never before has a Supreme Court nominee been defeated because of his general approach to the Constitution. This defeat consolidates the approach to the Constitution that has been followed for the past 50 years.    His confirmation would have allowed, if not encouraged, changes that some sitting justices are all too ready to make. Judge Bork's defeat makes clear that there is a fundamental consensus against radical constitutional change. Unless there's nothing to the idea that the court watches election returns, all justices for several decades will be affected by 1987's confirmation struggle.    However much one regrets the treatment given this fine, decent and deservedly eminent individual, however one views his caliber compared with that of the Judiciary Committee senators, we have had a referendum on the Constitution. Whatever one's view of the process and the event, it is historic.    Roy A. Schotland   Professor of Law   Georgetown University   Washington</TEXT></DOC>