<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Fleeing Factories: Shift of Auto Plants To Rural Areas Cuts Hiring of Minorities --- Some Critics Accuse Japanese Of Deliberately Shunning Employment of Blacks --- Claim of 'Economic Violence' </HL><AUTHOR> Jacob M. Schlesinger (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> AUT </IN><DATELINE> ANNA, Ohio  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's just a three-hour shot straight down Interstate 75 from Detroit to this tiny Midwestern town. But the two places are worlds apart.    Detroit's problems include murder, crack and decay. In Anna (population 1,150), the big problem is the alleys. &quot;Our alleys are pitiful. They're not paved; they're gravel,&quot; says Harold Shue, the octogenarian mayor.    An equally stark contrast occurred last December, when General Motors Corp. mothballed two 70-year-old factories in southwest Detroit while Honda Motor Co. cranked up a third shift at its spanking-new engine plant in Anna. The Detroit neighborhood is mostly black and Hispanic, like the GM workers. Anna is virtually all white, like the Honda workers.    It is a pattern cropping up all across industrial America. Optimists talk of &quot;reindustrialization&quot; by pointing to the spate of new plants, mainly Japanese, popping up in Rust Belt states such as Michigan, Ohio, Indiana and Illinois. But the new factories, unlike those they are supplanting, are mostly in small towns. So, rural whites are hitting the jobs jackpot, while urban minorities are hitting the streets.    In the 1960s, &quot;all blacks could get was bus boy, car wash, or a job in the auto factory,&quot; says Joe Wilson, the black president of the United Auto Workers local for one of the two shuttered Detroit plants. Now, he says bitterly, &quot;you can still get the bus boy, and you can still get the car wash. What's changed is you can't get anything in the auto industry.&quot;    Many blame that change on simple geography -- and an effort to move away from unions. But some critics also accuse the Japanese companies of deliberately avoiding blacks. Honda and the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission settled a big racial-discrimination case last month.    Whatever underlies the change, &quot;blacks are being affected in a profound fashion,&quot; says Robert E. Cole, a University of Michigan professor who will publish a study on the subject this spring. &quot;It's a major issue in terms of the future of American society and creating economic opportunities for all citizens.&quot;    That is especially so because the auto industry -- more than other manufacturing sectors -- has long been an important steppingstone for black Americans into the middle class. For decades, thousands of poor Southerners, including many blacks, headed North for low-skilled but high-paying auto jobs. &quot;Last night I went to sleep in Detroit City,&quot; Bobby Bare crooned in a 1963 song celebrating this migration, &quot;and I dreamed about the cotton fields back home.&quot;    By the mid-1960s, blacks held one of every four U.S. auto-production jobs, more than twice their share of the total work force. During the 1980 government hearings on whether to bail out Chrysler Corp., a critical fact swaying support was that the No. 3 auto maker alone provided 1% of black income in the U.S.    Thus, inevitably, the slump in manufacturing has especially damaged minority-group members. Between 1979 and 1984, blacks lost 27% of their manufacturing jobs, compared with a 19% drop for whites, a recent Michigan State University study says. GM's major assembly-plant closings over the past two years haven't hit just Detroit but also communities such as Flint and Pontiac, Mich., and St. Louis, all 40% black.    A few factories, however, are returning to urban areas. GM has built new high-tech plants outside of Pontiac and in the inner-Detroit city of Hamtramck. Mazda Motor Corp. has resuscitated a closed Ford Motor Co. plant in Flat Rock, Mich., near Detroit. The black share of Big Three hourly jobs has held constant for the past two decades, although the black total has dropped since 1979 to 140,000 from 180,000 as the industry has retrenched.    But the proportion of blacks may soon start to drop as well. GM's eight plants built since 1981 also include sites such as Bowling Green, Ky., and its high-profile new Saturn Corp. plant will open in Spring Hill, Tenn. Prof. Cole estimates that, on the average, blacks constitute 15% of the population in cities with Big Three plants that are either new or renovated, while in cities with older plants blacks make up 20% of the population. UAW-negotiated transfer agreements ensure that more blacks will work in the new plants than otherwise might, but the location of those plants may further dilute the minority work force.    And even if the percentage of black employment does hold constant at the Big Three, it will probably drop for the auto industry. That's because Japanese factories are providing a growing portion of those jobs, and they aren't setting up near major black population centers. Of the seven new, major Japanese assembly plants operating or planned for this country, none match the Big Three in actual or potential black work forces.    Nissan Motor Co. comes the closest, with blacks making up 16.8% of its production work force at Smyrna, Tenn. But Fuji Heavy Industry Ltd. and Isuzu Motors Ltd. will start making vehicles next year near Lafayette, Ind., which is 1.7% black. Mitsubishi Motors Corp., in a joint venture with Chrysler, soon will begin making cars in the twin cities of Bloomington, Ill., and Normal, Ill., which are 4% black.    Auto-assembly plants are highly visible, but the trend is far broader. Japanese auto-parts makers -- and their U.S. rivals -- are following their customers. Dana Corp. is shifting work away from its integrated manufacturing complexes in the North and doing some of it closer to the companies it supplies. It is making some Nissan truck drive-shafts, formerly assembled near Philadelphia, in Gordonsville, Tenn.    All this is reshaping the industrial landscape. The area of Detroit surrounding GM's now-silent Fleetwood and Clark Street factories that used to build Cadillacs is a stereotypical aging inner city. Anna, in contrast, is the last place one would expect an auto factory. Its downtown is a three-block stretch on Main Street whose only concession to the late 20th century is a tanning salon next to the barber shop.    For the Honda workers, the plant marks a new beginning. Jim Lemmon, a 25-year-old, had expected to spend his life on the family farm, but now he works on dies. He plans to stay at the Honda plant until he retires. &quot;Farmers aren't too called for now,&quot; he says. &quot;There's a lot more money here.&quot;    But the Detroit workers' future looks grim. &quot;A third of the workers in this plant were women, most of them single parents,&quot; Mr. Wilson says. While the UAW official himself will have a job until GM officially leaves the plants later this year, his 27-year-old son was laid off from the Fleetwood plant in June and still hasn't found a job. Mr. Wilson's wife was laid off from GM's Hamtramck plant a year ago because the cars built there weren't selling well. He says, &quot;The drug-selling lines in my neighborhood are getting longer. It used to be 10 guys, now it's 30. That's how they get their employment now.&quot;    Not surprisingly, the people in Detroit and Anna explain their fates differently. &quot;Economic violence&quot; and &quot;corporate greed&quot; are phrases tumbling off Mr. Wilson's tongue. &quot;They did it for selfish reasons. They did it for profit.&quot; A &quot;No Foreign Cars&quot; sign protects the local's parking lot. Since the plant-closing announcement, workers have sponsored rallies, news conferences and trips to Washington to draw attention to their plight.    But to John Hofmann, senior manager of the Honda plant, success is simply a matter of hard work. &quot;We don't have that problem {plant closings} at Honda, and the reason is the people here care about what they're doing,&quot; he says.    Auto makers say they aren't running away from blacks. Instead, they cite the advantages of rural locations. A big one is plentiful, and relatively cheap, land suitable for the sprawling, single-story factories such as Honda's yellow aluminum-sided complex, which is next to a large field with a white farmhouse. Those are deemed far more efficient than the multistory structures that urban sites often require. Besides, Honda says it liked its site's proximity to a state automotive research and development center.    &quot;We wanted easy access to potential suppliers, easy access to markets, available land and a supportive business climate,&quot; says H.J. &quot;Bucky&quot; Kahl, Nissan's director of human resources in Smyrna. He states flatly that the region's racial composition didn't play any role in site selection. He adds that the company has an active affirmative-action program, which includes about half-a-dozen summer internships for minority-group college students.    Another important factor in choosing a site seems to be avoiding organized labor. &quot;Most Japanese companies are looking for areas of the state that are nonunion,&quot; says Bob Mason, Indiana's industrial-development specialist. Although most Japanese companies deny that this is an explicit factor, many clearly prefer a nonunion shop. Honda successfully beat back a UAW organizing bid, and Nissan is fighting to keep the union out. Those manufacturers pay roughly the same wages that Big Three factories do, but they apparently prefer the free rein to manage without dealing with a U.S. union.    Besides economic factors, other ones -- including a lack of social consciousness at the least -- may be at work. &quot;The Japanese come in without that cultural background of minority hiring,&quot; says Michael J. Kane, who heads the fledgling U.S.-Japan International Management Institute at the University of Kentucky near Toyota Motor Corp.'s new Georgetown plant. &quot;They're kind of economic animals, and we tend to be more social animals. They say a fact is a fact, and traditionally minorities have a low level of education.&quot;    Honda, the government alleged, was a case in point. Although many Japanese auto makers note their affirmative-action programs, Honda's hiring policies, in effect, screened out blacks. From the time it started hiring in 1979 (for its assembly complex in Marysville, Ohio, which began operations six years before the Anna engine plant), Honda had a strict rule that workers must live within 20 miles of the plant (later expanded to 30 miles).    &quot;There's a fair amount of manufacturing in this area, and in the early 1980s many plants were either closing or laying off,&quot; Roger Lambert, a Honda spokesman, says. &quot;The local residents said they hoped we'd hire from around here. . . . We were committed to deepening ties with the local community.&quot;    But the effect also was to exclude Columbus, which is 35 miles to the southeast and has the region's largest black population. The Urban League got seven complaints from black Columbus residents, most of whom worked at a nearby Rockwell International Corp. plant that was laying workers off after completing part of a B-1 bomber contract. &quot;They even committed to move,&quot; says Samuel Gresham, the president of the civil-rights group's Columbus chapter. &quot;Honda said move first. Who's going to take a chance like that?&quot;    Last month, in its settlement with the EEOC, Honda agreed to give $6 million in back pay to 370 black and female employees that the government said should have been hired sooner. The company, which recently expanded its hiring area again to include Columbus, also agreed to change its promotion practices and recruit minorities more actively.    Honda, which had argued that its 2.8% black work force merely reflected the portion of its applicants who were black, says it is unfair to generalize from that complaint about the social consciousness of the Japanese. Mr. Lambert says all those awarded damages were put on the payroll before the settlement, some as long as two years before. He argues that the auto maker had planned most of the actions outlined in the settlement anyway. Honda didn't admit any wrongdoing in the settlement, which it says it agreed to in order to avoid a lengthy court fight.    Mr. Lambert also notes tougher settlements by other U.S. institutions, including auto makers. In the early 1980s, Ford reached a $23 million EEOC settlement and GM a $44.5 million settlement, both for discrimination against women and minorities.    Yet, as more Japanese companies move into the U.S., some black leaders keep worrying about the possibility of a subtle, intentional racism. Blacks regularly cite the 1986 statement by then-Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone that Japan's racial homogeneity made it a more &quot;intelligent society&quot; than the U.S., &quot;where there are blacks, Mexicans and Puerto Ricans and the level is still quite low.&quot;    &quot;If you look at the trend,&quot; says Porter G. Peeples, who heads the Lexington, Ky., Urban League, &quot;the foreign car manufacturers are coming to rural areas here in the South.&quot; He praises Toyota's specific efforts to hire minorities in his area but adds that &quot;one could easily assume under that trend that {the Japanese} are trying to avoid large numbers of black folks.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>