<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Concerns Forced Revamping in '86Of Iran Initiative, Ex-CIA Counsel Says---By David Rogers and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Central Intelligence Agency's former chief counsel described legal analyses within the Reagan administration that indicated its early Iran arms initiative conflicted with the Arms Export Control Act.    Stanley Sporkin testified before the Iran-Contra congressional committees that the legal concerns forced a revamping of the program in January 1986. The issue is important to House and Senate panels focusing on efforts in the White House and CIA to disguise U.S. involvement in the first arms shipments to Tehran in 1985.    These sales involved Israeli stocks of U.S. weapons, and the committees released a summary of testimony by CIA officials in Portugal detailing the agency's role in a November 1985 shipment; the officials weren't identified. Mr. Sporkin, now a federal judge, described a belated effort to seek a presidential ratification of the agency's involvement, but questions remain whether White House officials ever had Mr. Reagan sign the document.    Yesterday's testimony came as the House and Senate committees said that they are scheduled to begin closed-door questioning of Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North next Wednesday, and that the former White House aide will begin his public testimony July 7. The joint statement by the panels follows a week of legal maneuvering over the conditions for Col. North's appearance, and concessions were made rather than risk prolonged contempt-of-Congress proceedings if Col. North failed to testify.    A letter signed by the committees' counsels and released last night indicates investigators will sharply confine their closed-door questioning of Col. North. The examination, which lawmakers expect to be completed in one day, will include testimony under oath and focus on President Reagan's knowledge of the Iran-Contra operation, specifically the diversion of proceeds to insurgents in Nicaragua. Brendan Sullivan, Col. North's attorney, remained unavailable for comment yesterday.    The deadline for a subpoena requiring the Marine officer to turn over documents, including personal notebooks of his activities, will be postponed until next Tuesday, the day before the closed-door session. The committees indicated they intend to complete the White House aide's testimony within four days, and no plans to recall Col. North for testimony later are envisioned.    Mr. Sporkin, a longtime veteran of the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division before going to the CIA in 1981, was feisty, and sometimes earthy, in his exchanges with committee members. A friend of the late CIA Director William Casey, he offered glimpses of Mr. Casey's style. But the main focus for investigators was the legal background of the agency's role in the Iran initiative, carried out without notifying Congress.    Mr. Sporkin, who left the counsel's office in February 1986, was intimately involved in the drafting of two relevant findings in the preceding months. The first of these was hastily prepared in November 1985 to ratify the CIA's role after the agency had been pressed into involvement in a shipment of 18 Hawk surface-to-air missiles to Tehran around Nov. 24.    Though administration officials later prepared testimony for Congress portraying the shipment as oil-drilling equipment, Mr. Sporkin said he was informed missiles had been shipped when he was briefed on the matter Nov. 25.    It was only then that the CIA began drafting a finding for Mr. Reagan's signature. Mr. Sporkin described it as a defensive process to ensure the president supported what the agency had done. &quot;I wanted to nail it home so that the president would say, 'Yes, I confirm that this was authorized activity.'&quot;    The counsel never learned if Mr. Reagan signed the finding, and the effort in the administration a year later to cover up the U.S. involvement suggests the move may never have been formally approved. In contrast to later statements of White House policy, the November finding bluntly portrayed the operation as an arms-for-hostage swap. This directness may have made the directive unwelcome, and a new authorization drafted only weeks later made no reference to the November finding or even the hostages.    Mr. Sporkin said it was only at his and Mr. Casey's insistence that the hostage issue was finally mentioned in the January finding signed by Mr. Reagan. That finding spoke more generally of an effort to improve relations with Iran, and a cover letter prepared by the National Security Council staff is written as if the prior sales through Israel never took place.    The January drafting process was accompanied by legal analyses challenging the prior strategy of replenishing Israeli stocks after Jerusalem shipped U.S. weapons to Tehran. The policy raised potential violations of the arms-export law both in terms of the replenishment of Israeli stocks and requirements to notify Congress. Mr. Sporkin said he had argued that U.S. stocks be used directly.    After the revamping, the program used the CIA to buy weapons from the Defense Department and then sell the arms to a network controlled by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord.    Meanwhile, the committees released information that raised questions about the sworn testimony given behind closed doors by Duane &quot;Dewey&quot; Clarridge, head of the CIA's counter-terrorism section. Mr. Clarridge's statement that he wasn't aware of planned Hawk missiles shipments in November 1985 was contradicted by the testimony of other government employees, including the CIA officers in Portugal. Further, two cables dealing with the shipments appeared to be missing from Mr. Clarridge's files, according to the committees.    The panels said the CIA station chief in Lisbon, Portugal, testified that Gen. Secord told him on Nov. 23, 1985, that a flight from Portugal to Iran would contain Hawk missiles, and that the weapons were being shipped to secure the release of American hostages. The station chief testified that he cabled this information to Mr. Clarridge. In addition, the committees said, another CIA employee recalled sending a cable containing information about missiles to CIA headquarters in Langley, Va.    But Mr. Clarridge testified that he never saw the cable from the station chief, and that he believed any shipments to Iran contained oil-drilling equipment. The committees said they were told by the CIA that such a cable would be located only in Mr. Clarridge's files, and that no copies were maintained elsewhere at headquarters. &quot;This cable was not there and the CIA has not been able to locate any copies of this cable,&quot; Neil Eggleston, deputy chief counsel for the House committee, said yesterday.    Separately, the federal district court judge considering Col. North's constitutional challenge to independent counsel Lawrence Walsh's investigation ordered that all future filings and hearings in the case will be public &quot;unless specified otherwise.&quot; Mr. Walsh previously told the court such a move wouldn't impede his grand jury investigation, while attorneys for Col. North urged that records and proceedings remain secret. </TEXT></DOC>