<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880707-0004 </DOCNO><HL> GAF Is Indicted in Alleged Scheme To Manipulate Carbide Stock in '86 --- Chemical Maker Is the First Industrial Firm Charged In Insider-Trading Cases </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GAF JEFG </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> JUS SEC </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In a powerful message to Wall Street that it intends to criminally prosecute securities-law violations, the federal government obtained a 10-count indictment charging GAF Corp. and one of its top officials, James T. Sherwin, with stock manipulation, securities fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy and other crimes in an alleged scheme to boost the price of Union Carbide Corp. stock.    GAF, a Wayne, N.J., chemical and building products concern whose 1985 hostile raid on giant Carbide made it a symbol of the takeover era, is the first industrial corporation to be charged in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal.    It also is likely to be the first contested trial in the scandal after an early string of guilty pleas followed the fall of former takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky. GAF reacted with indignation, saying it was being prosecuted for alleged offenses it considered, at most, to be minor, civil matters. It vowed to vigorously contest the charges.    The government alleges that GAF carried out its scheme through the brokerage firm of Jefferies andamp; Co. It was Jefferies's former chairman, Boyd L. Jefferies, who first told prosecutors about the alleged scheme.    In a statement, GAF expressed &quot;its deep disappointment in the government's decision to bring these unprecedented charges,&quot; and said both the company and Mr. Sherwin, GAF's vice chairman and chief administrative officer, &quot;are confident of complete vindication.&quot; Stuart Baskin, a partner at Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kramer andamp; Frankel, which is representing GAF, also characterized the charges as unprecedented. He contended that the alleged crimes have &quot;no victim, injury, motive, payment of money, or personal or corporate gain.&quot; Stephen Kaufman, Mr. Sherwin's lawyer, declined to comment beyond the GAF statement.    If convicted on all counts, GAF and Mr. Sherwin face severe penalties. Mr. Sherwin, 54 years old, could be sentenced to a maximum of 50 years in prison and fined $2.5 million; GAF faces a total of $15 million in fines. GAF also faces the possibility of related civil suits, including action by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The company's proposed $1.27 billion leveraged buy-out also appears certain to be clouded by the allegations and their consequences.    The severity of the sanctions makes clear what criminal defense lawyers have been fearing for months: For the first time since the passage of the securities laws in 1934, the government will seek to bring the full force of criminal provisions of those laws to bear against those implicated in the insider-trading scandal. For others under investigation for possible securities crimes, including Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Michael Milken, its head of junk bonds; Singer Co. Chairman Paul Bilzerian; and arbitrager John A. Mulheren Jr., the implications could be ominous.    The indictment charges GAF and Mr. Sherwin with a scheme to manipulate the price of Carbide stock in October 1986, just as GAF was preparing to sell a large block of the stock it acquired prior to its 1985 takeover bid. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the U.S. attorney for Manhattan, rejected any suggestion that criminal charges against GAF and Mr. Sherwin were unwarranted. &quot;Manipulation has been a crime for over 50 years, and there have been numerous prosecutions for manipulation,&quot; Mr. Giuliani said in an interview.    People close to GAF have said that GAF's chairman, Samuel J. Heyman, wasn't involved in the alleged manipulation scheme. Others familiar with the case said there hasn't been any indication that Mr. Heyman was under grand jury investigation. Mr. Heyman was a former federal prosecutor before launching his successful 1983 proxy fight for control of GAF.    Since the government's criminal investigation of GAF was first reported in this newspaper, some people familiar with GAF and others on Wall Street have expressed skepticism that Mr. Sherwin would have masterminded a criminal stock manipulation scheme, or that he would have taken such a step without telling Mr. Heyman.    In its indictment, the government identified two alleged motives for GAF: to create the impression that Carbide stock &quot;was increasing in value&quot; and to &quot;maximize the gain&quot; GAF would realize from its sale of Carbide stock. In October 1986, GAF still held about 10% of Carbide's stock. It had just ended its year-long hostilities with its former takeover target by signing an agreement not to buy any more Carbide stock, and it would shortly sell a large block of Carbide shares through Salomon Brothers. Both Carbide and Salomon declined to comment.    According to the indictment, Mr. Sherwin asked two unnamed Jefferies employees in October 1986 &quot;to make the price of Union Carbide common stock close at or above a specified price per share for a number of days&quot; and agreed to reimburse Jefferies for any losses it incurred on stock it bought to boost Carbide's price. As a result, Jefferies bought a total of 190,000 Carbide shares near the close of trading on Oct. 29 and Oct 30, 1986, and the stock price &quot;increased,&quot; the government alleged. People familiar with the case say Mr. Jefferies was the key participant in the negotiations with Mr. Sherwin.    Jefferies sold its stock several days later, incurring a loss, and Mr. Sherwin agreed to reimburse Jefferies $40,000, the indictment alleges. To conceal the scheme, Mr. Sherwin and his conspirators at Jefferies agreed that a false invoice for &quot;investment banking advisory services&quot; would be provided, the indictment claims. Mr. Sherwin approved the payment on Nov. 7, but never sent it.    The government noted that The Wall Street Journal reported on Nov. 17 that Mr. Jefferies had been named in government subpoenas related to the Boesky scandal. Mr. Sherwin subsequently told his secretary to void the check, the indictment alleges. GAF sold five million Carbide shares for about $115 million on Nov. 10.    The indictment doesn't address how the alleged manipulation affected the ultimate sale of the Carbide block by GAF. Carl H. Loewenson Jr., the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the case, declined to comment beyond the contents of the indictment. Others familiar with the case, however, noted that the crime of manipulation is complete once the price is affected with the purpose of inducing others to purchase the stock, and that the government doesn't need to demonstrate there was any direct impact on the ultimate sale.    Still, they said that the purchases by Jefferies may have sent a message to the market that helped boost Carbide's stock in ensuing trading sessions. Carbide's stock closed at $22 on Oct. 29 and $22.375 on Oct. 30, holding above what some traders thought was an important support level of $22. GAF ultimately sold the five million shares for $23.125 a share.    The GAF charges are the second alleged market manipulation scheme to emerge from the cooperation of Mr. Jefferies, who pleaded guilty to two felonies and agreed to cooperate after being implicated by Mr. Boesky. As reported, arbitrager Salim B. Lewis was implicated by Mr. Jefferies in a scheme to manipulate the price of an offering of Fireman's Fund stock. No charges have been filed against him, and Mr. Lewis has denied any wrongdoing. Peter Morrison, the attorney for Mr. Jefferies, declined to comment yesterday.    The indictment makes no mention of any individuals allegedly involved in the scheme other than Mr. Sherwin and the two Jefferies employees, although Mr. Giuliani told a news conference that the government's investigation is continuing.    People familiar with the case said the decision by Mr. Giuliani's office to go forward with the GAF case now reflects two considerations: prosecutors believe the case to be a strong one, with the testimony by cooperating witnesses from Jefferies corroborated by written records, and the case won't expose Mr. Boesky, who is likely to be the government's star witness in numerous future trials, to cross-examination. They said Mr. Boesky won't be a witness in the GAF case.    Wendeen H. Eolis, chairman of W.H. Eolis International Inc., a consulting firm that has advised GAF, and a friend of Mr. Sherwin's, said that she was &quot;stunned&quot; by the charges. &quot;It is unimaginable based on my personal experience that Jim Sherwin could have been knowledgeably involved in any wrongdoing,&quot; she said.    Besides his role at GAF, Mr. Sherwin is an internationally recognized chess master. In 1957 he defeated eccentric genius Bobby Fischer, according to Chess Life magazine, and Mr. Fischer once described a 1958 victory over Mr. Sherwin as one of the most memorable matches he ever played. Mr. Sherwin attained the rank of international master in 1958. Since then he has served as president of the American Chess Foundation and is a frequent commentator on public television's chess matches.    An SEC spokeswoman wouldn't comment on the status of the proposed disclosure documents for GAF's leveraged buy-out, which are awaiting SEC approval. People familiar with the prospectus have said it contains a disclosure of the goverment's criminal investigation; that provision would presumably have to be updated to reflect the grand jury's indictments. Wall Street arbitragers investing in GAF already have expressed concern about the possibility of delays resulting from the investigation.    GAF has said repeatedly that the government's allegations would have no effect on the buy-out, but its stock price dropped following disclosure of the investigation, and fell again yesterday amid concern that the buy-out would be delayed or derailed. GAF closed at $45, down $1.375, in composite New York Stock Exchange trading.    GAF said that Mr. Sherwin remains chief administrative officer of the company -- where he earned about $430,000 last year -- and that the board has given him its full backing. GAF is paying Mr. Sherwin's legal fees. Still, some investors were worried that banks financing the buy-out might be concerned that Mr. Sherwin will have to resign if convicted, or that the scandal might spread to other key GAF officials. Most of the money for the buy-out is being provided by a syndicate of banks led by Chase Manhattan Bank and by high-yield junk bonds to be underwritten by Drexel and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    The SEC spokeswoman also declined to comment on the possibility of related SEC civil charges. The SEC could seek disgorgement of GAF's profits as well as penalties and injunctive relief.    In Los Angeles, a spokesman for Jefferies andamp; Co. said that &quot;these matters were fully settled in the company's settlement with the government in March 1987,&quot; which means that the securities firm won't face any charges as a result of the alleged stock manipulation scheme. </TEXT></DOC>