<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870319-0105 </DOCNO><HL> The Myth of the New Soviet Man---By S. Enders Wimbush</HL><DD> 03/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   The recent nationalist riots by Kazakhs in the Soviet city of Alma-Ata, Kazakhstan, are a serious portent for Soviet planners who envisage unimpeded Russian rule in the Soviet empire into the indefinite future. And they are an important reminder to outside analysts who have failed to recognize that minority nationalism remains a prominent threat to the empire's long-term survival and short-term stability.    We seldom receive direct evidence of nationalist unrest inside the U.S.S.R. The Russians have succeeded in controlling nationalist feelings and resentment in many parts of the Soviet state through the use of elaborate police, military and intelligence apparatuses. Also, the movement of information from the empire's non-Russian periphery often faces the added disadvantage of language barriers, distance and the lack of interest on the part of both the Moscow intelligentsia, who are the usual channel for other kinds of dissidence, and public opinion beyond Soviet borders.    With regard to Alma-Ata, it is tempting to conclude that the Soviet regime's own apparent candor on the matter is further evidence of Mikhail Gorbachev's vaunted glasnost campaign. But the Soviet reporting was an effort to structure unstoppable news to the Soviets' best advantage. The hundreds of foreigners in Alma-Ata would have rapidly exported the story in any case, putting their own interpretations on the tumultuous events.    December's riots in Alma-Ata were not the first. In 1980, Kazakhs rioted when Soviet officials attempted quietly to bury Kazakh soldiers who had been killed in Afghanistan in Soviet military, rather than Moslem, cemeteries. The war in Afghanistan, in fact, has prompted a number of minority protests -- from the Baltic states and Transcaucasia to Central Asia. There were several mutinies by Soviet Moslem soldiers inside Afghanistan in 1981 and 1985 and at least one protest in the U.S.S.R. by Moslems in Astrakhan in 1985.    The recent Alma-Ata riots demand our close attention. First, while estimates of the number of rioters vary greatly, from 10,000 to several hundred thousand, they are significant by any standard, and in the Soviet context they are truly extraordinary. So are the number of casualties -- as many as 40 killed, according to unofficial sources -- including policemen, militia and Communist Party officials. (Soviet officials admit to only two deaths.)    And while early reports from Soviet sources insisted that the rioters were mostly young people and other impressionable elements, reports from eyewitnesses now indicate that practically every stratum of Kazakh society was represented. Soviet officials have passed severe sentences on a number of young university faculty members, including women, and embarked on pre-emptive purges of social-science faculties in nearby republics. Thus they have admitted that the rioters were not simply, or even primarily, thugs or &quot;parasites&quot; and that the movement could spread.    Second, the apparent cause of the riots -- the dismissal of Kazakhstan Communist Party First Secretary Dinmukhamed Kunaev, himself a Kazakh, and his replacement by Gennadi Kolbin, a Russian crony of Mr. Gorbachev -- is both revealing and suggestive. At base it shows the substantial groundswell of anti-Russian feeling that lies just below the surface among the non-Russian natives.    The conduct of the riots suggests planning and coordination. Mr. Kunaev's dismissal had been rumored for weeks; when it was announced, the streets suddenly came alive. The Soviets' own reporting claims that the riots were &quot;not spontaneous&quot; and that the leadership of the riots was well organized.    Only the most naive optimist will conclude that Mr. Kunaev's replacement by a Russian is the sole cause of the disturbances. They clearly result from much deeper and longstanding hostility. Its roots can be traced to the Russians' massacre of Kazakhs in 1916, when Central Asian Moslems rioted after being ordered to report for conscription to the czar's imperial service; to the forced settlement of the nomadic Kazakhs on Stalin's orders in the 1930s, which cost the Kazakhs one-third of their total population, or one million lives; to Moscow's steady inundation of Kazakhstan with Russians, until the local Kazakhs now form a minority within their own region; and to the recent heavy attacks in the republic against Islam, to which most Kazakhs adhere.    One need not have the ability to predict events like the Alma-Ata riots to appreciate the political sensitivity of replacing the Kazakh Kunaev with Kolbin the Russian. Unless we conclude that Mr. Gorbachev intended gratuitous offense to the Kazakh people by breaking one of the seldom-violated principles of cadre appointments -- i.e., a member of the nominal nationality of a republic becomes first secretary -- then we must conclude that he blundered.    Will more glasnost help Mr. Gorbachev remedy his problems in Central Asia, as several commentators have suggested? Glasnost is an unlikely palliative for the grievances of the U.S.S.R.'s many national minorities. Given a fair chance, many would be certain to describe Russian-minority relations openly in terms that the Kremlin cannot tolerate, such as &quot;colonialism,&quot; &quot;Russian chauvinism,&quot; or racism, which is precisely why glasnost is unlikely to be extended in any significant way to the non-Russian borderlands.    Alma-Ata should sound the final death knell in the U.S.S.R. and abroad for the New Soviet Man fantasy of the official Soviet liturgy. In the face of massive Soviet efforts over many decades to convince the rioters' grandparents and parents of the wisdom of sublimating their national feelings to an overarching &quot;Soviet patriotism,&quot; their children today by choice remain more Kazakh than &quot;Soviet.&quot;    This fact should caution against accepting uncritically the version of Soviet reality of many Western political scientists and economists, who insist that Soviet political and economic progress has given birth to a new generation of upwardly mobile non-Russians who have an inviolable stake in the system, and who can therefore be counted on to defend it. What we now know beyond doubt is that a large number of Kazakh young people and professionals with good prospects and positions were prepared to sacrifice them to remain Kazakh above all else. At some point the magnetic attraction of economic betterment becomes meaningless.    This isn't so for a far more ominous attraction, however. Several Western accounts of the Alma-Ata riots noted that some demonstrators were carrying signs that read &quot;We want to join China,&quot; or words to that effect. Post-riot Soviet reports referred to some of the rioters' &quot;obnoxious banners.&quot; Assuming that these banners reflect the political feelings of some, if not many, Kazakhs, they represent an important reversal of a crucial regional reality. China has a large Kazakh population of its own, which it has historically oppressed. Over the past 50 years, there have been many Kazakh migrations from China to the Soviet empire. However, in the early 1980s China undertook important and far-reaching changes with a view toward stabilizing a nagging borderland vulnerability that the Soviets have conscientiously exploited for decades.    China still has some distance to go before its Kazakhs will be fully content. But if the banners are representative, China has already moved far enough to reverse the poles of attraction.    The Alma-Ata riots will be seen throughout the Soviet Union as &quot;Moslem riots,&quot; even though Kazakh nationalism is in many ways different from nationalism among other Soviet Moslems in that it has always been strongly secular in character. We simply cannot know at this stage if the common bond of Islam among the Kazakhs or the Islamic stimuli from Iran and Afghanistan played an important role in the direction or severity of the riots.    We do know that Soviet leaders have recently expressed considerable apprehension about the politicization of Islam in Central Asia. They are undoubtedly concerned that the Kazakhs' example will spread to other parts of Central Asia and that it will acquire in transit a more pronounced Islamic coloring. The distance between Kazakh nationalism and &quot;Moslem nationalism&quot; is indeed short and could be easily bridged.    Mr. Gorbachev has already signaled that he is aware of this possibility. For example, his cadre is responsible for orchestrating the current vehement anti-Islamic campaign in the borderlands, the most strident campaign of its kind since the Khrushchev days. Mr. Gorbachev himself, as recently as November, complained in Tashkent about the rising specter of unchecked religious adherence, even among the party faithful, and demanded tough measures to deal with it. On the subjects of national feeling and religion, he has provided no evidence to support his image in the West as a liberal pragmatist.    A sizable cross-section of Kazakhs have already spoken, glasnost or no glasnost. Even if Mr. Gorbachev cracks down hard and ruthlessly on the perpetrators of the Kazakh riots, as he has already begun to do, there is every likelihood that other Soviet minorities, non-Moslems as well as Moslems, will raise their own demands in their own ways and in their own time.    American strategist Albert Wohlstetter certainly comes close to the mark when he describes the U.S.S.R. and its satellites as having &quot;the brittle stability of an explosive mixture in a strong container capped under high pressure.&quot;    ---   Mr. Wimbush is director of the Society for Central Asian Studies in Oxford, England. This article is adapted from one in a coming issue of Encounter magazine. </TEXT></DOC>