<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870213-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BUSH SAID he had &quot;expressed reservations&quot; about U.S. arms sales to Iran.    The vice president, who minimized his own role in the arms transactions, said he is &quot;deeply troubled&quot; by evidence that the U.S. may have traded arms for hostages in violation of its own policy. Bush conceded that the controversy has eroded support for his 1988 GOP presidential nomination. Separately, intelligence sources said the network of ex-military officers involved in the Iran-Contra affair has played a role in covert operations beyond shipping arms to Nicaraguan rebels.    Reagan's Iran-Contra panel has acquired a number of recordings that may further establish a link between the NSC and private Contra support groups.    ---   REAGAN WILL PROPOSE a program for major health-care costs.    The president, in a statement, backed a program to help pay the costs of care for catastrophic illnesses by expanding Medicare. The plan, which would affect about 30 million elderly Americans, is nearly identical to one suggested by HHS Secretary Bowen. Under the plan, Medicare's monthly premium for optional medical insurance would rise $4.92 from the current $17.90 and cover acute-care expenses that exceed $2,000 annually.    The announcement ends almost three months of internal administration debate in which some of Reagan's closest advisers argued against Bowen's plan.    ---   A Pentagon task force recommended that U.S. semiconductor makers be allowed to form a consortium to receive $200 million a year from the Defense Department to develop techniques for making advanced computer chips. The panel said such funds are needed to reverse a decline in the U.S. semiconductor industry.    ---   Soviet security agents clashed with protesters and used two snowplows to drive them from a Moscow street during the fourth day of rallies seeking the release of a Jewish activist. Police briefly detained 15 people, including a Western reporter.    ---   Adm. Crowe said it is unclear whether an arms-control interpretation backed by Defense Secretary Weinberger is legally correct. The interpretation, which would broaden U.S. ability to test space weapons under the 1972 ABM treaty, involves &quot;very complex&quot; legal questions, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs said.    ---   Shultz said that ending aid to Nicaraguan rebels could spark a &quot;strategic crisis&quot; between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. The secretary of state, in a speech to the American Bar Association, dismissed the IranContra scandal as a &quot;domestic concern,&quot; and said the U.S. can't permit Nicaragua to strengthen a &quot;Soviet stronghold.&quot;    ---   Justice Department officials said they have convened a federal grand jury to investigate about $350 million of New York City real estate that deposed Philippine leader Marcos and his family are suspected of controlling. The Manhattan grand jury is the third such panel trying to unravel Marcos's wealth.    Communist rebels responded to a new Philippine military offensive by attacking a police station in the city of Davao and raiding a village on the island of Panay. At least four civilians were killed and about 13 others wounded in the violence.    ---   A House panel's chairman estimated that improvements and repairs on B-1 bombers may cost as much as $3 billion. The projection by Les Aspin of the Armed Services Committee is well above cost estimates by the Air Force, which is seeking an additional $600 million over the next two years for the bomber.    ---   The Air Force launched a Titan 3B rocket late Wednesday from Vandenburg Air Force Base in California. The launch was the first involving any type of Titan booster since the Pentagon grounded the fleet last April following two explosions. The rocket was carrying a classified payload that sources indicated may have been a spy satellite.    ---   The Israeli government said reports of secret negotiations to exchange Arab prisoners in Israel for foreign hostages in Lebanon were &quot;completely baseless.&quot; In West Beirut, gunmen abducted a prominent Christian politician who had been an adviser to Lebanese President Gemayel.    Moslem fundamentalists seized, beat and later released members of a 25-man Syrian-Lebanese patrol in Beirut after the patrol killed one of their comrades.    ---   A South African court ordered the release of a detainee because the state hadn't provided sufficient grounds to justify the arrest, the first time a court had rejected the state's reasons for holding a detainee. Meanwhile, Pretoria reported that more than 13,000 people had been detained under emergency rules imposed last June.    ---   Federal health officials found that women who take birth-control pills for at least a year gain protection against a common type of uterine cancer. The conclusion by researchers at the Centers for Disease Control complements earlier reports that the pill provides protection against ovarian cancer and doesn't cause breast cancer.    ---   Iraq said its jets bombed a command center in a Tehran suburb and 11 other Iranian cities. Casualty figures weren't reported. Iran said it retaliated by firing a missile into the Iraqi port city of Basra.    ---   Navy Secretary Lehman plans to resign later this year and return to the private sector, the Pentagon said. Lehman, who assumed the top Navy post in 1981 and is considered the architect of the Reagan administration's planned 600-ship fleet, didn't say when he would step down.    ---   Sikh militants robbed about $4.4 million from a bank in Punjab state, the most money ever stolen from a bank in India, police said. Bank robberies have been a major means of financing an often-violent Sikh campaign for a separate state. </TEXT></DOC>