<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881108-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Law: Justices to Decide if Defendants In Drug Cases Can Retain Funds </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> DJ TGT EQT GM MTC LABOR </CO><IN> REL CON PUB ENV UTI PET </IN><G> SUP EPA JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether defendants in drug and racketeering cases, whose tainted money and property may be seized if they are convicted, must be allowed to retain funds to hire lawyers.    The high court will hear two appeals presenting conflicting views of what is allowed by federal law and the Constitution's Sixth Amendment right to a lawyer.    The issue is being watched closely by criminal defense lawyers, who have complained strongly that criminal forfeiture laws interfere with their work, and by federal and local prosecutors who view seizure of assets as a powerful weapon against drug dealing and other criminal conspiracies.    Two federal laws, one aimed at fighting illegal drug trafficking, and the other more broadly aimed at combating ongoing criminal activities, include provisions allowing federal officials, after a conviction, to seize assets derived from the illegal activities.    A variety of legal and constitutional questions have arisen about whether federal officials may freeze an accused person's tainted assets after an indictment but before a conviction, including funds that would be used to hire a lawyer. Questions have also arisen about whether tainted funds already used to pay a lawyer may be seized by federal officials after a conviction.    In one appeal that the high court agreed to hear, a federal appeals court in New York ruled that a defendant who hasn't been convicted must be allowed to pay legitimate legal fees out of frozen assets. The New York court also ruled that once those funds are paid to a lawyer, they aren't subject to forfeiture. (U.S. vs. Monsanto)   In the other case, the high court agreed to review the ruling by a federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., that federal prosecutors may seize funds intended to be used to pay lawyers' fees. The appeals court said the seizure doesn't violate the Sixth Amendment, because a defendant who can't afford a lawyer may still have a court-appointed attorney. (Caplin andamp; Drysdale vs. U.S.)    The Justice Department appealed the New York court's ruling to the Supreme Court. The other case was appealed by a Washington law firm, Caplin andamp; Drysdale, which is trying to collect fees owed by a client who pleaded guilty to tax evasion and running a drug ring.    Copyright Claim   The justices agreed to decide who owns a copyright when a work of art is commissioned by a patron to be produced by an artist who isn't technically an employee of the patron.    Federal law says that the copyright for a &quot;work made for hire&quot; belongs to the employer or patron. The law defines a work for hire, in part, as one produced by an employee. Federal appeals courts have reached disparate conclusions about whether a commissioned artist is legally an employee who loses the copyright to the employer.    The high court will review the ruling of a federal appeals court in Washington, D.C., in a copyright dispute between a Baltimore artist and the homeless rights organization, Community for Creative Non-Violence. The organization commissioned a statue that depicts a homeless family with their belongings in a shopping cart. The appeals court rejected the group's argument that it owns the copyright because the artist was an employee creating a work for hire. (Community for Creative Non-Violence vs. Reid)   Housing Discrimination   The justices ruled 6-3, without hearing argument, that the town of Huntington, N.Y., practiced racial discrimination in housing by restricting the private construction of low-income, multifamily rental units to an urban-renewal area occupied primarily by minorities. In an unsigned opinion, the justices affirmed a ruling by a federal appeals court in New York rejecting the defense by Huntington officials that they wanted to encourage investment in the urban-renewal area. (Town of Huntington vs. NAACP)   Three justices, Byron White, Thurgood Marshall and John Stevens, voted to set the case for arguments instead of ruling summarily.    Starrett City   The high court left intact a decision by a federal appeals court in New York striking down the use of racial goals to preserve integration at Starrett City, the 17,000-resident, publicly assisted housing development in Brooklyn, N.Y. The percentage goals often force blacks to wait longer for an apartment than whites, since there are more black applicants and the goals are intended to maintain the existing racial makeup of the 46-building complex. (Starrett City Associates vs. U.S.)    Court Gag Order   The justices refused to hear an appeal by Dow Jones andamp; Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, and other news organizations, objecting to a judge's order that prevented participants in the corruption trial of former Rep. Mario Biaggi from talking to the news media. Mr. Biaggi and other defendants were convicted last August of extorting money from Wedtech Corp. A federal appeals court in New York upheld the gag order. (Dow Jones andamp; Co. vs. Simon)   Tenneco Appeal   The high court let stand a court award against a Tenneco Inc. unit of $32 million in damages, interest and attorneys' fees that was won by Kern Oil andamp; Refining Co. A federal judge in California ruled in November 1986 that the Tenneco unit failed to sell Kern all the oil it had promised in a contract covering certain California oilfields, and a federal appeals court in San Francisco affirmed the decision last March. (Tenneco Oil Co. vs. Kern Oil andamp; Refining Co.)    Asbestos in Schools   The justices let stand a ruling by a federal appeals court in Washington, D.C., upholding Environmental Protection Agency rules for handling asbestos found in school buildings. Issued in October 1987, the rules require licensed inspections to detect asbestos materials, but leave it to school officials to decide how to remove or contain the harmful fibers. The rules were challenged by National Gypsum Co. and other former manufacturers of asbestos products. (National Gypsum vs. EPA)   Other Cases   In other actions, the high court:   --Let stand court rulings upholding a Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission decision to deny an Equitable Resources Inc. unit a $14.3 million natural gas rate increase for customers in the Pittsburgh area. In Pittsburgh, an Equitable Resources spokesman said the company charged the amount against 1987 earnings and made refunds to consumers. (Kentucky West Virginia Gas Co. vs. Pennsylvania P.U.C.)    -- Let stand a federal court ruling that General Motors Corp. discriminated against three women workers at several factories near Athens, Ala. A federal court in Alabama ruled in favor of the women who charged that GM paid them less than it paid men for performing the same jobs. The district court ordered GM to pay double the lost wages to the women, and a federal appeals court in Atlanta upheld the district court ruling. (GMC vs. Glenn)</TEXT></DOC>