<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0091 </DOCNO><HL> In the Wilderness: Democrats' Troubles In Winning Presidency Are Likely to Persist --- Deep Divisions May Confine The Influence of the Party To Congress, State Politics --- Is Bentsen Too Old a Moses? </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Democrats, long the dominant force in American politics, are at risk of becoming isolated as principally a state and congressional party.    Last Tuesday's election marked the fifth time in the last six presidential contests that the party has lost. Unless a series of internal struggles is resolved -- and that won't be easy -- Democratic analysts fear they will be reduced to waiting for chance or Republican misfortune before capturing the White House again.    &quot;There comes a time when you have to suggest that there is a serious problem,&quot; says James Friedman, a prominent Democratic fund-raiser. &quot;It is no longer possible to dispute that Democratic presidential candidates are not connected to the everyday concerns of people who go out and vote.&quot;    The postmortems or recriminations will begin this weekend as the party's state chairmen meet in Phoenix. While little is likely to be resolved, the divisions in Democratic ranks will be apparent, starting with the jockeying to elect a new national chairman early next year.    Numerous Democratic governors and senators have asked Paul Kirk, the current chairman, to stay on to head off a potential blood bath over his successor, but if he does, it is likely to be only an interim solution.    Behind the scenes, former Carter budget chief Bert Lance is trying to engineer a compromise between the Rev. Jesse Jackson and the party's more conservative forces. Charles Whitehead, the Florida state chairman, is mentioned as well as Texas Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, who might become a titular party head.    The stakes are higher now, in part because behind last week's defeat may be the outline of a potential comeback. There are signs that the GOP has overinvested in the South while its base in the Midwest and the West is beginning to erode. And some political analysts think President-elect George Bush is a potentially vulnerable target if a strong Democratic opposition can find the direction it needs.    Voters didn't repudiate the Democrats in 1988 as they did eight years ago, but complacency is itself an enemy. &quot;When you lose five of the last six elections, the danger isn't that we'll have confrontations,&quot; says Alvin From, the executive director of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group of moderate to conservative Democrats. &quot;The danger is that we won't.&quot;    Certainly, fundamental problems remain:   --The liberal label continues to plague the Democrats, who are divided on how liberalism should be redefined going into a new century. It wasn't until the final days of the campaign that Michael Dukakis acknowledged that he is a liberal, an admission that liberals hailed but that some aides think was costly. In 1984 the party was clobbered for being big taxers; the Democrats have improved their fiscal image but were damaged on issues ranging from crime to defense. In the final Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll just before the election, voters preferred George Bush to Mr. Dukakis by 62% to 25% for maintaining a strong national defense and by 46% to 32% for being tough on crime.    --The Democrats' nominating process is criticized for tilting the party to the left. This was dramatized again in 1988: Social issues that were barely raised until late in the Democratic primaries plagued Mr. Dukakis in the general election: prison furloughs, the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag and national defense. Any overt appeal to conservatism would sound a candidate's death knell during Democratic primaries; even voters in Southern primaries are out of kilter with voters in general elections in those states. Mr. Dukakis won the Florida primary, for example, but never had a chance to win the state in the election last week.    --Democrats are represented nationally by a congressional wing that is torn between its roles as both the opposition party and the governing majority in the House and the Senate. A prime example this year was the 60-day notice to workers who lose their jobs because of plant closings, a popular measure that Mr. Dukakis favored and Vice President Bush opposed. But there was little consideration given to saving such a winning pocketbook issue for the national election campaign. Congressional Democrats successfully forced the measure upon President Reagan and fearful Republicans. The issue lost some of its edge in the industrial states such as Illinois and Pennsylvania, where Mr. Dukakis finished narrowly behind.    --Democrats still struggle with the legacy of the party's historical commitment to civil rights. White Southerners have fled to the GOP, even as leading Republicans are determined to make a stronger bid for a younger generation of black voters raised since the civil-rights debate. Jesse Jackson emerged as one of the Democrats' most eloquent spokesmen for populism, yet in his own party he is seen as a threat by those who think the Democrats never will win presidential elections unless it wins back large numbers of white voters.    The two men who stand tallest after last Tuesday, Mr. Jackson and Sen. Bentsen, symbolize these currents in their party. Sen. Bentsen emerged as a Texas-size hero, but he got his chance only because he avoided the entire nominating process. Mr. Jackson accumulated power even as he lost in the primaries, but he lacks any government post -- such as Mr. Bentsen enjoys in the Senate -- to sustain him until the next election.    The jockeying for 1992 has begun; it was well illustrated in the tableau of candidates who marched down Chicago's Michigan Avenue in the traditional Democratic torchlight parade just before the election. Following Mr. Dukakis was not only Mr. Jackson but also one of the candidates they defeated in the primaries, Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore, whose supporters along the parade route shouted, &quot;Gore in '92.&quot;    Both Sen. Gore and Missouri Rep. Richard Gephardt took part in campaigns this fall in New Hampshire, traditionally the site of the first presidential primary. Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia won friends by supporting Mr. Dukakis at key points. New Jersey Sen. Bill Bradley's increased activity -- he recently asked Mr. Friedman, the fund-raiser, for his business card -- pleases some top Democratic strategists. Mr. Dukakis insists he plans to remain active in the party, but much more interest will be focused on his fellow Northeastern governor, Mario Cuomo of New York.    Though he insists he will stay on the sidelines, Gov. Cuomo is positioned as someone strongly supportive of Mr. Kirk but also with ties to the likely Jackson candidate for party chairman, Ron Brown. &quot;This is a time for ideas, not names . . . a time to think as Americans and not Democrats,&quot; Gov. Cuomo says. &quot;The complaint that I've heard is that a presidential campaign for two years is too long. The answer to that is not to make it four years.&quot;    Some say that Sen. Bentsen, at age 67, is too old to run, but he can certainly play. &quot;Lloyd Bentsen is sort of the Moses now,&quot; says House Majority Whip Tony Coelho of California. Atlanta Mayor Andrew Young adds that Mr. Bentsen's role in the campaign makes him &quot;more important&quot; than Mr. Jackson now that the focus has shifted back to the congressional arena. &quot;Bentsen is a sitting senator,&quot; the mayor says. &quot;In between elections, real power becomes more important.&quot;    But even as Republicans say they want to court the black vote themselves, they want other voters to focus on Mr. Jackson. &quot;Jesse Jackson is the titular head of the Democratic Party,&quot; says Gov. John Sununu of New Hampshire, who may play a major role in the Bush administration. Conservative GOP Rep. Newt Gingrich of Georgia crows: &quot;The two leading Democrats right now are Jim Wright and Jesse Jackson. Over the next two months, we'll be competing against Jackson and Wright, and that's good for us.&quot;    Republicans, in fact, made House Speaker James Wright an issue in House races in Texas this year but lost doing so. Mr. Jackson's supporters argue that Republicans will fail also if they make him a target. But these supporters are also sensitive to not appearing to be too dominant an element of the Democratic coalition.    &quot;It should not be one aspect or wing of the party attempting to dominate,&quot; says Frank Watkins, a longtime top Jackson aide. And Mr. Lance, the former Carter administration budget chief, suggests that Mr. Jackson would win most by not appearing to win now. &quot;I don't think it serves the party well for anyone to appear in charge now,&quot; says Mr. Lance, who advised the Jackson campaign this year. &quot;This is a time for building coalitions.&quot;    Jackson Democrats see Mr. Jackson as an activist, strong leader who is more willing to take risks than those in the often-blander congressional wing of the party. He clearly commands the Democrats' most loyal constituency. &quot;It is never wise to ignore those you can depend on,&quot; says Sonia Jarvis of the National Coalition on Black Voter Participation.    Mr. Jackson's populism serves to force Democrats to address the economic needs of working-class voters. &quot;When Jackson spoke at the convention, it could have been Andrew Jackson,&quot; says Democratic consultant Alan Baron. &quot;Jackson had a populist message. The Democrats turned it off because it was black.&quot;    Beyond populism, Mr. Jackson's positions on defense and the Middle East have had the effect of moving the party's debate to the left, both in 1984 and in 1988. &quot;Denying him his rightful place in the party is unfair,&quot; says Douglas Schoen, a political consultant in New York. &quot;But on a practical basis, giving him the influence in the party that he has earned will cause problems.&quot;    The challenge for the Democrats is to create a nominating process in which this activism is tested against the more moderate constituencies that have sustained the congressional wing. These constituencies too often flee to the Republicans in presidential races.    &quot;The rules that operate in the primary setting have the ideologues coming out in force and nominating their person,&quot; says former Texas Rep. Barbara Jordan. &quot;Then the person who survives the process and gets the nomination is unelectable. We need a drastic retooling.&quot; Says Syracuse University political scientist Thomas Patterson: &quot;The Democrats aren't going to be fully competitive until they bring this whole thing under control.&quot;    Each season brings new solutions -- and disasters. &quot;The Committee on Rules in the Democratic Party is the Committee on Unintended Consequences,&quot; says Democratic consultant Robert Squier. Although Chairman Kirk warns that &quot;we shouldn't overreact and knee-jerk our way&quot; into changing party rules, Super Tuesday -- with several primaries, mainly in the South, held on the same day -- is likely to be broken up. And there is pressure to make substantial adjustments in the primary calendar in 1992.    But &quot;we're never going to go back to the bosses,&quot; says former party Chairman John White, a Texan, like Mr. Bentsen, and a past adviser to Mr. Jackson. &quot;There are no bosses to go back to. We have to go to states that have a larger representative group of Democrats. I want to make it where they {the candidates} have to lay all their cards on the table.&quot;    Democrats are wary of large regional primaries, but Mr. Dukakis's strong showing in the West -- he won Oregon, Washington and 48% of the vote in California -- has heightened interest in giving states there an earlier voice. &quot;That has to be the silver lining in the dark cloud,&quot; says Gov. James Blanchard of Michigan. And Rep. Coelho is pressing to move the California primary forward from its traditional place as the last event on the political calendar.    Democrats are a stronger party, in finances and in organization, than eight years ago. But that strength goes wasted when a candidate, like Mr. Dukakis, chooses to take an insular approach in shaping his campaign. Republicans have a strong core of professionals who provide rare expertise and continuity for their candidates, and Democrats could similarly elevate the role of their own professionals in much the same manner.    &quot;It's a matter of having pros at the table when strategic decisions are being thrashed out,&quot; says Chairman Kirk.    But it may also be a matter of the congressional wing, where those professionals are rooted, taking on more of the identity of an opposition party. &quot;I think Democrats are going to read these results and say, unfortunately, 'Each man on his own hook,'&quot; says Democratic pollster Peter Hart. &quot;My biggest problem is that we always have a tendency to reach into the base . . . rather than having a sense of reaching out. I just hope we're hungry enough in terms of 1990 and 1992.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>