<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870701-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News:World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CHUN ACCEPTED proposals for sweeping political changes in South Korea.    The South Korean president, in a nationally televised address, expressed strong support for an eight-point proposal outlined two days ago by the ruling party's chairman, Roh Tae Woo. The plan included a call for direct presidential elections, amnesty for political prisoners, press freedoms and more autonomy for municipalities and universities, among other things. Roh had presented his plan in an effort to quell anti-government protests that began June 10 in Seoul and other cities.    Roh said he planned to meet with opposition leader Kim Young Sam to begin negotiations on constitutional changes to allow elections by popular vote.    ---   REAGAN SAID the U.S. would proceed with plans to escort tankers in the gulf.    Despite opposition in Congress, the president said his plan to provide Navy protection for Kuwaiti ships in the Persian Gulf would begin later this month. Reagan also unveiled a diplomatic initiative calling for a U.S. envoy to work with U.N. Security Council members to seek a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. Following the announcement, the Senate Foreign Relations panel approved a bill to delay the escort plan, but congressional leaders doubted that they could halt its implementation.    An Iranian gunboat attacked a Kuwaiti cargo vessel, gulf shipping officials said. At least 10 mines also were found near Kuwait's main oil depot.    ---   The Senate voted to bar Japan's Toshiba Corp. and a Norwegian company from selling any products in the U.S. for at least two years because the firms sold militarily sensitive technology to the Soviet Union. The amendment to the pending trade bill was approved by a 92-5 vote.    ---   A U.S. ethics official questioned the legality of Attorney General Meese's investment in a &quot;limited blind partnership&quot; set up by a former Wedtech Corp. director. In a letter to a House panel, the head of the Office of Government Ethics asserted that Meese failed to obtain approval before investing $60,000.    ---   A Reagan aide said the U.S. and Soviet Union reached an agreement in principle that could lead to the removal of Moscow's medium-range missiles from Europe and Asia. The U.S., in return, would make certain concessions on its missile arsenal. Shultz and Shevardnadze likely will discuss the plan later this month in Washington.    ---   Congressional investigators are pursuing evidence indicating Reagan signed a finding authorizing the CIA's role in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran. A signed copy hasn't been found, but sources said data received by Iran-Contra panels disputes suggestions that Reagan was unaware of the document.    North delivered subpoenaed documents to Iran-Contra investigators after being granted limited immunity from prosecution. The former White House aide is expected to continue closed-door meetings today with members of the congressional panels, and is scheduled to testify publicly next week.    ---   Reagan officials met Senate leaders to discuss the president's inclination to nominate Judge Robert Bork to succeed Supreme Court Justice Powell. Chief of Staff Baker and Attorney General Meese were told it would be a tough confirmation fight. White House aides said a final decision wasn't made.    ---   The Supreme Soviet adopted an economic plan proposed by Kremlin leader Gorbachev to improve production by giving managers more autonomy and responsibility. The 1,500-member nominal parliament also approved a measure establishing an appeals process for citizens who believe their rights have been violated by officials.    ---   A U.S. appeals court ruled that the EPA lacks authority to ban construction of factories that have failed to apply for a permit to discharge pollutants. The ruling was the first response to challenges of the EPA's water pollution regulations brought by environmental and industry groups over the past 15 years.    ---   Iran's Revolutionary Guards smuggled at least two American hostages to Iran from Lebanon in coffins that were transported part of the way in a car from Tehran's embassy, a Shiite Moslem source told the Associated Press. The transfer reportedly took place in May. Iran denied the report.    ---   Prime Minister Lange announced a general election Aug. 15 in New Zealand. Lange, who is seeking a second three-year term, said he was calling the election a month early so the Labor Party government can complete its legislative programs.    ---   Panama's government lifted a nationwide state of emergency. The emergency decree had been imposed June 11 to quell anti-government disturbances sparked by allegations that the country's military chief had been involved in election fraud.    ---   Soviet troops were dispatched to an area nine miles west of Kabul to bolster Afghan forces besieged by anti-Marxist guerrillas, Western diplomats said. In Moscow, U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar said negotiations with the Soviet Union over the Afghan conflict might be concluded soon.    ---   The National Institutes of Health found that mosquitoes intentionally infected with AIDS-contaminated blood were later discovered to carry the AIDS virus. The researchers said, however, that there wasn't any evidence to suggest that the insects could spread the disease. </TEXT></DOC>