<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0077 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Cancer 'Conspiracy' on Film </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Few episodes in medicine have been as colorful, as emotional and as controversial as the 35-year-long battle between the American Medical Association and Harry Hoxsey. Mr. Hoxsey was an ex-coal miner who, in 1924, began claiming that a herbal tonic compounded by his great grandfather to treat a sick horse was a cure for cancer. Operating out of Dallas, Mr. Hoxsey at one point had 17 clinics around the nation administering his tonic and a salve to desperate cancer patients.    Not surprisingly, the AMA, led by Morris Fishbein, the magisterial editor of its official journal, labeled Mr. Hoxsey as a money-grabbing quack and launched a full-scale public relations and legal war to suppress him. At the height of the battle in the early '50s, newspapers, magazines, politicians, congressional committees, doctors and even judges and prosecutors had lined up on one side or the other, leaving a cancer-fearing public bereft of an objective evaluation of the Hoxsey claims.    Eventually, the AMA succeeded. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration in the late 1950s managed to close the Hoxsey clinics in the U.S. Today, a former Hoxsey nurse continues to offer the treatment at a clinic in Mexico and still attracts hundreds of desperate cancer patients.    One would hope that after 30 years it would be possible to take a tempered look at this battle and its colorful protagonists and to put the entire affair into perspective. Unfortunately, &quot;Hoxsey-Quacks Who Cure Cancer?&quot; a full-length feature film making the rounds of the country in special showings, not only fails to do this but turns out to be an ill-disguised attempt to resurrect the Hoxsey treatment as well as promote other &quot;alternative methods&quot; of cancer treatment, as they are charitably called.    The film's one appeal lies in its vintage film clips of Mr. Hoxsey himself. He comes across as the stereotype of a 1920s medicine hawker, a man of limited education, descended from poor Illinois farmers and miners, who is doing nothing more in pushing his tonic than carrying out the deathbed wishes of his father and grandfather.    On the other hand, even though the AMA's Mr. Fishbein was a leading figure in the controversy, in this film he is dismissed as a physician who became the most powerful figure in organized medicine without ever having practiced medicine.    The film makes a pretense at objectivity by using a few short excerpts of interviews with some Hoxsey opponents who are still alive. A former AMA official is permitted to call Mr. Hoxsey a &quot;ghoul feasting off the bodies of the dead and dying&quot; while a Dallas physician is shown calling him a &quot;force of evil.&quot; But these short segments are more than overshadowed by lengthy and emotional testimonials by people who claim to have been cured of their cancer by the Hoxsey treatment. (Only at the end of the film is it revealed in passing that one young woman suffering breast cancer, who appears several times in the film, died of her cancer within a year of seeking the Hoxsey treatment in Mexico -- and that Hoxsey himself died of prostate cancer, uncured by his own medicine.)    Much is made of Mr. Hoxsey's assertion that his files were open to doubters, but only a few brief seconds are devoted to the fact that when the files were examined they were found to be so incomplete that it was impossible to tell whether the &quot;cured&quot; patients actually had had cancer or whether conventional treatment had been effective. Film clips 30 and 40 years old are used to contrast the &quot;horrors&quot; of conventional surgery, radiation and chemotherapy treatments with the ease of drinking a dose of Hoxsey's tonic.    There's little doubt that the AMA itself was largely responsible for inflating the Hoxsey controversy beyond what it deserved. And at the time, the association also was engaged in an all-out effort to defeat President Truman's plan for a national health-insurance program. This concentration on an economic issue undoubtedly helped lend credence, in the minds of many, to the Hoxsey forces' charges that the AMA was only trying to protect the billions of dollars its members were earning in treating cancer patients.    Unfortunately, the film, like the Hoxsey advocates, adroitly sidesteps the real issue. That is whether the Hoxsey tonic -- or any of the other &quot;alternative methods&quot; -- really work.    There are ways to determine the effectiveness of any medical therapy, based on three centuries of experience with the scientific method and a system of ethics and morality that determines when and under what conditions experiments may be carried out on humans. Perhaps those who fear or know that their alleged discoveries can't stand up to such scientific tests are the ones who, like the Hoxsey followers, flee across the border crying &quot;suppression&quot; and &quot;conspiracy.&quot;    The film was produced, written and directed by Ken Ausubel, a Santa Fe, N.M., writer whose previous film credit was a television program on herbal medicine and who is planning a fictionalized version of the Hoxsey story. His co-producer and director was Catherine Salveson, a nurse working for a state agency in New Mexico who, according to the publicity handouts, has a private company, Health Source Inc., &quot;which provides continuing education on contemporary issues for health-care professionals,&quot; including, presumably, the issue of the Hoxsey treatment. The film's medical adviser was Hugh Riordan, a past president of the American Holistic Medical Association, whose members often incorporate a variety of unorthodox therapies in their practices.    &quot;Hoxsey-Quacks Who Cure Cancer?&quot; will be screened next at the Kennedy Center in Washington on May 11.    ---   Mr. Bishop covers medicine in the Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>