<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880524-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ AND DOLE URGED Senate ratification of a superpower missile pact.    The secretary of state called for approval of the INF accord before the start of the Reagan-Gorbachev summit this weekend, and the GOP senator said failure to do so &quot;would be an embarrassment.&quot; The chamber voted to kill an amendment to the treaty requiring certification of Moscow's estimate of its arsenal, and another to close what was termed a loophole over missile construction. The president's visit, however, may be overshadowed by Moscow's attention to next month's Communist Party forum, which is to debate the next phase of Gorbachev's restructuring.    The Soviet parliament endorsed the intermediate-range missile pact, setting the stage for final ratification by the Presidium, the highest executive body.    ---   Reagan ordered his chief emissary back to Panama to press for a deal to remove Noriega. The White House, divided over whether to drop drug charges against the military chief, said it hoped to break the stalemate with Noriega before the Moscow summit begins Sunday. Officials denied that the U.S. was issuing an ultimatum.    ---   The FDA approved a cervical cap, authorizing the return of the birth control device to the U.S. market after years of disuse. The cap, a rubber, cup-like device that fits around the base of the cervix, was never rejected by the FDA, but its popularity fell with the introduction of oral contraceptives and IUDs in the 1960s.    ---   The Supreme Court gave trial judges broad power to deny criminal defendants the lawyer of their choice if a possible conflict of interest exists. The justices, upholding a 1984 drug-trafficking case from California, also said a defendant's choice of lawyers can be vetoed even when the right to conflict-free legal help is waived.    ---   Nicaragua announced that it was unilaterally extending a seven-week-old truce to allow more time for continuing peace talks between the Managua government and the Contra rebels. The 60-day cease-fire was to expire next Monday. The Sandinistas and the insurgents are scheduled to begin another round of negotiations tomorrow.    ---   Israel's high court reserved decision on an appeal by an Arab-American advocate of civil disobedience who asked that a deportation order against him be revoked. Mubarak Awad was ordered expelled by Israeli officials May 6. He has been blamed for inciting unrest in the occupied territories.    Palestinian leaders called Israel's reopening of Arab elementary schools in the West Bank a &quot;glorious victory.&quot; About 200,000 pupils returned to classes for the first time in nearly four months of violence in the area. The army said a number of teachers involved in the unrest were dismissed.    ---   A hijacker commandeered a Colombian jetliner carrying 135 people, released all but the cockpit crew and forced the plane to fly to Panama and Aruba. The plane, hijacked en route to Bogota from Medellin, later returned to Colombia, where the gunman, said to be carrying a pistol and hand grenades, escaped. There weren't any injuries.    ---   Guerrillas fired rockets into Afghanistan's capital, killing at least one person, the Soviet news agency Tass reported. The Kabul government, which again protested Pakistan's support of the insurgents, also said it was prepared to take back 3,000 Afghan refugees a day without preconditions. It said Pakistan is hindering the return.    ---   A 40-member panel on minorities said the U.S. &quot;is moving backward&quot; in efforts to achieve equality for blacks, Hispanics and American Indians. The bipartisan commission of political, civic and academic leaders -- including Presidents Ford and Carter -- urged a 20-year drive to close economic and educational gaps with whites.    ---   A white couple pleaded innocent to charges resulting from an alleged threat on the life of Democratic presidential candidate Jackson. Londell and Tammy Williams entered the plea in federal court in St. Louis. The 30-year-old Mr. Williams has said he was raised to believe in white supremacy.    ---   More than 1,000 mourners attended a funeral service for an eight-year-old boy who was killed when a woman stormed an elementary school in Winnetka, Ill., and fired on a second-grade class. Five other children were wounded in Friday's attack by Laurie Dann, 30, who also injured a man at a nearby house before killing herself.    ---   Syria dismissed as &quot;out of the question&quot; an Iranian request to participate in a military force that would enter Beirut's southern slums to end more than two weeks of fighting between rival Shiite Moslem factions, Lebanese officials said. Fighting raged in the area, and as many as 13 people were killed and 78 others wounded. </TEXT></DOC>