<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0092 </DOCNO><HL> AIDS Is Growing Priority, Parley Shows---Governments, Big DrugFirms Increase Roles---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The new world-wide attention given to the AIDS epidemic was highlighted by the many high-level political officials, major drug companies' representatives and patients' advocates who attended the third international conference on the disease.    The conference marked a profound shift in the social and economic context of the epidemic six years after the first reported cases. In the early days, the disease was the province of a small cadre of researchers. Today, it commands attention in the highest councils of world governments -- it has a spot on the agenda of the Venice Economic Summit, which starts today.    Indicative of the urgent priority given to the AIDS problem was the announcement by U.S. officials Friday, the AIDS conference's final day, that there would be a national AIDS survey. Thus far, acquired immune deficiency syndrome has sickened more than 36,000 Americans of whom more than 21,000 have died.    But AIDS also poses a sensitive political problem: how, for instance, to balance the need to track and treat the victims while protecting them from social ostracism.    A large number of AIDS patients showed up at the conference, unprecedented for such gatherings where highly technical discussions usually dominate the agenda. Many expressed concern over what they see as an uncaring, if not a punitive, government attitude toward the plight of AIDS victims.    About 50 patients, advocates and scientists interruped Health and Human Services Secretary Otis R. Bowen's speech with hisses, jeers, and calls for appointment of a homosexual member to the president's commission on AIDS.    Dr. Bowen was booed when he invoked President Reagan's stands on mandatory testing and AIDS education, which emphasizes abstinence and morality rather than pragmatic techniques for &quot;safe sex.&quot; But he drew applause when he said AIDS isn't &quot;a them-vs.-us thing; this is truly just an us thing.&quot;    More than 1,000 of the 7,300 conferees signed a petition urging the administration to let science, not politics, dictate AIDS policy.    Though there were no announcements at the conference of major breakthroughs, progress was reported in several areas, including how the virus is put together, how it spreads, where it is spreading, and the quest for therapies and prevention.    Many major pharmaceutical and chemical concerns now are working to develop AIDS drugs, such as Du Pont Co. and its partnership with HEM Research Inc. to develop the drug Ampligen. This contrasts sharply with last year when small biotechnology companies dominated the field. Government laboratories are accelerating the process of technology transfer with more manufacturing licenses for drugs like the National Cancer Institute's dideoxycytidine, or DDC, licensed to Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., the U.S. unit of F. Hoffmann-LaRoche andamp; Co., the Swiss company.    The national blood survey announced by Dr. Bowen is intended to obtain a more accurate reading of how many Americans carry the deadly virus. Though an estimated 1.5 million Americans are infected, Dr. Bowen acknowledged, &quot;No one knows for sure.&quot;    Random and anonymous blood samplings of 45,000 people from selected population groups are planned to give scientists better &quot;baseline data&quot; on the magnitude of the problem, said James O. Mason, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control. Details of the study were sketchy, but it is expected to take six months.    The progress reports covered several aspects of research:    --How the virus spreads. Molecular biologists like Flossie Wong-Staal of the National Cancer Institute now recognize the AIDS virus has an intricate system of regulation, with several genes that speed or slow its life cycle to permit spells of latency or aggressive cell-killing. William Haseltine of Dana-Farber Cancer Center said such genes as the TAT gene, called a &quot;fast forward&quot; signal for its virulence, offer targets for drugs.    --Where the virus attacks. Formerly, the virus was thought to infect only immune-sentry cells known as T-helper cells. It now is known to infect and hide in cells of the brain, lungs, intestine and even the heart, producing a sometimes fatal myocarditis. Such findings complicate the work of clinicians, as well as the drug and vaccine developers.    --When a person is infectious. William Blattner and James Goedert of the cancer institute said that, unlike other diseases, in which a person is most infectious just before the outbreak of symptoms, AIDS becomes more infectious as the disease progresses. The findings, from a study of infected wives of hemophiliacs with AIDS, suggest a &quot;critical mass&quot; of infected people may only now be entering their most infectious phase, Dr. Blattner said.    --What populations are being infected. Though homosexual men still account for most of the current caseload, with heterosexuals constituting 2% to 4% of cases, the rate of growth in the number of homosexuals with new infections has slowed while the number of heterosexual cases is fastest growing. Mostly this is a result of intravenous drug users, who become infected and then pass the virus sexually to their partners. Stanley Weiss of the National Cancer Institute said 35% of addicts in New Jersey are carriers of AIDS virus, and 5% are infected both with AIDS and adult-t-cell leukemia virus, or HTLV-1, which also is spread by sex and shared needles. &quot;The risk of spread to non-drug-using women and their children is real -- especially among minorities,&quot; he said. A second, though much smaller, cluster of the leukemia, now endemic in Japan and the Carribean, is possible in the U.S. in a decade, he added.    --Co-factors of AIDS Infection. Evidence is mounting that episodes of herpes, and other viral infections such as hepatitis help make a person more vulnerable to infection, and &quot;activate&quot; a dormant AIDS infection. Studies in Africa and among U.S. prostitutes also suggest that those with a history of venereal diseases or genital sores provide points of entry for the virus. Conversely, AIDS-infected people who avoid repeated infections and other assaults on their immune system may have a better prognosis.    --In drug development, a panoply of drugs including azidothymidine, or AZT, DDC, Ampligen, HL-721, Foscarnet and controversial Peptide T are in various stages of human tests. A second group including DDI, phosphorothioates, tumor necrosis factor, and castanospermine are still in test-tube development.    But companies were put on notice that their test data must be unassailable. Despite supporters of the drug ribaviran, its dubious test results drew an unusual personal rebuke from Food and Drug Administrator Frank E. Young. Dr. Young told conferees that ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s drug was rejected by FDA because those in the test's control group who received placebos later were discovered to have been sicker at the trial's outset than those on the drug, thus invalidating the company's claims.    --Vaccine studies. The search is concentrating on a range of new animal models -- from rhesus monkeys, macaques, and gibbons to cat and even goat viruses -- after disappointing results from chimpanzee tests of experimental vaccines from several labs.    Meanwhile, French researcher Daniel Zagury reported that he is well, and his immune system brimming with neutralizing antibodies, after his self-vaccination. He plans to extend his tests to the offspring of infected women, who might be able to be vaccinated at birth as are babies of mothers with hepatitis-B.    --New Viruses. Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur Institute said the new African AIDS virus named HIV-2, though mostly confined to the West African countries of Guinea, Guinea Bissau and the Cape Verde Islands, has undergone a &quot;slow spreading&quot; to France, Germany and Britain, as well as Sao Paulo, Brazil -- mostly through travel to and from Africa or sexual relations with infected Africans. A screening of stored U.S. blood samples didn't detect any clear presence of HIV-2 in this country. Robert Gallo of the cancer institute also found a new Nigerian strain. These findings may dictate fine-tuning blood-tests and vaccines, but most scientists stress AIDS is just &quot;one epidemic.&quot;    Finally, there was news about the natural history of the AIDS virus infection. George Rutherford of the San Francisco Health Department reported that a long-term study of infected gay men in San Francisco shows that almost 80% have disease symptoms after 76 months of medical observation. Dr. Rutherford said 30% of the men have full-blown AIDS, 21% have severe AIDS-related complex, and 27% have generalized swollen glands caused by the infection. But a slender ray of hope was offered by researchers at Johns Hopkins University, who said they observed five patients out of more than 4,000 who, once infected, apparently reconverted to an antibody-free state on their own. Other researchers said that even if this is confirmed by later studies, they believe it is &quot;very rare.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>