<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870603-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Head and Shoulders Above the Rest---By Albert R. Hunt</HL><DD> 06/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   When Bill Bradley was a high-school basketball star in Crystal City, Mo., the &quot;experts&quot; said he should go to Duke instead of Princeton. He'd get just about as good an education, and could be an All-American on a team likely to make the Final Four championships.    The 17-year-old listened to his own instincts and chose Princeton. He became one of the greatest college players in the history of the game and even led his outmanned Ivy Leaguers to the Final Four.    After Princeton, the experts said he shouldn't pass up a once-in-a-lifetime, lucrative pro-basketball contract for a Rhodes scholarship. Some years later he was told that if he was interested in politics he should run for a House seat, and that he couldn't start a political career by going for the Senate. Five years ago the experts told him that tax reform was a legislative and political nonstarter.    Bill Bradley ignored the experts each time and became a professional basketball Hall-of-Famer after his stint at Oxford, easily won his initial contest for the Senate and was the architect of the sweeping tax-revision plan adopted by Congress last year.    Once again, Sen. Bradley is ignoring the experts -- who now are saying he should run for president in 1988. This time, though, the experts may be right and his time-tested instincts wrong.    Timing is everything in politics, and few elections have offered as wide-open opportunities for both parties and many politicians. The Democratic dominance of American politics has ended, but the Republicans haven't taken over. As the Reagan administration draws to a close, the conservative momentum of a decade ago has ebbed, but the public isn't rushing to liberalism.    In 1988, the public will be looking for someone with experience but also of a new generation; a politician who has demonstrated competence but also has a vision to lead the country, someone steeped in ideals but not rigid ideology who embodies traditional values.    There is no one in the field today who so closely resembles this profile as Bill Bradley. More important, the 43-year-old New Jersey Democrat seems more ready to govern in these difficult times than any other aspirant of either party.    He has demonstrated a remarkable ability not only to seize on but to take the lead on important issues. Tax revision never would have occurred in the last Congress without Bill Bradley. On critical international economic issues, no politician other than Treasury Secretary James Baker is playing a more instrumental role; a year ago, Sen. Bradley fashioned his own solution to Third World debt problems, which included some forgiveness of loans.    He also displayed independence as one of the few Northern Democrats last year to vote for aid to the Nicaraguan Contras. This, however, was less a visceral anti-communist vote than it was an effort to help buy some time for the struggling democracies in Central America.    As a presidential candidate, Mr. Bradley is a more realistic possibility than such other current noncombatants as Georgia Sen. Sam Nunn and New York Gov. Mario Cuomo. The late Nunn run and closing Mario scenario are favorites of some pundits, but they are pipe dreams: Sen. Nunn is too conservative for the liberal-oriented Democrats to nominate, and no one who doesn't enter the fray this year will win the nomination, eliminating Gov. Cuomo, who's too tied down in Albany.    Republican admirers who harbor illusions that Sen. Bradley is a closet conservative will be disappointed. In the tax-revision fight, his real passion was to close tax loopholes, not just to lower rates; he was the only member of the Senate Finance Committee to vote against the 1981 Reagan tax cuts. He opposed the Gramm-Rudman budget-deficit reduction measure, favors affirmative action and takes a liberal tack on most judicial issues. On foreign policy, while he sided with the Contras -- at least temporarily -- he is also suspicious of the Reagan Doctrine and opposes deploying the strategic defense initiative.    He's liberal enough to be nominated but not too liberal to win a general election. And as a senator not facing reelection until 1990, he isn't constrained from running. (Gary Hart's sudden departure is irrelevant, since the Hart candidacy never was a factor in Mr. Bradley's calculations.)    The reasons that Sen. Bradley isn't running include questions about his electability (is he too dull a speaker in the television age?), his own professed concern that he isn't ready yet to offer a comprehensive vision of where he would take the country, and personal considerations. All are legitimate concerns; yet all can be adequately addressed.    On the question of electability, political analyst Alan Baron is right when he says that &quot;Bill Bradley is probably the most electable Democrat in the country today.&quot; Any shortcomings in telegenic superficialities are more than offset by his record, his sense of both himself and what he hopes to accomplish, his exceptionally able and loyal aides (14 of his original staff remain more than eight years later) and, not insignificant, the fact that the former star athlete and Rhodes scholar is a hero to many middle-class Americans. Parents bring their sons (and now, thanks to Title IX, their daughters, too) to meet Bill Bradley, role model.    He has told some intimates that he isn't ready with a sense of leadership yet. Then again, how ready was, say, Franklin Roosevelt in 1932 when he offered a balanced budget as the cure for economic ills? Like FDR, Bill Bradley is one of those rare politicians who constantly grows. A prominent Republican who has dealt extensively with him observes that he has leadership flaws but that &quot;he has a more rapid upward trajectory of growth than anyone in American politics today.&quot;    It isn't that the rest of the field is so mediocre; there are some new Democratic faces with interesting ideas and some familiar Republican ones with proven successes. But given the times and the challenges, none seem to measure up to Mr. Bradley.    His personal arguments against running -- his wife is a college professor in New Jersey, and they have a 10-year-old daughter -- are tougher to answer. But after a grueling year or so of campaigning, life in the White House may prove more accommodating personally.    All this brings up the final reservation: Bill Bradley's own instincts. In 1979, Bill and Ernestine Bradley considered buying a vacation home in Bay Head, N.J., but the place they liked cost $239,000, which he thought too expensive. They didn't buy; today, that home is valued at $1.5 million.    In other words, even the vaunted Bradley instincts can be wrong.    ---   Mr. Hunt is chief of the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>