<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870710-0050 </DOCNO><HL> North Says Casey Suggested Ex-Aide,Poindexter Take 'Fall' to Shield Reagan---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North testified that former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey sought to protect President Reagan by having Col. North and his superior, Rear Adm. John Poindexter, take &quot;the fall&quot; for the Iran-Contra scandal.    Col. North said he offered to take the blame himself, but Mr. Casey argued that Adm. Poindexter, then the national security adviser, needed to be &quot;hit&quot; as well to give the administration a &quot;credible&quot; defense. &quot;He was concerned that the president not be damaged . . . and I shared that belief,&quot; the Marine officer testified. &quot;He quite frankly did not think I was senior enough to do that . . . and suggested that it was probably going to go up the line.&quot;    Col. North indicated the discussions took place in late October or early November, when he and Mr. Casey already knew the covert operation was unraveling. Even after the diversion was discovered by Justice Department attorneys last Nov. 22, Col. North testified that he sought to conceal Mr. Casey's role in the scheme to funnel arms-sale profits to assist Nicaraguan insurgents.    The former National Security Council aide said he continued destroying documents relevant to his covert activities until the morning of Nov. 25 when he was fired by President Reagan, and once even shredded papers while Justice Department attorneys were looking at others in his office.    Appearing for a third day before House and Senate committees investigating the controversy, Col. North denied he was lying in order to protect &quot;anybody.&quot; But he acknowledged there was a plan in which a small group of military men in and out of the government would try to limit the damage to their &quot;commander-in-chief.&quot;    &quot;If the commander-in-chief tells this lieutenant colonel to go stand in the corner and sit on his head, I will do so,&quot; Col. North stated. &quot;And if the commander-in-chief decides to dismiss me from the NSC staff, this lieutenant colonel will proudly salute and say 'Thank you for the opportunity to have served,' and go.&quot;    Adm. Poindexter resigned from the NSC the same day as Col. North's dismissal. But it is only now -- two months after the former CIA director's death -- that the Marine officer has disclosed the director's role. Mr. Casey, who was a generation older than the 43-year-old lieutenant colonel, emerged as a major influence over Col. North, who testified that he talked as frequently as several times a week with the director and briefed him fully on the Iran-Contra operation.    During these discussions, Mr. Casey was familiar with the format of memoranda that Col. North prepared to describe individual weapons sales to Iran, and the anticipated diversion of profits to the private Contra-arms network overseen from the White House. The memos were channeled through Adm. Poindexter for the purpose of seeking Mr. Reagan's authorization, and Col. North said Mr. Casey never instructed him to alter the format so that it wouldn't include the president.    Col. North described Mr. Casey as a &quot;close personal friend and adviser to the president,&quot; and administration sources yesterday said the late director occasionally met privately with Mr. Reagan without the knowledge of either Mr. McFarlane or Adm. Poindexter.    The proceedings yesterday more than ever gave full vent to the emotions surrounding Col. North's appearance. Two demonstrators protesting the war in Nicaragua interrupted the morning testimony, while floral displays sent by North supporters decorated the office used as his waiting room.    Wearing his combat ribbons, the former White House aide has successfully used the televised hearings as a forum, offering his own props for the cameras and invoking his family by gesturing to his wife Betsy, who sat behind him yesterday. While still critical of the committees, he struck an early conciliatory note in expressing his &quot;awe&quot; for Congress. But by afternoon, the tone had shifted under the questioning of Arthur Liman, chief counsel for the Senate committee.    Underlying the tense exchanges was a battle of manners. Instead of taking a prosecutor's role, Mr. Liman began in an almost fatherly style, playing to Col. North's portrayal of himself as a victim and trying to draw him away from his combative attorney, Brendan Sullivan. Mr. Sullivan, in turn, sought to slow the pace by interrupting to confer with his client in an apparent effort to maintain control and cast the Senate counsel as the aggressor.    When Col. North hesitated at one point, Mr. Sullivan interjected sarcastically, &quot;He's looking for tricks, Mr. Liman.&quot; Moments later, Mr. Sullivan snapped, &quot;Get off his back,&quot; and when Senate committee Chairman Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) tried to quiet the attorney's protests, Mr. Sullivan answered, &quot;I'm not here as a potted plant . . . That's my job.&quot;    Mr. Liman's questions repeatedly referred to personal notebooks kept by Col. North, who on the day of his dismissal drew up a list of priorities that included protecting the president. When interviewed by Attorney General Edwin Meese two days before, Col. North only identified four military men -- himself, Adm. Poindexter, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord -- as knowing of the diversion. And beginning last October, he said, he had followed Mr. Casey's instructions to shred relevant documents, including the diversion memoranda seeking presidential authorization.    Prior testimony has described intensive shredding in Col. North's office hours after Mr. Meese began his investigation into the brewing scandal last Nov. 21. The Marine officer said, however, that the destruction of documents was spread over a longer period, and occurred even after Justice Department attorneys came to review papers related to the Iran initiative.    &quot;I remember shredding documents while they were reading documents,&quot; he said, describing the scene in his office on Nov. 22. The following day, Col. North testified, Mr. Meese never told him to preserve all of his papers. And the Marine officer said he shredded documents until hours before his firing, partly to limit potential political damage to the administration.    Col. North continued to insist that he believed he was carrying out the president's orders during the two-year effort to sustain the Nicaraguan resistance. He said Mr. McFarlane relayed to him a directive from President Reagan to keep the Contras together &quot;body and soul&quot; after Congress suspended official aid to them in October 1984. Col. North said he was surprised to learn that Mr. Reagan told the review board headed by former Texas Sen. John Tower that he didn't know the NSC staff was engaged in helping the Contras.    But under questioning, it became apparent that Col. North had little foundation upon which to base his belief that his activities were legal. He said Mr. Casey told him it was legal &quot;at length,&quot; and he cited a 1985 opinion by Bretton Sciaroni, the attorney for the president's Intelligence Oversight Board. But he testified that he didn't disclose all of his activities to Mr. Sciaroni because, he said, the intelligence board had no jurisdiction over NSC staff operations.    Col. North said neither Attorney General Meese nor Mr. McFarlane told him that congressional restrictions on U.S. government assistance to the insurgents didn't apply to the NSC staff. Mr. McFarlane was Col. North's superior when the secret Contra-aid program began in 1984.    Mr. McFarlane, however, has testified that he believes the NSC staff was covered by the congressional restrictions, and has asserted that he didn't know the extent of Col. North's role in arming the Contras.    Col. North also has testified the most of any witness about Israel's role in the Iran operation. The hijacking of a TWA airliner in June 1985 was a catalyst for the initiative, and strengthened the working relationship between the White House and the Jerusalem government, he said.    The U.S. and Israel decided to begin joint covert operations, and Amiram Nir, a counterterrorism adviser to former Prime Minister Shimon Peres, later suggested these activities could be funded from the profits of arms sales to Iran, Col. North said.    In 1986, when the U.S. began selling American weapons directly from U.S. stocks rather than from Israel's, Col. North said the operation was set up to mirror the structure used by Jerusalem when it carried out the sales in 1985.    Gen. Secord, who had assisted in a November 1985 shipment of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Tehran, was brought in as a middleman because he was already familiar with such transactions, Col. North said. But investigators believe the general was a catalyst for the decision to divert funds to support the Contra arms network he oversaw with Col. North. </TEXT></DOC>