<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0115 </DOCNO><HL> NASD Disciplines 29 Firms, 31 People For Violating Rules </HL><SO> </SO><IN> SCR STK </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The National Association of Securities Dealers said it fined and suspended 29 firms and 31 individuals for various rules violations.    The self-regulatory organization said that it fined Steven M. Swedish of Bloomfield, N.J., $200,000 and barred him from association with any NASD member for misappropriating customer funds. Mr. Swedish, who was working for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. at the time, declined to comment.    Michael Lee Scott of Las Vegas, Nev., was fined $90,000 and barred from association with any NASD member for unauthorized diversions of funds. Mr. Scott couldn't be reached for comment.    The NASD also fined Dale E. Taylor of Kersey, Pa., $40,000 and barred him from association with any NASD member for converting customer money to his use. Mr. Taylor, who has reached a settlement agreement with the NASD, couldn't be reached for comment.    Emmogene G. Moore of Detroit, who couldn't be reached for comment, was fined $30,000 and barred from association with any NASD member.    Jose A. Sierra of New Orleans was fined $30,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. He couldn't be reached for comment.    William C. Bailey Jr. of Los Angeles was fined $30,000 and suspended from association with any NASD member for six months. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Brian Todd Morton of New York was fined $25,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Daniel B. Ptak of Hialeah, Fla., was fined $15,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Harold Federbush of Edison, N.J., was fined $15,000, suspended from association with any NASD member for six months and barred from association with an NASD member in any principal capacity. Mr. Federbush couldn't be reached for comment.    Gary Wayne Harsanyi of Lawrenceville, Ga., was fined $12,500 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Harsanyi couldn't be reached for comment.    O.R. Securities Inc. and its president, Luther E. Oliver, both of Chesterfield, Mo., were jointly fined $15,000. Thomas J. Soher, Overland Park, Kan., who left O.R. in December 1985, was suspended from association with any NASD member for 90 days and barred from association with any member as a financial and operations principal. A spokesman for O.R. said the company and Mr. Oliver are contesting the action. Mr. Soher couldn't be reached for comment.    Joseph D. Barbaro of Erie, Pa., was fined $10,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Barbaro couldn't be reached for comment.    Mark A. Henne, Pittsburgh, was fined $10,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Henne couldn't be reached for comment.    Samuel F. Polo, of Gretna, La., was fined $10,000 and barred from association with any NASD member for one week. Mr. Polo, who couldn't be reached for comment, consented to the disciplinary actions without admitting or denying guilt.    Mark W. Sharpe, Morrison, Colo., was fined $10,000 and suspended from association with any NASD member for two years. Mr. Sharpe, who said he had just learned of the action, said he expects to contest the fine and suspension.    Mark Edwin Sigurdson of Ottawa, Kan., was fined $10,000, suspended from association with any NASD member for 90 days and subsequently suspended from association with any NASD member as a general securities principal for two years. Mr. Sigurdson, who consented to the action without admitting or denying guilt, wouldn't comment.    George Wesley Lanning, Portland, Ore., was fined $10,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. He couldn't be reached for comment.    IFPS Securities Corp. and the principal of the firm, John W. Schwartz Jr., both in North Jackson, Ohio, were jointly fined $10,000. In addition, Mr. Schwartz was suspended from association with any NASD member for five days and suspended from association with any NASD member as a registered principal for 30 days. Mr. Schwartz said the company has paid part of the fine and will pay the rest soon; he had no further comment.    Douglas James Suttie of Springfield, Mo., was fined $10,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Suttie, who settled with the NASD without admitting or denying the allegations, couldn't be reached for comment.    Stephen M. McIntosh, Council Bluffs, Iowa, was fined $9,800 jointly with his firm and suspended from association with any NASD member as a general securities principal for 30 days. Mr. McIntosh, who settled with the NASD without admitting or denying the allegations, didn't return a telephone call seeking comment.    Gregory W. Kolberg, Sunnyvale, Calif., was fined $7,500 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Kolberg couldn't be reached for comment.    Ernest G. Gallo of Torrance, Calif., was fined $5,000 and suspended from association with any NASD member for two years. Mr. Gallo couldn't be reached for comment.    Steven Randall Lynch, Houston, was fined $5,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Lynch couldn't be reached for comment.    James M. Masterson, Slidell, La., was fined $5,000 and suspended from association with any NASD member for 30 days. Mr. Masterson, who consented to the actions without admitting or denying the allegations, couldn't be reached for comment.    Eric J. Schedeler, Phoenix, Ariz., was fined $5,000 and barred from association with any NASD member. Mr. Schedeler couldn't be reached for comment.    Kermit George Turley of Portland, Ore., was fined $5,000 and barred from association with any NASD member in any capacity requiring registration as a principal. Mr. Turley couldn't be reached for comment.    Roland C. Ash, Pittsford, N.Y., was fined $2,500, and suspended from association with any NASD member for five days. Mr. Ash, who consented to the actions without admitting or denying the allegations, couldn't be reached for comment.    Andre Pozzuoli of Coral Springs, Fla., was fined $2,000 and suspended from association with any NASD member for 10 days. Mr. Pozzuoli couldn't be reached for comment.    William Crocker of Boise, Idaho, was fined $1,500 and suspended from association with any NASD member for 10 days. Mr. Crocker couldn't be reached for comment.    Steven Telsey, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., settled with the NASD, which prohibited him from applying to the NASD to become associated with a member of the NASD for five years. Mr. Telsey couldn't be reached for comment.    In addition, the NASD suspended the following firms from NASD membership for failure to comply with formal requests to submit financial information. A date after the name of the firm indicates that the company eventually complied with the request and represents the date of the end of the suspension:   Allied Equity Group, Valencia, Calif. Beuret andamp; Co., New York Blackstock andamp; Landstreet Inc., Jacksonville, Fla. Central States Capital Group, Menomonee Falls, Wis. (April 6) Douglas Smith andamp; Co., Wellesley, Mass. (April 28) DuPont Lauder andamp; Co., Hicksville, N.Y. Equilease Equity Corp., New York.    Galbraith Reynolds andamp; Co., Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Gulledge Securities Corp., Falls Church, Va. Hanover Equities Co., Dallas.    Heritage Financial Corp., Lutherville, Md. Integrated Assets Group Inc., New York. Intervest Corp., Jackson, Miss. Kensington Securities Inc., New York. Keystone Equity Corp., South Natick, Mass. Margate Securities Inc., Westbury, N.Y. Millennium III Capital Corp., New York. Munoz Financial Securities Inc., Fort Collins, Colo.    Provident Financial Securities Inc., Tempe, Ariz. (April 27) Revenue Capital Investments Inc., Clearwater, Fla. (April 11) Rose Le Jeune Investment Brokerage, Nutley, N.J. Sandstone Securities Corp., Wilton Manors, Fla. SG Securities Corp., Binghamton, N.Y. Southwest Resources Inc., Austin, Texas. Sunwealth Securities Corp., Houston.    Teichberg, Loeb, Waxman, Rabinowitz Inc., New York. Tercel Securities Inc., Amarillo, Texas. </TEXT></DOC>