<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880511-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Vietnam Seeks Aid as Its Harvests Falter --- Rampant Inflation, Plunging Currency Also Plague Hanoi </HL><AUTHOR> Barry Wain (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> CMD MON BON FRX </IN><DATELINE> HANOI, Vietnam  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Again near economic collapse, Vietnam has appealed for help in averting a famine.    Not only has the country's currency plummeted, causing prices of food and other essential items to triple in only a few months, but a second consecutive year of crop failures has brought millions of farmers in northern Vietnam close to starvation.    The government is requesting international donations of fertilizer, insecticide and -- more urgently -- food. Hanoi says it needs 120,000 metric tons of rice in the next two to three months to make up its immediate shortfall.    Meanwhile, the authorities are scrambling to transport rice from relatively prosperous southern Vietnam to critical areas in the north. They also are relying on the Soviet Union to buy large quantities of grain for them on world markets.    Beset by ill-conceived domestic policies, Vietnam's economy has stagnated almost from the time the country was unified under Communist rule following Hanoi's 1975 victory over the U.S.-supported Saigon regime in the south. The current woes pose the biggest threat to Vietnam's economy since 1979, when it almost collapsed because of similar problems. Increasingly vocal domestic critics accuse the government of moving too slowly to ease the food problem while doing nothing at all to stabilize prices and the currency.    &quot;The situation has reached crisis proportions,&quot; says Nguyen Xuan Oanh, a Harvard-trained government economic adviser. &quot;While the economy is crying for countermeasures against the price rises, there has been dead silence.&quot;    The latest developments are especially onerous for Vietnam, one of the world's poorest countries. Only recently has it tried to address its economic problems by introducing capitalist-style reforms, trying to attract Western investment and tourism, and increasing trade with capitalist countries. But it continues to lose development aid because of an international economic embargo imposed on Hanoi in 1979 over its occupation of neighboring Cambodia.    Despite the reforms, the country has been unable to feed itself. In the past several years, population growth has outstripped food production. Bad weather last year, including widespread drought, six typhoons and localized rice-bug infestation set off by an unusually warm winter, was disastrous. In 1987, unhusked-rice production fell to 17.6 million tons from 18.5 million tons in 1986, while the population grew by more than 1.3 million to an estimated 63.5 million.    And the bad weather has continued. Drought, disease and infestation are again taking a heavy toll, though equally damaging has been the absence of sunshine for the main, winter-spring crop in northern Vietnam, which is due to be harvested at the end of June and early July.    &quot;This crop will fail,&quot; says an international agricultural specialist. Experts say food output this year is unlikely to exceed 18 million tons, short of the 19 million-ton target that itself probably would be insufficient to feed the expanding population.    Chu Manh, vice minister of agriculture and food industry, last month convened a meeting of Western donor countries and agencies in Hanoi and told them the 1.5 million-ton food deficit from last year's crop failure is causing &quot;near-famine conditions in many areas of the country, especially in the provinces of the north.&quot; He also described this year's conditions as adverse, and said Hanoi is instituting an &quot;emergency crop-production plan&quot; requiring the delivery to Vietnam of $122 million worth of fertilizers and insecticides. A similar appeal went to the Soviet bloc.    In past weeks, officials have grown even more anxious, telling international agencies that four million people in northern Vietnam are &quot;near starvation&quot; and will need a total of 120,000 tons of rice to survive until the winter-spring crop is harvested. But Vietnamese sources now say a government report indicates that a total of seven million people are short of food. According to other reports -- unconfirmed, but believed in Hanoi -- some elderly and infirm people have died of hunger in Thanh Hoa, one of the more severely affected provinces.    With a chronic shortage of almost everything, Vietnam is ill-equipped to cope with the emergency. International agency officials in Hanoi say the government bureaucracy waited too long to ask for food to feed those facing immediate hunger.    To meet the shortage, the authorities have embarked on a repeat of last year's operation, when 500,000 tons of rice were moved northward from surplus southern areas by train, truck and small coastal vessel. With motor vehicles and rolling stock in short supply and poor condition, roads in an appalling state and cargo-handling capacity at ports extremely limited, movement is slow and difficult.    Initially, Vietnamese sources say, the initiative was taken by individual factories, state enterprises and provincial authorities, which sent trucks and boats to the south to buy supplies for their employees. Although the central government has now taken over, it isn't having much success buying rice, the sources say, apparently because it is unable or unwilling to pay soaring free-market prices.    Even if the emergency measures manage to prevent a disaster, the food shortage is likely to persist through the year. Already the shortage is helping drive up prices, though the main causes of the price hikes lie elsewhere. As Vietnamese tell it, the trouble started when government and Communist Party discussions of a possible further devaluation of Vietnam's currency, the dong, became public. Reform-minded officials wanted the dong -- devalued in December to 368 to the U.S. dollar from 80 -- to be devalued again to about 1,000 in February.    Anticipating the move, businessmen and others unloaded the dong and bought dollars and gold and other commodities. The flight from currency reached fever pitch when the general director of the State Bank of Vietnam, the central bank, said on television in March that new bank notes were to be issued the next day.    The introduction of 1,000-, 2,000- and 5,000-dong bills -- the biggest denominations in the country's history -- was meant to make handling large sums of money more convenient. Instead, it created panic.    Since the year started, the dong has tumbled on the black market to about 3,000 to the dollar from 1,000, while the price of gold has more than tripled. The prices of food, building materials and almost everything else are also out of control.    &quot;Inflation has reached a very critical stage,&quot; says Le Dang Doanh, a government economic adviser. &quot;It is a big burden on the shoulders of the workers.&quot; The dong's official exchange rate remains 368 to the dollar while the black-market rate, on which the country operates, sags daily. Spiraling prices encourage hoarding, theft and black-marketeering.    The long-suffering population openly expresses disillusionment with government and party leaders, though there are no signs of rebellion. Some foreign-educated Vietnamese say privately they don't think the government is capable of dealing with the economic and financial chaos. </TEXT></DOC>