<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880907-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Killer Bees Evade First Line of Defense In a Beeline for U.S. --- A Chemical Wall in Mexico Designed to Slow Arrival In Texas Has Little Effect </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Lu Carnevale (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> ML </CO><IN> CMD CHM </IN><G> AGD </G><TEXT>   The way the scientists saw it, the BRZ was supposed to be this country's first line of defense, a chemical wall that would neutralize the enemy. But when the onslaught hit in force this summer, the BRZ proved at best a porous Maginot Line. Now the experts are hoping a new set of defensive traps -- closer to the U.S. border -- will slow the advance.    The enemy here is the much-maligned &quot;killer bee,&quot; and the BRZ is the shorthand researchers use for the Bee Regulated Zone, a 125-mile-wide stretch of land across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in Mexico. The aggressive bees -- actually Africanized honeybees -- have been on maneuvers there all summer, confounding a joint U.S.-Mexican effort to slow their march through Mexico and into Texas. The scientists' tactics are straightforward: Kill as many bees as possible and dilute the genetic traits of the survivors to take some of the sting out of their orneriness. That strategy has given life to a new, albeit still small, arms industry: modern anti-bee warfare.    Under development are radar and infrared devices to track the intruders, instruments with elaborate electronics to identify them, genetic tactics to tame them and chemicals to kill them.    Martin Marietta Corp., the big defense contractor better known for its efforts on Titan rockets and MX missiles, is developing the Buzz Buster and the Bee Backpack. Meanwhile, researchers at the Agriculture Department and several universities are tinkering with formulas for synthetic pheromones -- chemicals that can be sex attractants and can lure the bees into traps.    These new gadgets and techniques probably can't be brought to market fast enough to stop the African bees from causing at least some disruption of the $150 million U.S. honey business, particularly in southern states where most commercial bees are produced. Moreover, farmers and ranchers also may have reason for worry. In South America, African bees have attacked cows, chickens and dogs, stinging until the animals dropped dead.    The bees broke through the BRZ by flanking traps in the west end of the zone. Within three months, other swarms probably will have flown beyond the BRZ on the opposite side.    Nevertheless, scientists are sticking to plans to trap and kill wild colonies in the BRZ and flood the area with European males. African bees generally dominate in mating, but the scientists hope to give a numerical edge to the calmer European honeybees, the type widely used throughout North America for honey production and crop pollination.    Farther north, researchers are setting hundreds of traps along three lines: a 100-mile stretch from the coastal town of La Pesca to Ciudad Victoria in Mexico; a 125-mile line from Tampico to Ocampo, also in Mexico; and a 100-mile section of the Rio Grande, roughly from Brownsville, Texas, to Rio Grande City.    Nonetheless, the bees are expected to reach Texas in a little more than a year, but just how far north they will spread is a matter of some debate. Most entomologists believe the tropical bees can't survive more than about four months of winter.    If they are correct, the greatest harm could come to the U.S. bee business in the south, particularly California, Florida and the Rio Grande Valley in Texas. Throughout the U.S., European bees are used to pollinate crops valued at about $20 billion. One study, however, suggests some African bees, if they get past all the lines of defense, could endure colder climates as far north as Canada.    &quot;We're using a very limited technology, and it's far from a perfect technology,&quot; acknowledges Orley Taylor, a University of Kansas entomologist who recently returned from the BRZ. The chemically baited traps are cardboard boxes eight inches tall, 15 inches deep and 20 inches long, with plastic bags attached for easy removal.    So far, they have been somewhat effective: Hundreds of colonies, each containing thousands of bees, have been caught in the traps. Researchers are using the boxes to test pheromone formulas to find what's most attractive to the African bees. They may later add an agent to kill or sterilize the bees, but steps first must be taken to keep the boxes away from impoverished Mexicans. &quot;People steal them,&quot; says Mr. Taylor. &quot;They burn the cardboard and use the plastic bags.&quot;    African bees may be gentle enough initially, but when agitated, they turn ugly fast. A cloud of hundreds of bees will rise up to attack, often pursuing a victim for some distance. Their venom is no more potent than that of their European kin, but their collective stinging can kill. While most victims have been animals, estimates of human deaths range from 300 to 4,000 since 1957, when 26 swarms were accidentally released in Brazil during breeding experiments.    The bees had been imported from Africa the year before in a failed effort to develop a better honey producer for the tropics. What emerged instead is a ferocious insect -- and only an average honey producer -- that looks just like a European bee.    Anita Collins, a member of the Agriculture Department's research team in Baton Rouge, La., doesn't wear a bee suit when working with European colonies. But, she says, &quot;when I go into an African yard, I wear two bee suits over blue jeans and a long-sleeved shirt, a pair of gloves and a veil.&quot;    As an extra precaution, researchers and beekeepers work in pairs, one doing the beekeeping work and the other constantly blowing smoke out of a small pot with bellows to keep the colony calm. &quot;Even still, you have large numbers of bees swarming around,&quot; Ms. Collins says.    In the field, it's nearly impossible to distinguish African bees -- unless they're upset. But in a laboratory, the differences become apparent when measurements of the two bees are compared. An African bee is somewhat smaller, has a shorter tibia and displays distinctive angles in the veins on its wings. Years ago, Ms. Collins and other researchers also noticed that the African bees sound different. That observation led to the hand-held Buzz Buster.    &quot;It's a little hand-held box, about the size of a cigarette pack, with a chamber that you put the bee in,&quot; says Michael Buchanan, a project manager at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which Martin Marietta operates under contract with the federal government. A microphone amplifies the buzz as the bee beats its wings while a sensitive tone-decoder microchip measures the sound's frequency. African bees are smaller, so they buzz at a higher frequency, around 260 hertz versus 220 for a European bee. A red signal lights up if the bee is African; a green signal indicates it is European.    &quot;We haven't had any mistakes in identifying pure African and pure European bees,&quot; Mr. Buchanan says. But the device, he concedes, has had some trouble distinguishing cross breeds.    Elsewhere at the National Lab, a small team is working on an infrared transmitter used for tracking the bees, called the Bee Backpack. It is about the size of a newborn baby's fingernail and weighs less than 47 milligrams, the maximum load for a worker bee.    Once developed, the device will be glued to bees' backs. It will then transmit infrared signals from microscopic, solarpowered laser diodes mounted on the backpack. Kelly Falter, one of the device's developers, says the microchip can track a bee as far as a mile away, as long as it is in the line of sight of a receiver. If all goes well, field tests will begin on European bees next spring.    In the fields outside Tucson, Ariz., scientists are using radar to track bees. They hope, among other things, to find out exactly where bees mate, says Gerald Loper, a researcher in the Agriculture Department's Carl Hayden Honeybee Laboratory. That data could help researchers and beekeepers genetically dilute aggressive strains.    While radar can't track individual bees, it works well on mass maneuvers. &quot;We've been able to find the flyways where drones go after they leave the apiary,&quot; said Mr. Loper. The narrow flyways, about 80 yards wide and two miles long, are crowded in late spring and early summer with as many as two thousand drones.    Within the flyways are dozens of congregation areas where drones are drawn, perhaps by queen bees on mating flights. The scientists are attempting to track bees and mating patterns in flyways to try to explain why African bees tend to be more successful than European bees in mating with available queens.    Eventually, the researchers hope to identify certain habits of the Africanized bees that can then be turned against the insects. For example, if the bees are inclined to mate in certain areas of a flyway, commercial beekeepers could move their breeding grounds elsewhere.    Whatever the success of this modern warfare, it looks as if the Africanized bees will be here to stay, so accommodation may prove the ultimate line of defense. Explains Ms. Collins: &quot;A small percentage of Africanized bees, say 10%, would be acceptable.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>