<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0129 </DOCNO><HL> States Step in Where OSHA Fails to Tread---By Elizabeth Holtzman</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORENVIRONMENT (ENV)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Federal nonenforcement of environmental and occupational-safety laws has reached a crisis level. The time has come for local and state authorities to take these matters into their own hands and prosecute polluters and employers who put their workers at risk.    The extent of these dangers was made alarmingly clear in the recent case of the Pymm thermometer factory in Brooklyn. Employees in this factory worked alongside puddles of poisonous mercury, with noxious vapors floating in the unventilated air. Worst of all was the secret cellar operation, where a worker without a mask and without even a pair of gloves would take broken thermometers from a cardboard box and put them in a primitive machine designed to recycle the mercury.    That worker, Vidal Rodriquez, now has irreversible brain damage from his exposure to mercury. Last October, my office, along with the state attorney general's office, filed criminal charges against the Pymm executives for allegedly allowing these abuses to take place.    But the Pymm story does not end there. State and federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration officials were aware of high levels of mercury at Pymm for more than 15 years without taking serious actions to prevent injury. Some fines were imposed, but Pymm was able to bargain these down to mere pittances, and won repeated extensions on compliance deadlines. The Pymm case &quot;was not OSHA's finest hour,&quot; as even Patrick Tyson, then-acting head of OSHA, said last year.    Pymm may be an extreme case, but it represents a nationwide trend. In 1985, there were 3,750 workplace fatalities in the U.S., up 21% from 1983. Some 5.5 million occupational injuries and illnesses were reported in 1985, up 13.5% from 1983.    During this same period, the pattern of OSHA enforcement established by the Reagan administration is clear: Hear no evil, see no evil. There are only 1,000 OSHA inspectors today, 289 fewer than in 1981; and 40% fewer inspections of manufacturers. Similar drops have occurred in OSHA citations, and between 1980 and 1985, total penalties dropped 42% to $14.9 million from $25.5 million.    The Reagan administration also has a poor record on the environment. Since Congress passed the Superfund in 1980 to clear up toxic-waste sites, the EPA has removed only eight sites from the 10,000 sites identified. The portions of the EPA budget for safe drinking water and pesticide control have been cut dramatically. And Reagan's opposition to the Clear Air Act and Clean Water Act is well known.    Given the failure of the federal government to protect workers and the environment, what can local residents do? One answer is criminal prosecution. The new Environmental Crimes Bureau in my office will investigate reports of releases of hazardous substances in the environment, and workplace deaths and injuries in Brooklyn, pursuing prosecution where warranted. Similar units are now in place in Los Angeles, Chicago and Milwaukee as prosecutors begin to fill the void left by federal regulatory agencies.    But criminal prosecution can affect only a small number of cases. There are other paths that states should follow. The federal law should be changed to allow states to enforce occupational safety and health laws side by side with the federal government. Concurrent jurisdiction will give workers a place to turn to when, as now, the federal government fails to protect them, and will also ease the efforts of state and local prosecutors by clearing up arguments of federal preemption.    States can train doctors and hospital personnel to recognize and report the signs of occupational injuries and illnesses. Given the paucity of inspections, worker injuries are one of the surest ways to identify employers who are breaking the law, and medical personnel have a crucial role to play in protecting workers.    Furthermore, state legislatures can enact laws giving workers a civil cause of action against employers who willfully violate state or federal safety and health laws. Under current law, employees must prove criminal negligence in order to sue their employers successfully; this standard should be relaxed so that willful violation is sufficient basis for a suit. The threat of damages surely would encourage many employers to comply with regulations.    Finally, states can fund environmental units in the offices of local prosecutors. Until recently, in New York state, for example, the state attorney general has had the sole responsibility for criminal prosecutions, a Herculean task indeed. The state could track criminal employers more effectively by helping local prosecutors to assume some of the responsibility. Statefunded units would also make it easier for prosecutors to handle crimes involving pollution, radiation and toxic waste.    Of course, none of these measures is a sufficient substitute for proper federal enforcement. But given the refusal of the Reagan administration to enforce environmental and occupational safety laws vigorously, it is vital that states not sit back while people are being poisoned.    It is distressing that federal laxity has created this problem, but it is a problem we cannot afford to ignore.    ---   Ms. Holtzman is district attorney of King's County, New York. </TEXT></DOC>