<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880204-0133 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Film: The Naked Truth: A Tale From the Czech </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Tomas, a handsome young surgeon, has a standard greeting for attractive women: &quot;Take off your clothes.&quot; His directness throws them off guard -- and he's handsome -- so they frequently do what he says. He has sex with them and goes home, where he always spends the night alone on a single bed. He's determined to travel &quot;light&quot; through life -- unbeholden to anyone or anything -- because he thinks that commitment of any kind will destroy him.    But opting out doesn't make him feel any better. In Prague, in the restless spring of 1968, the promiscuous Tomas sees that because he avoids politics as well as love or any other commitment, his life is empty.    Tomas is the rakish, soulful, ironic hero of &quot;The Unbearable Lightness of Being,&quot; Philip Kaufman's splendid film adaptation of the Czech exile Milan Kundera's dazzling novel, which was published in the U.S. four years ago. In Mr. Kundera's skillful hands, Tomas was a philosophical and artistic symbol within a complicated, pessimistic fable.    It was no small trick to project Tomas sympathetically onto film, where harsh objectivity might make him seem like a shallow lecher, at least at first. But by casting Daniel Day-Lewis as Tomas, Mr. Kaufman found a way to make the Kundera character vulnerable and tragic, even before he finds conviction and acts on it. Mr. Day-Lewis has already demonstrated his versatility with remarkable performances in &quot;My Beautiful Laundrette&quot; (as a homosexual punk) and &quot;Room With a View&quot; (as an insufferable, sniffy Victorian). The young actor's amused imperturbability and his dark, thin good looks help him now to make himself plausible both as a rake and, deeper down, someone troubled and noble.    &quot;Unbearable Lightness&quot; also presented Mr. Kaufman with other complexities. He had to translate its literary texture to the screen -- its metaphorical interplay of light and dark, its moody eroticism, its political and moral ambiguity, its playfulness. Well, of course, he didn't have to bother with any of this, but the challenge of getting it right obviously appealed to him, just as the quite dissimilar but equally complex challenge of turning Tom Wolfe's space epic &quot;The Right Stuff&quot; into a movie had inspired him in 1983.    With the help of the airy, folkish music of the turn-of-the-century Czech composer Leos Janacek, Mr. Kaufman creates a mood that feels authentically Czech: good-natured and spirited with an underlying sense of absurdity and impending disaster. It's hard to know exactly where Czechs get their quirky independence, since their country has always been caught geographically between East and West, doomed to be someone else's booty. Wherever they got it from, Mr. Kaufman has caught it in his film.    Politics, particularly the Russian crackdown on Alexander Dubcek's reforms in 1968, permeates the picture, but Mr. Kaufman has followed Mr. Kundera in making romantic passion the foreground of his epic-length (two hours, 52 minutes) movie. Tomas feels at one with Sabina, a sensual artist who's even more of an emotional loner than he is, but he marries Tereza, for whom love and fidelity are the same thing. &quot;I wish I could be like you,&quot; she tells her philandering husband. &quot;Insensitive.&quot;    With Sabina, played with feline charm and aloofness and sensuality by Swedish actress Lena Olin, Tomas feels free to indulge in his wildest fantasies -- because they can't exceed anything Sabina is willing to do. She likes to admire herself -- in her Sandamp;M black underwear and her jaunty black bowler hat -- in the mirror, the same mirror she stares at during her afternoon sexual acrobatics with Tomas. She likes the distance of the reflection; it keeps their passion at a comfortable distance. So their relationship is forever hot and forever cool.    Tereza is childlike, pale and flushed, in love with Tomas and mystified by him. When he asks her to take off her clothes, on their second meeting, she sneezes. But then, when they sleep together for the first time, he wakes up in the morning with her lying next to him and he knows something strange is happening to him. He's allowed this strange naif to violate his prohibition against all-night stands.    They met at a spa, where the young surgeon had been sent to perform an operation. Mr. Kaufman arranges this first meeting in an atmosphere of dreamy surrealism. He takes us on a tour of this place where, in room after room, sprawling flesh is being pounded and rubbed and oiled. As the camera pauses at the indoor swimming pool, to let us giggle at the old men playing serious chess while they stand in chestdeep water, a splash interrupts the game. The men pause briefly to glance at the girl streaking by in a plain black swimsuit.    She is Tereza, played by French actress Juliette Binoche with hesitant charm. When she and Tomas meet, she tells him she's reading &quot;Anna Karenina,&quot; perhaps a premonition of another imminent Russian invasion, or a portent of her own doomed love. For all her apparent shyness and naivete, she's got steel in her little backbone.    After she's moved to Prague to be with Tomas, and the Russians send their tanks to squash the Czech flirtation with liberalization, it is Tereza who becomes an activist. She's a photographer, who chronicles the beatings, the bodies sprawled on the street. (Mr. Kaufman has interspersed his own staged black-and-white invasion footage with the real thing.)    But, then, it isn't surprising at all. Tereza doesn't understand people like Tomas and Sabina, who try to float above it all. She is down in the trenches, falling in love, facing the enemy with her camera. However, the movie's (and the novel's) romanticized pessimism can find no peaceful place for anyone, not even a survivor like Tomas or a pragmatist like Tereza. </TEXT></DOC>