<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870603-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Hakim, Chief Money Man in Iran-Contra Affair,Is No Stranger to Payoffs and Shell Companies---By Edward T. PoundStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Iranian-American businessman Albert Hakim, the principal money man in the Reagan administration's covert Iran and Contra operations, is accustomed to financial sleight of hand.    Mr. Hakim, who was an agent for foreign companies in the shah's Iran, finessed three rival military groups by concealing his secret payoffs to each faction to win business for a U.S. concern, according to his 1983 testimony in a Connecticut lawsuit. The reason for his deception: Mr. Hakim said he feared for his safety and the loss of his military business.    Mr. Hakim, an international businessman and millionaire, is scheduled to testify soon before the Senate and House committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair. Under a grant of immunity, he is to be interrogated about his crucial role in managing the secret network of shell companies and offshore bank accounts used in the sale of U.S. weapons to Iran and the arms airlift to the Nicaraguan Contras.    Mr. Hakim didn't win many friends when he was questioned privately by lawmakers and congressional investigators. His public appearance was postponed last week after he claimed a hazy memory or lack of knowledge of many financial details, according to persons familiar with the private sessions. Although he served as interpreter between Americans and Iranians in the Iran-Contra affair, Mr. Hakim told investigators that he had difficulty understanding their questions, the sources say.    &quot;He's going to be a fascinating witness,&quot; predicts one lawmaker, &quot;but he's going to be an elusive one.&quot;    Another lawmaker, Sen. David Boren (D., Okla.), adds bluntly: &quot;I think he will be a very significant witness if he tells the truth.&quot;    Mr. Hakim still controls $7.7 million in profits from the Iran arms sales. More than $6 million has been moved out of Switzerland and worried lawmakers argue that the profits belong to the U.S. Given that view, his history of using fronts and offshore banks to funnel payoffs to the shah's generals and his responses during the private interviews, Mr. Hakim can expect a tough congressional reception.    Some lawmakers regard him as a skillful and manipulative profiteer. They were skeptical of his business partner, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, when he testified last month that patriotism, not profits, propelled him to supervise the Contra airlift operation and to arrange Iran weapons sales for the Reagan administration.    Sen. Boren, for one, believes that Mr. Hakim's credibility can't be evaluated until he provides complete access to Swiss banking records clarifying what happened to all $48 million that moved through his financial network from 1984 to 1986. In some cases, lawmakers say, money disappeared into accounts set up in the names of dummy companies. At the urging of the committees, Mr. Hakim turned over additional financial records this week.    A special federal prosecutor has been investigating Mr. Hakim and his partner, Gen. Secord, among others, for their roles in the Iran-Contra affair. Evasive and mysterious, Mr. Hakim has avoided attempts by reporters to interview him, and thus far two somewhat contradictory pictures of him have emerged.    One is of a smart and charming businessman, an especially cunning one when government and business mix, a man who has moved skillfully in political and intelligence circles. The second is of an investor whose insatiable appetite for profit makes him vulnerable to dubious investment schemes that have run from laser gun sights to submachine-gun manufacturing to cattle feed to timber.    Congressional investigators say that in recent years Mr. Hakim, who sells electronic security and surveillance systems, has extended his business reach beyond the U.S., Europe and the Middle East to include South Korea, where he has benefited from his second marriage to a South Korean and ties to high government officials.    Court files in the U.S. and immigration records (part of Mr. Hakim's immigration file is classified) show that Mr. Hakim was born in Iran 50 years ago. After attending college in the U.S. for three years, he returned to Tehran in 1958 and worked for his father's insurance business for a few years. For the next decade, he worked for a small Tehran company that dealt with the government of the shah, Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, and he diligently cultivated important contacts in the military.    In 1971, Mr. Hakim formed his own Tehran company, Multi-Corp. International Ltd., and his golden years of success began, propelled largely by payoffs to senior military officials. He also set up other companies in Switzerland, Panama and California, including Stanford Technology Corp., which sold electronic surveillance equipment to the Iranian government.    Former associates say that Mr. Hakim enjoyed close ties to Savak, the shah's secret police, and employed a former senior Savak agent. Moreover, during the mid-1970s, Mr. Hakim met his future business partner, Gen. Secord, who was stationed in Tehran as chief of the U.S. Air Force military assistance group for Iran.    Both Gen. Secord and Mr. Hakim were associates of, and engaged in financial transactions with, Edwin Wilson, the renegade former U.S. intelligence agent who later was imprisoned in the U.S. for illegally exporting arms and explosives to Libya. Someone close to Mr. Hakim says Mr. Wilson tried without success to drum up business for Mr. Hakim. He says the two men parted ways after Mr. Wilson failed to repay Mr. Hakim a loan of about $20,000.    As he developed his business style, Mr. Hakim, who now is a U.S. citizen and lives in a $500,000 hilltop home in northern California, cultivated a taste for fine wines, good food and the best hotels in Europe. He was quick to pick up a dinner check and entertained business guests at the finest restaurants, former associates say.    The U.S. Embassy in Tehran told visiting American business executives that Mr. Hakim was a reputable agent. A senior officer of Olin Corp., after meeting Mr. Hakim, wrote a memo a decade ago describing him as &quot;highly motivated and efficient. He . . . would feel at home among the 'ruling circles' of almost any country.&quot;    Mr. Hakim described his operating style in a deposition given four years ago in a lawsuit filed in a state court in New Haven, Conn., by Olin against him and a former senior employee of that Stamford, Conn.-based multinational concern. Mr. Hakim's Multi-Corp. International was Olin's agent in Tehran and helped the company win $50 million in ammunition sales and technical-assistance projects during the 1970s.    Mr. Hakim testified that, using Swiss bank accounts and Iranian middlemen, he routinely funneled most of his $6.1 million in Olin commissions to military officials, including some close to the shah. He said he made payoffs to win business for other companies. &quot;It was a business operation,&quot; Mr. Hakim explained. &quot;There were tens of other accounts like Olin within our own domain that we had handled in more or less the same way.&quot; Olin has said its top management at the time wasn't aware of Mr. Hakim's payoffs.    The Olin story sheds light on the details of his operations. Republic National Bank, New York, surfaced in the money trail then, just as it later was identified as a conduit for cash transfers in the Iran-Contra affair. Willard Zucker was already an attorney for Mr. Hakim in Geneva a decade ago, and as a principal in Cie. des Services Fiduciare, a financial services firm, he emerges as a lawyer and banker of sorts for the multitude of accounts used by Mr. Hakim and Gen. Secord.    Most important for investigators may be Mr. Hakim's statement in his deposition that he was a fiduciary himself, investing payments he made to Iranian officers who were in no position to manage -- or admit to -- profits abroad. The same question has been raised in the current scandal. While Gen. Secord has denied making any money, investigators are trying to learn whether a portion of the millions Mr. Hakim has retained from the Iran-Contra operations in fact represents hidden profits belonging to Gen. Secord.    ---   David Rogers contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>