<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881004-0171 </DOCNO><HL> Space, the New Trade Frontier </HL><AUTHOR> James C. Bennett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN FREST EUROP </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Space transportation, once an exotic pursuit of interest primarily to scientists and generals, has now taken its place alongside airlines and automobiles as a subject of down-to-earth trade negotiation. While manned launches, such as that of the space shuttle last week, still grab occasional headlines, industry observers are focusing more and more on the moves of trade negotiators. Terms such as dumping, subsidy, and trade barriers are added to space vocabularies once characterized by talk of apogees and azimuths. With one satellite launch having the same trade impact as the import of 10,000 Toyotas, trade officials, for their part, have begun to take space seriously.    The most recent example is the administration's ruling earlier last month to allow three U.S.-built satellites to be launched on Chinese rockets. Two of the satellites are being built by Hughes Aircraft Corp., a subsidiary of General Motors Corp., for Aussat, the Australian communications satellite authority. Aussat required the satellite manufacturers competing for its business to bid for the satellite and launch as a package. The Chinese, who reportedly are charging about $20 million for the launch (about half of what a Western launch would cost) were Hughes's choice for a launch provider. The third satellite, already built by Hughes, is the Westar-6, which was stranded in space, retrieved by the space shuttle, and refurbished. It was purchased by Asiasat, a British-Chinese consortium.    Some may wonder how a country like China, which is trying to break into the launch field, could possibly be competitive with advanced space powers like the U.S. and Europe. Yet most commercial-launch customers just want a ride -- they don't need the fancy capabilities of the space shuttle. If the space shuttle is the Indy 500 car of launch vehicles, and the American private vehicles being developed are like pickup trucks, then the Chinese launchers can be likened to a 1940 Army truck -- old, sturdy, not particularly efficient. But they'll do the job and if Beijing is subsidizing the cost, who cares?    There's one hitch for a U.S. customer, however. In order to launch a satellite on a Chinese rocket, an American company must take the satellite into China, and U.S. export controls forbid exporting sophisticated satellite technology to that country. So Hughes applied for a State Department export permit, claiming that the technology could be adequately guarded from copying, and that if it couldn't use a Chinese launcher, foreign satellite companies not so constrained would get the business.    Not so fast, space-transportation companies replied. This is not just a technology-transfer issue, this is a trade issue too. The Chinese are selling rides on rockets derived from old military missiles, built by workers paid in soft currency, operated by Chinese military personnel, and sold for whatever hard currency they can earn. There is no way U.S. (or European) launchers, built with free labor in hard-currency economies, can compete against the Chinese on price. If the Chinese can dump launch service on the world market, the U.S. commercial-launch industry cannot support launch capacity on the basis of its commercial business, much less afford to develop a newer, cheaper generation of launch vehicles. If you want a U.S launch industry, they say, you must keep out predators.    Furthermore, waiting in the wings are the Soviets, who have been actively marketing their launch services world-wide at low prices. The Soviets are a far bigger concern than the Chinese, who have only a limited number of launches a year to sell. The Soviets routinely conduct about 100 launches annually, and could expand that easily. If they could freely dump on the world market, it would be very hard for Western launchers to stay in business. The Soviets already have sold micro-gravity research time to a West German company on their Mir space station, and gained recent notoriety for their offer to sell a ride on Mir to John Denver.    After much lobbying from each side of the issue (with Hughes's parent company taking a very different stance than it does on Japanese auto imports) the administration rendered a less-than-Solomonic decision: Four U.S. payloads a year could ride on Chinese rockets, but after the initial three launches (&quot;introductory offers&quot;) China will have to abide by fair-trade rules, to be determined by bilateral negotiation. All the launches will have to abide by rules to be negotiated for protection of the sensitive U.S. technology in the satellites, and none of the launches is supposed to occur before both agreements have been concluded.    There are a lot of problems with this outcome, but the greatest one is this: It undermines the considerable progress already made toward genuine elimination of trade barriers and subsidies in space-transportation services. Space transportation has gone from a universally (and heavily) subsidized industry only five years ago to one in which the major non-communist supplier, the U.S., has entirely eliminated subsidies, and is now negotiating with the second-largest provider, the European Community, to create a subsidy-free industry standard.    If an agreement with the EC can be reached, it is widely expected that the Japanese, an up-and-coming commercial space power, will follow suit. But the administration's decision on the Chinese launches (which will go into effect unless Congress passes a resolution stopping it before Oct. 12) throws a monkey wrench into the works of this free-trade process. How can the U.S. ask its major trading partners to open their markets after it has made unreciprocated concessions to the Chinese?    Let there be no mistake about it: Space commerce is becoming international, as fully international as any other competitive, high-technology field of trade. A free flow of money, ideas and effort across international borders is becoming the norm -- outside the U.S., European and Japanese companies are exploring joint ventures and cooperation with one another, while American companies are becoming increasingly isolated. Trade and other political barriers must be torn down to permit American companies to compete and cooperate.    The protectionist road leads only to a stagnant space-launch industry, in which private American companies will be able to sell only to the U.S. government, and a moribund space-transportation-user community stuck with higher launch costs than those of its foreign competitors. The question is how to protect U.S. launch companies against genuine predation without shielding them from the forces of the market.    The only answer lies in continuing the hard, unspectacular task of trade negotiations, first with the EC and Japan, then reaching out to include the Chinese, and, provided that works well, ultimately providing for some kind of commercial interchange with the Soviets. The Europeans have a strong incentive to conclude a reasonable pact, since Europe would be sorely taxed to match the kind of prices the Chinese and the Soviets could (and do) offer.    The Europeans support the Ariane program for national-prestige and strategic reasons, and do not necessarily expect to make a profit. But if they faced extreme dumping from the Chinese and the Soviets, matching those prices would bleed the European space budget and cut into funding for the next generation of projects. The Europeans have been outspoken on the issue of the Soviets and Chinese. The Japanese are not eager to be accused of unfair trade practices in yet another area: They would likely be quite willing to join a trade agreement.    The U.S., Europe and Japan need an agreement that clearly identifies and eliminates subsidies, opens civil and commercial markets to all providers, and encourages private multinational ventures. Once an agreement has been reached, we can find ways to include the Chinese -- provided that a fair formula can be derived for dealing with their lack of hard cost numbers (this is done with varying degrees of success in other trade areas). Congress now has the challenge of rejecting the special deal with China as a bad compromise and setting the U.S. on the road to fair and free trade in space.    ---   Mr. Bennett is vice president for external affairs of American Rocket Co., a space-transportation firm in Camarillo, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>