<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871210-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan and Gorbachev Appear ApartOn More Arms Cuts, Afghan Withdrawal---By Gerald F. Seib and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST PN EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AIRLINES (AIR)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev met for a second day in a congenial atmosphere, but amid signs they haven't overcome their central differences over space-based missile defenses or a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan.    At the same time, in an apparent effort to reach beyond the White House and the final year of the Reagan presidency, Mr. Gorbachev continued to weave into his schedule meetings with political and opinion leaders. He began his day by meeting at the Soviet embassy with congressional leaders. Following a luncheon at the State Department, he met with a group of American editors, publishers and television executives.    Mr. Gorbachev, in a two-hour morning meeting with Mr. Reagan, talked in more detail about his ideas for withdrawing 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan. But U.S. officials complained later that, although the Soviet leader discussed a more specific timetable for withdrawing troops, he wasn't as flexible in the private discussions on that and other issues as Soviet officials have appeared to be in public.    Soviet officials accompanying Mr. Gorbachev have suggested to reporters that Moscow is prepared to withdraw its troops in as little time as eight months, and they have predicted flatly that the troops will be out some time next year.    But the Soviets also have sought to link the beginning of a withdrawal with a halt to U.S. aid to the Afghan resistance. And they have tried to secure American support for a coalition government dominated by the Afghan Communist party.    White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater wouldn't say whether Mr. Reagan is ready to discuss ending aid to the resistance, but he noted: &quot;Our position is that the question in Afghanistan is the removal of Soviet troops, and that is the first issue that has to be resolved.&quot; Other officials indicated last night that the two sides continue to squabble about the issue.    While lower-level officials continued to negotiate last night, U.S. officials said there isn't any sign yet that they have agreed on a way to overcome Soviet objections to President Reagan's plans for a Strategic Defense Initiative. That issue stands in the way of a breakthrough on an agreement to cut arsenals of long-range nuclear weapons by 50%.    Spokesmen from both countries continued to assert that, whatever their differences on specific issues, President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev continue to get along well personally.    &quot;The president and the general secretary were very pleased with the meetings this morning,&quot; Mr. Fitzwater said. &quot;I think they left on a very optimistic note.&quot;    But in his meeting with editors, publishers and TV executives, Mr. Gorbachev indicated that some sparks also have flown in his sessions with Mr. Reagan and congressional leaders. The Soviet leader said that he and Mr. Reagan &quot;talk less and less in platitudes to each other. We deal more in practicalities.&quot; But he also complained that he was tired of being lectured about human rights by Mr. Reagan and U.S. lawmakers, and said he told Mr. Reagan that he isn't &quot;on trial here.&quot;    Mr. Reagan chose to be more upbeat. In an interview with four syndicated columnists yesterday, Mr. Reagan said the talks show that he and Mr. Gorbachev lead &quot;systems that are different but that can live in peace with each other.&quot; He added that &quot;the fundamental change is that in the past Soviet leaders always expressed the belief of Marxian theory in a one-world Marxian state&quot; but that &quot;they no longer feel that way,&quot; acording to an account of the interview provided to the Associated Press by columnist Georgie Anne Geyer of the Universal Press Syndicate.    Earlier, Mr. Gorbachev sought to build personal bridges of his own to congressional leaders who will be instrumental in deciding whether the treaty eliminating medium-range and shorter-range missiles, which the two leaders signed Tuesday, will be ratified quickly and cleanly by the Senate. In an attempt to avoid clouding the ratification debate with other issues, Mr. Gorbachev proposed establishing a group composed of U.S. lawmakers and members of the Soviet Politburo to discuss human rights practices in both countries.    Though the lawmakers quickly embraced the idea, administration officials have rejected similar proposals in the past, arguing that they imply wrongly that U.S. and Soviet human rights situations are comparable. And Mr. Gorbachev's effort to separate the issues of human rights and the ratification of the new arms pact isn't likely to succeed in quelling objections to the treaty or discussion of human rights during the ratification debate.    After their meeting with Mr. Gorbachev, lawmakers said they were impressed by the Soviet leader's candor and directness in a discussion that covered arms control, human rights, Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf and Central America.    Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.), who first met Mr. Gorbachev in the Soviet Union in 1979, said: &quot;He has a very different style from his predecessors. He's articulate, aggressive and is trying to move his country forward . . . I'm very impressed with this man. He can hold his own in any debating forum. But changes in styles don't necessarily mean changes in direction.&quot;    Senate Minority leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.), a Republican presidential candidate, was less generous. &quot;I don't trust him yet,&quot; Sen. Dole said. &quot;We need to see some action . . . I see no advances on human rights, I see no advances on regional conflicts.&quot;    Sen. Dole cautioned: &quot;I don't think we ought to be swept away with glasnost fever. . . . There's been a lot of hype.&quot; Glasnost, or openness, is Mr. Gorbachev's term for the process of easing some controls on free expression in the Soviet Union.    Despite the general optimism surrounding the summit, Mr. Gorbachev's interest in restraining President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative and the president's commitment to the space-based missile defense program remain the central obstacles to the strategic arms agreement both sides want. At the two leaders' last meeting 13 months ago in Reykjavik, Iceland, they took huge strides toward agreeing to further cuts in nuclear weapons, but the summit foundered at the last minute when they were unable to resolve their differences over SDI.    So far, the two leaders apparently have avoided tackling the divisive issue themselves by delegating it to a working group headed by veteran U.S. arms negotiator Paul Nitze and Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev, the chief of the Soviet general staff. The group was scheduled to conclude its work late yesterday, but President Reagan and Mr. Gorbachev weren't to discuss the results until today, the final day of the three-day summit.    The working group also discussed possible cuts in Western alliance and Warsaw Pact conventional forces in Europe. Soviet officials have said they are willing to make deeper cuts than the West in areas such as tank forces, where the Soviet bloc has conventional superiority. They also have pressed for a treaty banning chemical weapons.    While arms control discussions continued, U.S. and Soviet officials did wrap up three minor agreements yesterday, including one designed to improve verification of two unratified treaties limiting the size of underground nuclear tests. Under the agreement, U.S. inspectors next month will visit the Soviet nuclear test site at Semipalatinsk in Siberia, and Soviet technicians will visit the American test site in Nevada. The agreement also will enable each country to monitor two tests on the other's soil in order to check the accuracy of its instruments.    Secretary of State George Shultz and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze signed a pact expanding commercial airline service between New York and Moscow beginning next May. Under the agreement, Pan American World Airways and Aeroflot, the Soviet national airline, jointly will begin the first nonstop service between New York and the Soviet capital. The Pan Am Corp. unit will provide planes and pilots, and both airlines will provide flight attendants.    A Pan Am spokesman said the agreement between Pan Am and Aeroflot was approved by the State Department Oct. 27, but was contingent on the pact that Mr. Shultz and Mr. Shevardnadze signed yesterday.    The spokesman said Aeroflot will be responsible for selling half the tickets for each flight. He added that the airlines will provide three flights a week each way during the summer, two flights a week in the spring and fall, and one flight a week in the winter. A nonstop flight from New York to Moscow will take about eight hours to travel 4,646 miles. Current Pan Am service between the U.S. and Moscow includes one stop, in Frankfurt, West Germany.    Mr. Shevardnadze also gave Mr. Shultz a note extending for a year an agreement promoting cooperation in oceanographic research.    Meanwhile, Mr. Gorbachev's wife, Raisa, has kept a busy schedule of her own during the summit, visiting a number of tourist attractions and attending some of the meetings between her husband and Americans. At times, Mrs. Gorbachev's chatty style has upstaged that of the cool Mrs. Reagan.    When asked about how she liked the White House during her tour yesterday morning with Mrs. Reagan, Mrs. Gorbachev said: &quot;It's an official house. A human being would like to live in a regular house. This is a museum.&quot; She added that &quot;Mrs. Reagan is kind enough to tell me about the history in this house.&quot;    In a forthcoming book, former White House spokesman Larry Speakes has said that Mrs. Reagan views the Soviet first lady as a &quot;dogmatic Marxist who simply spouts Communist philosophy.&quot; But yesterday, Mrs. Reagan described as &quot;so silly&quot; all the talk about her feeling competitive with Mrs. Gorbachev.    ---   Ellen Hume contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>