<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880906-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- The Issues: Facing Reality -- Bush-Dukakis Division On Economic Policies May Narrow in Practice --- Federal Deficits Are Likely To Override Philosophies; Avoiding Talk of Tax Rise --- Half Full or Half Empty? </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and Alan Murray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> ECO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- George Bush and Michael Dukakis say they have broad philosophical differences on the government's role in the economy: Mr. Bush thinks it is part of the problem, Mr. Dukakis thinks it should be part of the solution.    But interviews with the two men and scrutiny of their stated positions suggest that the gulf in economic policy may be deeper in theory than in practice. Mr. Bush is far less anti-government than Ronald Reagan. And Mr. Dukakis's activism is inhibited by the stark reality of huge budget deficits and his natural frugality.    &quot;Given that the constraints are very heavy, there aren't a lot of differences,&quot; says a Democratic economist, Alice Rivlin. A Republican economist, Rudolph Penner, agrees that there isn't &quot;much difference between the two in terms of fiscal policy.&quot; Adding a sharper perspective, one longtime GOP economist who insists on anonymity says: &quot;If you look at Carter and Reagan as left and right, these candidates have both moved in&quot; toward the middle.    Both candidates dodge suggesting specific budget cuts or revenue increases to close the budget gap. Edmund Pratt, the chairman of Pfizer Inc. and head of the Business Roundtable, complains that neither candidate &quot;is dealing with what the business community feels is the crushing problem, and that's the double deficits, budget and trade.&quot;    Instead, Mr. Bush talks of a &quot;flexible freeze&quot; in spending, and Mr. Dukakis says he would raise money by catching tax evaders. In any event, the deficits and political resistance to tax increases or to cuts in big domestic spending programs, such as Social Security, will leave both men with little room for budget maneuvering.    The most apparent differences in economic policy may lie in initiatives that wouldn't directly drain the federal Treasury but would have other broad economic and social consequences.    Mr. Dukakis, for instance, supports a sweeping plan to require businesses to provide minimum health-insurance benefits to employees, endorses increases in the minimum wage and wants to toughen antitrust enforcement. Mr. Bush opposes such steps, arguing that they would increase the cost of doing business and block the enormous growth in jobs he has promised.    Behind the two candidates' proposals lies a predictable but basic dispute on the current health of the economy: Mr. Bush sees the economic glass half full, and Mr. Dukakis insists it is half empty.    Mr. Bush emphasizes that the Reagan administration has more than halved inflation and interest rates and has driven unemployment to its lowest level in a decade. Early in the campaign, he called the deficit &quot;public enemy No. 1,&quot; but in an interview now he says he doesn't think it &quot;is the big economic issue.&quot; He adds, &quot;I think it is to keep the recovery going. And I think it's to create more jobs.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis argues that, behind the statistics, economic gains are uneven and temporary. He emphasizes the problems of areas bypassed by growth, such as the Rio Grande Valley and the Iron Range in Minnesota. And he contends that by more than doubling the federal debt and allowing the U.S. to become the world's largest debtor, the Reagan administration has threatened the nation's economic future.    &quot;We've been living on the tab for eight years,&quot; he says in an interview. &quot;And that's going to hurt us.&quot;    From these differing views of America spring differing philosophical approaches to the economy. Mr. Dukakis says government must be an active partner with business and labor in creating more competitive industries and ensuring that all share in prosperity. &quot;I'm somebody who believes that the thing that works these days in this country is very strong and vital public-private partnerships, in which public resources and private investment combine, especially in communities and regions that need economic growth and new jobs,&quot; he says.    By contrast, Mr. Bush asserted in a recent television interview: &quot;I think the government role in the economy should be keeping the markets as free as possible, providing opportunity for individuals, keeping tax rates down and providing an economic climate in which employment can increase.&quot;    When it comes to practical matters, nevertheless, the two candidates often end up surprisingly close to each other. In choosing Indiana Sen. Dan Quayle as his running mate, Mr. Bush repeatedly emphasized the job-retraining program that Sen. Quayle co-wrote with liberal Democratic Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts; that program helps finance a Massachusetts training program that Mr. Dukakis frequently promotes.    When asked for an example of effective government involvement in the economy, the Dukakis campaign often cites Sematech -- a public-private semiconductor research group started under the Reagan administration.    Similarly, although the two candidates have differing approaches to dealing with the federal budget, many analysts doubt that the results would differ drastically.    Mr. Bush's proposed &quot;flexible freeze&quot; in the budget would allow spending to rise only enough to match inflation. Meantime, Mr. Bush argues, economic growth will increase government revenues and bring the $150 billion budget deficit near zero by 1993. He repeatedly rules out raising taxes to handle the budget deficit.    Within his &quot;frozen&quot; budget total, there would be increases in spending for programs Mr. Bush considers important and decreases for others. For example, he proposes granting $500 million in annual awards to schools with disadvantaged students. He also endorses a proposed multibillion-dollar space program to launch an observation platform to study the environment. On defense, aides suggest that the vice president would increase spending only enough to match inflation.    Frequently, Mr. Bush proposes accomplishing his domestic goals by creating new tax breaks, which could aggravate the deficit. He has proposed a $2.2 billion child-care program, including a &quot;toddler tax credit&quot; to defray day-care costs for low-income parents. Proposals to encourage oil and gas drilling and institute college savings bonds would cost the Treasury $630 million in revenue the first year, aides say. Mr. Bush also wants to cut the capital-gains tax rate to 15% from 28%, though he insists that that step would increase revenues by generating new investments. And he favors tax-free enterprise zones for rural development.    Taken together, the changes could undermine President Reagan's 1986 Tax Reform Act. &quot;Do I favor opening up the tax structure to do certain things?&quot; Mr. Bush says. &quot;Yes, I do. . . . There's a Bush difference&quot; with President Reagan.    But Mr. Bush doesn't say much about what programs he would cut, or even slow down, to offset the cost of the new programs he proposes -- though he has suggested eliminating some relatively small ones such as the Economic Development Administration. His theory of deficit reduction rests largely on the premise that the nation can grow its way out of the hole.    &quot;The main point is that people are inclined to underestimate growth and how much revenue comes in,&quot; he says. Indeed, Mr. Bush is so upbeat about growth that he pledges to create 30 million jobs in eight years -- a goal that even his own economists consider totally unrealistic.    Mr. Dukakis, by contrast, essentially promises big government programs on the cheap -- a kind of leveraged liberalism. And he is at least as vague as his opponent in explaining how he would raise revenues to pay for these programs while also cutting the deficit.    Mr. Dukakis proposes something grandly called the &quot;Fund to Rebuild America,&quot; to give grants for new businesses in depressed areas -- but plans just $500 million to finance it. He endorses the concepts in a $2.5 billion child-care bill proposed by liberal Democrats in Congress -- but says he can't promise to spend that much money on it. He generally lauds a low-income housing plan calling for $3 billion in its first year -- but aides say he envisions spending considerably less.    Mr. Dukakis also has endorsed an ambitious measure, sponsored by Democratic Rep. Claude Pepper of Florida, to provide long-term health care to the elderly. It would cost $9 billion a year by 1993, according to the Congressional Budget Office, and would be paid for by increasing payroll taxes on upper-income workers.    Mr. Dukakis does propose big offsetting spending cuts at the Pentagon, where he pledges to kill the MX and Midgetman missiles, cancel two new aircraft-carrier battle groups and shrink the Strategic Defense Initiative. But it isn't clear how much of the billions of dollars saved would be available for social programs, because Mr. Dukakis proposes funneling an unspecified amount into improving conventional forces. In general, aides say, Mr. Dukakis might raise defense spending enough to match inflation, but no faster.    Paradoxically, while Mr. Bush proposes tinkering with the tax revision passed in 1986 under the GOP administration, Mr. Dukakis supports the current law. &quot;I think there is a lot to be said for sticking with the Tax Reform Act for the sake of consistency and predictability,&quot; Mr. Dukakis says. He argues that &quot;no serious candidate&quot; can rule out tax increases, but he vows that he would turn to them only as a last resort.    Pressed about where he would raise more revenue, Mr. Dukakis says money could be saved by reforming the welfare system and shrinking agricultural subsidies. He also cites studies suggesting that $35 billion a year could be raised by catching tax cheats. And like Mr. Bush, he predicts that lower interest rates and greater economic growth during his administration will bolster revenues.    In areas outside the budget, the Dukakis-Bush gulf deepens.    Mr. Dukakis backs an ambitious set of proposals to require businesses to provide more benefits to employees. Heading that list is his plan to require employers to provide certain minimum health-insurance benefits. That wouldn't directly cost the Treasury anything, but Dukakis campaign officials acknowledge that it would cost businesses more than $20 billion a year. Mr. Dukakis also favors requiring companies to grant employees parental leave.    He also indicates that he would roll back some of the deregulation pushed through during the Reagan years, particularly pledging tougher antitrust policies.    &quot;I don't want to stop mergers and acquisitions,&quot; Mr. Dukakis says in the interview. &quot;On the other hand, I think, and most people agree, that a good, vigorous antitrust policy is in the best interest of a competitive America. Look at the airline industry to see what happens when there is effectively no antitrust policy.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis's goal, says economic adviser Lawrence Summers, would be to support deregulation if it benefits consumers but oppose it if it threatens health or safety. &quot;Where regulation is pro-consumer, he is for it,&quot; Mr. Summers says.    Mr. Dukakis's belief in an active government earned him plenty of enemies in the business community during his time as governor of Massachusetts. Howard Foley, the president of the Massachusetts HighTech Council, complains that the governor's much-vaunted public-private partnerships always &quot;have government as the majority stockholder.&quot;    But some businessmen praise the governor's willingness to compromise with business people. &quot;It's wrong to suggest he's pro-business,&quot; says Donald Melville, former chairman of Norton Co. in Worcester, Mass. &quot;But I think he's pragmatic. He's a reasonable person to work with.&quot;    Mr. Bush, on the other hand, opposes nearly all these required benefit and regulatory proposals, contending that they would increase business costs and make U.S. companies less competitive. &quot;Interventionist government,&quot; he argues, &quot;is part of the problem.&quot;    But his interest in reducing government interference in the economy lacks the ideological fervor expressed by President Reagan. Unlike the president, Mr. Bush asserts: &quot;I don't hate government.&quot; Former Reagan adviser William Niskanen says the vice president's work as head of a regulatory-relief task force showed a commitment to deregulation that fell &quot;far short of zeal.&quot; In the end, the economist says, most of the task force's proposals were set aside for political reasons.    Moreover, Mr. Bush hasn't emphasized deregulation in his campaign. Other than a few proposals to cut back regulation in the oil and gas industry, he has avoided specific proposals. And he has suggested greater government efforts may be needed to clean up the environment.    While a Dukakis administration would be likely to impose more new regulations than a Bush administration, Mr. Penner, the Republican economist, says: &quot;I would expect that even by the end of a Bush administration, there would be more regulatory costs than there are today.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>