<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870819-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Trade in Human Tissue Needs Regulation---By Emanuel Thorne</HL><DD> 08/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Transplants of human hearts, livers, kidneys, corneas, skin and bones are now commonplace, and new uses for human body parts are proposed almost daily. A human-tissue &quot;industry&quot; is emerging both here and abroad that will require international agreement to ensure that tissue is harvested humanely.    A few examples of where the tissue industry is headed show why even a well-designed U.S. policy is likely to be inadequate:    --Recent reports indicate that transplants of adrenal glands, which produce dopamine, into the brains of Parkinson's patients may ease their tremors. When the transplant procedure is perfected, the tissue of choice will be dopamine-producing fetal brain cells. Some success with transplanting fetal brain tissue has already been achieved with apes.    Since well-matched fetal tissue probably will be in short supply, women may conceive, intending to harvest and transplant the fetus's tissue. Indeed, this has already been proposed. One woman, whose father suffers from renal disease, sought to be artificially inseminated with his sperm so that she might abort the fetus in the third trimester and transplant its kidneys into her father. Physicians believe that the tissue match would be nearly perfect. She was refused and no such arrangements have as yet been reported in the U.S.    In West Germany, however, a transplant of a fetal organ into an adult has already happened. The New England Journal of Medicine reported that scientists there have successfully transplanted three kidneys from two anencephalic fetuses (fetuses without sufficient brain development for cognitive function and incapable of living more than a few weeks after birth) into two children aged four and nine, and one 25-year-old adult.    The potential uses of fetal tissue make the temptation to conceive with the intent to abort almost inevitable. Even if the U.S. were to ban the use of tissue from viable -- or even inviable -- fetuses, nothing prevents desperate people from seeking such help overseas.    --Tissue increasingly is being used to develop commercial products. A physician recently developed a patentable cancer-fighting product from the spleen of one of his leukemia patients. The patient is suing the physician for the economic value of his spleen. Of course, if U.S. courts decide that individuals do not have economic rights to their tissue, nothing prevents them from selling their tissue overseas.    --Couples like William and Elizabeth Stern could extract their own fertilized egg, pack it in dry ice, and export it to a poor country where, for a relatively small sum, the embryo could be transplanted into a surrogate mother, carried to term and &quot;imported&quot; back to the U.S.    Clearly, human beings have become useful to each other in ways never before possible. In the U.S. last year, 1,400 hearts, 8,000 kidneys, 30,000 corneas and 900 livers were transplanted at a total cost of nearly $1 billion. The transplant industry currently helps between 25,000 and 50,000 Americans each year, and many more could benefit if the supply of organs were not limited by the requirement that donors be relatively young and healthy.    A transplant industry based upon fetal-tissue technology could dwarf the present organ-transplant industry. Fetal-cell implants have the potential to offer relief to several million Americans, including one million with Parkinson's disease, 2.5 million to three million suffering from Alzheimer's disease, 25,000 with Huntington's disease, 400,000 stroke victims, 5.8 million diabetics, and several hundred thousand people with spinal-cord injuries.    The 1.2 million fetuses aborted annually in the U.S., together with the ability of individuals to arrange their own source of tissue by conceiving with the intent to abort, make the supply of fetal tissue potentially abundant. In the absence of ethical and legal guidelines, a transplant industry based on fetal tissue can be expected to thrive.    What types of tissue transfers should be allowed and what types should be restricted? In the U.S., the use of human tissue is governed by a patchwork of laws, enacted without a unifying vision, offering little to guide policy on new developments. This is not surprising, since the laws were never designed to deal with the radical scientific advances we are now witnessing. The Baby M case, in which lawyers attempted to apply property and contract law, illustrated the inadequacy of existing legal conventions at the technological and social frontiers where we increasingly find ourselves.    (It may be left to the Internal Revenue Service to have the last word on the nature of the Baby M contract. If the IRS decides to tax the money received by the biological mother as earnings derived from the sale of a capital asset, then the contract must have been for the sale of a baby and, if baby-selling is illegal, the baby should belong to the biological mother. However, if the money is taxed as earnings derived from providing a service, then the contract must have been for the rental of a uterus and, if such rentals are legal, the baby should belong to the Sterns.)    Even a well-designed U.S. policy on human tissue is likely to be inadequate for two reasons:    First, what is illegal in the U.S. may be legal in another country. To restrict undesirable transfers in an increasingly mobile world, the U.S. will have to coordinate its policy with that of other countries.    Second, since a successful transplant requires a precise match of donor and recipient tissue, countries must trade tissue in order to form a sufficiently large pool. Several hundred U.S. kidneys were shipped overseas last year because recipients with the right tissue match could not be found among the 10,000 Americans awaiting kidney transplants. Smaller countries have an even greater need to trade.    Trade in tissue is fundamentally unlike trade in other goods because we ask people to donate their tissue or the tissue of loved ones. For a trading system based on altruism to work, the ethical values of donor and recipient, and of their societies' laws, require greater harmony than for other types of trade.    Can there be successful trade between a highly egalitarian society in which the person with the best tissue match gets the organ and another society in which the organ is sold to the highest bidder? And what about trade with a country whose people receive transplants but whose religion prohibits them from mutilating the dead body and, therefore, from donating organs? Can a system function in which some countries define death as occurring when the heart stops, thus barring them as a source for heart transplants?    The answer to all of these questions is that people are unlikely to donate their tissue or the tissue of their loved ones unless they are convinced that the allocation system reflects their ethical values. At a minimum, countries must harmonize the laws on human-tissue transfer within trading regions. International consensus on the proper use of human tissue would be even better.    The horrors of World War II led a military tribunal at Nuremburg to lay down the first generally accepted code on human experimentation in 1947. In 1964, the Declaration of Helsinki (revised in 1975) regarding clinical trials and research was adopted by the World Medical Association. Most countries have incorporated these principles into their domestic laws, and the principles have been extremely effective in curtailing the worst experimental abuses. There is nothing comparable at the international level governing the use of human tissue for transplantation.    Not only is the human-tissue industry largely unregulated, but its basic organization is still unformed; even its size and extent are unknown. Soon, powerful interests are likely to become vested in how this industry is organized and regulated. Once established, the attitudes they shape and the institutions they create will be difficult to undo. Allowing the human-tissue industry to develop without humane, universally accepted guiding principles may lead to terrible abuses of human rights while at the same time denying to many the transplant miracle.    ---   Mr. Thorne is an economist at the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies in Washington, D.C., and co-author of a recent report for Congress's Office of Technology Assessment on the use of human tissue in biotechnological research. </TEXT></DOC>