<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890915-0033 </DOCNO><DD> = 890915 </DD><AN> 890915-0033. </AN><HL> Economy:@  House Panel Clears Capital-Gains Tax Cut@  ---@  Members Also Vote to Limit@  Federal Tax Refunds@  For Corporate LBOs@  ----@  By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/15/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> TAXES LABOR </CO><IN> FINANCIAL, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)INSURANCE (INS)HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS, MEDICINE, DENTISTRY (HEA)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BANKS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TELEPHONE SYSTEMS (TLS)AIRLINES (AIR)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)SAVINGS AND LOANS, THRIFTS, CREDIT UNIONS (SAL)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><GV> CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </GV><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After months of wrangling, the House Ways and Means Committee approved a reduction in the tax on capital gains.    The 19-17 vote was a big victory for President Bush and a defeat for the committee's chairman, Illinois Democrat Dan Rostenkowski.    As part of the same legislation, the committee also voted to limit tax refunds for corporations involved in leveraged buyouts and to repeal a tax law that compelled companies to offer comparable health fringe benefits to both top executives and rank-and-file workers. The provisions are part of a much larger piece of legislation the panel approved last night, also by a vote of 19-17. The measure includes tax increases, tax reductions and other law changes meant to cut the federal deficit in line with congressional budget directives. It is intended to reduce the projected deficit for fiscal 1990, which begins Oct. 1, by $8 billion. The tax changes, on balance, would add about $6 billion to U.S. coffers in fiscal 1990.    The capital-gains measure, authored by Rep. Ed Jenkins (D., Ga.), is opposed by the Democratic leadership in Congress. Still, it has a good chance of passing the House because it is backed by a solid phalanx of Republicans and a minority of Democrats.    In the Senate, it will be competing with a proposal by Sen. Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas) to expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts, which would benefit many more people. Still, Sen. Bentsen said yesterday that the House committee's action will make it &quot;more difficult&quot; to gain approval of the IRA provision in the Senate Finance Committee, which he heads.    Although administration officials had been trying to find some compromise that both Republicans and Rep. Rostenkowski could support, they nonetheless were pleased by the committee vote. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady called it &quot;a major step forward in providing incentives for long-term investment in the U.S.&quot;    But Rep. Rostenkowski said the vote &quot;is a disappointment to me, and it is going to be a financial disaster for this country.&quot;    For most of this year, the chances of a capital-gains tax cut seemed minuscule. But in the spring, at the behest of the president, Rep Rostenkowski floated the idea of a temporary cut as a way to raise revenue for deficit reduction. After that, the genie was out of the bottle.    Though Rep. Rostenkowski later backed off at the urging of many fellow Democrats, Rep. Jenkins was able to quietly knit together a coalition of six Democrats and all 13 of the committee's Republicans in support of the capital-gains measure that passed yesterday.    The result will be a partisan conflagration, though chances are strong that the proposal will succeed, at least in its next step in the legislative process -- the House floor.    A leading challenge is Sen. Bentsen's proposal to extend deductible IRAs to all taxpayers instead of reducing the capital-gains tax. He said yesterday that his plan to expand IRAs probably wouldn't take effect until 1991.    House Majority Leader Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.,), speaking for the Democratic leadership, derided the vote on capital gains. He said a cut in the capital-gains rate would benefit only the wealthiest Americans and that middle-income and lower-income taxpayers will end up paying for the revenue-losing measure.    &quot;The question is who pays for this folly,&quot; Mr. Gephardt said. &quot;The answer is clear.&quot; Mr. Gephardt also disputed the contention that the cut would stimulate economic growth. &quot;There is no evidence that a cut in capital gains will invigorate the economy,&quot; he said.    But Rep. Bill Archer (R., Texas), a cosponsor of the proposal, said, &quot;This is a big win for the country. What we're doing is ensuring the creation of jobs and more investment.&quot; He said the fight on the House floor will be bruising, but Republicans and enough Democrats support the measure for it to win.    Mr. Gephardt said several Democratic alternatives are being drafted in preparation for the floor battle, although three of those were rejected by the panel yesterday: the expanded IRA, an increase in the top nominal tax rate on the richest taxpayers to 33% from the current 28%, and targeting the benefit of the capital-gains tax cut to middle-income taxpayers.    In line with the wishes of Rep. Rostenkowski, the panel decided to repeal the fringe benefit law, known as Section 89. The law was vigorously opposed by business and labor lobbyists as overly complicated. Rep. Rostenkowski had tried to simplify it, but was overwhelmed and bowed to pressure for repeal, saving only minor parts.    In addition, the plan would give a temporary extension, through Dec. 31, 1991, to the 25% deduction that self-employed individuals can take for the purchase of health insurance. This is in line with a bill proposed by Rep. Byron Dorgan (D., N.D.).    But to pay for the provision, the panel accepted a proposal of Sen. Bentsen that would limit federal tax refunds for corporate leveraged buy-outs. The provision would reduce the amount of losses that can be carried back for tax purposes by corporations that replace equity with debt.    In leveraged buy-outs and certain corporate restructurings, companies often take on large amounts of debt to buy back stock. In the early years after these transactions, interest on the debt sometimes wipes out profit. Under the Bentsen bill, companies that have enough losses because of this kind of debt to claim refunds of taxes paid on previous years' profit would be prevented from claiming those refunds. Instead, they would have to deduct the losses against profit in future years. The legislation would raise $200 million in fiscal 1990, which begins Oct. 1, and $1.8 billion over five years.    Separately, Rep. Robert Matsui (D., Calif.) backed off on a plan to offer an amendment to force utility companies to refund to ratepayers billions of dollars in taxes they collected but didn't have to pay because of tax rate reductions in 1986.    The Matsui bill faced near-certain defeat, and representatives of utilities were eager to get it voted down. Instead, Mr. Matsui extracted a promise from the chairman that hearings would be held on the issue and vowed to fight on.    Capital Gains    Initially the Jenkins plan would allow individuals to exclude from income 30% of any gain from the sale or exchange of capital assets held for more than one year. Eligible assets would include such things as securities, depreciable real estate and timber but not collectibles, such as artworks or antiques.    The exclusion, which amounts to a 19.6% top rate, would apply to assets sold beginning yesterday and ending Dec. 31, 1991.    Individuals who sell eligible assets after Dec. 31, 1991, would be permitted to exclude from taxation any gain attributable to inflation after that date. The maximum effective tax rate on that gain would be 28% under the plan.    According to congressional estimates, the Jenkins capital-gains tax reduction would actually raise $2.9 billion in the fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 1990, and would raise $3.8 billion in fiscal 1991 and $2.7 billion in fiscal 1992. That's because the lower rate is expected to increase the turnover of assets.    But starting in fiscal 1993, the plan would lose revenue, compared with current law. In fiscal 1993 it would cost the Treasury $5.7 billion and in fiscal 1994 $5.2 billion. Over the five years, the Jenkins capital-gains reduction would cost the government $1.5 billion.    Treasury estimates are similar, but Treasury analysts project the plan will yield $2.4 billion in revenue in fiscal 1990, $500 million less than the congressional figure. The Treasury estimate will be used by the White House budget office to decide whether Congress has done enough to avoid automatic spending cuts this fall. Over five years, the Treasury said, the Ways and Means panel plan would cost the government $2 billion.    Tax Reductions    The short-term revenue increases would finance the extension of several popular tax credits that are scheduled to expire at year end. The Jenkins plan would extend for two years, through Dec. 31, 1991, the credit that helps employers hire low-income workers, the credits that encourage solar and geothermal energy projects by businesses, and the tax exemptions that subsidize bonds used to raise money to help small manufacturers and middle-income families obtain mortgages.    It also would restore through Dec. 31, 1991, the exclusion from income of as much as $5,250 of educational assistance to workers provided by employers. The exclusion would be restored retroactively to the date it expired at the end of 1988.    Permanent extensions would be granted to a few, select tax breaks that are due to expire at year end. These include modified versions of the credits that assist the construction of low-income housing and that provide incentives for increases in corporate expenditures for research and development.    The bill also would simplify the corporate minimum tax and provide some limited tax relief for heavy industrial companies that would be burdened.    Part of the tax package is a sizable increase in the earned income tax credit, which provides tax refunds to low-income working families. Over five years, the expansion would cost $13.5 billion. The provision also would increase by $1.75 billion over five years the funding for child care provided under an existing block grant program.    The package competes with an alternative approved by the House Education and Labor Committee that would authorize $1.78 billion in fiscal 1990 for a variety of child-care functions including: a new program to help so-called latch-key children who are left at home while their parents work; an expansion of the Head Start program; and a new grant program for child care services.    The competing proposals will battle it out on the House floor, but the Ways and Means Committee's plan is believed to have the upper hand.    The committee action is designed to make about $8 billion in reductions in the projected budget deficit for fiscal 1990. Part of the measure is a reduction in projected spending of $2.7 billion. The tax-increase portion of the large bill is slated to be $5.3 billion.    Tax Increases    The committee agreed to a long list of revenue-increase measures. These would:    --Close a loophole in the tax law regarding employee stock ownership plans, effective July 10, 1989, that has been exploited by investment bankers in corporate takeovers. The measure repeals a 50% exclusion on the interest on bank loans used to acquire securities for an ESOP.    --End a tax subsidy to big banks that encourages them to lend to developing nations.    --Curb junk bonds by ending tax benefits for certain securities that postpone cash interest payments until the bonds mature.    --Raise nearly $1 billion by forestalling an automatic reduction in airport and airway taxes.    --Speed up collection of the 3% tax on long-distance telephone calls and extend the tax permanently. It is scheduled to expire at the end of next year.    --Speed up collection of the 3% tax on long-distance telephone calls and extend the tax permanently. It is scheduled to expire at the end of next year.    --Speed up the collection of the tax on airline tickets, and, effective in 1994, speed up the collection of the payroll tax from large companies.    --Impose a tax on ozone-depleting chemicals, such as those used in air conditioners and in styrofoam, beginning at $1.25 a pound starting next year.    --Repeal special tax breaks created for troubled financial institutions that will get more direct aid from the savings and loan bailout legislation.    --Require professional corporations, known as &quot;S&quot; corporations, to make advance payments of their estimated taxes, a proposal already approved by Senate tax writers.    --Withhold income taxes from the paychecks of certain farm workers currently exempt from withholding.    --Include certain deferred compensation in the calculation of how much individuals and corporations pay in federal unemployment taxes. This plan gains revenue in the short term but loses money over the long haul.    --Repeal the completed-contract method of accounting, which is used by military contractors to reduce their tax burden.    --Permit corporations to use excess pension funds to pay health benefits for current retirees. Using the pension excess would increase a company's taxable income. Currently companies deduct as business expenses the money they use to pay for retirees' health benefits.    --Collect gasoline excise taxes when gasoline is received at the terminal effective Oct. 1.    --Restrict the ability of real-estate owners to escape taxes by swapping one piece of property for another instead of selling it for cash. Swaps of properties with similar uses would continue to avoid taxes, but the swap of dissimilar properties, such as land for a building, would be disallowed.    --Include certain deferred compensation in the calculation of how much individuals and corporations pay in federal Social Security taxes. This plan gains revenue in the short run but loses money over the long haul.    --Impose a tax of three cents a barrel on domestic crude oil, effective Oct. 1, to pay for a fund that finances oil-spill cleanups.    --Make it harder to write off cellular telephones. Beginning next year, a cellular phone would have to be used at least 50% of the time for business before any writeoff is permitted.    Penalties    The bill also seeks to simplify the nation's civil tax penalty system. The measure, which often would mean smaller fines for violators, would:    --Eliminate the so-called stacking of penalties by coordinating sanctions so only one penalty could be imposed on an underpayment of tax.    --Change the current penalty for underpayment through negligence to 20% of the portion of the underpayment directly attributable to negligence, rather than 20% of the entire underpayment.    --Tie the fees imposed for late filing of information returns to how late they are. A taxpayer who filed an information return two weeks late would pay a smaller fine than someone who filed six months late.    --Reduce the penalty for substantially understating tax liability to 20% of the understatement from 25%.    Medicare    In non-tax actions, the panel agreed to a variety of changes in Medicare that are extremely controversial with doctors. The most hotly debated provision would impose a limit on the total amount Medicare will pay physicians. The bill generally reduces Medicare reimbursements of physicians, and the limit is intended to prevent doctors from maintaining their incomes by simply increasing the number of patients or the services to them.    In addition, the committee agreed to impose a revised payment structure for physicians based on a new scale of the relative value of medical procedures. The structure would reduce payments for some procedures, mostly done by surgeons, and boost those used mostly by internists and other primary-care doctors. The new structure would take effect in October 1991.    The package also contains a third element, designed to hold down the amount patients have to pay doctors beyond the Medicare reimbursement. The fee plan isn't designed to save money for the federal government initially. But over the long haul, it is meant to slow the rapid rise in physician reimbursements. The federal health care insurance program is for people aged 65 and over and the disabled.    For the next two years, cuts are proposed in a variety of physicians' services, especially for procedures the government determines are overpriced.    The legislation also would reduce spending by extending a rule that requires Medicare premiums to cover one-quarter of the costs of Part B of Medicare, which pays 80% of physician and other outpatient bills. Another hotly debated provision would prohibit a physician from referring a patient for a Medicare-covered service to a medical provider if the physician owned part of that provider or was paid by the provider for the referral. Hospitals are exempted from the prohibition.    The bill also contains modifications of the controversial catastrophic-illness insurance program, as previously approved by the committee. The provisions would reduce the Medicare surtax and benefits and increase a flat monthly premium meant to finance the program.    Efforts will be made on the House floor to repeal the entire program. Repeal would cost the government more than $5 billion because it began collecting the tax before it started paying the benefits.    ---@ Capital-Gains Tax: Present and Proposed    A married couple's capital-gains tax when buying $100,000 of stock and selling it for $110,000 one year and one day later @1989 Taxable Under Under Ways andamp; @Income Current Law Means Proposal @Under $30,949 $1,500 $1,050 @Above $30,950 $2,800 $1,960    ---@ Who Benefits from the Cut @ In the Capital-Gains Tax?    Percentage of tax benefit that would go to each income class under the Ways and Means Committee's proposed cut in capital-gains tax: @Income Group Share of Cut @Less than $10,000* ........................... 0.0% @$10,000-$19,999 .............................. 0.5 @$20,000-$29,999 .............................. 1.3 @$30,000-$39,000 .............................. 2.6 @$40,000-$49,000 .............................. 3.6 @$50,000-$74,999 .............................. 6.7 @$75,000-$99,000 .............................. 5.3 @$100,000-$199,000 ............................ 19.8 @$200,000 or more ............................. 60.2 @*Modified adjusted gross income for projected 1990 income levels @Source: Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation </TEXT></DOC>