<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871215-0028 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT RULED against an Illinois abortion law.    As hearings opened on the nomination of federal appellate Judge Anthony Kennedy to the high court, the justices ruled by a tie vote that the law improperly requires girls under 18 years old to wait 24 hours before having an abortion so that their parents can be notified. Meanwhile, California's Kennedy told the Senate Judiciary Committee that Americans have basic rights such as privacy, which aren't spelled out in the Constitution.    Kennedy, Reagan's third choice for Lewis Powell's seat, said he wouldn't allow his religious views to influence his decisions on abortion cases.    ---   GORBACHEV SAID the Star Wars project could block improved U.S.-Soviet ties.    The Kremlin leader, in an address broadcast in the Soviet Union, appeared to take issue with Reagan's assessment that the space-based anti-missile system wouldn't block progress on talks aimed at cutting long-range arms. He said differences over the project could halt further improvements in superpower relations. As Gorbachev urged ratification of the intermediate-range missile treaty, Reagan acknowledged some U.S. and European anxiety over the pact.    Britain and France announced a plan for joint development of an air-launched missile. They said the weapon won't undermine the superpower INF treaty.    ---   Nicaragua's government was faulted by Managua's Cardinal Obando for causing the postponement of the first face-to-face meeting between Sandinista representatives and those of the U.S.-backed Contra rebels. The peace talks had been scheduled to begin yesterday in the Dominican Republic.    The U.S. will pursue a summit offer by Gorbachev to cut Soviet arms shipments to Nicaragua's government if the White House reduces aid to the Contras, National Security Adviser Colin Powell said.    ---   South Korea's government ordered rigid security for presidential candidates and around polling stations to guard against violence in tomorrow's election, the first direct presidential vote in 16 years. It said that anyone attempting to disrupt the balloting would be dealt with &quot;swiftly and sternly.&quot;    ---   Israeli soldiers killed a Palestinian as violence continued in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. At least 17 others were reported injured in the anti-Israeli unrest. A second Palestinian died of wounds sustained in a clash with Israeli troops last week, an Arab-run news agency reported.    ---   A group of Catholic bishops rejected a national bishops' conference recommendation that condom use be explained in church-sponsored AIDS education programs. New York Cardinal O'Connor, a member of the conservative group, said the recommendation was a &quot;grave mistake.&quot;    ---   Philippine President Aquino opened a summit in Manila of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Despite terrorist threats, there weren't any serious incidents reported. The Southeast Asian leaders pledged support for Aquino's government, but sidestepped comment on U.S. military bases in the Philippines.    ---   The Justice Department is expected to drop an inquiry into payments made by Westinghouse Electric to an associate of former Philippine leader Marcos, sources said. Separately, two men pleaded guilty in U.S. court in Virginia to charges of conspiring to defraud the Pentagon in a plot involving Manila's military.    ---   A snowstorm moved across the Plains after stranding hundreds of travelers in the Southwest, where as much as 30 inches of snow fell. At least six deaths were blamed on the storm. Forecasters also warned of thunderstorms and tornadoes.    ---   Belgium's Premier Martens resigned following Sunday's general elections, in which the governing center-right coalition lost most of its legislative majority to the opposition Socialists. King Baudouin, who began talks among political leaders to form a new government, asked Martens's coalition to stay on in a caretaker capacity.    ---   Romania's Ceausescu called for further austerity measures despite last month's public protests over shortages of food and energy. Opening a Communist Party conference in Bucharest, Ceausescu rejected economic changes of the type promoted by Gorbachev. He urged improved productivity and pledged some wage increases.    ---   Shultz praised Norway's plan to halt sales of secret technology to the Soviets, and said congressional attempts to punish the NATO ally for violating the export rules would be &quot;unfortunate.&quot; The secretary of state's remarks came in Oslo, a stop on his post-summit tour of Western Europe.    ---   Serbia's president was dismissed after an apparent power struggle with Yugoslav Communist Party hard-liners who sought a tougher approach on Albanian nationals demanding increased autonomy. The former chief of general staff of the Yugoslav army was named as the republic's president.    ---   Kenya said dozens of Ugandan soldiers entered its territory and clashed with police. Two Ugandan soldiers were reported killed. Nairobi, which said the Ugandan troops were unprovoked, filed a protest over the &quot;unwarranted violation&quot; of its border.    ---   Died: Karl F. Hoenecke, 57, chairman of Federal Signal Corp., Sunday, in Hinsdale, Ill. . . . Maurice H. Jones Jr., 37, president of Metropolitan Financial Corp., Friday, in Rochester, Minn., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>