<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880624-0027 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE HIGH COURT IS BEING URGED to uphold a civil-rights precedent.    An array of groups and individuals, including 59 senators and 47 states, are to file briefs today urging the Supreme Court not to reverse a 1976 ruling allowing civil-rights lawsuits against private parties. Some lawyers said the move reflected an unprecedented expression of concern over the court's direction on civil rights. The justices have said they would use a pending case to decide the fate of the earlier decision giving individuals the right to sue to stop acts of private bias.    It won't be known for 30 days what briefs will be filed in favor of overruling the 1976 decision. The White House said it won't take a position in the case.    ---   CANADA MOVED against two more Soviet envoys as part of a spy squabble.    The Canadian government said it ordered the expulsion of a Soviet military attache in Ottawa and barred from Canada a former embassy secretary. It said it was responding to the &quot;unjustified expulsion&quot; of two Canadian diplomats Wednesday by the Kremlin. Ottawa last week took action against 17 Soviet officials accused of espionage. The Soviet activities were said to involve attempts to procure classified data from defense contractors, including Paramax Electronics, a Montreal-based unit of Detroit's Unisys.    Paramax is supplying electronic weapons systems for 12 new Canadian frigates, some involving advanced, classified U.S. naval technology.    ---   The Iran-Contra case judge complained about delays in bringing North to trial and called on the Reagan administration to accelerate declassification of necessary documents in the case. U.S. Judge Gerhard Gesell said &quot;the highest levels of government&quot; would have to decide whether national security concerns will prevent a trial.    A U.S. judge in Miami dismissed a $24 million damage suit against former CIA officials, Contra leaders and cocaine traffickers accused of running an arms-for-drugs smuggling operation. The suit was filed in 1986 by a Washington-based group. A trial had been set to begin Monday. The judge said the plaintiffs failed to prove a conspiracy.    ---   Pope John Paul II arrived in Vienna for a five-day visit to Austria. The pontiff recalled the &quot;cruel tyranny&quot; of Nazism during a meeting with President Waldheim, who has been accused of committing war crimes while serving in Hitler's army. Jewish groups protested the meeting. The trip is the pope's second to Austria in five years.    ---   Landslides in Turkey struck a mountain village and a highway, burying more than 100 people, officials said. Rescue workers were hampered by rain and threats of more landslides. A number of those caught in the mud and rock were foreign tourists.    ---   Police in Burma surrounded Rangoon's Shwedagon Pagoda, the country's holiest Buddhist shrine, after student demonstrators occupied its grounds. Unrest spread to the former imperial capital, Mandalay, and to the ancient port of Pegu. The protests appeared to stem from dissatisfation with the one-party regime of leader Ne Win.    ---   Haiti's military regime arrested a nephew of the former premier in a growing roundup of members of the deposed government and their relatives following Sunday's military coup. The takeover ended four months of civilian rule. The U.S. has protested the arrests and said that at least two of those being held are American citizens.    ---   The FCC voted to impose a maximum $2,000 fine against a Missouri television station for broadcasting during prime time a movie that included nudity and sexual themes. The fine against station KZKC-TV was the first levied by the commission under its revised decency standards. A station spokesman called the move unfair.    ---   A cabinet-level panel has decided to send Reagan a broad package of anti-drug proposals, including a requirement that federal contractors enact programs to combat drug abuse. The National Drug Policy Board's recommendations also include a provision cutting off financial aid to students found guilty of drug abuse.    ---   The White House welcomed what it hoped would be a &quot;flexible approach&quot; by Angola toward talks to end a war between Cuban-backed government forces and U.S.-supported troops. A two-day meeting is to begin today in Cairo. Luanda reportedly has said it is willing to negotiate a Cuban pullout without a U.S. pledge to halt rebel aid.    ---   The House ethics panel agreed to investigate whether GOP Rep. Swindall of Georgia violated laws or House rules by negotiating an $850,000 loan that he knew might be financed by drug sales. Swindall sought the inquiry last week after publication of transcripts of tape recordings made as part of a federal money-laundering probe.    ---   The U.S. plans to replace its traditional written examination for entry-level jobs with a system emphasizing college grades and tests geared to specific jobs. The Office of Personnel Management said the new system will permit the government to compete more effectively with the private sector.    ---   Iraq said its warplanes bombed 10 Iranian oil installations in what were considered the heaviest air raids on Tehran's economic targets in weeks. There wasn't any independent confirmation of Baghdad's report, but Iran's official news agency said a residential area and &quot;labor quarters&quot; were hit.    ---   Surgeon General Koop said the public health-care system should emphasize the &quot;promotion of good health and the prevention of disease.&quot; He called for increased congressional spending in these areas, and urged health professionals to get involved in medical &quot;self-help&quot; groups that have been joined by about 15 million Americans. </TEXT></DOC>