<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861229-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Stoic Masses:Poor People of Mexico,Afraid of Protesting,Endure Much Injustice---Ruling Party Enmeshes ManyAnd Intimidates Others;Case of the Cowed Cobby---Why Unions Rarely Strike---By Mary Williams WalshStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/29/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM LABOR </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The government raised gasoline prices three times this fall, but even as higher costs eat deeper into Raul Santana's profits from driving a cab, he is keeping his mouth shut.    &quot;There's enormous discontent, but what can we do?&quot; says the 41-year-old cab-driver, wheeling his battered Volkswagen into a service station. &quot;We're all afraid that if we protested, something would happen to us. I have eight children, and they need me.&quot;    In his own way, Mr. Santana is affirming what the Mexican public has repeatedly shown for four years: This is a stoic nation, quicker to tolerate hardship than fight it. When Mexico fell into economic disarray in 1982, foreign analysts started predicting a political breakdown. And there have been bloody protests, especially in the north. But even as annual inflation pushes 100%, the foreign debt grows and the ruling party plays dirty tricks at the polls, life generally grinds on here in relative peace.    &quot;Stoicism is the most exalted of our military and political attributes,&quot; writes Mexican poet laureate Octavio Paz. &quot;Resignation is one of our most popular virtues. We admire fortitude in the face of adversity more than the most brilliant triumph.&quot;    The reasons aren't simple. Explaining Mexican tranquillity today requires a look at the way society has functioned here since the 1930s -- the way nearly everybody, from laborer to leftist intellectual, has an official place inside the ruling-party system. It means understanding, as most Mexicans do, that to protect what you have in this country, you are better off going along with the system than battling it.    Those who go along can still improve their lot in ways that never show up in national wage statistics. But those who don't can lose everything. &quot;If you decide to be an activist, you have to decide that you may, at some point, confront naked force with no constitutional balances against it,&quot; says Lorenzo Meyer, a political scientist at the Colegio de Mexico, a graduate school in the capital. &quot;So you move very carefully before you start anything.&quot;    Mr. Santana, the cabdriver, knows firsthand what can happen to people who break out of the official order. Years ago, he and some friends set up an independent taxi collective. Their leader was murdered. A chastened Mr. Santana went back to driving a cab solo, convinced that to act collectively is to court trouble. &quot;Our situation is very difficult, but we have to tolerate it,&quot; he declares, ordering a tankful, then remembering the new prices. &quot;See what a problem I have?&quot; he asks, turning to show a passenger the contents of his wallet. &quot;Can you lend me 300 pesos?&quot;    In the early 1930s, when Mexico was pulling itself out of some 20 years of revolutionary chaos, peacemaking politicians set up what would eventually become the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (the Spanish initials are PRI). They designed PRI groups for nearly every imaginable sector of Mexican society: PRI confederations for unionists, PRI leagues for peasants, a PRI wing for the army. Over time, PRI organizations were created for everyone from cabdrivers to architects.    The initial results were positive: The war-fractured nation pulled itself together and returned to peace and growth. But now, half a century later, the social unity has degenerated into a kind of social paralysis. The discontented are afraid to speak out because their economic well-being is so tightly entwined in the political status quo.    Cabdrivers, for instance, say they feel compelled to support PRI taxi-group leaders just to get their driving permits. Newspaper reporters admit that they sometimes go soft on politicians because they get a cut of government ad revenues. Farmers say they grow corn rather than more profitable crops, for fear of losing PRI-controlled farm credits.    And so it goes. &quot;You can't take a step in Mexico without bumping into the state,&quot; says Joel Ortega, an economics professor at the national university.    Nowhere is this more striking than among Mexican labor unions. Workers here have taken recession on the chin. Real wages have fallen to 1967 levels. One recent study suggests that minimum-wage workers now spend a quarter of their earnings just getting to work.    Unionist members seem to have every reason to strike. But they rarely do.    &quot;You have to understand that all the Mexican union movements are attached to the federal government,&quot; explains Jaime Guajardo, the leader of Mining Liberation, a free-thinking splinter group inside the PRI-affiliated national miners' union.    Mining Liberation appeared in 1980 in the silver-mine town of Pachuca, an hour's drive northeast of Mexico City. Until then, Pachuca's miners had to buy their own safety equipment. They received no social-security benefits. They worked in a government mine, but they didn't even make the government-sanctioned minimum wage. They were carted to PRI rallies, where they had to cheer the politicians or have their wages docked.    &quot;We were treated like burros,&quot; says Mr. Guajardo, eating a plate of fried mushrooms and peppers in a local restaurant one evening. Yet the miners never struck. Their union leaders were PRI men of a breed known in Mexico as charros -- men committed to preserving calm in the workplace more than fulfilling worker needs. Across Mexico, charros have managed to keep the union rank and file behind the PRI, even in the midst of the worst recession since the Revolution of 1910.    Workers put up with them for fear of losing their jobs. In Mexico, union leaders, not management, hire and fire.    But in 1980, the Pachuca miners started holding their own meetings. The charros weren't there to tell them what to do; thus, the workers decided to strike. Over the next few years, they won social-security benefits, free bus rides to work, low-cost housing and pay based on the minimum wage. They even passed a motion that no one had to go to PRI rallies anymore unless he wanted to.    Then, the charros returned, winning union elections this year -- fraudulently, Mr. Guajardo says. Political order was restored. In October, when a PRI gubernatorial candidate toured the state, the miners were trotted out to cheer him -- just like old times.    Mr. Guajardo insists that Mining Liberation won't put up with the charros. &quot;The workers here in Pachuca aren't passive,&quot; he says, washing down mushrooms with rum and Coke. &quot;If the national union decides to keep these leaders in power, we'll take them out by blows. We're not afraid of the state or any other organization.&quot;    The restaurant door opens. In lumbers a group of charro thugs. Mr. Guajardo lowers his eyes, presses a finger to his lips and starts talking about local tourist attractions.    It happens again and again: A non-PRI labor movement springs up, then gets beaten down. Last fall, Mexico City garment workers unionized outside the PRI labor confederations; now, the courts are challenging their certification. In 1983, the nation's nuclear workers struck; the government shut down the whole uranium industry. This fall, Mexico City trolley drivers tried to strike without PRI permission; riot police and attack dogs dispersed the picketers after just one day.    &quot;I'm embarrassed to tell you about it,&quot; says a $30-a-week trolley driver, sneaking down a gritty north-side street to visit the fired strike leader at home. &quot;We lack responsibility. We're afraid.&quot;    If the downtrodden workers are too busy trying to keep a job to help themselves, where are the nation's leftist intellectuals? Certainly there is no dearth of educated Mexicans who embrace liberation causes.    But the leftists have the same problem the unionists do: Many of them are enmeshed in the system.    The reasons date to the 1960s, when open street dissidence did erupt in Mexico. The economy was growing then, and a new, educated middle class was chafing at the way the PRI promised revolutionary justice but didn't distribute wealth or political clout. Hundreds of thousands marched down the capital's tree-lined boulevards in 1968. Government troops opened fire on them one day and killed hundreds.    It was a watershed. Much of the middle class abandoned street politics for good. Committed leftists vanished underground. The government spent years trying to coax its opponents back into the mainstream. It adopted their slogans, set up social-interest institutes and offered dissidents government jobs. Finally, in 1978, it changed the electoral laws to give opposition parties official slots on the ballot.    The measures looked like reforms then, but now many historians call them a cynical attempt to channel the left. And today much of the opposition is channeled, either in small parties that the PRI always beats or in government institutions that can kick critics out if they make too much trouble.    Consider what happened this fall to the &quot;Democratic Current,&quot; a liberal-minded group of activists in the PRI. The members were people with a deep commitment to ruling-party principles -- and with an equally deep belief that the PRI is selling out the country. One was a former PRI president and United Nations ambassador. Another was a former governor and president's son.    They were luminaries, but when they went public with a list of PRI failings this fall, party higher-ups covered them with mud. The PRI leadership said they were just trying to get better jobs. It said they should have democratized the party 10 years ago if they loved democracy so much. Anyway, it said, the PRI already is democratic. It told them to shut up or bail out.    But political figures who bail out of the PRI don't have any other influential group to bail into. So the Democratic Current hasn't been heard from since.    Of course, some Mexicans ultimately decide that they have nothing to lose and break away from the system. For them, there are the police, the army, the jails.    &quot;Once a system can't achieve its goals through co-optation or persuasion, it will use force,&quot; says Mr. Meyer, the political scientist. &quot;There is no obstacle to the use of terror against political activists in Mexico.&quot;    Diehards from the National Action Party in northern Mexico know this well: Many of them were beaten and jailed in November for infiltrating official parades commemorating the Revolution of 1910.    Left-wing activists in dirt-poor southern Mexico know it, too.    &quot;I've been a part of the system,&quot; says 41-year-old German Jimenez, a teacher and former PRI congressman from the backwater southern state of Chiapas. &quot;But I didn't go along with their games. That's why I'm here.&quot;    &quot;Here&quot; is a prison perched high on a hill overlooking the rugged Chiapas landscape of mountains and low clouds. Mr. Jimenez and six other teachers are awaiting trial here on terrorism charges, facing sentences of up to 40 years.    Their crime: Last winter, they tried to organize Chiapas corn farmers outside the official PRI peasant union. Their cause was compelling: Government grain buyers were paying higher corn prices to farmers in the northern state of Chihuahua, where elections were coming up.    Angry Chiapas corn farmers rallied by the thousands. They took over dozens of the cone-shaped government grain depots that dot the countryside, and they threatened to burn them down if the government shipped any corn. They massed on the region's major east-west highway and blocked traffic for days.    In came the army.    &quot;They grabbed me by the hair and hit me on the head with their rifle butts,&quot; recalls 31-year-old Jorge Enrique, another jailed teacher. &quot;They blindfolded me and tied my hands behind my back. They threw me on the ground. They broke my eardrum.&quot; He adds: &quot;We were treated worse than drug dealers. I was urinating blood two or three days afterward.&quot;    The corn farmers got the message. After watching soldiers haul away their organizers blindfolded, they gave up the fight and went home.    In dirt-road Chiapas villages today, corn farmers tend their crops in stoic silence. &quot;Prices are going up so much,&quot; muses one, his hair soaked with sweat from a morning in the sun. &quot;We peasants -- all we have to sell is our harvest. What are we going to make our living out of?&quot; To a suggestion that they stage another protest, he replies, &quot;We don't want people to die here. We want peace. Our movement has ended.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>