<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POPE JOHN PAUL II ARRIVED in Miami for the start of a 10-day U.S. tour.    The pontiff, who described himself as &quot;a friend of America and of all Americans,&quot; was welcomed at the airport by Reagan. The pope later held the first of several ecclesiastical meetings with Roman Catholic churchmen and women, and then held private talks with the president at a Miami mansion. During the trip, his second in the U.S., the pope is expected to be faced with dissent over church dogma on birth control, divorce, homosexuality and other issues.    The pope's nine-city tour is being billed as a pastoral visit to America's 52 million Catholics. He also is to meet today with a Jewish delegation.    ---   SHULTZ SAID the White House will seek $270 million in new aid for the Contras.    The secretary of state, testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said the assistance was needed to &quot;end the doubt and uncertainty&quot; over the U.S. commitment to Nicaragua's anti-government rebels. The money, a far larger amount than had been anticipated, would be used for both military and nonmilitary purposes for an 18-month period once the current aid allocation for the insurgents expires at the end of the month.    House Speaker Wright faulted the request, saying the U.S. must act with restraint to help along a Central American peace proposal signed last month.    ---   IRAN ATTACKED a tanker in the Persian Gulf after Iraqi air raids.    As the U.N. secretary-general departed for a peace mission in the gulf region, an Iranian gunboat fired rocket-propelled grenades and machine guns at the Cypriot vessel, setting it ablaze. The attack was in apparent response to assaults by Iraqi warplanes. Baghdad said its jets bombed industrial centers in Iran, and a military communique said Iraq's aircraft attacked a tanker at Iran's Kharg island oil terminal.    Iranian dissidents occupied Tehran's embassy in Oslo, attacked an Iran Air office in Paris and briefly seized an office in Frankfurt, West Germany.    ---   Medical ethics specialists said a competent, informed patient should have the right to refuse life-sustaining medical treatments. The 20-member study group, in a 153-page report, also said that if the patient is incompetent, a properly designated surrogate should have the right to make this choice for the patient.    ---   The White House said Reagan would meet Tuesday with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze to discuss arms-control prospects. Shevardnadze is to be in Washington next week for three days of talks with Secretary of State Shultz, which a senior State Department aide said would focus more on long-term goals than on an arms pact.    ---   Argentine President Alfonsin said his government will move to freeze interest payments on foreign debt. In his first public statement since Sunday's broad defeat to the Peronists in midterm elections, he faulted the IMF for &quot;trying to apply ridiculous prescriptions.&quot;    ---   Poindexter portrayed the White House as suspicious of Israeli allies and so preoccupied with secrecy that the top U.S. military officer learned of Saudi Arabian aid to Nicaraguan insurgents in 1985 only when told by the Saudis themselves. The testimony was released by congressional Iran-Contra panels.    ---   Philippine President Aquino canceled a planned mid-October trip to Italy and said she would replace some members of her cabinet, who offered their resignations Wednesday. She indicated that some of the changes would be announced this weekend. Aquino also proposed a Mass for peace to show support for her government.    ---   Honecker returned to his West German hometown, the first time in more than 40 years that the East German leader had visited the mining city of Wiebelskirchen. Honecker is to travel today to Munich, the final stop on his unprecedented five-day trip to West Germany.    ---   Marine Sgt. Stufflebeam was acquitted by a military jury in Quantico, Va., on charges that he had sex with a Soviet woman and lied to his superiors about it. The former U.S. Embassy guard in Moscow was convicted, however, on two misdemeanor counts of dereliction of duty.    ---   A U.S. judge decided to release a former Chilean army major who admitted to lying to protect his superiors in the 1976 slaying of retired diplomat Orlando Letelier. The judge in Washington vacated the seven-year prison sentence given the officer May 6.    ---   An EPA draft report indicates that fish in much of the Great Lakes and many U.S. rivers are contaminated by low levels of dioxin. The unpublished study also pinpoints pulp and paper mills as &quot;a possible source&quot; of dioxin discharges, and agency officials said they are moving toward regulating the mill emissions.    ---   Denmark's prime minister unveiled a cabinet for his new minority coalition government that was little changed from the previous lineup, despite a setback in Tuesday's parliamentary elections. Conservative Premier Schlueter created two new ministries, eliminated another, and replaced four members of his earlier cabinet.    ---   Pentagon sources said the Navy last week canceled a port visit to Costa Rica by one of its warships because the Central American country demanded certification that all the ailors were free of AIDS. A U.S. Embassy official said the ship's visit was called off because of a fuel problem.    ---   A U.N. mediator said Afghanistan and Pakistan have narrowed their differences over a timetable for the withdrawal of about 115,000 Soviet troops backing the Kabul government. The &quot;concessions from both sides&quot; came during four days of indirect talks aimed at ending the Afghan war. </TEXT></DOC>