<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880324-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN ANNOUNCED that he will meet with Gorbachev in Moscow in May.    The president said he and the Soviet leader would hold their fourth summit May 29-June 2, but it remains doubtful that U.S. and Soviet negotiators can complete work on a treaty to reduce superpower long-range nuclear arsenals in time for the Moscow meeting. Shultz and Shevardnadze failed to resolve U.S.-Soviet differences over arms control and Afghanistan. They will have one more meeting before the summit -- in Moscow in late April.    Reagan's five-day visit to Moscow will be his first to the Soviet Union and is the only such trip by a U.S. president since Ford met with Brezhnev in 1974.    ---   NICARAGUA PRESENTED new peace proposals as a pact appeared near.    As the Sandinistas and the Contras chipped away at differences for a third day, the leader of Nicaragua's delegation said the Managua government offered a &quot;synthesis&quot; of earlier cease-fire proposals by both sides. Details weren't disclosed, but a Contra spokesman said &quot;some difficulties have been overcome.&quot; Meanwhile, Nicaraguan radio reported that Contras ambushed an army truck in violation of the current truce, but the talks were unaffected.    House Democratic leaders said they would act quickly to send food and clothing to the rebels if the Sandinistas and Contras agreed to a cease-fire.    ---   THE KREMLIN INDICATED it wouldn't meet Armenian annexation demands.    While the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet didn't directly address the demands of Armenians who want to control an area of neighboring Azerbaijan, the Soviet government made clear that it wouldn't bend to pressure to change internal borders. The Presidium ordered government ministries to make efforts to improve the area's &quot;economic, social and cultural development,&quot; but threatened to crack down on activists who cause further ethnic unrest.    Organizers of Armenian protests, in which at least 32 people were killed last month, have called for a mass meeting Saturday in the capital of Yerevan.    ---   The Supreme Court upheld a 1981 federal law that bars striking workers from becoming eligible for food stamps or increasing their food stamp allotment because of lost income during a strike. The 5-3 vote, in a case filed by the UAW, reversed a lower court's 1986 decision that found the law unconstitutional.    ---   The Pentagon signed a pact with Egypt, entitling companies from the Arab nation to bid on U.S. military contracts. The accord, reached during a visit to Washington by Cairo's defense minister, puts Egypt on comparable footing with the NATO allies and with Israel, which signed a similar agreement with the U.S. in December.    ---   Noriega apparently tried to relieve Panama's cash shortage by having local banks deposit checks owed to the government in a New York account at Chase Manhattan. Meanwhile, Panama ordered a U.S. diplomat expelled. A reason wasn't cited. And families sought food at relief centers during the third day of a general strike.    ---   Transportation Secretary Burnley faulted the FAA for sometimes being reluctant to take steps needed to improve air safety. Burnley told a Senate panel that the FAA, as currently structured, is &quot;an experiment which has failed.&quot;    ---   Israeli warplanes blasted Palestinian and Moslem guerrilla bases near the Lebanese port of Sidon. Police said at least two people were killed and about 15 wounded. In the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, hundreds of Palestinians were arrested as Israel's army conducted house-to-house raids, the latest strategy for ending Arab unrest.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked a Cypriot freighter in the Persian Gulf, leaving it in flames. There weren't any injuries reported. Iran also fired six missiles at Iraqi cities, and threatened to retaliate against Baghdad for its use of chemical weapons.    ---   Western intelligence officials believe that Iranian-backed Islamic fundamentalists in Lebanon are trafficking in heroin and opium. The officials suggest that some members of the Shiite group Hezbollah may be dealing in drugs to obtain money to allow them a greater degree of independence from Tehran.    ---   The General Assembly voted to condemn the U.S. move to close the PLO's observer mission to the U.N. Voting 148-2, the assembly also urged the U.S. to abide by an international treaty that allows foreign missions to operate. The U.S., which ordered the closure under an anti-terrorism law, and Israel voted against the resolution.    ---   Police in Ulster will reinstitute a policy of clamping tight security on Irish Republican Army funerals. Authorities cited the recent deaths of five people -- including two British soliders -- at recent rites in Northern Ireland. Protestant activists had urged police and troop presence at such services.    ---   South Africa's Botha was denounced for ordering a halt to a trial of six soldiers charged with the murder of a prominent black nationalist in Namibia. Legal officials and politicians in Pretoria and Windhoek, citing Botha's refusal last week to stay the execution of six blacks, accused the president of abusing his powers.    ---   NASA scientists are planning an international satellite project to study the Earth as a single ecological system. The global network of space-based laboratories will focus on the planet's weather as part of the project, which also will consider changes in the ozone layer and other problems. </TEXT></DOC>