<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Holmes a CourtHas 6.4% StakeIn Texaco Inc.---Australian Financier CallsPurchase an Investment;Other Motives Rumored---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX PZLTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)PETROLEUM (PET)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><TEXT>   Robert Holmes a Court, the Australian financier and takeover specialist, said he has acquired a 6.4% stake in Texaco Inc., thus positioning himself to become a major new figure in the oil company's mammoth legal battle with Pennzoil Co.    After more than a week of intense trading in Texaco shares amid speculation that Mr. Holmes a Court was accumulating the stock, he disclosed in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that he has purchased 15,507,300 Texaco common shares &quot;for investment purposes.&quot;    The stock purchase touched off speculation that Mr. Holmes a Court would try to make himself a force for settlement of Texaco's historic $10.3 billion legal dispute with Pennzoil. But if that is the investor's intent, he hasn't made either Texaco or Pennzoil privy to his plans.    James W. Kinnear, Texaco's president and chief executive officer, said he was still studying the situation and could only take Mr. Holmes a Court's statement of investment intention in the SEC filing &quot;at his word.&quot; Asked whether he would fight a takeover attempt by Mr. Holmes a Court, Mr. Kinnear said: &quot;All our options are open. Our objective is to get the best value for our shareholders.&quot;    &quot;We've had no contact with him,&quot; said a source close to Houston-based Pennzoil. The source said Pennzoil has been aware, from its own &quot;reliable&quot; informants, that Mr. Holmes a Court had been buying shares of White Plains, N.Y.-based Texaco. But the extent of his position &quot;was news to us,&quot; he added.    Mr. Holmes a Court, in Perth, Australia, couldn't immediately be reached for comment. In New York, a spokesman for one of Mr. Holmes a Court's companies declined to comment.    In a prepared statement, Texaco said: &quot;We've received Mr. Holmes a Court's SEC filing stating that he has purchased Texaco stock. But we have had no discussions with him. Mr. Holmes a Court has stated that his purchases are for investment only. We assume that he shares the view expressed by others that Texaco shares are at present undervalued and the stock is a good long-term investment.&quot;    In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Texaco closed at $37.50 a share, up 87.5 cents, on volume of more than 2.3 million shares, making it the seventh-most active issue.    Pennzoil didn't comment officially on the stock purchase. But privately, the company's legal strategists speculated that this could have a favorable effect on prospects for settling their litigation with Texaco.    &quot;This could make the Texaco board nervous -- extremely nervous,&quot; said a lawyer close to Pennzoil. &quot;He (Mr. Holmes a Court) could be in a posture of making those people much more reasonable than they've been.&quot; As previously reported, Texaco has offered $2 billion to settle the litigation, while Pennzoil has indicated it is seeking $4 billion.    In November 1985, a Houston state-court jury found that Texaco had improperly interfered with a binding merger agreement between Pennzoil and Getty Oil Co. It was to forestall enforcement of that jury award, currently valued at more than $10.3 billion, that Texaco last March filed for court protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Under Chapter 11, a company is protected from creditors' lawsuits while it works out a plan of reorganization. In the bankruptcy-law proceedings, Pennzoil is co-chair of a committee of industry creditors, while trade and bank creditors are represented on another committee.    Separately, Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. was engaged by the industry creditors committee, a source close to the bankruptcy-law proceedings said. The appointment requires bankruptcy court approval. It was described as a routine action, intended to secure financial advice in connection with the reorganization plan.    Yesterday, market sources had attributed the rise in Texaco's stock price to reports that the stock was placed on Shearson Lehman's restricted list. Shearson Lehman is a unit of American Express Co. Placing a company on its restricted list means that a brokerage house can't trade for its own accounts in the stock because it has privileged information that could affect the company -- either from the company or from an outside party.    Meanwhile, one source close to a large group of Texaco creditors said he believes that those creditors &quot;would be delighted to talk with Mr. Holmes a Court.&quot; The source said, &quot;The creditors would be willing to talk to anyone who imposes a solution.&quot;    The source said he believed that some creditors may even push for Mr. Holmes a Court to &quot;lead a bid that would deal with shareholders, Pennzoil and the other creditors.&quot;    Any such bid, the source said, would probably be in the form of an all-cash tender offer for all of Texaco's shares outstanding.    Mr. Holmes a Court said in his filing that he hadn't any present plans to acquire Texaco. One owner of Texaco stock which recently sold most of its large holding and is familiar with Mr. Holmes a Court said that the secretive Australian investor is likely to sit with his investment for a while before becoming more active. &quot;He's just going to survey the territory,&quot; the Texaco shareholder said.    Harvey Miller, Texaco's bankruptcy lawyer, said, however, that he didn't see how Mr. Holmes a Court's 6.4% stake would affect the bankruptcy-law proceedings. &quot;I don't think it would have any effect,&quot; he said. Mr. Holmes a Court &quot;would move into position of being just another shareholder dealing with the burdens of a company in bankruptcy proceedings.&quot;    Michael Crames, Pennzoil's bankruptcy counsel, said: &quot;My experience in Chapter 11 cases is that debtors have their stock traded and that there is speculation. It's impossible for me to say more than that without more information.&quot;    Some in the Pennzoil camp took delight in the news of Mr. Holmes a Court's purchase. &quot;I think he's taking dead aim at them,&quot; speculated Joe Jamail, the Houston personal-injury lawyer who won Pennzoil's $10.3 billion judgment from Texaco.    And although Mr. Holmes a Court may not have approached Pennzoil, he eventually must if he has any designs on taking control of Texaco, Mr. Jamail asserted. &quot;He can't go anywhere unless he talks to Pennzoil,&quot; he said. If Pennzoil ultimately prevails in the litigation, and if Mr. Holmes a Court were to acquire Texaco, &quot;he's got a big liability on his hands,&quot; Mr. Jamail said.    Mr. Holmes a Court's eventual objectives could include ownership of Texaco's oil reserves -- and at an extraordinarily inexpensive price. &quot;This is the most undervalued oil company on the Big Board. Period,&quot; said Alan Edgar, an official of Prudential-Bache Capital Funding Inc., Dallas. He reckoned that Texaco's current stock price values the company's oil-in-the-ground at a mere $2 a barrel -- less than half the value at which oil reserves typically are sold.    Mr. Edgar and others speculated that Japanese interests may be involved with Mr. Holmes a Court, whose home base of Western Australia has been a major recipient of Japanese investment capital. Moreover, the Japanese are among foreign investors particularly interested in acquiring U.S. oil reserves; Nippon Oil Co., in fact, is involved in a joint exploration venture with Texaco in the U.S.    Mr. Holmes a Court, in a letter he sent yesterday to Texaco's Mr. Kinnear, said, &quot;Our assessment is that the market has overreacted severely in devaluing Texaco stock to current market levels and that the intrinsic value of Texaco's assets is substantially higher.&quot;    And despite speculation to the contrary, the investor added in the letter that he has &quot;no desire or intention to influence Texaco's basic business decisions or its management, particularly in respect to its dealings with Pennzoil Co.&quot;    Except for its deeply discounted stock price, Texaco is hardly a prime acquisition candidate. As debtor-in-possession in history's largest bankruptcy-law case, the company can't take any major action without bankruptcy court approval. Prospects for reversal of the $10.3 billion judgment against it are uncertain.    Moreover, Texaco has plenty of anti-takeover defenses in reserve. Its board is divided into classes, in which members serve staggered terms, and the company's provision for a so-called poison pill defense recently survived an attack by a shareholder group. The company has already held its annual meeting of shareholders, making a proxy contest difficultthough not impossible -- to undertake.    But there were indications that Texaco might not automatically resist a takeover attempt -- should Mr. Holmes a Court, or anyone else, attempt to mount one. In response to shareholder questions about the massive buying of Texaco shares under way at that time, Mr. Kinnear twice told the annual meeting on May 12 that Texaco's main objective was enhancing &quot;shareholder value.&quot; He didn't use the meeting as a platform to declare that Texaco wished to remain independent.    Wall Street sources said Mr. Holmes a Court isn't believed to have retained a U.S. investment bank in connection with Texaco, indicating that he isn't likely to lead a bid for the company soon.    Mr. Holmes a Court hasn't any ties to U.S. investment banking firms. In taking a position last year in USX Corp., he is understood to have bought the shares through Bear, Stearns andamp; Co., which is said to have assisted him in accumulating Texaco shares. But regarding USX, Mr. Holmes a Court never hired an investment banker for takeover or other purposes.    Some sources pointed out, however, that Mr. Holmes a Court does have close ties to the New York law firm of Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton andamp; Garrison, which represented him in connection with his investments in USX and Asarco Inc. That law firm also remains on Pennzoil's retainer in connection with its Texaco litigation. Though Mr. Holmes a Court and Pennzoil are understood not to have had any contacts, &quot;The lawyers are in a convenient position to do bidding,&quot; one New York attorney said.    A reclusive 49-year-old Perth lawyer, Mr. Holmes a Court is generally considered Australia's wealthiest man. Over the past 17 years his flagship company, Bell Group Ltd., has acquired interests in transport, media, entertainment and building supplies.    As a takeover specialist, Mr. Holmes a Court is perhaps most famous for his protracted maneuvering for control of Broken Hill Proprietary Co., Australia's largest company. Since first launching a takeover bid in 1983, he has managed to acquire 29.9% of the steel and natural resources concern.    Mr. Holmes a Court has often acquired a stake in a company, then sold out for a handsome profit, a tactic sometimes called &quot;greenmail&quot; when the stake is bought out by the company under attack at a premium over market value. Early last year, he said, &quot;I'd be a party to any greenmail as long as I'm making money for my shareholders,&quot; but he also claimed that greenmail was never his first choice, asserting, &quot;I've never made a tender offer hoping to be bought out.&quot;    Last August, with shares of Pittsburgh-based USX trading at about $19.50 a share, Mr. Holmes a Court announced his intention to buy as much as 15% of the energy and steel concern. At the end of last October, with USX shares having risen to about $25.50, the Australian sold out his stake.    Ian Storey, an analyst at the Sydney, Australia, brokerage of Meares andamp; Philips Ltd., said of Mr. Holmes a Court: &quot;The Texaco play is to get in and get a whack of it to establish himself as a predator. This may attract other predators, as in the case of USX when Carl Icahn came along.&quot; Mr. Icahn, a New York investor, acquired a large stake in USX last year.    However, Mr. Storey said he believes it now is possible that Mr. Holmes a Court will move to take control of Broken Hill Proprietary as early as July. &quot;Texaco would be a very good fit with BHP,&quot; he said. &quot;In the same way as USX offered downstream steel finishing facilities that would have fit with BHP's low-cost slab operations, Texaco offers the same kind of vertical integration with its downstream oil marketing and refining.&quot;    Once described by an Australian labor leader as a man with &quot;ice water flowing through his veins,&quot; Mr. Holmes a Court has owned a string of fancy cars, including a rare, right-hand drive De Lorean and the 1925 Rolls Royce Silver Ghost used in the film &quot;The Great Gatsby.&quot; His private art collection was valued last year at more than $7 million. His racehorse studs turn out champions such as the horse bearing Mr. Holmes a Court's nickname, Black Knight, which won Australia's equivalent of the Kentucky Derby in 1984. </TEXT></DOC>