<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870522-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Wall StreetInquiry FocusesOn 11 Stocks---Sources Say Issues May BePart of Expanded ChargeIn the Case U.S. Delayed---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Federal prosecutors are focusing on 11 takeover-related stocks as part of their continuing investigation of alleged insider trading by three prominent arbitragers, according to people familiar with the government's investigation.    They said the stocks could be named in an expanded indictment the government says it will seek against the three.    The government's continuing investigation is also seeking to determine whether Robert M. Freeman, one of the three arbitragers and head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., exchanged inside information with persons at firms other than Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., according to the people familiar with the investigation.    So far, the government has alleged an insider-trading conspiracy only between Mr. Freeman; two former Kidder arbitragers, Richard B. Wigton and Timothy L. Tabor; and former Kidder investment banker Martin A. Siegel. Mr. Siegel is cooperating with the government.    All charges against Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor were dismissed earlier this week at the government's request, after the government characterized its earlier indictment, which named only two takeover-related stocks, as &quot;just the tip of an iceberg.&quot;    Government prosecutors said at the time that they will seek a new indictment that names about nine stocks involving about 12 takeover-related transactions. The 11 stocks that are now a focus of the investigation include eight stocks that have never been publicly identified as being involved in the case.    Those eight stocks are American Hospital Supply Corp., American Natural Resources Co., Beatrice Cos., General Foods Corp., Houston Natural Gas Corp., St. Regis Corp., SCA Services Inc. and Transway International Corp., according to the people familiar with the investigation.    The three other stocks are Storer Communications Inc. and Unocal Corp., named in the government's earlier indictment, and Continental Group Inc., named in a criminal information to which Mr. Siegel pleaded guilty in February.    Trading records and testimony obtained by the government suggest that Mr. Siegel leaked inside information about Beatrice, SCA Services and Transway, in addition to the previously identified Storer, the people said. Kidder had an investment banking role in three major transactions involving those stocks.    Beatrice was taken private in 1986 in a leveraged buyout led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. SCA Services' assets were acquired in 1984 by Genstar Corp. and Waste Management Inc.; and Transway was acquired in 1985 by International Controls Corp.    Audrey Strauss, a lawyer for Mr. Siegel, declined to comment.    The government is looking into whether Mr. Freeman may have leaked inside information about American Hospital Supply, American Natural Resources, General Foods, Houston Natural Gas, and St. Regis, as well as the previously alleged Unocal and Continental Group. Goldman had an investment banking role in major transactions involving the stocks.    American Hospital Supply was acquired in 1985 by Baxter Travenol Laboratories Inc.; American Natural Resources was acquired in 1985 by Coastal Corp.; General Foods was acquired in 1985 by Philip Morris Cos.; Houston Natural Gas was acquired in 1985 by InterNorth Inc.; and St. Regis was acquired in 1984 by Champion International Corp.    Paul J. Curran, Mr. Freeman's lawyer, said, &quot;I can't deal with rumors, because they seem to be constant. Mr. Freeman tried to go to trial on an indictment and the government dismissed the indictment. When and if they file another indictment, we look forward to the trial of that one, and we will deal with the charges.&quot;    Stanley S. Arkin, Mr. Wigton's lawyer, said, &quot;Now that the government has time to reflect, I would hope they would reconsider prosecuting Mr. Wigton. I don't think he ought to be prosecuted.&quot;    Andrew L. Lawler, Mr. Tabor's lawyer, declined to comment. The three former defendants have all asserted their innocence and said they look forward to vindication at trial.    A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office declined to comment.    As previously reported, government prosecutors said earlier this week that certain individuals had invoked their Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination and refused to testify before a grand jury investigating the case, and had been subsequently granted immunity so the government could compel their testimony.    The people familiar with the investigation said these individuals include people who aren't officials at either Kidder or Goldman. They declined to name the individuals or firms involved.    Moreover, the people familiar with the investigation said that some subpoenas issued in the case include references to stocks that don't figure in the alleged conspiracy involving the Kidder and Goldman arbitragers. The developments suggest that government prosecutors are expanding their inquiry and are looking into whether Mr. Freeman exchanged confidential information with anyone other than Mr. Siegel, the people said.    They added that there isn't any indication that the government is looking into whether Messrs. Wigton and Tabor had any alleged sources other than Messrs. Siegel and Freeman.    The disclosures lend support to government claims that its investigation has expanded significantly since the highly publicized arrests of Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor in February, necessitating a delay in the government's case. While the government has had evidence related to the 11 stocks for months, recent disclosures have taken the case in new directions that could lead to the naming of additional alleged co-conspirators, according to the people familiar with the investigation.    Expansion of the case to as many as 11 stocks from two could have adverse consequences for the defendants and Kidder and Goldman, lawyers in private practice said.    Eleven instances of trading could suggest a pattern that is more difficult to explain as luck or shrewd analysis, they said. And Kidder and Goldman could face additional civil suits from former clients who now claim they have been harmed by leaks of confidential information. Goldman, for example, has already been sued by Unocal, once one of its most important clients.    People familiar with trading records subpoenaed by the government said that, in most instances, they support the defense claims that the trading activity the government suspects may be unlawful took place after public announcements indicating that the companies involved were &quot;in play&quot; and likely to be the subject of takeover activity.    However, the people said that some of the specific trades and strategies adopted by Kidder and Goldman are finely tuned to events that subsequently took place. For example, they said Goldman's arbitrage department purchased Continental Group stock just before the emergence of a &quot;white knight&quot; rescuer. And Goldman also profited, they said, from a trading strategy that correctly anticipated a decline in the previously announced buyout price for Beatrice.    A Goldman spokesman declined to comment.    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.&quot; -- WSJ May 26, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>