<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890815-0042 </DOCNO><DD> = 890815 </DD><AN> 890815-0042. </AN><HL> What's News --@  World-Wide </HL><DD> 08/15/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   POLAND'S KISZCZAK ABANDONED his bid to form a Communist-led coalition.    In an effort to resolve a political crisis, Kiszczak gave the task of forming a government to the small United Peasants Party. Kiszczak, an ex-interior minister who was elected premier Aug. 2, also appeared prepared to resign. A Solidarity official said the move appeared aimed at blocking Walesa's attempt to form a government that excludes the Communist Party. The union leader has been trying to persuade the UPP and the Democratic Party, both traditionally aligned with the Communists, to join a coalition.    A Solidarity-led coalition has alarmed the Soviet Union and would be the first non-Communist government in the East bloc since the late 1940s.    ---   BOTHA RESIGNED as South Africa's president over a feud in the ruling party.    In a televised announcement, the 73-year-old Botha, who had been president for 11 years, relinquished his post after losing a leadership struggle with Education Minister de Klerk, head of the governing National Party and Botha's heir apparent. De Klerk is expected to be named acting president today. Botha, who had a stroke in January and was expected to resign shortly after parliamentary elections Sept. 6, said he was &quot;being ignored by ministers serving in my cabinet.&quot;    The power struggle erupted over the weekend when de Klerk arranged to meet Aug. 28 with Zambian President Kaunda. Botha opposed the meeting.    ---   Iran's Khamenei ruled out talks with the U.S. about the the possible release of Western hostages in Lebanon. The Iranian supreme leader also rejected the possibility of diplomatic relations with Washington unless it ends support for Israel and renounces its alleged oppression of &quot;weak nations.&quot;    ---   Bad weather in Ethiopia stalled efforts to recover the bodies of Democratic Rep. Leland of Texas and 15 companions from a mountain ravine in the southwestern part of the country, where their plane crashed a week ago. The wreckage of the aircraft, which was en route to a refugee camp near the border with Sudan, was found Sunday.    Mississippi Rep. Smith was killed in a crash of a single-engine plane in a forest near New Augusta, Miss. He was 45. The pilot of the aircraft also was killed. The freshman Republican's plane, which had disappeared Sunday night, was on a 90-mile flight to Gulfport from Hattiesburg.    ---   Syria assembled troops and armor near a strategic Christian garrison in the mountains above Beirut, security sources in Lebanon said, raising speculation about another Syrian-led ground assault. Artillery duels around Lebanon's capital, meanwhile, killed eight people. The U.S. condemned Syria and its Moslem allies for the fighting.    ---   U.S. and PLO officials met in Tunis, and Washington pressed Arafat's organization to accept an Israeli plan for Arab elections in the occupied territories. The U.S. also sought assurances of the PLO's peaceful intentions following a call last week for the group to &quot;escalate armed action.&quot;    ---   Connecticut agreed to end its segregation of prison inmates with AIDS. The settlement of a federal lawsuit is believed to be the first in which a state agreed to rescind a blanket quarantine of inmates with AIDS-related symptoms, and runs counter to prison policy in 20 other states.    ---   Bush pardoned industrialist Armand Hammer, who was convicted for making illegal contributions to Nixon's 1972 campaign, administration officials said. The Justice Department had recommended the pardon of the Occidental Petroleum chairman.    ---   Thousands of Azerbaijan workers rallied in the Soviet republic's capital, Baku, after a day of work stoppages to back demands for greater local autonomy. In Estonia, the Communist Party chief urged ethnic Russian workers to end a six-day strike over a new law tightening residency requirements. Strikes also were threatened in Georgia.    ---   Miners in Peru launched an indefinite strike for wider collective-bargaining rights, affecting operations at major mines in the country's copper industry. The strike by 70,000 miners added to the labor unrest facing President Garcia's government, which already is battling a guerrilla insurgency.    ---   A Beijing University official said all of next term's new students would be sent to army academies for a year's military and political training. The university, where last spring's pro-democracy protests began, also plans to cut enrollment to 800 students from the more than 2,000 initially planned.    ---   Police in Northern Ireland fired plastic bullets to disperse youths in Belfast who set fire to four vehicles in scattered violence marking the 20th anniversary of the arrival of British troops. In Londonderry, Irish Republican Army supporters staged a march.    ---   Prosecutors in Chicago dropped rape and kidnapping charges against Gary Dotson, 10 years after he was convicted on testimony later recanted by his accuser. The action, which clears the 32-year-old Dotson of any legal wrongdoing in the case, immediately followed a defense motion for a new trial.    ---   Died: William Shockley, 79, a Nobel Prize-winning creator of the transistor and a controversial racial theorist, Saturday, in Stanford, Calif., of prostate cancer. </TEXT></DOC>