<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880324-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Vital Parts: Military's Dependence On Foreign Suppliers Causes Rising Concern --- Lack of Domestic Producers Would Crimp War Effort; A Buy-American Proposal --- The Big Ball-Bearing Rescue </HL><AUTHOR> Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN EUROP FREST </CO><IN> ARO ELE </IN><G> DEF CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pentagon strategists recently discovered that if war broke out, Soviet bombers could gravely wound the U.S. simply by attacking a small German plant 30 miles west of the Czechoslovakian border.    The plant makes all of the high-purity silicon the U.S. buys for chips used in thousands of missile guidance systems. Destruction of the plant would stall U.S. missile production for months, crippling the West's capacity to resupply its forces with missiles. Alarmed, the Defense Department says it will guarantee business to one or two U.S. silicon suppliers it hopes to lure into making the crucial material.    Military officials concede that the U.S. arsenal is riddled with foreign-made parts that might not be available during a global crisis. In wartime, this weakness could emerge as the soft underbelly of the recent defense buildup. Ball bearings in U.S. submarines, aircraft and tanks come increasingly from Europe and Asia. Some Navy ships ride at anchor on Spanish chains.    Rep. Mary Rose Oakar, an Ohio Democrat, says the Pentagon bought $9 billion of foreign parts and equipment last year, up from $5.4 billion in 1981. But analysts say the figure is much higher because foreign parts creep into weapons undetected through the 100,000-odd subcontractors that provide components for full-blown weapons systems assembled in the U.S.    Congress, the military and the arms industry differ over what to do about the U.S. military's growing dependence on foreign components, but they agree on one sobering conclusion: In a global war today, the U.S. couldn't come close to accelerating armaments production as it did in World War II.    &quot;We have sustained major structural damage to our industrial base,&quot; says Pat Choate, director of policy analysis at TRW Inc. &quot;They can put individual weapons systems on line now, but there is no surge capacity&quot; because old plants have rusted away and shipments of important foreign parts would be interrupted. Potential fixes for the problem are hard to fashion. Some ailing U.S. industries advocate narrowly protectionist buy-American requirements, while others envision expensive plans to rebuild the nation's industrial base.    To dramatize the military's dependence on Japanese electronics, a senior Pentagon official recently warned uniformed procurement officers that if there is major conflict, &quot;we're going to subcontract the war to Japan.&quot; The National Council for Industrial Defense -- a newly formed lobbying group -- plans to sue the Pentagon next month for entering agreements to buy certain weapons from allies.    Congress tacked on to last year's catchall budget resolution a list of items it recommended the Defense Department purchase from U.S. suppliers, but Congress is considering tougher buy-American legislation this year. A bill sponsored by Rep. Oakar would require the Pentagon to purchase certain critical parts only from U.S. suppliers. The measure also calls for the Pentagon to help rebuild domestic producers suffering from foreign competition. &quot;We have a big budget relative to our military needs,&quot; says Rep. Oakar, &quot;but we're diminished in our ability to produce equipment in times of national crisis.&quot; A proposal from Sen. Alan Dixon, an Illinois Democrat, would give concessions to companies that prepare for a surge in production in the event of war.    The Defense Department opposes broad buy-American proposals as well as plans to prop up moribund industries. &quot;Some would have us subsidize obsolescence, and we don't want to do that,&quot; says Robert Costello, the undersecretary for acquisition. He favors helping certain industries that are ready to help themselves. &quot;When they lay out a plan to become world-wide competitive, then we'll be there to help,&quot; he says.    Currently, Mr. Costello is devising a rescue for U.S. makers of ball bearings. Because of a surge in bearing purchases from Japan, Singapore, Thailand and Europe, domestic producers may be forced to &quot;shut down production lines and some close their doors permanently,&quot; a Pentagon study warns. In World War II, Germany suffered crippling bottlenecks in its armaments production after Allied forces bombed several ball-bearing plants.    An Air Force officer working on the rescue plan says more than 30 congressional offices have called to press for generous terms. The Pentagon initially envisioned publishing a list of weapons that would have to contain U.S. bearings. But after a lobbying campaign, the bearing industry and its backers on Capitol Hill appear close to winning a blanket requirement for use of domestic bearings throughout the U.S. arsenal, except where procurement officers could prove national benefits from buying overseas ones. &quot;It would be very good for business,&quot; says Donald Ross, president of MPB Corp., a Keene, N.H., bearing company.    But the Pentagon has rejected other pleas. Defense officials recently rebuffed makers of optics equipment who wanted assured military business. &quot;The defense budget is getting smaller, and we're just not going to shield the optics industry&quot; from foreign competition, an Army officer involved in the talks says.    The Pentagon is cool toward sweeping buy-American plans like Rep. Oakar's. &quot;When you look at the bills on the Hill, they're clearly protectionist,&quot; says a Pentagon official who prefers the current case-by-case approach.    He and others point out that the foreign dependence grows out of trends that are bigger than the proposed solutions. The economy on which the defense base rests is both international and interdependent. In addition, Pentagon procurement rules -- rewritten to encourage competition -- place a premium on lower prices, even if that means buying overseas.    The high dollar drove companies in the defense and civilian sectors to look for foreign bargains. The shift meant that U.S. companies lost many of the benefits of high-volume production -- including lower unit prices and a stream of revenue to support research and development. The lower dollar will help U.S. companies compete, but the high-volume efficiencies and the business ties with contractors foreign suppliers have locked in won't dry up with a drop in the dollar.    Some foreign parts are more desirable: They not only meet the standards at lower cost but also can be delivered months sooner than rival American parts. TRW Vice President Arden Bement says, &quot;Whereas in the past the U.S. looked on itself as a paragon of quality, that's not the case anymore.&quot; TRW, General Electric Co., and other large contractors have set up overseas networks of procurement officers to acquire parts and components from Asian and European manufacturers.    Several years ago, the Navy found that a Spanish company could produce anchor chains meeting its quality requirements at a lower price than those sold by Baldt Corp., the sole U.S. producer. Because of fears of a cutoff during a crisis, the Pentagon plans to allot enough business to Baldt to keep it going. &quot;What's it mean if you lose your one anchor-chain manufacturer, that your ships are constantly in motion?&quot; asks one Pentagon official.    Foreign suppliers also gained contracts through political and commercial deals worked out by the Pentagon and its biggest contractors. The Defense Department has signed a slew of &quot;memoranda of understanding&quot; with allies calling for joint weapons development. In addition, large aerospace concerns increasingly offer &quot;offset agreements&quot; to foreign governments that buy their weapons; these require the contractor to purchase large amounts of parts from those countries.    Regardless of how the foreign purchases begin, they often involve the very parts that make weapons perform. For example, FMC Corp.'s Bradley Fighting Vehicle depends on a sophisticated sensor system from the Netherlands to inform soldiers of potential threats and targets. Without this part tucked into the turret of the armored vehicle, the Bradley would be comparatively helpless on the battlefield.    Industry studies show that half of the gear-box components in the M-1 Abrams tank are produced overseas. Richard Norment, executive director of the American Gear Manufacturers Association, claims this has contributed to the withering of the U.S. gear-making industry. Today, he estimates that U.S. plants could produce only one-third of the M-1 gears the U.S. would need to mobilize for war.    If the Pentagon lost access to Japan's gallium arsenide, it would face bottlenecks in making missile guidance systems, radar apparatus, communications equipment and electronic-countermeasures systems vital to penetrating enemy air space. Officials also say that gallium arsenide, which uses less power and is considered faster than silicon, would probably be critical to any space-based anti-missile system the U.S. might deploy. &quot;We'd like to have a gallium-arsenide industry in the U.S.,&quot; says one senior Pentagon official. &quot;But having said that, how do you do it?&quot;    Super-powerful magnets, used in satellite components, were developed by the U.S., but Japan now dominates production. New sources are on the horizon, according to a study by the National Research Council, but these are in Italy, the Netherlands and West Germany, not the U.S.    Sen. Jeff Bingaman, a New Mexico Democrat, criticizes the Pentagon for scrimping on research money for sprucing up the U.S. technology base. &quot;The research and development base for defense has grown substantially, but the technology-base part hasn't shared in that growth,&quot; he says. The current budget squeeze, however, makes heftier financing unlikely, and even more money wouldn't end the foreign dominance that already exists. </TEXT></DOC>