<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880321-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Losing Ground: Foreign Rivals Imperil U.S. Firms' Leadership In the Service Sector --- Narrower Technology Gap, Shortsighted Executives Have Led to Vulnerability --- International Janitor Services </HL><AUTHOR> Christopher J. Chipello (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CON EDP MON </IN><TEXT>   For a long time, Americans made money by making things -- pouring steel, stamping out auto fenders, assembling television sets.    Then came the Japanese and a host of other foreign rivals. Manufacturing became America's past, the service sector its future. Services now account for 71% of the nation's output. Americans shuffle papers, stare at computer screens, peddle real estate, make bank loans. And they don't worry much about foreign competition in services.    But some of those businesses may be vulnerable, too, say growing numbers of economists, executives and government officials. Although the U.S. remains a leader in many service areas, warning signs abound.    Already, technology is beginning to break down international barriers. AMR Corp. of Dallas enters ticket information and other data for its American Airlines subsidiary in Barbados, at its AMR Caribbean Data Services unit. It also recently hired 350 workers in the Dominican Republic to process health-care claims and credit-card applications for major U.S. companies. There are an estimated 100 offshore data-entry operations and most, unlike AMR's, are foreign-owned.    Americans &quot;don't like to sit at a computer terminal all day,&quot; explains Pat Griffith, the president of AMR Caribbean.    The Japanese have raced past U.S. banks in international lending volume and are gaining business here. U.S. construction and engineering firms are losing more contracts at home and abroad. European service companies step up acquisitions in the U.S. and promise to become more formidable as Common Market integration proceeds during the next few years.    &quot;The safety of our supremacy in the service sector will prove to be an illusion,&quot; cautions Patrick L. Townsend, a quality expert at Dun andamp; Bradstreet Corp.'s McCormack andamp; Dodge software subsidiary. Congress's Office of Technology Assessment, in a study published last year, agrees: &quot;In many of the service industries, as in manufacturing, continuing economic growth and development have helped other countries narrow the gap with the United States.&quot;    The U.S. Commerce Department is expanding its survey of international service transactions, but the statistics for trade in business services remain far less comprehensive than those for goods, hampering analysis of the issue. Nevertheless, the department's figures show a drop in the U.S. surplus, from $10 billion in 1981 to less than $1 billion in 1987. The Office of Technology study, which attempted to expand the coverage, came up with larger numbers but indicated a similar decline through 1984. In any case, any remaining surplus barely dents the overall trade deficit.    Advances in computers and telecommunications have made it vastly easier for securities houses, banks, accounting and advertising firms, and others to expand their global operations. Construction and some other U.S. service industries were hurt by the strong dollar earlier in the decade and have yet to rebound.    Foreign businesses such as airlines often have the benefit of government sponsorship. But that rarely tells the whole story. Although productivity measurements are controversial, some economists believe overall service-sector productivity in the U.S. has essentially been flat during the 1980s. And, just as in manufacturing, lower wages overseas often prove irresistible.    Plenty of bright spots remain in the American service sector. In software development and telecommunications, U.S. industry is pre-eminent. The nation's distribution system is as good as any at delivering goods to consumers cheaply. Foreigners flock to the U.S. for sophisticated health care and advanced education. U.S. airlines have become more efficient since deregulation, even if the effects on service quality are mixed.    &quot;If you go across the spectrum of services, we're pretty darn good,&quot; says James Brian Quinn, a Dartmouth College professor of management. Many economists and management consultants still argue that the U.S. stands to benefit overall from more open international markets in services. And they approve of the U.S. government push to include services in multilateral trade negotiations.    Yet even optimists admit to a nagging concern that the U.S. advantage in services could fall victim to some of the same problems that have plagued manufacturing in the U.S.: preoccupation with short-term profit, inattention to detail, alienated workers, and emphasis on cost savings at the expense of customer convenience.    &quot;The common thread for both manufacturing and services is the shortsightedness in the board rooms of America,&quot; says Brant Free, the director of the Commerce Department's Office of Service Industries. Few U.S. companies have built global strategies on careful assessments of how technology is likely to affect their industry, says Mr. Free. As a result, he says, Japanese companies &quot;are going to be eating our lunch&quot; even in such industries as insurance, where many U.S. firms fail to apply their sophistication to overseas markets.    Some worry that foreign companies aren't making the same mistake and that domestic service industries may find themselves defending not just market shares abroad but their home turf as well. Foreign ventures in the U.S. sometimes falter, of course. Nevertheless, &quot;The best offense is a good defense,&quot; argues Carl Sloane, the president of Temple, Barker andamp; Sloane Inc., a consulting firm based in Lexington, Mass. &quot;Foreign presence in U.S. service markets already is a great deal more extensive than what conventional wisdom and trade statistics would lead one to believe,&quot; he says.    European firms are penetrating the U.S. market in an increasing range of businesses. U.K.-based Blue Arrow PLC became the world's largest employment-services concern when it acquired Milwaukee-based Manpower Inc. last September. Even businesses as mundane as janitorial services are going international. ISS AS of Denmark, for example, now scrubs office buildings in some 15 countries; its U.S. subsidiary employs 16,000, up from around 9,000 in 1984. The unit ranks among the biggest operators of its kind in the American market, with roughly $220 million in revenues in 1987. Like other foreign-owned companies, however, ISS sends part of its profit back home.    Challenges are coming from across the Pacific, as well. U.S. construction and engineering companies blame their shrinking international market share on increased competition from developing nations, a closing of the technology gap among industrial countries and a generally tighter market. They also blame Japan for effectively shutting them out of the Japanese market, while Japanese construction companies last year did $2.3 billion of U.S. work.    But Daniel Halpin, a construction-engineering authority at Purdue University, says there is more to it than that. Some foreign companies, particularly Japanese, pour more money into developing new construction methods and patenting the machines and materials needed for them, he says. Thus, for work on certain sections of the Washington, D.C., subway system, U.S. contractors used Austrian and Japanese technology and equipment. Such proprietary technologies help foreign companies gain a foothold in the American market, though protectionist measures here could block some inroads: The Washington Metropolitan Transit Authority recently rejected a U.S.-Japanese joint bid for work on a new subway line, in the first invocation of a recently enacted law intended to force Japan to open up its public-works market.    Some observers see parallels between recent advances by Japanese into the service sector and earlier pushes by Japanese auto and semiconductor makers. In many cases, the Japanese companies target high-volume, low-margin areas -- government lending, for example, in the banking business -- then move on to more lucrative businesses after they have penetrated the market. Gunter Pauli, the head of the European Service Industries Forum, argues that the drive by Japanese banks and securities companies may be only the leading edge of impending Japanese competition in a much broader range of services, from parcel delivery to software for language translations.    In the longer run, computer technology and lower wages may make it attractive for U.S. companies to move some service work offshore, much as manufacturers did earlier. AMR's Caribbean operation shows how technology can separate some service workers from the markets they serve.    Data-entry workers in the U.S. typically are paid about $10 an hour, compared with $1 to $2 for workers in the Caribbean and as little as 20 cents in China. And foreign workers are less likely to worry about the effects of working at cathode-ray tubes for long stretches.    Language isn't a big problem. Overseas key-punch operators in non-English-speaking countries are &quot;just as good or even better than people who speak English,&quot; because they concentrate on keying in letters as they appear rather than reading the text, says a spokeswoman for Mead Corp.'s Nexis and Lexis electronic data bases. Mead still does most of its data entry in the U.S., but contracts for certain labor-intensive work in Asia.    Some services, of course, seem immune to foreign competition. Sending a soiled suit to a Hong Kong dry cleaner isn't likely to be a serious option any time soon. But many services have no such immunity.    Norman Bodek, the president of the Data Entry Management Association, says toll-free telephone services could become the next booming offshore data-entry service.    Frequently, services are important for international competition not so much in themselves as in how they affect manufacturers. And U.S. services don't always serve U.S. goods exporters well.    Walking through his company's cavernous freight-forwarding facility at Boston's Logan International Airport, Michael DeMarco, a manager for Nippon Express U.S.A. Inc., notes a box of computer-aided design equipment on its way to Japan. One side of the container is buckled and torn. Such slipshod handling alienates Japanese buyers, even when the goods are intact, Mr. DeMarco says. Shipments from Japan almost never show evidence of poor packing or handling, he adds.    It isn't too late for American service companies to fend off foreigners, the experts say, but U.S. companies must train workers better and give them more incentives to stay on the job -- profit-sharing plans, rewards for productivity gains, and the like.    Some believe better public-private sector cooperation could help. Roderic W. Rahe Jr., secretary of the International Engineering Construction Industry Council in Washington, D.C., says, &quot;Somehow we've got to find a way for the U.S. government and the U.S. private sector to work together.&quot; He adds, &quot;We're not talking about subsidies; it's an attitude toward coordination.&quot;    Using technology more effectively is another often-sounded theme. &quot;If U.S. services companies move aggressively to develop their own proprietary technology systems, they can maintain a competitive edge of a year or two in most services areas,&quot; argues Mr. Quinn of Dartmouth, who is coordinating a research project on services for the National Academy of Engineering. But he says service companies must shed the complacency and failure to attend to detail that contributed to the demise of some manufacturing industries. </TEXT></DOC>