<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:How Protectionism Soured the Sugar Market---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 11/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Everyone is worrying about the stock market now. In Washington, the conferees on the 1,000-page trade bill seemed to recognize that fear of onrushing protectionism is one of the many factors that started stocks tumbling. So Lloyd Bentsen, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, declared that &quot;this country wants to beat down protectionism around the world.&quot;    There is, however, a whale of a lot of protectionism in the House and Senate bills that the conferees are striving to reconcile. Up to now the major reason for optimism has been the fact that the reconciliation process is so complicated that the conferees might give up and quit. There are 13 House and eight Senate committees that have their sticky fingers in the bill, and these committees somehow have been parceled out into 17 subgroups.    But that was a dim hope at best. So it would be nice to know that a new attitude has infected the conferees. If Sen. Bentsen is to be believed, the public interest may be beginning to crowd out the variety of parochial interests that have made the House and Senate bills such unholy messes.    The conferees have yet to reach what promises to be the messiest part of the legislation -- the section that requires the president to retaliate against any country that the U.S., in its wisdom, finds guilty of unfair trade practices. Nobody likes unfair trade practices, and there's a lot of that sort of thing going around. But even some U.S. officials admit that the U.S. is about as guilty as its trading partners.    When the U.S. retaliates, the obvious step is to curtail imports from the offending country. The preferred method, from the domestic producers' standpoint, is a quota, not a tariff. Protectionists have found from experience that a foreign country can overcome a tariff by cutting costs and prices.    The U.S. has been involved in quota systems for many years. An economist at the Planning and Economic Analysis Staff at the State Department recently examined how this has worked out for one import commodity -- sugar. The author, Keith E. Maskus, a University of Colorado economist, notes that sugar provides &quot;an interesting case study in the political economy of import quotas in a rapidly changing market.&quot;    The U.S. government has been regulating sugar imports in one way or another almost continuously since 1789, which is some sort of proof that governments seldom learn from past mistakes. In 1934, a quota system was set up and has continued, with an interruption in the late 1970s, through today.    The late 1970s interruption surely showed that inflation often has a silver lining. World sugar prices soared in 1973 and 1974 amid general inflation, and Congress seized the opportunity to push the commodity into the free market. Freedom, unfortunately, didn't last long. Price supports were set in 1977 and 1978, and in 1981 full statutory protection was restored.    The farm bill set a &quot;market stabilization price&quot; of 20 to 22 cents a pound for raw sugar. Most of this represented a loan rate of 17 to 18 cents a pound. If market prices fell low enough, the growers could turn over their sugar to the Commodity Credit Corp. and still come out all right. But the price was set at a level that would keep the CCC from getting stuck with sugar, and generally this has worked.    At first a system of tariff and import fees was used to keep the stabilization price high enough to maintain the market price at the desired level. But the world price fell so fast in the recession of 1981-82 that it overwhelmed the fee setup. In May 1982 the free-enterprise Reagan administration opted to return to a quota system -- purely on an &quot;emergency&quot; basis, of course. The emergency is continuing.    The quotas cut imports sharply, as they were designed to do. The U.S. consumer footed the bill, since our government agreed that we would import the quota sugar at our domestic price, not at the much lower world price.    Meanwhile, supply and demand has reared its head. There was no restriction at all on domestic supply, so at the controlled price the growers outdid themselves. One trouble was that the American public was becoming more and more weight-conscious, and sugar does provide several calories. Another group of agricultural producers, corn growers, got into the act. Corn sweeteners did a good job of sweetening things, and at a somewhat lower price. The fixed price for domestic sugar created a lovely market for the corn people, at a higher price than they could have achieved otherwise.    In 1985, Congress was worried that the mess actually might hit the government in the budget, which was already hurting pretty badly anyway. So the farm bill that year stipulated that the sugar program should be run at no budgetary cost to the government. That meant that the government had to rely mainly on the quota system to keep the domestic price at the stipulated level.    The future looks even more weird. The way things have been going, the quota will have to be cut to zero in a couple of years. At that point, something will have to give. The government won't be able to keep the sugar growers in the style to which they have become accustomed without setting up some sort of program that is going to cost the government money, despite what Congress said back there in 1985.    It surely should be mentioned that this setup was devised in 1981 to provide a profitable return to the least efficient sugar growers. This might have made a little bit of sense if the U.S. and the rest of the world had been running out of sugar and we had to find a way to get people to grow more of the stuff. Such, of course, was not the case.    The sugar system has been a constant source of embarrassment to our government. In 1986, the Commodity Credit Corp. decided that, since it wasn't going to be required to hold sugar anymore, it might as well get rid of the 150,000 tons it had on hand. This was hardly the most profitable deal a federal agency had arranged: It had paid 18 cents a pound for the stuff, and China got it for 4.75 cents a pound.    The world price at the time was 6.33 cents a pound, but the U.S. bargain sale within two days knocked that down to 4.96 cents. Needless to say, foreign sugar exporters, notably Fiji, Australia and Thailand, were infuriated.    Prof. Maskus sees little hope that the U.S. will unilaterally extract itself from this mess. He suggests that another large rise in world sugar prices, such as occurred in the mid-1970s, might provide an opening. But even when we had that opportunity, pressure from special interests led us to blow it. Since other nations also play games with sugar, the author says there eventually might be hope for some sort of multilateral liberalization, but fears it would be very difficult to accomplish.    The sugar story, in any case, shows the trouble the government can create by fooling around with international markets. If the stock-market crash helped get the message across, it did indeed serve a useful purpose. </TEXT></DOC>