<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870407-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Farm Trade Tangle -- Level Field:Agricultural SubsidiesWould Be Jointly CutUnder U.S. Trade Plan---Their High Cost EverywhereGives Urgency to an IssueNegotiators Once Ignored---Elections in 1988 Are Hurdle---By Art PineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>      {Second of two articles}   WASHINGTON -- When U.S. trade representative Clayton Yeutter maps strategy for the current talks with America's main trading partners, he focuses mainly on farmers. For besides being a painful domestic issue, agriculture has become the nation's biggest foreign-trade problem.    For years, the U.S. exported far more farm products than it imported. In the 1970s, in fact, agriculture was the single largest contributor to the trade surplus the country then enjoyed. All this has changed. Although some 30% of the nation's farm output still is sold abroad, the nation last year briefly ran a deficit in agricultural trade.    American trade strategists blame much of the problem on subsidies. In major agricultural countries, farm-support payments have become so generous they spur global overproduction and surpluses that depress prices and squeeze farmers everywhere. They also spawn protectionism.    Mr. Yeutter's prescription is simple: Reduce government subsidies and trade barriers. &quot;We can't do that unilaterally here in Washington,&quot; he says. &quot;It's a global problem that has to be handled globally.&quot; For years, however, international trade conferences wouldn't even address the issue.    Now the prospects of international action are rising. In the Common Market, subsidy costs are so high they threaten the financial stability of the 12-nation compact. Japan is facing great pressure from abroad to open its agricultural markets. And a longstanding U.S.-European subsidy battle is hurting some other big agricultural producers such as Canada, Argentina and Australia, galvanizing them into a major political force for overhauling the current system.    The result is that in trade negotiations, farm subsidies have moved to the top of the agenda. Pressed by Washington, the 92-country General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has agreed on a two-year, fast-track timetable that calls for identifying the issues this year and getting the bargaining under way in 1988.    Washington wants a phased reduction of all countries' farm-support programs and new trade rules to promote peaceful settlement of disputes. To force action, the U.S. has begun an aggressive campaign to make it more costly for other countries to maintain current subsidies.    Although trade talks in Geneva are finally under way, there is a serious danger that they will drag on so long that countries will lose patience and begin imposing new trade restrictions. &quot;It's going to be a major challenge indeed,&quot; Mr. Yeutter says.    But it is an effort the U.S. believes it must make. &quot;Agriculture has become a global problem, affecting both industrialized and developing countries,&quot; Secretary of State George Shultz recently told the National Association of Wheatgrowers. &quot;The farming world faces a crisis of overproduction. . . . How we respond to this crisis will determine the future role of American agriculture in the world and the number of farms that survive in this country.&quot;    To help make its point, Washington has been using a carrot-and-stick strategy. In 1985, the U.S. began using new farm export subsidies to counter the Common Market's generous export subsidies, which have helped turn Europe from a net importer to an exporter of grain.    Congress also slashed federal price supports, sending crop prices lower world-wide. That policy, combined with the recent decline in the value of the dollar against many currencies, makes it more costly for other countries to maintain crop supports.    The U.S. has turned more combative in other ways. Earlier this year, it threatened Europe with huge retaliatory duties and blunted an attempt by the Common Market to raise tariffs on U.S. corn and sorghum. Mr. Yeutter is readying a similar volley against a proposed European tax on fats and oils. The new tactics mark a sharp change from a milder -- and unsuccessful -- 1982 American effort to win reductions in subisidies and trade curbs.    Now Washington wants governments to freeze farm programs at current levels and then agree to a world-wide plan to bring subsidies down to a minimal level -- perhaps by reducing them 10% or so a year. The U.S. also wants to standardize health and sanitation requirements so these can't be used as trade barriers.    U.S. officials say the ultimate objective of the talks is to write broad rules that will permit governments to continue subsidies but at much lower levels. One idea gaining acceptance among producing countries is to turn farm subsidies into flat income-maintenance programs rather than payments tied to crop prices or to acreage. &quot;This notion of giving a subsidy that encourages production, and then selling it at a lower price, is the inherent nature of the problem,&quot; Mr. Shultz says.    Mr. Yeutter has offered to &quot;put everything on the table&quot; in the new negotiations -- including a Depression-era U.S. law that enables the U.S. to maintain import restrictions on politically sensitive crops such as peanuts, sugar and dairy products. But U.S. officials stress that international cooperation is the key. &quot;No country can or will unilaterally disarm its agricultural subsidies overnight,&quot; Mr. Shultz says. &quot;We can't just stop ourselves if other people continue, because they'll just make inroads in our markets.&quot;    Washington did attempt a unilateral solution several years ago, resulting in an expensive fiasco. In 1983, after failing to launch new global trade talks, the Reagan administration decided to cut U.S. production without waiting for the rest of the world to do the same. The Agriculture Department paid farmers handsomely, in previously harvested grain and other crops, to take large portions of their acreage out of production.    Farmers signed on in droves. Within months, 30% of the cropland covered by U.S. subsidy programs -- the equivalent to the entire acreage of Western Europe -- had been idled by this so-called payment-in-kind program. But when the cutbacks, coupled with a severe drought in the U.S. that year, drove up world prices, other countries increased their production and took export market share away from the U.S.    American farmers also stepped up production as soon as the program expired, and world crop prices sank. The declines helped drive up the cost of U.S. price-support programs, which are designed to bridge a gap between market prices and target prices. In fiscal 1986, farm programs cost Washington $25.8 billion, up nearly tenfold from 1980.    All in all, U.S. policies have given foreign producers an &quot;almost unfettered opportunity for expansion,&quot; charges Robbin Johnson, a vice president and economist at Cargill Inc., the grain giant.    But the costs of unfettered expansion are becoming a burden to more and more governments. &quot;There's an increasing realization of the cost being paid for agriculture,&quot; says Albert Bressand, the director of Promethee, a Paris-based research group. France, often a spoiler in efforts to cut Common Market farm subsidies, now pays more than it receives from EC farm programs and so is more willing to cooperate.    These conditions are raising the prospects for new global farm rules. Last spring, ministers of the 24-country Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development not only discussed agriculture for the first time but also issued a communique asserting the need to overhaul their farm programs to stem overproduction before it starts a trade war. President Reagan and leaders of the other six biggest industrial democracies endorsed that notion at the Tokyo economic summit last summer.    Then in September, at Punta del Este, Uruguay, the U.S. pushed through a major plank in the new round of trade talks broadening its agenda to include all farm subsidies, not just those that underwrite the cost of exports. Washington followed up by getting GATT to agree to the two-year timetable for trying to resolve the issues.    In another important step, the OECD this year has developed a complex formula that would enable negotiators to calculate a specific dollar value for each country's domestic farm subsidies -- a move that is expected to make the GATT negotiations a lot more orderly. Washington hopes to push that through at the next OECD ministerial meeting, next month, giving a further boost to the new GATT talks.    The administration also hopes to persuade heads of government to use this year's seven-nation economic summit, set for June in Venice, to provide fresh political impetus for the negotiations.    But the going won't be easy. The U.S. offer to &quot;put everything on the table&quot; hasn't drawn a reciprocal response. Japan, already in turmoil as a result of the dollar's decline against the yen, has been slow to include its sensitive rice-import restrictions in the talks. And Bonn, worried about its tiny but politically powerful Bavarian farms, is a holdout among the Europeans. &quot;The bad-guy these days is West Germany,&quot; a U.S. official says.    As a result, some analysts believe that while the nuts-and-bolts negotiations may be done in the GATT, the outlines of any deals will have to be made at higher levels, possibly by heads of government themselves. &quot;The political people have to discuss how to get there because it's really a political question,&quot; says Harald Malmgren, a Washington-based trade consultant. &quot;You can't do it in trade negotiations. It requires a commitment at the highest level, to keep the pressure groups from getting through.&quot;    One major obstacle is the political calendar. All sides agree that realistically the negotiators can't strike an agreement before the French presidential elections in April 1988 or the U.S. elections later that year, because the farm crisis will be too sensitive an issue in both.    &quot;There's an apprehension in American agriculture that we could be sold short again,&quot; says Michael Hall, the Washington representative for the National Corn Growers' Association. Right now there isn't any guarantee that Congress would support a new farm trade pact.    Negotiators for Canada, Australia and even the Common Market already have hinted they will push for an &quot;interim agreement&quot; this year designed to buy time until 1989. But the U.S. opposes any such move, on the ground that it would blunt pressure for a fundamental revamping.    Though farmers used to boast that agriculture was the last bastion of the free market, it now is one of the most heavily subsidized sectors. The U.S. maintains stringent -- and quite costly -- import quotas on a spate of farm products. Europe and Japan have intricate networks of quotas, managed markets and subsidy payments. Even Canada, Australia and Argentina, which purport to be non-subsidizers, maintain complex government price-setting programs that keep prices high domestically but keep their crops competitive abroad.    Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng argues that the food-producing nations must work out an accord &quot;or we're all going to have to dip a lot further into our pockets.&quot; The alternative to reaching an accord, he says, &quot;is chaos.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>