<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0132 </DOCNO><HL> There's World Enough, and Time, for Broader Arms Treaty---By Alton Frye</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;The president is not afraid to fail on this.&quot; That is Howard Baker's repeated assurance to those who think Mr. Reagan is a shade too eager to conclude an arms-control agreement with the Soviet Union.    The anxiety among some of the president's professed supporters stems partly from their knowledge that the clock is fast running down. With no foreign-policy achievements to match his dramatic transformation of the nation's domestic agenda, some fear that Mr. Reagan will press far-reaching agreements with Moscow in the time remaining to his administration.    Conventional wisdom holds that the president must strike a deal in 1987, on the theory that next year's election campaign will disrupt serious negotiations. That assumption leads to the conclusion that the most Mr. Reagan can hope for is a relatively modest accord eliminating a few hundred intermediate-range nuclear (INF) weapons in Europe. On both counts -- how much time Mr. Reagan has left for fruitful bargaining and how substantial a bargain he can achieve -- the conventional wisdom is very likely wrong.    One reason the common assumptions are off the mark is the apparent premise of Soviet diplomacy at this stage. Mikhail Gorbachev has revealed both in conversation with visitors and in the remarkable concessions his government has offered that he well understands how important it is to reach significant agreements with Mr. Reagan. The Soviet leader seems to appreciate that failure to do so will prejudice the chances for arms-control arrangements with future administrations.    The logic is straightforward: If there is no deal with this president, Mr. Reagan and his domestic allies may be tempted to challenge a successor's agreement as a sellout of U.S. interests. The seesaw history of Soviet-American diplomacy confirms that risk. That is a compelling rationale for Mr. Gorbachev's evident willingness to continue exploring options with Mr. Reagan.    President Reagan's calculations are different, but they also point toward concentration on an arms-reduction agreement covering far more than INF. The president has elicited Soviet acceptance of a series of unprecedented accommodations: deep cuts in offensive warheads to a level of 6,000 on each side, exclusion of British and French forces from the limitations, lenient counting rules for the bomber-carried weapons favored by the U.S., and a halving of the number of warheads on heavy missiles. Mr. Reagan must ask himself why he should not reap this diplomatic harvest, particularly when neglecting to could confront the U.S. not with 6,000 but 16,000 to 20,000 Soviet strategic warheads in the 1990s. Fortunately, he has ample time to wrap up that ambitious bargain.    There is no reason for Mr. Reagan to be distracted from this goal by the 1988 electoral calendar. Not being a candidate himself, in this realm he is liberated from clock-watching. He can reach for an agreement with confidence that his imprimatur will make it more ratifiable than any accord his successor, of whatever party, is likely to produce. Indeed, that probability, widely acknowledged in Washington, extends his negotiating time dramatically. For Mr. Reagan can pursue active arms diplomacy into the closing months of his tenure with no compulsion to ratify a treaty before he leaves office. Ratification can wait for the next administration.    There is an important precedent for this, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. That useful pact was the result of intensive Soviet-American negotiations over several years of the Johnson administration. But after the parties reached agreement in 1968, ratification was delayed, in part because of the political disruptions accompanying Moscow's intervention in Czechoslovakia. The Republican nominee, Richard Nixon, recognized the treaty's merit but prudently suggested that ratification should await the election of a new president. That indeed occurred, and the treaty Lyndon Johnson wrote won endorsement early in the Nixon presidency.    The non-proliferation precedent is a desirable model for Messrs. Reagan and Gorbachev. With an INF agreement possible this fall, a summit in Washington ought to increase the chances for another encounter next year in Moscow. The scheduling of that final Reagan-Gorbachev engagement should spur negotiations to head off the impending surge in strategic forces -- a surge that will otherwise obliterate any gains from cutbacks in INF. Apart from the valid national-security considerations, in crass political terms Mr. Reagan would surely bolster the candidacy of his party's chosen successor by bringing home the major reductions in strategic forces for which he has so often called.    Signs are that the Soviets are still angling for that larger deal. They are pressing for agreement on &quot;key provisions&quot; of a strategic accord as part of the agenda for an initial Gorbachev visit to Washington. And, to a degree even the president may not yet comprehend, they have relaxed their earlier demand to confine all work on future defensive technologies to laboratories on the ground.    Now the word in Moscow is that development and testing of such technologies can go forward at fixed sites and that the two sides could even agree on exploring certain of those technologies in space. That implies a less nervous attitude toward the danger that the U.S. strategic defense initiative will prove so successful as to undermine the Soviet deterrent. Soviet analysts are looking toward a reduction process in which both sides evolve toward more stabilizing forces, particularly a build-down of the threatening multiple-warhead missiles that have been the principal American complaint. The Scowcroft Commission could hardly have said it better.    These tendencies open extraordinary possibilities for the concluding chapter of Ronald Reagan's presidency. They even raise the prospect that skillful diplomacy could lay the foundation for an eventual cooperative transition to some reliance on strategic defenses, if technology someday warrants it.    That final chapter is Mr. Reagan's to write. Is a president not afraid to fail bold enough to succeed? The answer will come not this year, but next.    ---   Mr. Frye is Washington director of the Council on Foreign Relations. </TEXT></DOC>