<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870804-0012 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Precious metal prices rose amid concerns about increased tension in the Middle East, inflation and a possible strike by South African miners.    Futures prices recovered from a midday sell-off to close just below the day's highs. At the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for December delivery settled at $488.30 an ounce, up $13.20, while September silver was up 47.5 cents an ounce at $8.825. October platinum at the New York Mercantile Exchange rose $12.40 an ounce to $634.60.    Traders apparently were alarmed, analysts said, by Iranian threats against the U.S. and Saudi Arabia -- particularly a threat to uproot the Saudi rulers -- following weekend clashes between pilgrims and police in the Moslem holy city of Mecca in Saudi Arabia. The riots caused the deaths of 402 people, mostly Iranian pilgrims.    Traders fear that the Iran-Iraq war may spread to other Persian Gulf states -- concern that is heightened by U.S. escorts of Kuwaiti oil tankers, analysts said.    &quot;The fact that the U.S. has recently become a major player has made the Middle East a more important and sensitive area in the eyes of traders,&quot; said Bette Raptopoulos, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York.    Miss Raptopoulos also cited the announcement by the National Union of Mine Workers in South Africa that it set Aug. 9 as a strike date if negotiations -- largely concerning wages, but working conditions as well -- aren't successfully concluded by the deadline.    &quot;The union covers miners at more than half of South Africa's gold mines,&quot; Miss Raptopoulos noted. &quot;South Africa produces about 50% of the free world's gold, so this is a major issue,&quot; she said.    At the same time, &quot;while the situation bears watching,&quot; said Robin Adams, president of Resource Strategies, Inc., an Exton, Pa., mineral and mining consulting firm, &quot;it should be remembered that historically South African miners have seldom disrupted gold production.&quot;    Prices slid off the session's highs around midday upon word that the Gas Prince, a U.S.-escorted tanker, had safely negotiated the Persian Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz, said Bernard Savaiko, senior precious metals analyst at PaineWebber Inc. in New York. A drop in the Commodity Research Bureau's futures price index because of weaker grain and soybean prices also depressed prices in the middle of the day, Mr. Savaiko said.    The CRB index, a closely watched gauge of inflation, rose to 227.7 then fell back, he said. &quot;Traders were watching to see if it would reach 228,&quot; which is regarded as a significant inflationary level, he said.    &quot;We are at the crossroads as far as inflation is concerned,&quot; he said.    &quot;The markets are in the hands of investors and speculators,&quot; said Robert Menzies, a dealer at PaineWebber International Futures Ltd. in London, and he predicted gold could surge above $500 an ounce &quot;within a matter of weeks.&quot;    Gold could rise to $530 an ounce within the next 12 months, Union Bank of Switzerland said in a report. Gold even could reach $620, but this would be on the assumption that the U.S. Federal Reserve Board will pursue easy money policies and both real interest rates and the dollar will fall, the bank said.    Some analysts, however, cautioned that production of all precious metals are well in excess of fabrication, or industrial, demand.    Gold, silver and platinum are rising to levels where high prices encourage suppliers to sell, said Ann Whitby, a director of Chart Analysis Ltd. in London    London dealers also warned that precious metals marketsare as inconsistent as other commodities.   Only six weeks ago, prices were depressed because the dollar was strengthening, international stock markets were firm and Western producers, the Soviet Union and Middle Eastern holders were unloading supplies on the market.    In other futures markets yesterday:    INTEREST RATES: Prices skidded as concern about Middle East tensions sent oil and precious metals prices higher. At the Chicago Board of Trade, Treasury bond futures for September delivery tumbled 1 10/32 to 88 6/32. &quot;Everything a bond person hates to hear about,&quot; was heard yesterday, said Jeffrey Priest, head of fixed income trading at Miller Tabak Hirsch andamp; Co. in New York. The rising oil and precious metal prices fueled fears of accelerating inflation, while a survey of corporate purchasing managers indicated continued economic growth in July. Also troubling market participants was uncertainty about the Treasury Department's quarterly financing operation, details of which are expected to be announced this week. Despite all the concern, the 9% yield on 30-year Treasury bonds should prompt investor interest and help support prices, said Frederic Leiner, an analyst in Chicago at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.    SOYBEANS AND GRAINS: Forecasts of rain in much of the parched Midwest pushed soybean futures prices lower. Weather Services Corp., a private forecaster based in Bedford, Mass., predicted one-quarter of an inch to three-quarters of an inch of rainfall by this evening in many areas. The firm also sees temperatures dropping five degrees to 10 degrees from the record-breaking high temperatures that hit much of the western soybean belt over the weekend. Soybean futures prices didn't react strongly to news that the Agriculture Department set the 1987 loan rate at $4.77 a bushel. Although that was the same as the 1986 loan rate, farmers were able to borrow only $4.56 a bushel last year because of Gramm-Rudman budget cuts. The rate had been widely anticipated, said Jerry Gidel, an analyst with G.H. Miller andamp; Co. in Chicago. Under the loan program, farmers use their harvested crop as collateral to back government loans. The loan rate tends to set a price floor because farmers are allowed to cancel their loan obligations by forfeiting their crop to the goverment. Futures prices for corn fell, while wheat prices rose.    COTTON: Strong demand for physical cotton both domestically and from overseas again spurred buying of futures. The October contract settled at 79.55 cents a pound, a gain of 0.25 cent. But the heaviest action was in the months from December outward, which represent the 1987-88 crop season that began Saturday. Those months rose to life-of-contract highs. &quot;This is an extension of the advances last month, which contributed to life-of-contract highs in different positions 12 times,&quot; said Ernest Simon, cotton specialist for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. Government reports late last week on exports sales and domestic mill consumption show demand and consumption of cotton remains strong, Mr. Simon said. This is also reflected in the open interest, or contracts that still have to be evened out either by an opposite trade or delivery of the commodity, in futures. As of Friday, open interest rose to 35,719 contracts, a four-year high, Mr. Simon said. Stocks of cotton certified for delivery against futures contracts have dropped sharply, he noted. As of Friday, they were down to 6,092 bales, &quot;a very small number in view of the activity we have in this market,&quot; he said. But he added that &quot;the price, near 80 cents, is very attractive, and will likely induce cotton to be certified for delivery against contracts.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>