<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870427-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Italian Imbroglio:Vatican Bank PlayedA Central Role in FallOf Banco Ambrosiano---It Is Tied by New InformationTo Shell-Company Deals;Extradition Fight Looms---Calvi and 'the Secret Strategy'---By Laura ColbyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP MHCBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> ROME  </DATELINE><TEXT>   New information shows that the Vatican bank played a central role in the billion-dollar collapse of Italy's Banco Ambrosiano in 1982.    Since the scandal broke, the Vatican bank has sought to portray its involvement as innocent and at most peripheral. But for five years investigators have been sifting through thousands of pages of documents scattered from Luxembourg, Switzerland and Italy to Central and South America, and the documents tell a different story.    From them has emerged evidence that, for more than a decade, Vatican bank officials played a more prominent role than was previously believed in the tangled, fraudulent schemes of Roberto Calvi, the Banco Ambrosiano chairman who was found hanged under Blackfriars Bridge in London in 1982. In February, investigating magistrates in Milan, Banco Ambrosiano's headquarters, issued warrants for the arrest of three senior officials of the Istituto per le Opere di Religione, or IOR, commonly known as the Vatican bank.    The investigators' Banco Ambrosiano file contains thousands of pages, dating back to the early 1970s. Some of them, such as the now-famous letters of patronage issued by the Vatican bank, are widely known. But investigators say the file also documents dozens of transactions not previously known to the general public. The additional evidence was essential to the prosecutors' decision to bring indictments against the three Vatican bank officials.    Confidential liquidators' reports and bank records made available to this newspaper show for the first time just how involved in Mr. Calvi's affairs the Vatican bank was. They describe in detail a series of financial transactions that took place over several years leading up to the Banco Ambrosiano collapse. These transactions, investigators assert, not only demonstrate the close relations between Mr. Calvi and the Vatican bank; they also show how Banco Ambrosiano's funds were used in ways not in its own best interests.    In one of the transactions, the documents show, the Vatican bank on Oct. 16, 1979, received two time deposits, one for $65 million and the other for 101 million Swiss francs ($69.2 million at present exchange rates), from the Lima, Peru, unit of Banco Ambrosiano. The Vatican bank turned around and lent identical amounts, with identical maturities, to a Panamanian company, United Trading. It appeared to be a routine banking intermediation operation, for which the Vatican bank received an interest-rate spread of one-sixteenth of a percentage point.    When the deposits matured in 1982 and the Banco Ambrosiano unit asked for its money, the Vatican bank declined, saying that it was United Trading that actually owed the Lima unit the money. But as it turns out, the Vatican bank controlled the entire share capital of United Trading and had for years. In essence, the Vatican bank had borrowed the money from the Banco Ambrosiano unit and lent it to itself.    United Trading was involved in buying shares of Banco Ambrosiano and in other activities that haven't been fully explained, but it isn't clear what it used the money from the Lima bank for. In any case, that bank wasn't repaid. Thus disappeared more than $100 million of the $1.3 billion initially lost in Italy's biggest bank failure, a failure that sent shock waves through the international financial community. Though creditors have since recovered some 70% of their losses, most shareholders of the Italian bank lost their investments.    Many questions about what happened and why remain unanswered. But investigators have assembled evidence strong enough to charge the three Vatican bank officials -- Archbishop Paul Marcinkus, the bank's chairman; Luigi Mennini, its managing director; and Pelligrino De Stroebel, its chief accountant -- with being accessories to fraudulent bankruptcy.    Such a charge implies that those accused either knew of the fraud or suspected it and went on with their business dealings anyway. &quot;Without the complicity of the Vatican bank,&quot; says one Italian investigator, &quot;Calvi would not have been able to do what he did.&quot;    There doesn't appear to be any evidence that the accused officials profited personally, and it remains to be seen whether the charges will lead to convictions. Still, the warrants have put the church in the position of harboring fugitives from Italian justice.    The three officials, who maintain their innocence, have avoided arrest by remaining secluded within the walls of the Vatican, a sovereign state, requiring Italian authorities to request extradition through diplomatic channels. Italy and the Vatican don't have an extradition treaty. The Holy See hasn't indicated its response, but high-level Vatican sources say they expect it to fight the extradition requests. It has been fighting the arrest warrants.    In his first comment on the matter, Pope John Paul II last month defended Archbishop Marcinkus. &quot;We are convinced that you cannot attack a person in such an exclusive and brutal manner,&quot; he said, &quot;but we are taking the case with all seriousness, and we will have it studied by competent authorities.&quot;    Secular authorities have long asserted that what they call the fraudulent bankruptcy resulted from Banco Ambrosiano's lending huge sums of its money through its overseas affiliates and the Vatican bank to a group of shell companies that had few, if any, ascertainable assets. The shell companies bought shares in Banco Ambrosiano, made an often dizzying series of loans to one another, and funneled funds to Calvi associates.    The Vatican has always insisted that it didn't own the shell companies, but new evidence indicates that it did own at least some of them. The Vatican has also denied that it had any knowledge of their operations. Indeed, sources in the Holy See say the Vatican bank didn't even know of the existence of many of the companies until mid-1981. But investigators now dispute this.    One aim of all the shell-company transactions apparently was to ensure the independence of Banco Ambrosiano; the secretive Mr. Calvi feared a takeover. Counting the stake in the bank's shares amassed by the shell companies, the Vatican bank held 10%, giving it effective control at the time of the bank's collapse. Another goal may have been to support friendly politicians; Mr. Calvi also feared a Communist takeover of the Italian government.    Vatican sources say that it was Mr. Calvi who managed the shell companies and that the Vatican bank, therefore, wasn't responsible for them. Italian officials don't dispute that Mr. Calvi was the mastermind, but they say the Vatican bank shares the blame. They assert that it was aware of at least some of these companies' questionable activities and that its unique status as &quot;an offshore bank in the center of Rome&quot; enabled Mr. Calvi to operate under a veil of secrecy and escape supervision by Italian authorities.    How did the Holy See get mixed up in all of this? Vatican sources say officials trusted Mr. Calvi because of Banco Ambrosiano's prestige as Italy's largest private bank and its unique role as a Roman Catholic bank; until a few years ago, one had to produce a baptismal certificate to buy its shares. And Vatican bank officials may have had their own political interest in maintaining the bank's independence. The profitable, discreet institution, with important holdings in publishing, regional banking and insurance, wielded much power in Italy.    The relationship was certainly profitable for the Vatican bank. During the 11-year partnership, it acted as the intermediary for Mr. Calvi in countless operations like the loans to United Trading. It earned fees, commissions and interest, although just how much isn't known. As Archbishop Marcinkus, the Vatican bank's chairman, told the Italian press shortly before Banco Ambrosiano's collapse, the Vatican bank puts its money &quot;where it does best.&quot;    By the late 1970s, according to evidence compiled by investigators and liquidators, the Vatican bank owned a number of Calvi-related shell companies. The bank itself acknowledged in the well-known letters of patronage, issued Sept. 1, 1981, that &quot;we directly or indirectly control&quot; a series of Luxembourg and Panamanian companies and that it was &quot;aware of their indebtedness.&quot; The letters -- to the Lima and Managua, Nicaragua, units of Banco Ambrosiano -- were signed by Messrs. Mennini and De Stroebel.    Investigators in Milan see the letters as proof of a high-level agreement between Mr. Calvi and the Vatican bank. &quot;There was an understanding that went far beyond ordinary banking intermediation,&quot; one Italian official says.    But Vatican sources have always said that the letters were issued at Mr. Calvi's request as he sought to shore up his collapsing empire, and that the Holy See didn't actually own the Luxembourg and Panamanian companies. The Vatican bank merely played a fiduciary role, never managed the companies, and issued the letters to try to keep them from piling up further debts, the sources have said.    &quot;Even in the period after the letters were issued,&quot; Archbishop Marcinkus wrote in a 1983 report detailing the Vatican's side of the story, &quot;there was no type of intervention by the IOR -- either direct or indirect -- in the management of the controlled companies, even under the form of (giving} clearance or authorization for the execution of operations to interested persons or third parties.&quot;    Yet the archbishop's report appears to be contradicted by an Oct. 16, 1981, letter signed by Messrs. Mennini and De Stroebel. The letter, turned up by investigators in Luxembourg, gives clearance for Mr. Calvi to give orders on the Vatican bank's behalf, naming him &quot;attorney in fact&quot; for the companies mentioned in the letters of patronage. The letter raises two unanswered questions: If the Vatican bank really wanted to stop Mr. Calvi from borrowing more, why did it give him such power over the companies? And if it didn't really own the companies, how could it give orders as to who was to manage them?    A little-known provision of a 1984 Geneva agreement with creditors of Banco Ambrosiano's Luxembourg unit supports the belief that the Vatican bank actually did own the shell companies. Under the agreement, the Vatican bank agreed to pay $250 million to the creditors in recognition of a &quot;moral responsibility&quot; in the affair.    It also agreed to turn over to the creditors an assortment of &quot;bearer shares&quot; in its possession. These included 500 shares of United Trading, &quot;forming the entire share capital&quot;; 5,499,000 of the 5.5 million shares of a Luxembourg company called Zitropo Holding S.A.; and 44,944 shares of the 50,000 shares of a company called Manic S.A. Most of the shell companies were units of these three. In addition, the Vatican bank agreed to hand over to the same creditors 53,300 shares, or 23% of those outstanding, of Banco Ambrosiano Holding S.A., the Luxembourg affiliate of the Milan bank. In return, the creditors agreed to drop any civil suits against the Vatican bank to recover their money.    Even Vatican sources say that the Vatican bank knew almost 10 years ago of the existence of United Trading, the Panama shell company that later ended up with the loans from Banco Ambrosiano's Lima unit. Vatican sources say that Mr. Calvi asked the Vatican bank to register United Trading's shares in the bank's name in late 1977 and that this was done early in 1978.    United Trading, investigators say, was also the recipient of further loans for which the Vatican bank was intermediary. The money was lent by the Bahamas unit of Banco Ambrosiano to the Vatican bank and then passed on to United Trading. In these cases, too, the Vatican bank said that United Trading, not itself, was responsible for repaying the loans. Vatican sources say the bank had received written instructions from Mr. Calvi, as chairman of the Bahamas unit, empowering it to carry out the loan-intermediation operation. It was paid a commission.    Yet Pierre Siegenthaler, the president of the Bahamas unit, didn't know anything about such a letter, he told an investigating panel appointed jointly by the Italian government and the Holy See. According to the panel's report, he said the Bahamas bank's auditors &quot;only accepted such a high exposure because IOR was the state bank of the Vatican. The auditors certainly would not have accepted such a huge indebtedness towards an unknown client company.&quot;    Thus, by using the Vatican bank as intermediary, Mr. Calvi apparently succeeded in tricking officials of his own bank into making shaky loans. At the time of Banco Ambrosiano's crash, United Trading's debts to units of the Milan bank totaled more than $200 million.    Another big debtor, the Luxembourg-based Manic, &quot;was evidently incorporated by Calvi with the agreement of the IOR,&quot; according to a confidential 1985 report by liquidators of Banco Ambrosiano Holdings, the Luxembourg unit that grouped all of the Milan bank's overseas interests.    Manic was established in Luxembourg in 1973, say the liquidators, quoting from the company's charter, &quot;to deal in shares, form and hold subsidiaries in Luxembourg and abroad, and to make and take loans with and without guarantees.&quot; Its initial capital was $50,000. Later that year, it increased its capital to $5 million, apparently through the sale of shares to the Bahamas affiliate of Banco Ambrosiano.    One month after Manic's establishment, says the liquidators' report, Roberto Calvi, as chairman of Banco Ambrosiano Overseas, signed an accord under which the Vatican bank subscribed to a $40 million bond issue by Manic and lent Manic $5 million against its entire share capital, taking possession of the shares and thus effectively gaining control of the company. Mr. Calvi, the report goes on, agreed to pay 10% interest on the total of $45 million with the understanding that once the loan was repaid, the shares would be returned to a holding vehicle of his choice.    This was not to be the case. When the $45 million was repaid to the Vatican bank in April 1979 via a transfer through Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co., the shares remained in the Vatican bank's possession, according to the 1983 report by Archbishop Marcinkus.    The archbishop's report says this was because &quot;the counterparty&quot; never came to claim the shares. It isn't clear whether, by &quot;counterparty,&quot; he meant Mr. Calvi or, rather, the repaying entity. But according to the liquidators, the repaying entity was a company called Nordeurop, a unit of none other than United Trading, the company controlled by the Vatican bank. So the Vatican bank, indirectly at least, still controlled Manic. It is uncertain where the $45 million came from, but in September 1981, Nordeurop owed nearly $400 million to Banco Ambrosiano's Lima unit.    In the meantime, Manic had embarked on a course of action that was to prove disastrous for Banco Ambrosiano: It began buying, through nominee companies, shares of the Milan bank, and the purchases, according to the liquidators' report, were financed largely by loans -- many of which were never repaid -- from Banco Ambrosiano and its units. By the time Ambrosiano collapsed in 1982, says one published account, Manic directly or indirectly owned 3.7 million of the bank's shares, or 7.5% of those outstanding.    &quot;The main purpose of Manic's transactions in Banco Ambrosiano S.p.A. appears to have been maintaining control of a significant block,&quot; the liquidators write. &quot;The reason for Manic holding the shares in the names of various nominee companies was presumably to conceal the true ownership of the shares.&quot; For Banco Ambrosiano itself to have made such purchases, which exceeded the limits agreed to by its shareholders, would have been against the law, Italian legal experts say.    A Milan investigator is more blunt. &quot;This was the secret strategy,&quot; he says. &quot;Together they {Mr. Calvi and the Vatican bank} succeeded in controlling Banco Ambrosiano.&quot;    The Vatican bank maintains that it never administered Manic and had nothing to do with its operations. It also says that it never knew of the existence of Manic's Panamanian units until mid-1981, when it wrote the letters of patronage.    Yet there is evidence, in the form of letters addressed to the IOR's Mr. Mennini, that the Vatican bank did receive some information about Manic on at least three occasions. The letters, dated in 1975, 1976 and 1977, gave information on a capital increase and invited Mr. Mennini to attend the company's shareholders' meetings.    And investigators suggest that the Vatican bank could have learned about the activities of Manic's many subsidiaries through Archbishop Marcinkus, who since August 1971 had been one of the three directors of Banco Ambrosiano's Bahamas unit. One typewritten letter to the Bahamas unit, dated March 6, 1980, and signed simply &quot;Manic S.A.,&quot; underscores the Bahamas unit's involvement in Manic's affairs:    &quot;In connection with our various Panamanian subsidiaries which you are managing in our behalf, whose regular office is located in your premises, and for which you provide officers and directors, we hereby confirm that all corporate documents and files related to these companies are to be considered their exclusive property and are not to be made available to any third parties whatsoever, including your independent auditors.&quot;    How much of such information actually was available to the archbishop in his role as a director of the Bahamas bank is one of the many questions that remain unanswered. Vatican sources say the administered companies were never mentioned at the Bahamas unit's board meetings. They assert that the minutes of these meetings show that the archbishop repeatedly questioned proposals put forward by Mr. Calvi, who was the unit's chairman, to increase the tiny bank's line of credit.    But there were other warning signals about Banco Ambrosiano that the Vatican apparently failed to heed. In early 1982, for example, Carlo De Benedetti, currently the chairman of Olivetti and briefly deputy chairman of Banco Ambrosiano, met with a high Vatican official and expressed his concern about what was going on at Banco Ambrosiano. Mr. De Benedetti confirms the meeting.    Now, it is only a matter of time before the full details of the bank's long collaboration with Mr. Calvi are aired publicly. Magistrates in Milan say that if their extradition request is refused, they will try the three Vatican bank officials in absentia.    Meanwhile, Archbishop Marcinkus and Messrs. Mennini and De Stroebel remain behind the ninth-century walls of the Vatican, where they continue to run the affairs of the Vatican bank. </TEXT></DOC>