<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870825-0103 </DOCNO><HL> In Verity, Big Steel Stands to Gain an Ally at Commerce---Armco's Former Chief Would AssumePost at Vital Time for Industry---By J. Ernest BeazleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT FORGNMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   It helps to have friends in high places, and the steel industry may be getting one.    William Verity, President Reagan's newly nominated Commerce secretary, is intimately knowledgeable about U.S. steelmakers. The 70-year-old Ohioan, who is expected to win Senate confirmation next month, is the former chairman and chief executive officer of Armco Inc., the nation's No. 5 steelmaker.    A familiar face in international circles, Mr. Verity would take the reins of Commerce amid mounting friction with Japan and dickering with Congress over an expansive trade bill. He would also take over at a time when many steelmakers, including his old company, are fiercely lobbying the White House for aid they contend is vital to the industry's survival.    &quot;He will have a major role to play in a great many things bearing on the steel industry,&quot; says Donald Barnett, an industry economist.    Though no open opposition is surfacing, Mr. Verity's nomination has sparked concern in the ranks of steel importers and foreign producers, who recall his record of backing trade barriers in the 1970s. &quot;It's going to be impossible for him to be objective about foreign steel,&quot; argues one foreign steelmaker.    Industry executives and lobbyists say that Mr. Verity's background -- his grandfather founded Armco in 1900 -- will create ethical problems when it comes to steel-related issues. &quot;He's going to have to be very, very careful here&quot; and perhaps abstain, says one executive. Adds another, &quot;Every time the department does something that affects steel, people are going to wonder if he's doing it because of his background.&quot;    White House spokesmen referred all questions on Mr. Verity's nomination to the Commerce Department, which said it doesn't see any conflict of interest in the nomination. Mr. Verity is declining interviews pending his confirmation hearing.    One early test of his tack toward his old industry and company will be his stance toward Big Steel's hard-fought campaign for a government-subsidized restructuring. Armco, in particular, has lobbied aggressively for federal aid. &quot;The industry has pushed everybody they can push on this one,&quot; says an administration official.    The Commerce post will put plenty of other industry issues before Mr. Verity, too. One is the complex day-to-day task of interpreting and enforcing trade laws. &quot;Foreign governments quickly get the message from our enforcement procedures whether the administration means business or not,&quot; says James Collins, president of the Washington-based National Steel Producers Association.    Steelmakers are already calling on the White House to commit itself to extending federal quotas on imported steel before the limits expire in 1989. The industry is up in arms, too, over the failure of some nations -- notably Canada -- to agree to the quotas. And Mr. Verity will have to decide whether to relax enforcement of some steel import restrictions because of domestic steel shortages.    Within government, few positions command as much influence over the import-plagued industry. The Commerce post would make Mr. Verity the nation's top trade law enforcement official. But the job's influence extends far beyond policing violators since the Commerce secretary has major input into the administration's trade policy.    Mr. Verity's predecessor, Malcolm Baldrige, who died last month in a freak accident, was the architect of a series of negotiated steel quotas with Europe. More recently, Mr. Baldrige had been an important advocate within the administration of federal aid for the beleaguered industry.    Although he marked the third generation of Veritys to head Armco, the silver-haired Yale University graduate doesn't fit into a neat ideological package. While supportive of trade restraints, Mr. Verity made Armco one of the most international of American steel companies. His father was the steel expert on Gen. Douglas MacArthur's staff in Japan after World War II, and Mr. Verity has long advocated opening overseas markets for American exports.    Says a friend: &quot;Bill is no stranger to international economic diplomacy.&quot;    Despite such global thinking, though, former colleagues say Mr. Verity is firmly convinced that American steelmakers have been hurt by unfair trade. Under his guidance in the 1970s, for instance, Armco filed numerous trade complaints against foreign steelmakers.    &quot;He was very much in the mainstream of industry philosophy -- that American steel companies were efficient and modern, and their main problem was unfair foreign trade,&quot; recalls Hans Mueller, a steel consultant. Adds an Armco executive: &quot;He thinks the playing field is skewed, and he's spoken out strongly about it.&quot;    Mr. Verity will be no stranger to the Washington power structure. In addition to a stint on a Reagan administration task force, Mr. Verity has long been active in national and state politics. During his tenure, for instance, Armco wielded as much clout in the White House as industry leader U.S. Steel Corp.    &quot;Armco may not have been as big a company as the others, but their relationships in Washington were as good if not better,&quot; says Mr. Collins of the steel producers association. &quot;He always had good lines into the executive branch and Congress.&quot;    Despite Mr. Verity's popularity in Washington, a couple of questions may dog his nomination.    One is his business judgment. Mr. Verity, bidding to make Armco less dependent on the cyclical steel business, engineered the company's diversification into far-flung businesses ranging from insurance to leasing to drainage pipe. The bold move foreshadowed later maneuvers by Big Steel away from the business.    The strategy initially spelled hefty profits for Armco in the 1970s, then nearly drove the company into bankruptcy reorganization two years ago. To stave off insolvency, Armco had to part with choice assets, and the company's balance sheet still hasn't recovered.    Another problem involves decade-old company scandals. In the wake of the Watergate investigation, Armco conceded in 1976 that it had paid $313,000 in bogus bonuses and expense allowances to employees, who in turn funneled the cash to state and local political campaigns. The same inquiry also unearthed $1.7 million in kickbacks and bribes of foreign government officials and customers.    The matter didn't result in Securities and Exchange Commission or Justice Department prosecution, but the incidents won't enhance Mr. Verity's credibility in the post of top trade-law policeman. For his part, the Armco executive said he was unaware of the practices and, a year after their disclosure, voluntarily dipped into his own pocket to repay the company $230,000 of the amount.    Nonetheless, Senate aides foresee few problems with Mr. Verity's nomination. Sen. Ernest F. Hollings (D., S.C.), chairman of the Commerce Committee, which will review Mr. Verity's record, signaled as much this month when he set confirmation hearings for Sept. 10, the day after Congress returns from its recess.    Despite Mr. Verity's sympathetic views toward steel, some steelmakers fret that in his eagerness to display impartiality, he may actually &quot;go overboard not to do things that seem overtly pro-steel.&quot; Adds Thomas Graham, a USX Corp. vice chairman: &quot;It's a powerful position. He could hurt us or help us.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>