<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0161 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: 'Eurocommunism' Is Choking in Gorbachev's Dust </HL><AUTHOR> Leo J. Wollemborg </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><DATELINE> ROME  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The face-lifting performed by General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev in the Soviet Union seems at best a mixed blessing and at worst a shattering blow for the Communist movement in the West, already undergoing a crisis of its own.    In the mid-1970s the so-called &quot;Eurocommunist&quot; parties were proclaimed to be &quot;on the march&quot; across Southern Europe and were on the verge of gaining strong government roles from Greece through Italy, France, Spain and Portugal. These parties, it was speculated, were headed for a schism with Moscow whose impact on the world power balance would equal that of the Sino-Soviet split.    Yet today none of the Eurocommunist parties hold even a minor share of national power. Throughout Southern Europe the tide has been shifting away from the Communists and in favor of Socialist and democratic parties, which govern or play a key role in ruling coalitions with moderate forces. With the exception of Greece, the Socialist parties in Southern Europe are more pro-Western than the traditional parties of the democratic left in West Germany, Britain and Scandinavia.    Most important, the erosion of the Eurocommunist parties reflects a failure to reconcile their ideological and international commitment with Westernization farreaching enough to garner a significant share of national power in democratic countries.    In March 1977 the leaders of the three major Communist Parties in the West (Enrico Berlinguer of Italy, Georges Marchais of France and Santiago Carrillo of Spain) gathered in Madrid to launch a major expansion of Eurocommunism. The meeting, however, marked the onset of the movement's decline. Moscow went on the warpath against Mr. Carrillo, who had dared deny that Soviet society was a &quot;Socialist society.&quot; The Spanish Communist Party suffered disastrous splits, while the French and even the Italian Communists, the standard-bearers of Eurocommunism, distanced themselves from Mr. Carrillo.    The French Communist Party hastened again to snuggle up to Moscow, accelerating its losses at the polls. By the time a leftist coalition came to power, the PCF had been so weakened that it was relegated to a subordinate role in a government dominated by the Socialists and was dumped altogether at the first opportunity. The Socialists themselves were pushed back into the opposition by a revived center-right coalition. When the Socialists regained a plurality in Parliament a few months ago, they looked to centrist groups rather than the PCF to form a coalition.    In the 1976 general election more than one-third of the Italian electorate voted Communist, prompting many observers to predict that the PCI would soon overtake the long-dominant Christian Democrats. The DC was compelled to form a minority government that depended on Communist support. But the DC thwarted the PCI's drive for cabinet posts, and the party eventually moved back into opposition.    After winning 1.5 million fewer votes in the 1979 general election than it had taken in 1976, the PCI suffered subsequent severe defeats at the polls. While still the largest Communist Party in the West, it got one-third fewer votes at the most recent local elections in June than in 1976, while the Socialists' share of the popular vote rose to more than 17% from less than 10%.    PCI right-wingers urge the party to adopt a foreign policy similar to that of the West German and Northern European Social Democrats. But &quot;social democrat&quot; is still a dirty term for many Italian Communists. Since the early 1970s, leading PCI representatives have proclaimed acceptance of Italy's membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. But the party's actions and propaganda continue to reflect a strong anti-American bias and show that the PCI's top goals still parallel those of the Soviet Union, mainly when it comes to attempts at turning the Atlantic Alliance into an empty shell. The latest evidence is the party's sharp opposition to the transfer to Italy of the U.S. F-16 aircraft booted out by Spain.    The splits among the Greek Communists and the more recent splintering of the Spanish party have highlighted the fact that in most Western European countries there is still a more or less significant Communist faction committed to an attitude that the &quot;Kremlin can do no wrong.&quot; In Italy, the leaders of such a faction, notably Sen. Armando Cossutta, have been pushed out of the party's executive bodies, but their positions still find support among a sizable segment of the rank and file.    For the official PCI leadership the latest developments in the Soviet Union generally have been an opportunity to heal the rifts produced by its criticism of the 1968 Soviet intervention against the &quot;Prague Spring&quot; and of the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan, as well as by its emphasis on the differences between the &quot;Soviet model&quot; and the &quot;Italian road to socialism.&quot;    The Kremlin, moreover, can now resort to new tools to gain or regain influence in the Eurocommunist parties. For instance, it has been reported recently in the Western press that the Soviets may soon open the secret files of the Third International, or Comintern, which supervised Communist Parties and movements from 1919 to 1943. Although the timing and scope of such a move are still unclear, its consequences may well be explosive for many Western European Communist Parties.    A first sample was provided recently when the Italian Socialists denounced more sharply than ever before the late Palmiro Togliatti, a longtime PCI leader, for his subservience to Stalin and notably for supporting the bloody purges ordered by the Soviet dictator in the 1930s. The general reaction in the PCI was to minimize Mr. Togliatti's &quot;responsibilities&quot; while extolling his subsequent role in building up the PCI as a &quot;democratic mass party.&quot; The new PCI secretary general, Achille Occhetto, acknowledged with masterful ambiguity that Mr. Togliatti shared some of Stalin's responsibilities but, in a speech delivered at the unveiling of a monument to Mr. Togliatti, called such sharing &quot;inevitable.&quot;    At the same time, summit meetings and agreements between East and West make it much harder for Western European Communist Parties to focus on such traditional targets as the alleged reluctance of NATO leaders to reduce international tensions. Even more important, &quot;perestroika&quot; and &quot;glasnost&quot; have already involved a devastating indictment of the system so long prevailing in the Soviet Union. This shook the basic tenets that have guided Western Communist Parties since their founding after the Bolshevik Revolution.    Thus it's not surprising that at the PCI Central Committee meeting in mid-July some participants have wondered aloud whether in today's Italy there is still room and a role for a Communist Party.    This is, indeed, the big question mark that hangs over all Communist Parties in Western Europe. They can recoil from the new challenges facing them and accept becoming bunker parties backed by a dwindling minority of voters. Alternatively, they can accept the painful changes involved in a true Westernization. This would mean, in effect, discarding class warfare and accepting to work within a democratic and modern capitalistic system. But if these parties should move that far, wouldn't they cease to be Communist?    ---   Mr. Wollemborg is an American journalist based in Rome. </TEXT></DOC>