<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880114-0168 </DOCNO><HL> Central America Peace Plan Sinking Fast --- Many in Region Have Reasons To Prolong Conflict </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Allen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Five months after its promising birth, the Central American peace plan appears to be near death.    The five regional presidents who signed the accord on Aug. 7 are to meet tomorrow in San Jose, the Costa Rican capital, to review compliance with the agreement, which calls for truces, an end to outside interference, and democratic reforms. The meeting is likely to be painful.    Cease-fire talks, a central feature, have achieved little progress in the hot spots of El Salvador, Nicaragua and Guatemala. Honduras is reluctant to expel from its territory the U.S.-supported Contras, who want to overthrow the Sandinista regime in neighboring Nicaragua, until Nicaragua implements meaningful democratic reforms. The Sandinistas say reforms must wait until the Contras cease their aggression. But the Reagan administration and the Contras argue that the Sandinistas, supported by Havana and Moscow, won't change unless a gun is pointed at their heads.    President Reagan's national security adviser, Lt. Gen. Colin L. Powell, visited Central America last week to urge Nicaragua's neighbors to denounce the Sandinistas, administration sources say, and to suggest that U.S. aid to the region might be reduced if the Contras disappear. A diplomatic source said Salvadoran President Jose Napoleon Duarte, for one, plans to come down hard on the Sandinistas.    But most analysts have concluded the summit will extend last week's implementation deadline as requested by an international monitoring commission, partly because none of the presidents want to be the first to declare the peace pact dead. There is still an outside chance that concessions by someone will revive it. But, given the current climate, one veteran European ambassador says, &quot;I don't know where they get the guts to organize a conference of presidents.&quot;    One reason for the lack of progress, rarely stated openly, is that many important players benefit from continued conflict. In a region of chronic strife, blood feuds and suspicion, conflict is simply a hard habit to break.    The Contras, particularly, appear to have little choice but to fight on. They have spent seven years, and more than $300 million in U.S. aid, building the area's biggest insurgent force. Now, at their fighting peak, they are being asked to lay down their arms and become politicians.    The Contras' greatest worry is that the peace plan's lack of meaningful sanctions for noncompliance would allow the Sandinistas to renege as soon as the U.S. ended support for the Contras. Their skepticism has been fed by Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega's recent assertions that the Sandinistas &quot;would hand over government, not power&quot; if they lost an election. &quot;It's a sham, a complete farce,&quot; says Contra leader Aristides Sanchez. &quot;Unfortunately, the Sandinistas haven't given us any option but war.&quot;    The Sandinistas would appear to want peace. The war has caused widespread economic hardship, cost tens of thousands of lives and all but halted the revolution's promised social reforms. But even the Nicaraguan leaders may harbor reasons for wishing the peace process ill.    Fervent nationalists, the Sandinistas have used the war to rally supporters and indoctrinate a generation of army recruits. War gives them a chance to recapture their romantic days as guerrilla fighters. What's more, the Sandinistas enjoy superior military strength and believe they can defeat the Contras.    The war also provides the Sandinistas with a cover for their economic mismanagement, and is a convenient excuse for controlling the domestic media and opposition political parties. The peace plan would force them to level the playing field for next year's presidential elections -- and face possible defeat. Robert White, former U.S. ambassador to El Salvador and a Reagan critic, says that, though it would be &quot;overly cynical&quot; to say Nicaragua prefers war, &quot;peace would present the Sandinistas with new problems they aren't really ready to deal with.&quot;    The five Central American presidents gave no indication they weren't sincere when they signed the peace plan in August. After all, war has killed more than 150,000 of their citizens in the past decade. But they face pressures, subtle and overt, to declare the plan a failure.    For example, Central America's traditional power brokers, the standing armies, have an obvious institutional stake in war. The region's strife has nearly tripled the number of government troops since 1980, providing unprecedented career opportunities for the officer corps. U.S., Cuban and other military advisers have turned the armies into some of Latin America's best.    In El Salvador, the peace plan, rather than serving as a healing balm, has reopened wounds caused by nearly a decade of grueling war between leftist guerrillas and a right-wing military. Hard-line army officers were incensed when the government released hundreds of guerrilla suspects under the plan's amnesty provisions. The left was equally enraged when the same provisions were used to exonerate human-rights abusers from the right. Both sides took advantage of a de facto Christmas truce to regroup, and accelerate the war.    Even El Salvador's President Duarte, whose popularity rose when he signed the accord, might have reason to hope it fails. His center-left Christian Democrat Party faces an assault on its power base if leftist rebels enter elections, vastly improving the far right's chances.    Like the Contras, El Salvador's insurgents, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or FMLN, don't have much incentive to negotiate. Because the peace plan respects existing constitutions, it doesn't allow the radical changes demanded by guerrillas. The hard-core revolutionaries in the rebel ranks believe time and history are on their side. &quot;There's a tendency toward a prolongation and deepening of the conflict,&quot; says Ruben Zamora, a civilian ally of the FMLN.    Guatemala, home to Central America's longest-running and perhaps most brutal civil war, also has done little to meet the terms of the peace accord, and President Vinicio Cerezo's hands seem particularly tied by the military.    In Honduras, a desire to see the Contras leave the country is balanced by hunger for U.S. aid. Since the Contras set up camp there in 1981, U.S. economic and military assistance has grown to almost $200 million this year, including 12 coveted F-5 fighter jets. The aid is widely seen as the price paid for tolerance of the Contras. Moreover, a successful peace process might leave Honduras saddled with armed Contras who don't want to return home.    Costa Rica, the birthplace of the peace plan, has almost nothing to gain from continued war. Even so, President Oscar Arias Sanchez has come under criticism from the right for supporting a process that gives the Sandinistas a good chance of retaining power.    The Reagan administration, meanwhile, still holds more cards than anyone on the impoverished isthmus; it recently announced plans to request a new batch of Contra funding. Whatever the five presidents decide this week will be overshadowed by the debate in the U.S. Congress. The people who stand to lose the most from war -- ordinary Central Americans -- won't have much to say about that. </TEXT></DOC>