<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871007-0099 </DOCNO><HL> OPEC Fixed-Price SystemCould Be Undermined;Follows Similar '85 Move---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST XON CHV MOB TXPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   Saudi Arabia's policy makers proposed sweeping changes in the kingdom's oil pricing which could undermine the fixed-price system laboriously put together last year by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    The proposed changes submitted to King Fahd would once again link Saudi Arabia's oil prices to spot markets and would have a major impact on world petroleum markets, probably driving prices down.    The changes also suggest Saudi oil politics may be coming full circle since last year's firing of Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the oil minister who was considered the architect of the kingdom's 1985 move to market-related pricing. That move precipitated last year's world-wide oil price collapse.    In recent months, the Saudis have been intent on promoting stability in OPEC pricing even to the extent of cooperating with their adversary Iran. But since recent riots in Mecca and the harsh rhetoric that resulted between the two nations, Saudi Arabia appears to be abandoning any effort to maintain oil-pricing unity with Iran, which seeks higher oil prices.    Details of the policy proposal surfaced yesterday, coincidentally, as King Fahd was meeting with three of OPEC's leading oil ministers. The so-called Committee of Three ministers is touring Persian Gulf producing countries in an urgent effort to get high-level support for curbing overproduction in OPEC to maintain the fixed-price system of $18 a barrel.    Whether the Saudi king has approved the policy changes couldn't immediately be confirmed. But Dow Jones International News Service reported yesterday that the kingdom already has begun linking prices of a large volume of its crude oil sales to spot values of several widely traded crudes, including the North Sea Brent.    The reports of the new Saudi pricing plan rattled oil spot and futures markets yesterday. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, prices of West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery closed at $19.44 a barrel, down 38 cents.    The Saudi contracts linked to market-related pricing are understood to be limited to the four U.S. oil companies -- Exxon Corp., Chevron Corp., Texaco Inc. and Mobil Corp. -- that make up Arabian American Oil Co., or Aramco, the Saudi-American consortium. None of the U.S. companies, however, would confirm the developments, and Exxon, Chevron and Mobil declined to comment altogether.    Texaco said it doesn't have any knowledge of Saudi crude being sold at other than official prices. In Washington, an Aramco spokesman said, &quot;Aramco has received no instructions from the government to bill lifters (purchasers) of Saudi crude oil at other than the official selling prices.&quot;    But companies buying Saudi crudes under such contracts would pay official prices and then receive rebates, or discounts. The discount would be set after application of a formula that would establish the economic value of Saudi Arabian crudes against other widely traded grades.    The new pricing formulas would vary from contract to contract, depending on the particular crude to which the Saudi oil is linked. Over the month following the taking of the Saudi oil, an average of spot values of the non-Saudi crude would be calculated, according to Dow Jones International News Service. An agreed quality and transportation differential would be deducted from the average. If the result was lower than the official Saudi price, the buyer would pay that amount.    The differentials couldn't immediately be determined. Apparently they differ from contract to contract. Arabian Light, the chief Saudi grade, is officially priced at $17.52 a barrel. Traders said yesterday it should carry a differential, or discount, of as much as $2 a barrel under the Brent spot price, which has been recently quoted in a range of $18.65 to $18.70 a barrel. Other crudes said to be involved in the formula are Alaskan North Slope and a Dubai crude.    This wouldn't be the first time the kingdom has gone to market-related pricing. In 1985, in an effort to regain lost market share, Saudi Arabia moved to &quot;net-back&quot; pricing, an arrangement under which refiners were charged for Saudi crudes according to the wholesale value of the products that could be processed from the oil. That contributed to last year's oil-price collapse.    Saudi oil production recently has been well below its OPEC quota of 4.3 million barrels a day. The Aramco companies were taking less oil in October than they had during the summer. As a result, sources close to the latest developments said, the Aramco companies were approached by the Saudis several weeks ago regarding a new pricing formula. The companies were asked to submit proposals. Each Aramco company proposed the differential that it would consider acceptable.    Saudi Arabia isn't the first OPEC member this year to turn to a new method of pricing on some of its contracts. Earlier this year, both Iran and Iraq linked prices of some of their crude to spot values of other oil.    Also, Hisham Nazer, the Saudi oil minister, made clear in a recent interview that his country wouldn't again return to its former &quot;swing producer&quot; role in OPEC in which the kingdom reduced its production while other producers held their output up.    The Saudi pricing plan drew a surprised reaction, nonetheless, from others in OPEC. &quot;It is a revolutionary development,&quot; one senior OPEC official said. &quot;One would think this is a very bad time to change,&quot; he added, citing the audience the Committee of Three ministers had yesterday with King Fahd.    The new Saudi formula isn't intended, however, to assure the kingdom more production than it is allowed under OPEC quotas, sources close to developments said. Nonetheless, oil traders said the change will add to pricing volatility on world oil markets. &quot;It makes a mockery of OPEC's $18 price,&quot; said a London trader.    &quot;It's apparent the Saudis are very dissatisfied with the production policies of several OPEC countries,&quot; said Michael Rothman, senior petroleum market analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. &quot;They may, in fact, adopt a policy such as selling at spot levels to try to bring those countries back to discipline.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>