<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0121 </DOCNO><HL> 'Rogernomics' Transform New Zealand---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST TAXES LABORMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><DATELINE> TIRAU, New Zealand  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Come an early winter dusk, dairy farmer John T. Kneebone pulls a chair up to his kitchen table for a chat about what it's like to live in one of the world's most radically changing economies. &quot;What my generation is still reeling from,&quot; says the 51-year-old Mr. Kneebone, &quot;is the enthusiasm with which young New Zealanders have embraced the more competitive environment.&quot;    He's talking about the free-market policies with which the country's finance minister, Roger Douglas, is reforming one of the most socialized countries in the developed world. By the time the National Party government led by Prime Minister Robert Muldoon was voted out of office in 1984, the New Zealand economy was distinguished for high taxes, state subsidies, import barriers -- and three decades of low growth. Working for the government of Prime Minister David Lange's traditionally left-wing Labor Party, Roger Douglas has rewritten the policy agenda to focus on competition and free enterprise.    In an interview, the 49-year-old finance minister shrugs off his achievement, insisting that there's &quot;nothing radical about it.&quot; It is true that his ideas -- known here as &quot;Rogernomics&quot; -- fit in with the liberalization that recently has been sweeping through Washington, London, Australia and the more successful developing nations. But it's also true that New Zealand's Rogernomics has set a pace for reform that few countries have matched.    Since Labor came to power in 1984, New Zealand has sheared away virtually all subsidies to farming, cut top marginal income-tax rates, deregulated the financial markets, tossed out exchange controls, trimmed some of the big state enterprises, thrown out many import-licensing requirements and started to reduce import tariffs. A lot of regulatory clutter remains. But Labor holds a lead in the polls, and with a general election scheduled for Aug. 15, Rogernomics has left the statist National Party floundering for ways to out-reform the Lange administration.    All this has been achieved at some cost to New Zealand's security. Along with the free-market reforms, Mr. Lange has thrown himself behind the anti-nuclear policy that became law last month. Since 1984, this policy has excluded New Zealand from the Anzus defense treaty with America and Australia. One parliamentarian in the opposition National Party describes the Lange government's refusal to host port calls by friendly, nuclear-armed or nuclear-powered vessels as &quot;a bone thrown to the left. They've had few enough bones to chew on lately.&quot;    Still, it would be a shame if the lessons of New Zealand's economic about-face were to be lost in the isolation brought on by the country's nuclear-free politics. In Australia, for example, the recently reelected Prime Minister Bob Hawke could profit from a look through Mr. Douglas's new book, &quot;Toward Prosperity,&quot; in which he talks about his tactics for rapid reform. Australia's Labor government is being pushed in much the same direction by an electorate frustrated with welfare-state stagnation, but so far Mr. Hawke is taking a far slower approach to issues such as tax reform and privatization.    With the lifting of heavy controls on the interest rates, exchange rates and banking, New Zealand's financial-services market has been booming. Tax reform already has kicked in toward balancing the government budget, which was running a deficit of 8.9% of gross domestic product back in fiscal 1984. Last October, the top marginal income-tax rate was cut to 48% from 66%, and the number of brackets was reduced to six from eight. On average, income-tax rates came down 20%. The work incentives created by these cuts were offset in part by a new, 10% value-added tax on most goods and services -- the kind of consumption tax upon which Japan's proposed tax reform foundered this spring. Corporate taxes also were raised slightly, and loopholes tightened.    The New Zealand Institute of Economic Research estimates that even with the value-added tax, there will be a rise in real, after-tax income this year, especially for the lowest and highest wage earners. Meanwhile, tax revenues have increased enough so that when Mr. Douglas presented the 1987 fiscal-year budget last month, he was able to announce a slight surplus.    Critics of Rogernomics charge that the government owes this surplus partly to one-time revenues from selling state assets, such as 25% of Air New Zealand. That's hardly cause for criticism, however. Among the relics the Lange government inherited from Prime Minister Muldoon (now Sir Robert) were state-subsidized enterprises, including the notorious &quot;Think Big&quot; projects, such as steel and synthetic-fuel manufacturing programs. Their role in the economy had been to squander taxpayers' money. Under Mr. Douglas's &quot;corporatization&quot; plan, such enterprises now are being broken up. Some portions are being sold off to private buyers. Others are being retained by the state, with the understanding that they will no longer be subsidized and must run on the same profit-maximizing basis as private business.    Though this &quot;corporatization&quot; strategy is a step forward, its weak point is that there's no good reason for the state to retain any involvement in most of these enterprises. Even for-profit state corporations could expand again into moneyeaters under a future government. An unrepentant Sir Robert says his Think Big programs will yet be vindicated: &quot;They're coming right.&quot;    Labor's program has been painful for some, particularly farmers. Agricultural aid that was soaking up roughly 6% of yearly national income virtually has been abolished. Farm-land prices have dropped about 40% to 50% over the past three years.    Farmers would like to see a similar sweep of state aid to industry. Manufacturing still is protected by tariffs in the 30% to 40% range for goods such as refrigerators and textiles. Rob McLagan, president of Federated Farmers of New Zealand, points out that a tax on imports is in effect a tax on exports, because a chunk of export income must go to pay for the extra domestic cost of high-tariff goods. He estimates that tariffs add $11,900 a year to the costs facing the average New Zealand farmer.    The minister for trade and industry, David Caygill, acknowledges he's moved &quot;only a small way&quot; in tariff reductions. Since 1984, the government has ended import-licensing requirements for about 800 items and dropped tariffs at least a bit, and Mr. Caygill asserts that if Labor wins in August more reductions will take place next year.    The biggest obstacle to reform remains the trade unions, traditional constituents of the Labor Party. In 1983, the National government had introduced voluntary union membership. Union enrollments dropped by about half. In 1985, the Lange government reimposed compulsory union membership. It also forbids the start-up of competitive unions.    The unions pose several dangers to the economy. They have, for example, been a force behind the nuclear-free legislation that could yet draw trade retaliation -- as British Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe threatened on a recent visit. Also, the unions are lobbying against lower tariffs on manufactured goods. Cars, for example, are assembled at high cost in New Zealand to save about 12,000 jobs. Although the Federation of Labor, with about 450,000 members, sees no problem with stripping subsidies from farmers, the union's secretary, Ken Douglas, predicts &quot;anarchy of result&quot; should the same market discipline be imposed upon industry.    With free-market reforms half-completed, then, the success of Rogernomics still hangs in the balance. Growth has been low so far, with gross domestic product having expanded by only 1.1% for the fiscal year ended in March. Nominal interest rates run about 18%. Though it is a bit hard to figure precisely, since the Lange administration floated the New Zealand dollar in 1985 inflation is estimated at above 10%. This means that New Zealand has dangerously high real interest rates of more than 8%.    The greatest danger is that for all Roger Douglas's progress, the union demands and remaining tariffs may yet prevent the economy from taking off. Added drag comes from the fat welfare system, which provides a guaranteed minimum family income, state health care, retirement benefits and subsidized higher education. The creation of a more efficient, stripped-down social services system seems to have top priority on Mr. Douglas's post-election agenda. But what has helped speed along the reformers so far has been the Lange government's tendency to impose reform on the rival party's constituents -- chiefly the nation's farmers. The Labor Party will have a harder time asking its traditional supporters to brave the same free-trade environment.    For that, New Zealand may have to look to the National Party, where young parliamentarians such as Ruth Richardson and Simon Upton are impatient with the statist ways of their elders. Ms. Richardson champions a voucher system for education; Mr. Upton likes to point out the virtues of smaller government. It could be some years before this free-market, younger generation takes the reins from the National Party's leader, Jim Bolger, who gives a nod to free trade but still tries to win votes by promising &quot;adequate protection&quot; to &quot;the most vulnerable industries.&quot;    Meantime, Roger Douglas seems ready to hurl himself into fresh attacks on big government. &quot;At the end of the day,&quot; he says, &quot;it comes down to whether you think you're right. And I believe that people are better off.&quot;    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>