<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Troubled TVA Is Nearing Crucial Phase --- Restarting Nuclear Program Vital to Recovery </HL><AUTHOR> James R. Schiffman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> NUK UTI PRO BON </IN><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> CHATTANOOGA, Tenn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tennessee Valley Authority engineers, in a crucial test of new Chairman Marvin Runyon's plans to turn the federal utility around, are working feverishly toward next month's planned restart of the problem-plagued Sequoyah nuclear plant's second reactor.    Since taking over at the TVA in January, the 64-year-old Mr. Runyon has brought to bear the management skills he honed in a seven-year stint at the Japanese auto maker Nissan Motor Co. and 37 years at Ford Motor Co. The TVA, that venerable symbol of the New Deal, has had a troubled recent history since its ambitious nuclear program faltered. Today it is an agency that can't produce all the electricity its customers demand and whose debt is $19 billion and growing.    So far, Mr. Runyon has worked to cut costs, keep rates steady and eventually increase demand for power by attracting more businesses to the seven-state Tennessee Valley area. He has laid off one-fifth of the TVA's 34,000 workers. Reviving the nuclear program is vital to his efforts.    &quot;What we're trying to do is move TVA back to what it was supposed to be, a federal agency with the flexibility of private business,&quot; Mr. Runyon says.    But TVA isn't Nissan and resuscitating the agency won't be easy. Despite an investment of $17.7 billion in nuclear power, TVA relies on antiquated coal-fired and hydroelectric plants and must purchase 16% of its power from other utilities. Poor planning and safety problems have caused the scrapping or shutdown of 16 nuclear reactors, and bringing idle plants back on line is tough.    TVA is so far down the nuclear road, though, that Mr. Runyon appears to have little choice but to borrow billions more and press on. So the spiraling debt remains an ever-present wolf at the door and Mr. Runyon must prepare to fend off congressional critics who periodically try to shut off the debt spigot.    And the cuts Mr. Runyon has made so far, which will save only $300 million out of next fiscal year's $5.3 billion budget, have hurt morale and cost the TVA some of its best and brightest. Critics say Mr. Runyon is ruining a federal agency once filled with the New Deal idealism of its founder, President Franklin Roosevelt. Those in the industry have their doubts, too.    &quot;It's got to be a very difficult job to do what he says,&quot; says Jack Ferguson, president of neighboring Virginia Electric andamp; Power Co.    TVA's problems stem from the agency's 1966 decision to become the nation's premier nuclear utility. Forecasts for electricity demand proved far too optimistic and eight of 17 planned reactors were scrapped before completion. In 1985, all of TVA's nuclear units were shut down for safety reasons. Today, TVA has only one working reactor, at Sequoyah, and officials are trying to restart the plant's other unit. Seven other reactors at the Browns Ferry, Watts Bar and Bellefonte plants are either shut down or unfinished.    Without the nuclear plants, TVA's 29 hydroelectric and 12 coal-fired plants are inadequate for the needs of its three million residential and industrial customers, especially in this drought year. The agency's industrial rates are higher than some neighboring utilities, though its rate structure on the whole is consistently lower than the national average.    Next year, Mr. Runyon will borrow another $775 million for, among other things, the nuclear restart program. He also plans to refire the Browns Ferry plant next year. TVA projects that nuclear power in 1989 will supply 14% of its total demand, up from this year's 2%, and by 1990 outside power purchases are supposed to stop. The agency plans to put the Watts Bar plant on line in 1991.    Restarting the nuclear plants, however, presents monumental technical difficulties. Workers at Sequoyah, for example, found a minefield of questionable welds, instruments and procedures when they set out to the fix the electrical problems that triggered the plant's shutdown. To make matters worse, 6,000 calculations had to be redone to verify the safety of pipe supports because TVA had thrown the original figures away. Browns Ferry and Watts Bar may present even more formidable technical challenges.    &quot;When you're down, it's awfully hard to get back up,&quot; says Retired Admiral Steven White, TVA's headstrong nuclear czar. Adm. White is to hand over the reins Oct. 1 to Oliver Kingsley, who was named early this month to the post. Mr. Kingsley's main challenge will be to keep TVA's restart program from slipping further. According to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Browns Ferry restart is at least two months behind schedule.    The nuclear strategy hinges on increasing demand for power, a premise that critics such as S. David Freeman, a former TVA chairman appointed by President Carter, think is questionable and flies in the face of a conservation ethic the utility had previously espoused. History is on their side. In 1986, the last year for which full records are available, TVA sold 97.5 million kilowatt hours of electricity, less than any year since 1972.    Even if things go smoothly, the debt problem looms as a fiscal time bomb. The debt, mostly in bonds sold to the Federal Financing Bank, will reach $19.6 billion by September 1989. Almost all of the money has gone into the nuclear program. The agency also cannot set aside funds to retire at least $15 billion in bonds when they begin maturing 15 years from now. An attempt to roll them over likely would prompt a congressional debate about TVA's finances and future.    By law, the agency has a $30 billion debt ceiling with the Federal Financing Bank. But Sen. Gordon Humphrey (R., N.H.), a longtime critic of TVA, advocates putting an $18 billion ceiling on the agency's borrowing and forcing TVA to sell bonds on the market to finance itself. There isn't much support for the notion now, but Mr. Humphrey says that could change if TVA's debt picture worsens.    Mr. Runyon said he hopes to slow and, by 1990, stop TVA's borrowing, reducing the debt to 75% of TVA's capital from the current 85%. He offers no details on how he intends to do that, however. About the principal repayments, he says: &quot;To be quite honest with you, this isn't something I've talked to the finance people about.&quot;    Mr. Runyon's strategy must work well enough for pro-TVA congressmen such as Rep. Bart Gordon (D., Tenn.) to keep running interference for the agency. But even Mr. Gordon says the agency has to deal soon with the question of repaying principal on the $15 billion.    &quot;TVA needs to have a plan to address it,&quot; Mr. Gordon says. &quot;But they deserve to have a period to catch their breath as they appear to be getting their house in order.&quot;    Some critics say the steps Mr. Runyon has taken to cut costs have hurt the agency. Already some TVA employees are fretting that the chairman could be laying the groundwork to take the agency private, something Mr. Runyon denies.    Marie Corio, president of Applied Economic Research Co. and a TVA consultant, says the layoffs and cutbacks could hurt efficiency at all of TVA's power plants. That is bad news because the utility's hydroelectric plants already are operating at reduced levels because of the drought. In August, TVA had to ask customers to reduce electricity use because a coal-fired plant went on the blink.    So, many TVA employees are looking for greener pastures. Executive headhunters are actively scouting people in the nuclear program and key people have left other divisions. Seven managers of coal-fired plants opted for voluntary retirement after the June layoff announcement.    &quot;The people who are leaving represent a large corps of talent,&quot; says Robert C. Steffy, senior vice president for power.    Mr. Runyon says the brain drain isn't serious but he complains that a federal pay cap of $77,500 in annual salaries is hurting his efforts to keep good people.    Despite his painful measures, the whitehaired Mr. Runyon tries to bring a relaxed, family atmosphere to TVA as he preaches alien concepts: efficiency and participation. Drawing on his experience at Nissan, he solicits opinions from employees and acts on many.    Critics, however, aren't impressed. Mr. Freeman, the former TVA chairman, says the cost-cutting is destroying TVA's mission to promote social -- not just electric-power -- development. Mr. Runyon's profit motive, he says, is &quot;cutting the heart and soul&quot; out of an agency that once sent scientists to Africa to teach people how to eradicate malaria.    Says one TVA employee, who fears for his job if he is identified, many of his colleagues see themselves as &quot;pallbearers&quot; carrying TVA to its grave. </TEXT></DOC>