<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0093 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTPUBLISHING (PUB)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   How do we, in a free society, define a government that has crossed the line between the permissible and the impermissible? What distinguishes us from a totalitarian society? How far are we willing to let government go in the name of national security? These are among the questions that should have been raised by a spate of recent disclosures, including those in Bob Woodward's book &quot;VEIL,&quot; and that have instead been obscured by the puerile debate over his account of a death-bed conversation with CIA director William Casey.    The reaction to the Woodward account of that last interview has been, depending on the source, silly, sanctimonious, self-serving, self-righteous or slimy. But both the hype of the story itself and the controversy are largely irrelevant. Mr. Casey's loyal lieutenant, that hero of the political right, Oliver North, has already confirmed the only point that counts. Mr. Casey not only knew of the diversion of Iranian arms sales profits to the Contras, he was the author of that &quot;off-the-shelf enterprise.&quot;    That matter aside, the truly significant import of &quot;VEIL&quot; remains. The U.S., through the person of William Casey but more importantly through the interrelated assent of virtually every other national security wing of the executive branch, engaged in secret wars between 1981 and 1987 that violated national law, national principles and national honor. Anti-communism justified terrorism, disinformation, &quot;white propaganda,&quot; lies, betrayal of allies, subversion of official policy, and military operations against nations with which we were officially at peace.    This is the way we usually say that Moscow operates. Several score innocents blown away in a U.S.-subsidized bombing in Lebanon, hundreds of civilians killed deliberately by U.S.-trained &quot;freedom fighters&quot; in Nicaragua, blatant falsehoods fed to the domestic press for instant circulation: All these and many more were the proud accomplishments of the hardy cold warriors the Reagan presidency sheltered, encouraged and promoted.    The lies and disinformation ought to disturb people in my line of work particularly. But the initial response to this week's General Accounting Office report on the administration's &quot;covert propaganda activities&quot; has been disheartening. The GAO suggests that the New York Times and the Washington Post, among others, ran op-ed pieces produced or assisted by the Office of Public Diplomacy for Latin America and its masters at the National Security Council. The reaction at the Post and Times was one of pained incredulity and no more, at least publicly. The reaction at The Wall Street Journal to a similar allegation consisted primarily of an ad hominem attack by its editor on the two congressmen who requested the report -- one of whom, Dante Fascell, actually supports Contra funding.    But no one ever accused the mainstream media of facing up to the implications of the government lies they routinely run as news, or their repeated failure to go behind the &quot;veil&quot; until events make the task inescapable. Symbiotically linked to the same officials who routinely subvert the Constitution and mislead the people, too many journalists at the top prefer to believe that each revealed excess is an aberration -- or a thing of the past.    Thus, I suppose, there will not be much sustained outrage about two other recent revelations. One was contained in articles in The New Yorker and The Nation. Both documented the long-term FBI commitment to tracking &quot;subversive&quot; American writers and, where possible, doing them harm. Included in the lengthy list of such alleged subversives, apparently maintained for 40 or so years, were William Faulkner, Arthur Miller, Elizabeth Hardwick, E.L. Doctorow and Ernest Hemingway. As both articles made clear, no one on the list was ever convicted of any of the alleged crimes. But the FBI now says it all ended in the far-off year of 1976 and today's guidelines &quot;do not permit and the FBI does not allow, the investigation of an individual simply because he or she expresses his or her right to free speech.&quot;    There is room in that statement for several tanks and a half-dozen Bill Caseys of the future to maneuver, but accept it at face value. Then consider that 1976 was really only last week, just as the administration's disinformation, terrorism and secret wars were conducted in this decade -- right up until only yesterday.    And then finally note that it took a 10-year court battle to force the government of the United States of America, land of the free, to concede it had erred 41 years ago in labeling a distinguished human being, Penn T. Kimball, a security risk. Mr. Kimball, now a retired journalism professor, found out about his dossier in 1977. The State Department, the FBI and the CIA, with typical bureaucratic arrogance, refused to acknowledge that its raw data had been wrong or to give him a chance to clear himself in a hearing. Finally, under the pressure of legal action, the government -- in begrudging fashion that would have done the KGB proud -- agreed that there was no information Mr. Kimball was &quot;ever disloyal to the United States.&quot;    Add these snippets from a fall week in 1987 together and the questions raised at the beginning of this column take on greater urgency. As Rep. Fascell said, &quot;It makes me wonder what else is still being hidden from Congress and the American people.&quot; From the record to date, a lot.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>