<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871029-0128 </DOCNO><HL> The Anti-Scientific Method---By Donald Kennedy</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   American science faces a worrisome new threat. It stems from a shift in the attitudes of the public at large. Its genesis is ignorance and fear of science itself, and of the institutions in which it is done.    All over the U.S., for example, facilities for research on and housing of experimental animals are being blocked or picketed or invaded by members of the &quot;animal rights movement.&quot; That movement is rather difficult to define; it surely contains some quite reasonable elements, but it also contains some respected groups that have shifted in recent years to a more militant posture, and it contains some other groups that openly advocate breaking into research facilities, theft of materials, and &quot;liberation&quot; of animals.    Those of us who had close experience with the &quot;student movement&quot; of the late 1960s recognize at least one similarity: It is a great convenience for any anti-establishment coalition to have a range of elements, from moderate to radical. In that way the credibility of reasonable assertions can be maintained even against a background of violent action. Thus we hear again: &quot;Of course, we wouldn't contemplate actions of that kind; but you must understand that some of the people in this movement are very frustrated, and we can't make guarantees about what they might do.&quot; In quite different circles, this is called maintaining deniability.    Indeed, the disparity between assertion and action goes much further than this.    For example, proponents of the animal rights movement often start an action by saying that their chief concern is with animals that have been, or might be, used as pets. In Massachusetts and California, among other places, they pushed hard for pound laws that would prohibit the taking of pound animals for medical research, thus requiring that they be put to death instead. Some said that was all they wanted; that it would be enough. Some universities and states have engaged in what a colleague of mine calls &quot;prudential acquiescence,&quot; and caved in. But after its passage in Massachusetts, the pound law's advocates immediately initiated new legislation aimed at much more severe research restrictions. So much for &quot;enough.&quot;    Animal rights advocates also assert that they are interested in more humane care for research animals. Stanford spent $13 million on a state-of-the-art animal research facility, and at the beginning of this summer had committed an even larger sum for a second one that would bring almost all of the university's scattered animal quarters into one set of superb quarters. At Stanford, various mammals -- mostly genetic strains of several rodent species -- are essential for research on the immune system, cancer genetics, developmental biology, and various inherited diseases of childhood. To the university's surprise, the building permit was opposed before the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors by a coalition headed by the Palo Alto Humane Society.    The movement says it wants better housing and treatment for lab animals yet does its best to prevent construction of facilities that will provide them -- not only at Stanford, but at the University of California and elsewhere. Especially when they sound moderate, you want to watch what they do, not what they say.    Indeed, most of the movement's more moderate assertions focus on the wrongness of doing injury or of inflicting pain; they usually avoid direct assaults on science itself. But when in front of an audience they believe will be receptive, proponents do not hesitate to label all of biomedical research as a failed enterprise, dedicated primarily to aiding the careers and satisfying the personal curiosity of the practitioners.    The situation is strikingly reminiscent of that in Victorian England, where the anti-vivisection movement achieved great strength by raising moral outrage over individual acts while decrying, at the same time, the progress of science itself. Like the contemporary opponents of medical research who charge it with failing to cure cancer, the Victorian anti-vivisectionists displayed an affection for quack remedies: An important organization of that period published a pamphlet on the use of cinnamon in the treatment of cancer. It puts one in mind of Laetrile.    A safe conclusion from these clear differences between assertion and action is that there is another agenda working here -- one that has less to do with animals than it has to do with the control of science and the institutions in which it is done. Support for that view comes from the ease with which this and other causes against science can be brought together.    The coalition of objectors brought together to block Stanford's new facility marched under the animal rights banner. But many of the objections at the hearing were to possible environmental hazards. It was therefore no surprise to see many of the same players in support of an initiative -- this time under the leadership of the Santa Clara Toxics Coalition -- objecting to the permit for constructing a biology building. The hazards of recombinant DNA were touched on in the opposition to the animal facility; they were center stage in the dispute over the biology building.    A similar convergence has occurred elsewhere between the movement to block recombinant DNA research -- already successful in halting a number of university experiments that have passed the standards of the federal Recombinant Advisory Committee -- and the objectors to research using fetal tissues.    Now, there are ethical and/or health issues associated with each of these propositions. Some are concerned that, despite our reassuring experience with contained recombinant DNA research, genetically engineered organisms might escape and cause harm. And there are concerns that intervention into the process of evolution, especially if it involves human genes, may be tinkering with nature in a hubristic way.    Whatever the nub of that somewhat mysterious worry, it is surely very different from those that have to do with the ethics of animal research or the morality of employing for scientific purposes the tissues of fetuses. What links these objections is a vague and alarming mistrust of science, indeed of the elitism of expertise.    Its impact on Stanford's own region should be a source of deep distress. The Bay Area owes much of its economic strength and its future potential to the activity of three great research universities. Yet each of the three now finds itself blocked on major projects by local coalitions, deeply suspicious of science and prepared to join together any set of concerns that promises to add political strength to their efforts. At Stanford, imposed building delays on the two projects I've mentioned will cost us more than $2 million. I am told that combined costs at Berkeley and at the University of California at San Francisco will run in the millions. And we are, after all, just one regional reflection of an issue that is national in character.    What can be done? As usual, diagnosis is a lot easier than treatment. But I think we can recognize three key problems.    The first is that with respect to all of the concerns raised by the objectors to science, it is easy to assemble the constituency of the disaffected, but much harder to gather the (largely future) beneficiaries of the research. Animal lovers come together more easily than the parents of cystic fibrosis children, who are busy caring for their youngsters and supporting research efforts. They are strong advocates, but only after they have come to recognize the threat.    The second is that the current trend finds objectors aiming at local political processes. If it is believed that there are risks, their locus of action will be local -- whereas the benefits are likelier to be regional or even national in character.    The third is that the general public is understandably confused by claims and counterclaims regarding scientific issues. If two apparently well-credentialed people can be brought to testify on opposite sides in a hearing, it is far too easy for people to call the outcome a tie, without applying other standards to the merits of the argument. Part of that has to do with the tyranny of expert knowledge. But unfortunately, part of it relates to the disappointing level of scientific literacy displayed by the lay public. If a substantial proportion of our adult population believes in astrology and the efficacy of pyramids in promoting health, why should we expect thoughtful analyses of problems like these?    But there is the outline of a program here. First, we need to get the beneficiaries of research -- patients and loved ones -- to be effective players in getting these matters decided politically. Wherever that has been done it has improved matters -- notably in documenting the value of biomedical research against the claims of the animal rights movement.    Next, we need some bold experiments in regionalizing some of these local political decisions. The Bay Area is too unified and too important a region, and its universities are too important to it, to let those institutions become the victims of &quot;not in my backyard&quot; local politics. Broadening the regional framework for that decision would allow a more realistic comparison of cost and benefits for the whole area.    I think it would be salutary if the officers of the Palo Alto Humane Society had to meet the gay voters of San Francisco at a hearing to determine whether a Stanford facility important in AIDS research will be built. We know how to construct port authorities and air-pollution control districts, and we ought to be able to do this.    But in the long run it is the third problem we have to solve, and I'm afraid that will be a long haul. It starts with the admission that we haven't done as well as we should in science education. We need to produce a generation of voters with at least enough knowledge to avoid being bamboozled by foolishness.    ---   Mr. Kennedy, a biologist and former FDA commissioner, is president of Stanford University. </TEXT></DOC>