<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Personal Taxes (A Special Report): Investing---The Elusive Shelter---By Jill Bettner</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>   FINDING SHELTER from 1987 taxes won't be easy.    Gone are the days of deductible individual retirement accounts for all, of favorable treatment of long-term capital gains and of various other benefits. And the dismantling of high write-off limited partnerships has sent syndicators scrambling to assemble &quot;passive income&quot; deals that shoot for profits rather than for paper losses and other tax benefits.    But the coveted tax shelter hasn't been leveled completely. Although Congress killed IRA deductions for higher-income wage earners covered by company pension or profit-sharing plans, even the top brass at General Motors can still tuck away as much as $2,000 in non-deductible IRAs and let the earnings grow tax-free until retirement.    Anyone with a 401(k) savings plan at work can put as much as $7,000 a year in a tax-favored retirement nest egg, although the figure is far less generous than before. Most municipal bonds, variable life insurance, tax-deferred annuities and some kinds of real estate investments were also spared.    The appetite for passive income will expand traditional partnership-investing opportunities beyond real estate, oil and gas, and equipment leasing to nearly any business with operating assets, including hamburger chains, nursing homes and parking garages. At least a dozen ventures already are trading on major stock exchanges in the newfangled form of master limited partnerships.    The changed investment landscape calls for new strategies. Here are several places where it's still possible to find shelter from taxes, along with financial experts' advice on what to do:    IRAs and Keoghs   As many as half of IRA owners still can deduct all or part of their annual contributions on their federal tax returns.    Workers who aren't eligible for a company retirement plan retain the full benefit of IRA deductions. Moreover, single taxpayers with adjusted gross incomes of less than $25,000 and couples with adjusted gross incomes under $40,000 can deduct IRA savings even if they have a plan at work.    Every $1,000 of income above those thresholds, which are calculated before IRA contributions, reduces the potential $2,000 write-off by $200. Therefore, single people earning more than $35,000 and couples earning more than $50,000 lose the deduction entirely, starting this year.    The basic withdrawal rules weren't changed. An IRA owner can draw out money without penalty after age 59 1/2 and must start withdrawing it at 70 1/2. However, under the new law, a proportionate amount of every withdrawal will be taxed, whether contributions were deductible or nondeductible.    The taxable portion of each withdrawal is figured by dividing the amount of nondeductible contributions by the balance, before the withdrawal, in all of an individual's IRA accounts -- including deductible and non-deductible contributions as well as all earnings.    As alternatives to non-deductible IRAs, some financial advisers are recommending municipal bonds or tax-deferred annuities that let holders invest in a handful of stock, bond and money-market funds.    &quot;But those choices are limited. Even real estate can go into an IRA, so it still gives you the most investment flexibility,&quot; says William Brennan, a Valley Forge, Pa., financial planner.    Investors should forget about using nondeductible accounts as temporary shelters and think long-term. &quot;I might change now into zero-coupon bonds, where there's a guaranteed rate of return over a period of time and the paper income isn't taxable in an IRA,&quot; Mr. Brennan says.    Tax writers left intact most Keogh rules, including the limit on the amount that can go into a defined-contribution plan. That limit is the lesser of $30,000 or 25% of earned income. But with a defined-benefit plan, the other type of Keogh, the new law raises the age for receiving full benefits to 65 from 62.    As before, individuals covered by a company pension or profit-sharing plan also can fund a Keogh with self-employment earnings, such as outside consulting income or director's fees.    401(K) Plans   The $7,000 annual cap on tax-deferred contributions to the popular salary-deferral plans is a drastic cut from the $30,000 allowed before. Also, for the first time, there is a 10% penalty on withdrawals before age 59 1/2.    One bright spot: The new ceiling on contributions applies only to employee money, not company matching funds. Employers can still chip in enough to allow workers to defer taxes on income up to the old $30,000 limit.    Executives and others who deferred 1986 salary to 1987 can contribute up to the earlier $30,000 limit if their plan was in place before last August.    Municipal Bonds   Emerging from a wave of high yields last year, the municipal bond market didn't take long to adjust to tax reform by raising prices.    &quot;They're not particularly cheap, relative to taxables, like they were in July and August,&quot; says George Friedlander, managing director of municipal research at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York.    Investors also have to cope with several new classifications of municipal bonds, each taxed somewhat differently. Generally, interest is exempt from federal -- and in some cases state and local -- income tax on bonds issued for public purposes, such as building highways or financing schools.    But most bonds sold after last Aug. 7 to fund so-called nonessential projects, such as a sports stadium, lose their federal tax-exempt status. Moreover, the interest is a &quot;preference item,&quot; meaning it must be added to taxable income if the investor has to calculate the alternative minimum tax.    Tax revision spawned still another investment alternative, called &quot;stripped&quot; municipals, which allow investors to buy the interest portion alone as zero-coupon bonds.    Life Insurance, Annuities   Annuities, as well as life insurance with cash-value buildup, retain their considerable tax benefits, making them some of the hottest products on brokers' shelves.    Taxes are deferred on a life insurance policy's cash value, or accrued premiums plus investment interest, until the money is withdrawn. Even then, the policyholder is taxed only on the cash value, less dividends, that exceeds the total of premiums paid over the years. This shelter can be found in the newer single-premium, or lump-sum, policies being marketed as investments, as well as in traditional annual-premium cash-value policies.    Annuities, sold by life insurance companies as well as brokerages, are strictly tax-deferred retirement-savings vehicles. As with an IRA, money withdrawn in a lump sum or in periodic payments after age 59 1/2 is subject to ordinary income tax. Earlier withdrawals are generally subject to both ordinary income tax and a 10% penalty.    A drawback of both life and annuity products can be high annual fees. Annuity holders typically pay 2% of the amount invested per year. Variable life policies typically carry still higher annual charges.    &quot;The expenses offset a lot of the tax advantages,&quot; says Glenn Daily, insurance-product analyst for the financial planning affiliate of accountants Seidman andamp; Seidman/BDO in New York.    Real Estate   Although real estate investors no longer can count on multiple write-offs and big tax-favored gains, some shelter can be found in real estate investment trusts.    Tax writers didn't lump REITs with limited partnerships as passive investments, because REITs are mutual funds that buy either mortgages on commercial properties or buildings themselves.    After a four-year phase-out period, passive losses from rentals or business activities where investors aren't regularly involved in management can't be used to offset salaries, dividends or interest income. Starting in 1991, passive losses generally will only offset passive income from similar investments. (Landlords with adjusted gross incomes of less than $100,000 are an exception; they can use as much as $25,000 of passive losses to offset salaries, dividends and interest.)    Because the new law classifies REITs as portfolio investments, as much as $3,000 a year of REIT losses can be taken against income such as salary. As with bonds, the value of mortgage REITs rises and falls with interest rates, while equity REITs strive for appreciation.    ---   Ms. Bettner, based in Los Angeles, writes frequently on personal finance for The Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>