<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870108-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Small Steelmakers Find Profitable Niches---Lower-Cost MinimillsPressuring Big Firms---By Mark RussellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NUE LUCMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><DATELINE> COATESVILLE, Pa.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Viewed from a platform high above the sprawling plant, several workers move swiftly from a loading area to nearby flatbed trucks as they fill a surge in orders. Work has been generally steady here since November.    This isn't an electronics plant or a consumer goods factory. It's a steel company -- Lukens Inc.    In a period when most of the nation's big steelmakers are piling up losses because of weak demand and imports, this specialty steelmaker and several others like it are doing just fine, thank you. Ministeelmaker Nucor Corp. and specialty steelmaker Allegheny Ludlum Steel Corp., to cite two more examples, are turning profits while their larger competitors struggle. Indeed, major steelmakers feel more pressure from minimills and specialty steelmakers -- producers with limited product lines -- than from their traditional big competitors.    The minimill sector, whose share of domestic steel output has climbed above 20% from only 3% in 1960, hasn't been entirely free of the industry's travails. Several minimills, hurt by overcapacity and weak prices, were forced out of business in the past two years.    What's more, traditional advantages the smaller mills held over large integrated steelmakers -- lower costs for labor and materials -- continue to slowly erode. Many bigger steelmakers last spring wrested wage-and-benefit givebacks from the United Steelworkers union, closing the wage gap. And with a bankruptcy court's blessing, Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. scuttled expensive raw-material contracts, a move LTV Steel Co., an LTV Corp. unit, has followed.    Still, the minimills and specialty mills have been able to prosper, for the most part, by simply outpacing the integrated major steelmakers in increasing worker productivity through incentives, relaxed work rules and more efficient facilities. In addition to carving out profitable market niches, some small firms now feel bold enough to invade the turf of the integrated and foreign producers.    Charlotte, N.C.-based Nucor, long considered the premier minimill, is now taking on two such markets. It plans to cast thin-slab sheet steel to counter the integrated producers' hold on the sheet steel market, and it has also set its sights on the steel fastener business dominated by foreign producers.    If Nucor succeeds in its venture into sheet steel, it would signal a new frontier in the battle for the few glowing embers still largely controlled by the integrated steelmakers. So far minimills have captured big market shares in product categories such as wire rod and reinforced bar, lower-margin markets in which bigger steelmakers can't profitably compete with their leaner competitors. &quot;This project would open up a new arena of competition with the integrated steelmakers,&quot; declares F. Kenneth Iverson, Nucor's expansion-minded chairman.    Nucor said it will build a new mill to produce sheet steel. It said the plant, which will cost more than $200 million and have an annual capacity of 800,000 tons, will have reduced operating costs because of a novel strip caster that will eliminate a step in the rolling process. The strip caster, expected to be in use in 1989, will enable Nucor to bypass the &quot;roughing stand,&quot; which reduces a slab's thickness before the slabs are sent to finishing stands for thinning. Bigger steelmakers still use the roughing stand, which slightly increases the time it takes to reduce the slab.    Not all steel industry observers are convinced that this new mill will allow Nucor to threaten big steel's mainstay -- high-quality sheet steel for the automotive and appliance markets. &quot;It'll take some time for Nucor to make inroads into flat-rolled steel,&quot; contends John Jacobson, a steel economist at Chase Econometrics Inc., Philadelphia. Some industry officials expect Nucor will only penetrate markets for lesser-quality grades of sheet steel.    Mr. Iverson said: &quot;We think this mill will have the capability of producing high quality flat-rolled steel, but initially we will only make commercial-grade steel.&quot;    This venture isn't the only reason why Nucor continues to turn heads in what has been a tradition-bound industry. Among its innovative practices, the company gives bonuses to workers when they exceed a weekly production standard. In addition, a work group which exceeds its standard for production receives additional pay.    The concern, which operates seven small mills and has about 2.2 million tons of annual capacity, consistently issues quarterly profit-sharing checks and has been in the black in every quarter since 1966, posting a nearly 9% jump in net income in the first nine months of last year. It hasn't reported full-year results for 1986.    Nucor recently entered the steel fastener market despite the fact that imports control nearly 90% of the domestic market. Last September it opened a $25 million plant with annual capacity of 40,000 tons of bolts. &quot;It's really an effort to bring that business back home,&quot; Mr. Iverson says.    Can the bigger steelmakers duplicate the success of minimills? &quot;You can't take an integrated mill, throw in a couple of electric furnaces and hope to compete with the minimills,&quot; contends Robert W. Crandall, a prominent steel economist at the Brookings Institution in Washington. &quot;You really have to build the plant from the ground up so that there is an efficient relationship between the furnace, caster and rolling mills.&quot;    Minimills are successful, Mr. Crandall notes, because of a nonunion work force, greater flexibility in work rules, and exclusive use of scrap and plant locations close to their markets, which reduces shipping costs. (The nation's 22 specialty steelmakers, like Lukens, often are unionized.)    Most big steelmakers would rather cede ground than do battle with ministeelmakers in some product lines. As early as 1964, for instance, minimills had overtaken U.S. integrated producers in the wire-rod market -- capacity that has largely been written off by the major integrated producers as they all but abandon wire-rod production.    Indeed, minimills -- which now number around 50 -- fostered a radically different operating practice in steel, one based on a smaller scale, lower labor costs, higher productivity and newer technology -- concepts since borrowed by many of their big steel brethren.    Allegheny Ludlum has made its mark by recycling scrap into finished stainless products -- used in consumer goods ranging from cookware to automotive exhaust controls -- and turning a higher profit margin than that of major steelmakers. Pittsburgh-based Allegheny, a closely held former unit of Allegheny International Corp., posted 1985 sales of $716 million. The concern doesn't report earnings, but a spokesman says that Allegheny consistently turns a healthy profit.    While most integrated steelmakers try to stem market erosion, Allegheny is gearing up for future growth in markets for stainless steel including equipment for fast-food restaurants, residential furnaces and cars. &quot;The market for high-efficiency home furnaces is going to be big,&quot; contends Richard D. Mercer, Allegheny's commercial vice president.    In addition, Mr. Mercer says the concern's flat-rolled strip and plate business has increased about 3.4% annually in the last decade. Because of imports, most steelmakers aren't benefiting from the growth in markets for certain stainless products.    Because of their smaller size, ministeelmakers and specialty steelmakers are more nimble when market shifts occur. &quot;Unlike the integrated steelmakers, we can move pretty fast, make decisions quickly and shift a little from one market to another,&quot; says Arthur Aronson, president of the steel division of Lukens.    A closer look at Lukens illustrates differences as well as similarities with big steel. A medium-sized specialty steelmaker, Lukens has carved out a modestly profitable niche churning out an expansive line of a single product-steel plates -- in addition to some products for the electrical equipment and construction markets.    Evoking images of Bethlehem Steel Corp.'s dominance of nearby Bethlehem, Pa., Lukens reigns over Coatesville, an industrial town nestled amid the Pennsylvania hills about 40 miles west of Philadelphia. Its Georgian-style headquarters, built in 1902, is a local landmark, and the company's pale gray plant buildings dominate the landscape.    Like other steelmakers, Lukens looks for cost savings everywhere. Its salaried work force, for instance, has been pared to 700 from about 1,750 seven years ago through, among other things, voluntary early retirements and layoffs. &quot;Today we're producing from one electric furnace what we produced out of four such furnaces four years ago,&quot; says Mr. Aronson.    During that period, Lukens invested about $13 million to spruce up the remaining furnace. For the nine months ended Sept. 30, Lukens, aided largely by a gain from pension changes, earned $9 million on sales of $300.7 million.    Like big steel companies, Lukens faces some sizable hurdles. It's negotiating a new labor contract with the United Steelworkers to replace one that expired last Sept. 30. The two sides essentially agreed to a contract extension, which expired Dec. 31. However, union members continue to work under terms of the former contract. Mr. Aronson cautions: &quot;We will never agree to a labor contract that has us paying a higher rate than our competitors.&quot;    And Lukens also finds itself facing a strong challenge from foreign competitors in its plate product line -- used in bridges, ships and heavy machinery. But despite such labor and import uncertainties, Lukens officials expect the specialty steelmaker to make further gains against its larger domestic and foreign competitors. </TEXT></DOC>