<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871110-0003 </DOCNO><HL> Bank Revolution Won't Wait for Congress---By Robert E. Litan</HL><DD> 11/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)INSURANCE (INS)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Despite rapid market changes that have made the U.S. system of financial regulation obsolete, Congress has been unable throughout the 1980s to break the deadlock among the warring interests -- banks, securities houses, insurance companies, real-estate firms and nonfinancial firms -- to redraw the rules.    Recently there have been signs of hope. As a parting gesture, Senate Banking Committee Chairman William Proxmire has proposed the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, which has (imperfectly) separated commercial and investment banking since the 1930s. Of perhaps greater importance in the long run, Alan Greenspan brings to the Federal Reserve Board chairmanship a more aggressive support of financial restructuring than his predecessor Paul Volcker.    Still, a major overhaul of America's financial laws in the short run appears unlikely. Lobbyists for the different interests are spending most of their time, money and political capital on a narrow but important issue: whether the moratorium on regulatory expansion of bank powers enacted in August should be extended after it expires March 1, 1988. Some legislators have pointed to the recent gyrations in the stock market as reason for not granting banks new powers. Moreover, many elected officials remain uncomfortable choosing sides on this hot topic in a presidential election year.    But events may pass Congress by. There is a quiet revolution going on at the state level: Slowly but surely, state legislators and bank supervisors are expanding the authorized powers of banks chartered by the states. This trend will continue and, as it does, will either make congressional action irrelevant or eventually force Congress to draw the legal road map for the financial marketplace of the future.    Quite by accident, the U.S. has had a &quot;dual&quot; banking system for more than a century: Bank owners may obtain a charter and be regulated either by state or federal banking agencies. During the Civil War, Congress tried to run state banks out of business by placing a tax on their notes, but this gambit failed. State banks instead started checking accounts, which were not taxed. By the end of 19th century, banks chartered at the state level outnumbered national banks.    Although a dual banking system probably would seem a bit insane to someone who had never seen it in practice, the structure actually has made it easier for regulators to adapt to market developments. For example, the offering of NOW accounts (checking accounts that pay interest) by state-chartered institutions in the Northeast in the early 1970s laid the groundwork for the removal of the Regulation Q ceiling on bank deposit interest rates in the 1980s. Equally significant, the states and not Congress have gradually relaxed restrictions on interstate banking. As a result, some time in the 1990s, the U.S. should finally have nationwide interstate banking.    Now states are expanding the authorized activities of the banks they charter. A few states, such as Minnesota and North Carolina, have long allowed their banks to sell insurance, but not much else. In recent years, however, the states have begun to liberalize. Today, most states allow their banks broader activity powers than the comptroller allows for national banks.    In some states -- notably Massachusetts, New Jersey and North Carolina -- state banks can engage in the brokerage and underwriting aspects of all the &quot;big three&quot; non-banking businesses: insurance, securities and real estate. Last December, New York banking supervisors allowed state-chartered banks broader securities -- underwriting powers than either the comptroller allows for national banks or the Fed permits for bank-holding companies. But New York's bold action has been suspended until next March by legislation enacted this past summer by Congress.    Unfortunately, there are no data indicating how extensively the new broader state powers are being used. Nevertheless, there are some straws in the wind. Savings banks in Massachusetts and New York have aggressively marketed the limited life-insurance policies they have been allowed to offer and have become the lowest-cost providers of that insurance in their states. In 1986, 38 national banks converted to state charter, up from just eight in 1982. Significantly, in early 1987, Citicorp switched the charter of its former national bank in upstate New York -- the first national-to-state charter conversion by a major multinational banking corporation in more than a decade.    Federal regulators are well aware of the movement at the state level. The FDIC has proposed rules that would allow state banks to enter other financial activities, either directly or through subsidiaries. Also, in August, the agency issued a well-publicized report on the future structure of the financial system urging that banks be permitted to diversify freely into other financial businesses, as long as the banks have capital that meets regulatory requirements. This plan contrasts sharply with received wisdom, which until now has held that banking organizations be allowed to enter other activities only through separate non-bank subsidiaries of either a &quot;bank&quot; or &quot;financial-services&quot; holding company.    While the FDIC's proposal accordingly has been dismissed in some quarters, the agency's preferred plan will govern the future as long as Congress remains stalemated on the bank-powers question. For the FDIC is the primary regulator of the roughly 8,000 state-chartered banks that do not belong to the Federal Reserve. By giving the green light to activity diversification by banks, the FDIC is in effect telling the states that they can continue to liberalize the powers of the banks they charter.    Although the dual banking system is clearly facilitating reform of the financial system, it is doing so inefficiently. By de facto delegation of the job to the states, Congress is consigning the nation to waiting 10 years or more for financial restructuring to be completed. In the meantime, many non-banking giants -- such as Ford Motor, Sears and Merrill Lynch -- will continue to be engaged in some form of banking as a part of their &quot;one-stop&quot; financial networks, while many banks are forbidden from fighting back.    The consumer loses, denied the benefits of full competition and forced to pay for the armies of lawyers and lobbyists that the various financial-services industries will continue to field until the legal framework is finally reformed. Perhaps more significant, other countries -- such as Canada and Britain -- that have already reformed their financial systems will continue to attract more business in the meantime, at the expense of institutions and markets in the U.S.    Congress could do better if it finally faced up to the inevitable blending of financial-service businesses by designing a new, comprehensive framework for the financial system. Other than the FDIC's, there are a number of plans from which to choose: Rep. Tom Carper (D., Del.) has a limited proposal to equalize the powers of state and national banks; Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, proposes to broaden the powers of bank-holding companies; and I have, like some others, an admittedly controversial plan to allow banking organizations to engage freely in financial and commercial activities, but only if they reorganize their banks into &quot;safe&quot; or &quot;narrow banks,&quot; limited to investing only in Treasury instruments or securities guaranteed by the federal government.    But time is marching on. Unless Congress decides what it wants the financial system of the future to look like, the states will decide for us all.    ---   Mr. Litan is a senior fellow, Economic Studies Program, of the Brookings Institution, and author of &quot;What Should Banks Do?&quot; (Brookings 1987). </TEXT></DOC>