<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0011 </DOCNO><HL> Senate Plan to Pick Nuclear Waste Sites AppealsTo Majority of States Since Most Would Be Spared---By Barbara RosewiczStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Some day, while the nation's first nuclear waste dump is still radiating, future generations may ask why it got stuck in Nevada.    The answer will be that it was partly because of tourists in Maine, partly because of dam and water projects popular in 1987, and mostly because a lot of states ganged up on a few.    That, at least, is the likely result of the Senate's latest strategy for picking a burial ground for tons of spent nuclear fuel that is piling up at 108 nuclear power plants around the country. Lawmakers led by Sen. Bennett Johnston (D., La.) have concocted a deal that is proving irresistible for a majority of states: It gets all but three or four of them off the hook from the threat of a nuclear dump in their back yards.    &quot;It's a political solution to a scientific problem,&quot; complains Democratic Sen. Harry Reid of Nevada, whose state -- along with Texas and Washington state -- leads the list of unwilling finalists for the underground dump.    The story of how the Senate is advancing a plan that most likely would put the nuclear-waste disposal site in Nevada is a case study in how Congress decides an issue by choosing the path of least political resistance. But while many politically based decisions can be undone later, the solution to the current debate will last for 10,000 years.    When Congress took up the same issue in 1982, it struck delicate political balances to win passage of a law that launched the Energy Department's current embattled search for a site. A key consensus-builder was an agreement to build two dumps -- in the West first and then in the East. But the current politicking is anything but delicate.    Sen. Johnston's divide-and-conquer strategy was born of a need to revive the search for a storage site. The Energy Department's search process is at a standstill because of lawsuits and accusations of political maneuvering. The House has before it several bills, including one to impose an 18-month moratorium on the search process to make sure it's done more scientifically. But the Senate's proposal, endorsed last month with 63 votes, would instead speed up the process, single out one state by January 1989 for deep-underground testing, and pay the host state $100 million a year.    The House could still reject Sen. Johnston's plan, and such influential legislators as Arizona Democratic Rep. Morris Udall, the father of the 1982 act, are resisting pitting states against each other. Despite the temptations, says Democratic Rep. Ron Wyden of Oregon, &quot;So far, we've been able to derail it in the House.&quot;    One reason may be that there's no equivalent to Sen. Johnston in the House. A strong supporter of nuclear power, he heads both the Energy Committee and an appropriations subcommittee handling this year's $16 billion energy and water bill. Using that crucial combination, Sen. Johnston managed to place his nuclear-waste program on a prime pork-barrel bill doling out billions of dollars for dams and water projects.    The linchpin of his strategy is that his proposal, which he has offered with GOP Sen. James McClure of Idaho and which is backed by the Reagan administration, cancels the search for a dump in the East for 20 years. That spares seven states that were on the nuclear-dump hit list: Maine, New Hampshire, Virginia, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Georgia and North Carolina.    A swing vote was Sen. George Mitchell of Maine, an influential Democrat who started out the year supporting a moratorium on the search process and ended up side-by-side with Sen. Johnston. Sen. Mitchell's conversion probably helped convince lawmakers from other targeted Eastern states as well.    To the anger of some of his colleagues, Sen. Mitchell parlayed one proposal into another until he ended up with a seemingly iron-clad assurance that Maine won't be looked at again as a home for high-level radioactive waste. One insurance policy he and GOP colleague William Cohen won is a cut-off of research funding on waste-disposal in granite, the rock base in Maine and other Eastern states. Another provision stipulates that &quot;seasonal increases in population&quot; be a factor in choosing a dump site. The language was written with Sebago Lake in Maine in mind; the tourist spot is located near a site being looked at for a dump.    Sen. Reid says other Senate members were afraid to vote against Sen. Johnston. For instance, he says, the Louisianan wrote a letter to another senator -- Mr. Reid declines to identify him -- warning that no other nuclear-waste proposal would clear the Senate if the Johnston plan failed. With current law in effect, the letter warned, the dump could wind up in that senator's state.    Mr. Reid says senators regarded such warnings as a threat. Sen. Johnston disagrees. &quot;It's a fact, not a threat,&quot; he says. &quot;I said it on the floor of the Senate.&quot;    Other lawmakers told Sens. Reid and Brock Adams (D., Wash.), who led a filibuster against Sen. Johnston's plan, that they were afraid they'd lose lucrative water projects for their states if they crossed Sen. Johnston.    In a related nuclear-waste issue, Tennessee Democratic Sen. James Sasser negotiated a deal with Mr. Johnston requiring the Energy Department at least to reconsider its plan to locate a temporary spent-fuel storage facility in his state.    Other pot-sweeteners, which emphasize cost and groundwater in siting decisions, could eventually help steer a permanent dump away from Hanford, Wash., and Deaf Smith County, Texas, to a corner of the atomic testing grounds at Yucca Mountain, Nev.    Mr. Johnston doesn't deny that politics is playing a big role in the selection process, but he argues that those who oppose his proposal are just as politically motivated. Environmental lobbyists want to shut down nuclear plants, &quot;and one of the best ways to do that is to show that Congress is incapable of dealing with nuclear waste,&quot; he says.    &quot;If you're asking, 'Is this bill all science and no politics?' the answer is no,&quot; says the senator, whose aspirations to become majority leader are boosted if he appears tough and effective. &quot;Of course this bill is about politics. That doesn't mean we have put together a bad bill.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>