<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870903-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   RIVAL PARTIES AGREED on a timetable for South Korea's presidential election.    The head of the ruling Democratic Justice Party, Roh Tae Woo, and opposition leader Kim Young Sam met formally for the first time, and agreed to submit a draft constitution to a national referendum by the end of October and to hold an election by Dec. 20. Roh and Kim also decided that the Seoul government shouldn't intervene in labor disputes, and they vowed legislation to increase workers' rights. The political breakthrough was marred, however, by new labor violence.    More than 15,000 shipyard workers from Hyundai Heavy Industries seized the city hall in Ulsan, evicting about 150 police guards and setting fires.    ---   West German Mathias Rust apologized to a Moscow court at the opening of his trial for flying a light plane into Red Square last May, saying he was on a peace mission and had hoped to meet Gorbachev. The 19-year-old pilot, who is charged with illegally entering Soviet airspace and with hooliganism, faces as long as 10 years in prison.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked a cargo vessel and four tankers and said its forces fired artillery shells at the southern Iraqi city of Basra in apparent response to a spate of Iraqi assaults in the Persian Gulf region. Iraq said its warplanes hit two Iranian oil tankers as well as industrial targets, as renewed attacks in the area escalated.    Baghdad has rebuffed U.S. entreaties to halt its raids on Iranian targets, U.S. officials said. As U.S. Navy warships prepared to escort more Kuwaiti tankers through the gulf, the officials said Iraq believes the renewed offensive will force Tehran to accept a U.N. call for a cease-fire.    ---   The State Department said the U.S. would withdraw the nuclear warheads it controls on 72 West German missiles once Bonn scrapped the launchers. The department said withdrawal of the warheads wouldn't be included in a proposed U.S.-Soviet arms pact, and it declined to specify whether the warheads would be destroyed.    ---   The Philippine defense minister said the leader of last week's failed coup still has a force of 2,000 men who could launch a new revolt. Meanwhile, President Aquino said she had ordered Manila's troops to use force to put down the uprising to prevent greater violence. Aquino also said she knew in advance that a mutiny was planned.    ---   Britain agreed to extradite 26 soccer fans to Belgium to face manslaughter charges in connection with a 1985 stadium riot in Brussels that left 39 people dead and about 400 injured. The Britons were arrested mainly on the basis of video tapes of the rioting, which preceded a European Cup final between English and Italian teams.    ---   South Africa appointed a panel to monitor newspapers that publish &quot;revolution-mongering propaganda.&quot; The 25-member body was named under state-of-emergency regulations announced by President Botha last week that allow the censorship or closure of publications that threaten the authority or security of the country.    ---   A Contra political spokesman said that some Nicaraguan rebels received military training in the U.S. last year. The official, who said instruction was given at bases in Florida, Texas and elsewhere, noted that his information came from unofficial sources within the guerrilla movement.    ---   The U.S. envoy to Syria returned to Damascus after a 10-month absence caused by Syria's alleged involvement in a plot to blow up an Israeli jetliner at a London airport. The U.S. said the ambassador was sent back because Syria had expelled Palestinian terrorist leader Abu Nidal and had helped free American hostages held in Lebanon.    ---   Israel's Moshe Arens resigned from the cabinet in a dispute over a government decision Sunday to scrap the over-budget Lavi jet fighter. The move came as aeronautics workers in Jerusalem staged a fourth consecutive day of protest over the decision.    ---   National Guardsmen were summoned and firefighters flew in from around the nation to help crews battling blazes in four Western states. At least 180,000 acres have been burned in California, Oregon, Idaho and Washington, forcing hundreds of residents to evacuate their homes.    ---   Federal health officials said the nation's fertility rate fell to a record low last year, while life expectancy reached an all-time high of 74.9 years. The government also reported that marriage and divorce rates dipped to the lowest levels in a decade.    ---   A landslide in China killed at least 44 people in central Sichuan province, and rescue workers dug through thousands of tons of mud in search of 37 others still missing. The landslide, caused by heavy rains, also damaged a hotel and a number of houses.    ---   Prince Sihanouk has resumed his duties as president of a coalition of Cambodian resistance groups, reversing a decision to step down four months ago. The rebel groups are fighting to expel the Vietnamese troops that have occupied Cambodia since 1978. </TEXT></DOC>