<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870408-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Synthetic Growth Hormone Raises HopesOf Many -- And Ethical Concerns Over Use---By Alan L. OttenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Increasingly abundant supplies of synthetic human-growth hormone offer new hope to abnormally small children -- and yet another example of biotechnology bringing fresh dilemmas.    The growing availability of the hormone means that more children can be treated, and that treatment can start earlier and last longer -- slowly adding important inches to the children's ultimate height and thus enhancing their ability to cope in a large-scaled world.    But some parents have already begun to besiege doctors to prescribe the hormone for kids who ultimately will be only slightly shorter than normal or even of average height. These parents figure that even if their children don't become basketball stars or fashion models, the extra inches will contribute to career and social success. And because the hormone can't be easily detected in ordinary urinalysis tests, weight lifters and other athletes are pursuing it on the inevitable black market as a bulk-building alternative to easily spotted anabolic steroids.    Many doctors, however, caution against casual use of the hormone. &quot;Possible side effects . . . are slow to show, and that is why it is essential to be very conservative,&quot; says Raymond Hintz, a Stanford University pediatric endocrinologist. &quot;Five to 10 years from now, we'll know more about the stuff. Use of human-growth hormone is not to be undertaken lightly.&quot;    The uses and possible abuses of biosynthetic human-growth hormone, hGH, will begin to be aired today before the health subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Concern over possible misuse has prompted chairman Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) to introduce a controversial bill to place synthetic hGH on Schedule II of the Controlled Substances Act, along with cocaine, morphine, some amphetamines and other medically useful substances with high potential for abuse.    Such a step would require hormone manufacturers, distributors, pharmacies and doctors to undertake extensive security, record-keeping and other measures.    Growth in children and teen-agers is stimulated by a hormone secreted in occasional spurts by the pituitary, the tiny gland at the base of the brain. Some children fail to produce this hormone or produce it only in minute quantities; some grow to an adult height of under four feet, and many others wind up well below five feet.    Since 1963, doctors have been able to obtain some additional growth in affected children -- anywhere from a few inches to perhaps a foot -- by injecting them with hGH from the pituitary glands of cadavers. But such supplies were extremely limited, and many affected children were undertreated or not treated at all. And in the spring of 1985, use of the chemical was halted when several young men who had received treatment died from a rare, slow-acting virus traced to contaminated natural growth hormone.    Only a few months later, though, Genentech Inc. received approval from the Food and Drug Administration to market a biosynthetic hGH called Protropin. Last month, Eli Lilly andamp; Co. received FDA approval for its version, Humatrope; marketing began last week.    Other domestic and foreign biotechnology firms are pushing hard to develop their own synthetic hGH. Scientists say the prospect of unlimited supplies will spur research into other possible uses of the hormone: reducing weight, healing wounds, treating bone diseases, and retarding wrinkling and other symptoms of aging.    Right now, about 5,000 children are being treated for hGH deficiency; another 10,000 could easily qualify for help. Inevitably, as supplies grow, doctors will begin to relax criteria, and more and more very short children will be treated.    But doctors fear increasing parental pressure for &quot;cosmetic&quot; use on healthy children whose projected adult height may be below average but still well within the normal range. Several studies indicate that society tends to look up, figuratively as well as literally, to tall people -- perceiving them as more intelligent and giving them preference in hiring and promotions.    Stanford's Dr. Hintz tells of one parent who wanted hGH for an 11-year-old son whose adult height was projected at 5 feet 10 inches, and he says &quot;not a week goes by&quot; that he or his colleagues aren't badgered by parents of normally growing children. He says nearly all specialists are thus far resisting such pressure.    Cost of treatment ranges from about $6,000 to $20,000 or more a year. If treatment is for true growth deficiency, medical insurance usually covers most of the expense, and Medicaid helps impoverished families in every state but Alabama.    &quot;Two things will help us keep (cosmetic) usage down,&quot; says Martin Press, a pediatrics professor at Yale Medical School. &quot;One is cost; if I tell parents I won't ask the insurance companies to cover it, they lose interest quite rapidly. The other is that many kids aren't too keen to have three shots a week for a good many years&quot; -- the usual treatment.    But the cost of hGH raise an obvious concern: that only well-to-do families will be able to afford the cosmetic treatment, and thus richer kids will get yet another advantage. &quot;The prospect of two classes -- one tall and moneyed, the other short and poor -- is ugly and disquieting,&quot; writes Thomas Murray, an ethicist at the Institute for the Medical Humanities at the University of Texas at Galveston.    So far, interest in Mr. Waxman's bill has come mainly from the U.S. Olympic Committee and doctors active in sports medicine. &quot;Since the synthetic became available, there has been a fivefold increase in queries from athletes about using human-growth hormone,&quot; says William Taylor, a physician who writes widely about drug use by athletes. &quot;And as volume goes up, you can be sure that the percentage diverted from regular distribution channels will also go up.&quot;    But the lineup of Waxman bill opponents is impressive. Genentech and Lilly both insist that their tightly controlled distribution systems confine the hormone to specialists treating children for specifically diagnosed growth problems, and that this, plus intensive education of doctors and parents, makes government controls unnecessary. An organization of families with growth-deficient children argues that the bill would raise costs, complicate distribution, and hamper further research.    Many doctors also resist the Waxman approach. &quot;The paperwork burden is bound to result in additional costs to the patient,&quot; says Robert Blizzard, director of the University of Virginia's Children's Medical Center. &quot;Education and tight controls by the manufacturers should be the mechanism to prevent abuse.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>