<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0082 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors: Vice President: The Ticket's Big Zero </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Contrary to widespread predictions (not by me) of contests to the finishing line and &quot;brokered conventions,&quot; both parties have settled on their presidential nominees comfortably ahead of the last roundup. There has been a consequent letdown in political suspense; and, since too many reporters these days cover politics as if it were a form of horse racing, the press is now doing its best to pump drama into the vice presidential nominations. It is not clear, however, whether it really makes all that much difference whom Messrs. Bush and Dukakis choose as their running mates.    There are exceptions: John Kennedy would certainly never have carried Texas (and perhaps other Southern states) in 1960 without Lyndon Johnson on the ticket. But vice presidential candidates often cannot even deliver their own states. In 1948, Tom Dewey put Earl Warren, the most popular governor California had ever had, on the ticket with him, and the Truman-Barkley ticket took California. Estes Kefauver could not save Tennessee for Adlai Stevenson in 1956, nor Cabot Lodge Massachusetts for Richard Nixon in 1960, nor William Miller New York for Barry Goldwater in 1964, nor Spiro Agnew Maryland for Mr. Nixon in 1968, nor Sargent Shriver Illinois for George McGovern in 1972, nor Geraldine Ferraro New York for Walter Mondale in 1984. The capacity of vice presidential candidates to help the ticket can be easily overrated.    This is surely as it should be. Because the president, so long as he lives, is the only one of the two who matters, no sensible voter will make his decision on the ground of the running mate. That is why the electorate through most of American history has paid little attention to vice presidential nominations.    When vice presidential candidates make any difference at all, it is most commonly a negative difference. &quot;The vice president can't help you,&quot; Mr. Nixon has well said. &quot;He can only hurt you.&quot; Polling analysis suggests that people tend to vote more against vice presidential candidates than for them. Robert Dole's hatchet-man style very probably hurt Gerald Ford in 1976. Racial bigots would vote against any ticket that has Jesse Jackson on it.    Still, presidential nominees cherish the hope their running mates will help. They claim, of course, that they pick them because their statesmanlike qualities would equip them, if worst should come to worst, to be president. This is at best a secondary consideration. &quot;Whether they should or not,&quot; former congressman James O'Hara has observed, they will not, in the final analysis, choose their vice presidential candidate to succeed them. They will choose them to help them succeed.    Who will help George Bush and Michael Dukakis to succeed? Each probably needs some solid and blameless figure with at least regional drawing power who will not outshine the candidate and will seem vaguely eligible for the highest office. Each also probably will hope to use his choice to neutralize his opponent's choice. In this, Mr. Bush has the advantage, as Mr. Dukakis's choice will have been nominated in Atlanta three weeks before the Republicans assemble in New Orleans.    Mr. Dukakis's vice presidential &quot;problem,&quot; everyone says, is Jesse Jackson. There is little question that Mr. Jackson's eloquence, his wit, his directness on issues and his personal magnetism have made him the star of the campaign. He has established himself as a serious political figure, and he will be around for a long time to come. He has hustled himself up from nowhere through the years; but the more he has seen himself as the spokesman and symbol of his race, the more responsible he has become. The Jesse Jackson of 1988 would not do things that Jesse Jackson did 20 years ago, or 10 years ago, or even four years ago. He has earned a top place in the councils of the party and the nation.    My impression is that Mr. Jackson is at bottom a realist who will use his claim to the vice presidential nomination as a bargain counter to gain other objectives regarding the platform and appointments. I doubt for several reasons that he can really want the nomination. If he were on the ticket and the ticket lost, he would be blamed for the defeat, and that would set back the cause of blacks in our higher politics. If he were on the ticket, it would invite a scrutiny of the minutiae of his own past that he has thus far avoided. And, alas -- and it is a terrible thing to have to say -- if he were on the ticket, some psychopathic bigot in this violent country of ours would probably take a shot at him. Finally, if he were on the ticket and the ticket won, what in the world would hyperactive Jesse Jackson do as vice president, the biggest non-job in the land?    Why indeed should anyone want to be vice president? The answer cannot lie in the gratifications of the job itself. It must lie in the capacity the office has to make its holder a national figure and the advantage it offers in seeking the subsequent presidential nomination. Last week a bipartisan Twentieth Century Fund task force under the chairmanship of Jack Watson, who used to serve in Jimmy Carter's White House, produced a thoughtful report on the office.    The task force acknowledges that vice presidents have never had much of consequence to do. But it unanimously rejects the recurrent idea that a vice president should be given a cabinet post or any specific administrative responsibility. It does so on several grounds: that an executive position may place the vice president in an uncomfortable adversarial relationship with the president and with other executive officials; that, unlike other executive officials, the vice president cannot be fired; and that a specific job would focus the vice president's attention on a single policy area, thereby reducing his general preparedness for the succession.    Nevertheless, the task-force majority believes that two centuries of history have woven the vice presidency into the fabric of the American constitutional order and that in recent times the vice presidency has become, on balance, a more promising and constructive office than it has been historically. Five of the seven most recent vice presidents have subsequently received their party's nomination in their own right (and George Bush will make it six out of eight). The future of the vice presidency, the majority concludes, lies in using the vice president as a general policy adviser for the president -- the role that would in addition most effectively prepare a vice president for the succession.    An unregenerate minority (in which this writer joined former congressman Henry Reuss and the political scientist Hugh Heclo) was unconvinced. We contend that long experience has proved the office beyond redemption. A president will use (or ignore) a vice president as he wishes. Only Andrew Jackson, Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, three out of 40 presidents, have ever pretended to use their vice presidents as general policy advisers. Even then the office condemns its holder to be an echo of the president, deprives him of the power to think independent thoughts (or at least to utter them publicly) and, far from preparing him for the presidency, may often be a maiming rather than a making experience.    The office confers unfair political advantages on its holder in the contest for the party nomination and then handicaps him in the election by identifying him with policies that he may privately reject but can publicly oppose only at the cost of seeming disloyal. This is perhaps why no serving vice president has been elected president since Martin Van Buren, more than 150 years ago. Perhaps George Bush, a stalwart fellow, may break the jinx.    Better, it seems to the minority, to abolish the office, as Theodore Roosevelt, who served as both vice president and president, once recommended; and to take care of the succession, as France, for example, does, through a special election, thereby bringing to the office a person expressly chosen for it and not someone elected vice president in a tie-in sale.    I suppose that the majority is right and that we are stuck with the vice presidency for a while yet. Let the two candidates do the best they can; but let us not exaggerate the importance of the vice presidency either for winning the election or for governing the country thereafter. John Adams, the first vice president, summed up the hopeless anomaly of the office. &quot;I am vice president,&quot; he observed. &quot;In this I am nothing, but I may be everything.&quot;    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>