<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870310-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Use Accounting to Make U.S. Leaders Accountable---By Morton Egol</HL><DD> 03/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Even those citizens and opinion leaders who consider themselves reasonably well informed about the economy probably wouldn't score a passing grade on the nearby quiz. (See related story: &quot;A Closed-Books Test&quot; -- WSJ March 10, 1987.) What's worse, no member of Congress probably would either. Nor would the president himself.    Yet these are very basic questions about the financial status of our government. And lacking answers to them, how can we say we know the state of the union?    A basic premise of democracy is that when the public has all available information, it will act with collective rationality. But U.S. citizens do not demand and policy makers do not utilize the most elementary facts about our financial condition and the stewardship of government operations. A bill introduced by Rep. Philip Crane (R., Ill.) would change this by requiring the government to prepare and make public annual consolidated financial statements using the accrual method of accounting, much as publicly traded companies are required to do. It's a sound idea whose time has come.    For most of our nation's history, a defacto balanced-budget rule was followed. When deficits were incurred due to war or other unusual circumstances, they were substantially offset in subsequent years. The taxes people paid were more or less a fair way of communicating the cost of government to them.    But since the Depression, and particularly since 1945, government policy has violated this &quot;common law&quot; balanced-budget rule. Moreover, government has enacted programs that grant benefits to citizens today, currying favor with current voters at the expense of future taxpayers. There are no accounting and reporting systems in place to inform the public about the possible negative consequences of unfunded promises on the financial well-being of our nation. Politicians enjoy promising and spending, but they do not like to tax or to report, routinely and comprehensively, on the results of operations they conduct. They avoid accountability. Neither the executive branch nor Congress wants to bear the burden of being measured by sound financial reporting.    The result of the current system has been excessive growth in government spending at the expense of private savings and investment, and hidden liabilities that create conditions for fiscal crises to develop and the threat of economic stagnation.    &quot;Cash-basis accounting,&quot; which the federal government uses, is an oxymoron. It is merely a reporting of checkbook entries with virtually no assessment of assets and liabilities and no evaluation of outputs. Unlike accrual-basis accounting, cash-basis accounting ignores such things as accounts receivable and accounts payable. It provides no reserves for uncollectible debts, treats the sale of assets as income and long-term capital investments as current expenses, fails to depreciate capital assets, and disregards the long-term cost of retirement programs.    The federal government doesn't permit the cash-basis accounting it follows to be used by publicly traded corporations. Before conducting their annual stockholders meetings, publicly traded corporations must distribute an annual report, including financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. &quot;We the People&quot; deserve no less.    A call for accrual-basis accounting for governments is neither radical nor new. The federal government imposed accrual-basis accounting on New York City in 1975 as one of the pre-conditions for loans to keep the city from going bankrupt. And the city's compliance with this requirement was a key factor in its eventual recovery. Since then, Gov. Mario Cuomo and State Comptroller Ned Regan have instituted reforms that provide for annual budgets and annual reports on New York state's financial condition, prepared on the accrual-basis of accounting in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles. These reforms have helped to bring down the state's accumulated deficit and have provided a framework for public accountability.    Why haven't accounting standards evolved for the federal government? One reason is the rather persistent, antiquated belief that cash-basis accounting is the easiest accounting method for the public to understand. That point of view had some validity when governments were simple and when accounting was rather like what I do each month when I balance my checking account. The federal government is now the largest enterprise on earth and its financial commitments are so vast that cash-basis accounting no longer fits.    Many also argue that attempting to record asset values and to calculate amounts committed to be paid out in the future involves uncertainties so massive that estimates are highly speculative at best. However, ignoring data because they are difficult to estimate is like choosing to navigate the streets of Manhattan with a superbly detailed map of Paris rather than with a less-detailed map of New York.    If citizens and creditors were to demand the financial information to which they're clearly entitled, incentives would be created for sound fiscal management and perhaps for more enlightened political leadership. We would then see better-informed decision-making. That could set the brakes on fiscal recklessness. Ultimately, effective reporting on government should improve public confidence in public officials. And maybe -- just maybe -- citizens might feel less cynical about the idea that concerted action and some sacrifice are still the requirements for effective self-government.    As for the questions nearby, we can't answer them for sure without sound financial reporting. But based on a study performed by my firm, Arthur Andersen andamp; Co., as of June 30, 1974, and again as of Sept. 30, 1984, the answers -- basic to an understanding of our government's financial condition -- are likely to be (c), (d), (d), (e) and (d).    ---   Mr. Egol is a partner of Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. </TEXT></DOC>