<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870522-0115 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Soap-Bubble Derby</HL><DD> 05/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Ever notice with how much fascination people watch soap bubbles form? The surface of a soap bubble is uncommonly smooth, and its colors dance and change in the light. But the bubble's surface is thin, its structure is loosely formed, and after a short, bright life, it pops. The bubble of Gary Hart's presidential ambitions popped a fortnight ago, but over this long Memorial Day weekend the soap-bubble derby will surely continue.    Jackson, Dukakis, Simon, Gore, Gephardt, Babbitt, Clinton, Biden, Boren, Celeste, Nunn, Cuomo, Hollings, Glenn. In the latest preference polls Jesse Jackson leads this field of declared and undeclared Democratic party contenders with 17%. Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis holds 11%. Don't Know appears to have the loyalty of 51% of Democratic primary voters.    How have the Democrats come to this pass? Why are so many party professionals lying awake nights hoping to be bailed out by the former All-Star forward of the New York Knicks? Bill Bradley himself, we suspect, must wonder how suddenly many Democrats have decided it is time for him to be president of the United States.    In fact, the explanation for the Bradley phenomenon holds the beginning of wisdom for the Democrats, but the bad news is that it's a little late in the day to adopt his formula for success. The pros are taking Sen. Bradley seriously because years ago he started taking political policy seriously. Unlike most of the 14 horsemen of the Democrats' current apocalypse, Mr. Bradley didn't decide he should be president and then go window-shopping for a set of ideas appropriate to the office.    He identified himself with two of the most important issues of our day -- cutting marginal income-tax rates and international monetary policy -- while others of his colleagues were abandoning these ideas to embrace protectionism (Rep. Gephardt), waging McCarthyite attacks on Reagan nominees (Sen. Biden) or pretending that clocks can run backward (Sen. Simon).    Over the past year, Mr. Bradley, with co-sponsor Jack Kemp, held well-attended conferences in Europe and Washington on the future of the international monetary system. Both meetings received next to no public notice. Virtually all the conferences' participants knew at the time, however, that the recurrent distortions in exchange rates already had the world economy in rough seas. For months, this has been the world's number one topic. Most reporters are too polite to publicly ask the 14 or so contenders to assemble three consecutive sentences on this subject.    The short answer to the Democrats' problem is that while the Republican candidates are all running on variations of the Reagan legacy, the national Democrats still can't bring themselves to incorporate any idea or policy of this presidency into their party's identity. Socialists in Europe, Australia and New Zealand can do it. U.S. Democrats can't.    Democrats helped pass the tax-reform act; now they'd rather take it back and run on &quot;the deficit.&quot; Defend against nuclear missiles? No way; much better for the party, led by Sen. Nunn, to defend every dotted &quot;i&quot; in a 15-year-old arms-control deal. Communism in Central America? The entire party's position is bound up in the language of a Massachusetts congressman's amendment to an appropriations bill. C-SPAN is now offering audiences a clear view of that issue. Bill Bradley argues out of a Democratic tradition with the likes of Mr. Kemp and Richard Darman over the U.S. role in the global economy, but this initiative gets ground up in the most mindless protectionism seen in 50 years. (Here Mr. Reagan is vulnerable but the Democratic Party fails to capitalize.)    We understand the purpose and requirements of a loyal opposition, but to win the presidency the Democrats are going to have to steal some of Mr. Reagan's clothes. We have trouble understanding how in the midst of a grand change in the country's politics, a party can spend six years cutting off its nose to spite its face. This in any event is the face the Democrats now seem to be showing the American electorate. </TEXT></DOC>