<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880720-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   JACKSON PRAISED nominee-to-be Dukakis at the Democratic Party convention.    In remarks delivered at the party's national gathering in Atlanta, the civil-rights leader appealed for unity and said the Massachusetts governor had &quot;always resisted the temptation to stoop to demagoguery.&quot; While he didn't formally endorse Dukakis, Jackson described him as a man with &quot;a good mind fast at work.&quot; Prior to the address, the delegates adopted a broadly worded platform endorsed by the Dukakis forces, rejecting Jackson's call for higher taxes on the wealthy and corporations, and another plank barring first use of nuclear arms by the U.S.    Kennedy delivered a speech that was critical of the GOP and of Bush, whom he described as a &quot;hear-nothing, see-nothing, do-nothing vice president.&quot;    ---   The U.N.'s Perez de Cuellar sought to complete details of a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war as the belligerents continued fighting in the Persian Gulf. A day after Iran accepted a U.N. truce resolution, Iraqi warplanes attacked a nuclear plant and other Iranian industrial targets, and Tehran said it shot down three of Baghdad's jets.    Shultz said the U.S. was prepared to hold talks with Iran &quot;on all manner of issues.&quot; The secretary of state, on a tour of Asia, welcomed the Tehran government's acceptance of the truce resolution and said the U.S. military presence in the gulf &quot;will go down&quot; if a cease-fire takes hold.    ---   Moscow's chief arms negotiator said the Soviet Union would scrap its Krasnoyarsk radar station in Siberia if the U.S. agrees to extend the 1972 ABM treaty for at least 10 years. Washington has contended that the radar facility, currently under construction, violates the anti-ballistic missile pact.    ---   Gorbachev accused leaders of Armenia's unification movement of exploiting a territorial dispute to sabotage his campaign of political and economic restructuring. And Kremlin officials, warning of a crackdown, said they wouldn't tolerate protests to press demands to transfer Azerbaijan's Nagorno-Karabakh enclave to Armenia.    ---   Nicaragua's President Ortega extended for another month a unilateral cease-fire with the Contra rebels. In a speech marking the Sandinista government's ninth anniversary, Ortega also urged the U.S. to renew bilateral talks, and invited the rebels to return to Managua to resume negotiations aimed at ending the country's civil war.    The White House called for a package of &quot;effective aid&quot; for the Contras, saying a Sandinista victory would have &quot;ominous consequences&quot; for all of Central America. In the Dominican Republic, Contra leaders denied that the election of rebel commander Bermudez as a political director would place the military in charge of the movement.    ---   A NASA official said that a pressure drop detected in January might have alerted space-shuttle engineers to the small gas leak that currently threatens a two-month delay in September's planned flight of Discovery. The shuttle's launch director said, however, that there isn't any conclusive evidence showing that workers acted improperly.    ---   Israeli police clashed with Palestinians in Jerusalem at a funeral for the city's first Arab resident killed by the army since the start of the seven-month-old uprising in the occupied territories. Israeli authorities also ordered Arabs in the Gaza Strip to pay a higher car tax, which critics contended will be used to help fund a crackdown.    ---   Wildfires burned in at least five Western states and in Alaska. Firefighters used natural barriers to keep a 14,000-acre blaze in Wyoming's Teton Wilderness from reaching summer homes. Crews slowed fires in Colorado, California, Utah and Oregon. But fires that have charred about 675,000 acres in Alaska were left to die on their own.    ---   Police in Peru wounded five people and arrested at least 270 protesters when a nationwide general strike flared into street battles in Lima, officials said. Leftist guerrillas attacked a police post. Thousands of union workers participated in the strike against the government's economic policy and to press demands for higher wages.    ---   A leftist guerrilla group claimed responsibility for Sunday's attack in Honduras that injured six U.S. soldiers. The Cinchoneros group, which has been almost inactive in recent years, said the assault in San Pedro Sula was a show of solidarity with those opposing &quot;detested Yankee imperialism.&quot;    ---   Shiite Moslem tribesmen bombarded a Maronite Catholic town in northern Lebanon, officials in Beirut said. At least 11 people have been killed and about 45 wounded in the fighting that erupted Sunday, apparently over grazing rights to pastures.    ---   Died: Charles Welles Buek, 76, former chairman of U.S. Trust Co. of New York, Monday, in Darien, Conn. </TEXT></DOC>