<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880805-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NASA ABORTED a test firing of the space shuttle Discovery's main engines.    In the final moment of the countdown at Cape Canaveral, Fla., a computer detected a valve problem and scrubbed the test. The agency suspended it until Sunday but said the delay could stretch until late next week depending on the problem's severity. The postponement was the fifth in two weeks. NASA still contends Discovery's launch, the first shuttle liftoff since the 1986 Challenger explosion, can be made in September. A date won't be set until completion of a successful test firing.    NASA engineers must determine whether the shuttle's engine actually malfunctioned or a computer sensor merely misread the situation.    ---   BIAGGI WAS CONVICTED on racketeering charges in the Wedtech Corp. case.    A federal jury in New York found the 10-term Democratic congressman guilty of racketeering, extortion and bribe-taking for his role in the corruption scandal involving the defense contractor. The U.S. attorney in Manhattan called on Congress to expel Biaggi. Four other defendants also were convicted of racketeering for turning Wedtech into an enterprise that paid millions of dollars in bribes to public officials.    The 70-year-old Biaggi is the 12th member of Congress to be convicted of criminal charges or to plead guilty to them during the past decade.    ---   Thornburgh participated in a decision to withhold from Congress parts of a 1975 Justice Department report about drug-trafficking by Panamanian officials and showing corruption inside the DEA, internal department documents show. The papers don't suggest illegality on the part of the nominee for attorney general.    ---   Jordan dismissed or ordered the retirement of about 21,200 Palestinian employees at Amman's institutions in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. The move effectively turns over responsibility to the PLO and follows King Hussein's decision Sunday to sever Jordan's legal and administrative ties with the West Bank.    ---   The House passed and sent to Reagan legislation that would give $1.2 billion and an apology to Japanese-Americans who were put into detention camps during World War II. The measure provides tax-free payments of $20,000 to each of the 62,000 survivors of the internment as victims of &quot;racial prejudice {and} wartime hysteria.&quot;    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked a tanker in the Persian Gulf, shipping executives said, in the first such incident reported since Tehran agreed to a negotiated truce. Iran denied involvement. At the U.N., the head of a military team sent to the region to arrange a cease-fire presented a report to the secretary-general. Details weren't disclosed.    ---   Bush portrayed Dukakis as weak on defense and foreign policy. Speaking in Texas, the GOP candidate said the Democratic presidential nominee's opposition to new nuclear weapons was part of a policy of &quot;unilateral disarmament.&quot; Dukakis said Bush's statements were &quot;nonsense.&quot;    ---   A State Department official said it will take &quot;a considerable amount of time&quot; to determine how to compensate families of the 290 people killed last month in the downing of an Iranian jetliner by a U.S. warship. Preliminary findings blame human error for the incident, Pentagon sources said.    ---   South Africa, Cuba and Angola agreed to extend until today U.S.-mediated negotiations on a peace settlement in southern Africa. The one-day extension of the talks, being held in Geneva, indicated that some progress was being made, delegates said.    ---   Burma's government sent as many as 10,000 soldiers into Rangoon to halt thousands of masked teen-agers from demonstrating in defiance of leader Sein Lwin's martial-law decree, Western diplomats said. Soldiers fired warning shots, but there weren't any immediate reports of injury or violence.    ---   Mexican opposition leaders called for the ruling party to further substantiate its claim of victory in last month's disputed presidential election or annul it. The officials of three leading opposition parties also pledged to pursue legislative actions and street protests to prevent the president-elect from taking office Dec. 1.    ---   The White House rejected a Senate Democratic proposal for non-lethal assistance to Nicaragua's Contra rebels. But a Reagan spokesman expressed hope that a compromise could lead to an acceptable aid package. The Democrats' six-month plan calls for $27 million in food, medicine and clothing but doesn't include military aid.    ---   Shevardnadze traveled to Afghanistan for a &quot;working visit&quot; with officials of the Kabul government, Tass reported. The trip came a day after the Soviet foreign minister criticized his Pakistani counterpart during a visit by that official to Moscow. Shortly before his arrival, a truck bomb exploded, killing at least three people.    ---   Shultz met with Uruguay's president for talks that touched on Central America, narcotics trafficking and the economy. The secretary of state, on a tour of Latin America, traveled to Montevideo from Buenos Aires, where he said relations between the U.S. and Argentina had improved.    ---   Died: Toshiwo Doko, 91, former president of Toshiba Corp., in Tokyo. . . . Marisa Bellisario, chief executive of Italy's state-owned Italtel, in Turin, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>