<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880406-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Focus: Small Securities Firm Links Drexel's Milken, Goldman's Freeman --- Oakley Sutton, Also an Ally Of the Coniston Partners, Is Target of Investigation --- Subpoenas and Flak Jackets </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR TNM </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> PRINCETON, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Armed and wearing bulletproof vests, the force of 50 federal marshals poured off the elevators and through the glass doors of Oakley Sutton Management Inc. Frightened employees of the small investment firm huddled in their offices near Princeton University's main gate while the men swept through filing cabinets, desks and closets, carting out nearly 300 boxes of documents.    The raid last December was enough to make last year's arrests of three Wall Street arbitragers look tame, yet it drew little media attention. Oakley Sutton was hardly a household name, and its principals, Edward Oakley Thorp and James Sutton Regan, hardly Wall Street stars. Instead, it was considered a conservative, hedged investment firm, albeit a quite successful one.    So why 50 federal marshals?    The answer is that belying its gray and very proper reputation, Oakley Sutton had in recent years been drawn into quite another side of the investment game: buying high-yield securities through Drexel Burnham Lambert; accumulating stocks for corporate raider Coniston Partners; and speculating in some of the same takeover stocks as Robert Freeman, the Goldman Sachs arbitrage chief who is under investigation for insider trading. Mr. Freeman and Drexel's Michael Milken, the junkbond king, invested in a partnership with Oakley Sutton's Mr. Regan.    According to people familiar with the investigation, the government is trying to determine whether Oakley Sutton traded inside information with Mr. Freeman and &quot;parked&quot; stock for Mr. Milken to conceal its ownership. At the same time, the government is probing Oakley Sutton for possible tax evasion. That was the matter cited in the search warrant authorizing the government's raid.    Although it may turn out that Oakley Sutton hasn't done anything wrong -- it says it hasn't -- the firm's evolution shows how a respected, conservative firm was drawn into a takeover frenzy that evidently spawned a new generation of securities crimes. It is possible that Oakley Sutton itself is a secondary target of investigators, drawing scrutiny largely because of its friends: Messrs. Freeman and Milken, two prime targets who, apart from Oakley Sutton, had no known links.    Oakley Sutton's basic investment method takes advantage of temporary discrepancies between prices of related securities, using computer models to spot opportunities and calculate returns. And it has compiled an enviable record: annual returns averaging 20.5% since 1969. It is highly respected among investment professionals; Richard Elden, the head of Chicago's Grosvenor Partners, calls Oakley Sutton &quot;the best hedging operation in the country.&quot;    The firm's principals agreed to be interviewed in the presence of two lawyers, Theodore Wells and Paul Grand. The lawyers told them not to answer any questions about matters under investigation, including any dealings with Messrs. Freeman and Milken.    Mr. Regan and Mr. Thorp attribute much of their success to minimizing risk. Mr. Thorp is a mathematician, a former professor at the University of California at Irvine who developed hedging strategies first for gambling and then for stocks. He wrote a best seller about blackjack called &quot;Beat the Dealer.&quot; Tanned and athletic, he runs marathons and jogs daily near the firm's Newport Beach, Calif., offices.    The redheaded Mr. Regan is in charge of the Princeton office, handling more than $6 billion in yearly trading for the operation, which now has over $250 million in equity. (Oakley Sutton's main investment unit is called Princeton/Newport Partners.) A former stockbroker at White Weld andamp; Co., he met Mr. Thorp in 1969 after reading Mr. Thorp's next book, &quot;Beat the Market.&quot; The possibilities were evident: Mr. Regan had the contacts on Wall Street, and Mr. Thorp had the system.    The two raised about $1.4 million and began investing, mostly in convertible securities, many of them thinly traded and under-researched. They hedged their positions by buying options or selling short -- that is, selling borrowed securities. Oakley Sutton offered the opportunity for nearly risk-free returns using their conservative hedging strategies, the two men say.    But some of the firm's trading is hard to square with this description. Records show that in February and March of 1985, when Coniston was secretly accumulating a stake in Storer Communications, Oakley Sutton was also investing in Storer for its own account, mainly through call options, a tactic that permits far greater leverage and profits.    By the time Coniston announced its position in Storer, Oakley Sutton had bought 516 May 60 call contracts, to cite just one option series. Each contract entitled it to buy 100 shares at $60 each upon the May expiration date. Coniston's disclosure that it owned over 5% of Storer made the stock and options soar in anticipation of a takeover contest.    Oakley Sutton bought the contracts at from $2.50 to $4 for each callable share. On March 21, shortly after Coniston's announcement, they were worth $14.375, giving Oakley Sutton an estimated profit of about $585,000 on its investment of $155,000. Not only was this trading not hedged, it seems an unusually aggressive example of so-called risk arbitrage, the speculation in real or rumored merger stocks that swept Wall Street along with the takeover boom.    Oakley Sutton appears to have taken its first step down this road during the late 1970s, after Mr. Regan met Keith Gollust, a former White Weld investment banker who is now one of the Coniston Partners. Coniston is known for its corporate raids and proxy fights, most recently involving Gillette and Allegis. At the time, Mr. Gollust was taking large positions in closed-end funds and wanted to minimize the risk. He turned to Mr. Regan to hedge the positions.    Mr. Regan also got to know Drexel's Mr. Milken. One colleague says they met while Mr. Milken was working in Drexel's New York offices before moving to Beverly Hills. Mr. Milken lived in Cherry Hill, N.J. Mr. Regan lives not far away on a sprawling farm in Pennington, N.J., where his wife breeds racehorses. Mr. Milken's interest in high-yield instruments fit with Messrs. Regan and Thorp's search for trading opportunities in convertible securities.    Colleagues say Mr. Regan's ties to Mr. Milken are solely professional. At Goldman Sachs, however, he has two old friends, Mr. Freeman and Lewis Eisenberg, both former Dartmouth classmates and current Goldman partners. Goldman handles most of Oakley Sutton's trading.    From some of these relationships sprang investment ventures. Messrs. Regan and Thorp say they devote 90% of their energy to their Princeton/Newport unit, but Mr. Regan was also involved in investment activities with Messrs. Gollust, Milken and Freeman, among others, in a complicated network of partnerships. Though none of the investors may have known of the involvement of the others, it was a network that at least theoretically linked a corporate raider, a takeover financier and a takeover-stock speculator.    Mr. Freeman and Mr. Regan sometimes invested together, say people familiar with some of the investments. In 1985 Goldman asked Mr. Freeman to withdraw from them, as part of a companywide effort to curb partners' outside investments for fear of potential conflicts of interest. (Mr. Freeman's lawyers declined all comment on this story, as did Goldman Sachs.)    Mr. Milken and his brother Lowell, a Drexel official as well, were also investors with Mr. Regan, these people say. They say, too, that Mr. Freeman and Michael Milken were partners in at least one of Mr. Regan's partnerships.    Mr. Regan's lawyer, Mr. Wells, says that &quot;Regan's participation in certain partnership ventures with Milken, Freeman and numerous other respected investors was perfectly legal, and to our knowledge is not the focus of any government investigations, nor should it be.&quot; Mr. Grand, the other lawyer, adds that the matters under investigation account for an &quot;infinitesimally small part&quot; of Oakley Sutton's business. A spokesman for Drexel says neither the firm nor the Milken brothers would comment on any matter that may be under investigation.    Oakley Sutton also helped launch Coniston Partners. When Mr. Gollust formed Coniston six years ago, its first investment was a joint venture with Oakley Sutton in which that firm provided 90% of the capital. Mr. Gollust also invested in one of Mr. Regan's limited partnerships, apparently not the same one Mr. Freeman and Mike Milken invested in. Mr. Gollust won't say whether Mr. Regan is an investor in Coniston. One common investor in both Coniston and Oakley Sutton's Princeton/Newport unit is Mr. Elden's Grosvenor Partners.    Oakley Sutton also had another, little-known relationship with Coniston. As profit opportunities in closed-end funds evaporated in the mid-1980s, Coniston turned to more aggressive strategies, including buying large blocks of a company's stock and threatening a proxy fight or hostile takeover. Such strategies benefit from secret accumulation of stock in the target companies, since even rumors of a stake being acquired can drive up a stock.    Because, Mr. Gollust says, he has so much trust in Mr. Regan, Coniston used Oakley Sutton to acquire stakes in Storer as well as in other Coniston targets. In recent years, Coniston has pursued, among others, Viacom International, NL Industries and Gelco. Accumulating stock for raiders doesn't seem to have been a service Oakley Sutton offered to others.    Compared with the spectacular profits generated by Mr. Milken's junk-bonds operation, Mr. Freeman's risk arbitrage and Mr. Gollust's raids, Oakley Sutton's performance looked pretty peaked. From 1983 to 1985, Princeton/Newport generated gross profits of 13% to 14.5% -- respectable but well below its average. Several limited partners, including one large investor, pulled out of Princeton/Newport at the end of 1985.    Part of Mr. Regan's remedy was to turn to trading in takeover situations, a course that appears to have led eventually to the firm's current plight. In 1986, Messrs. Regan and Thorp joined the principals of Coniston in a risk-arbitrage venture called Sabre Partners. In a private-placement memorandum for potential investors in Princeton/Newport, the firm disclosed that it was entering into a joint venture with Coniston to pursue risk arbitrage using up to 10% of Princeton/Newport's capital through Sabre. The memorandum also disclosed that Oakley Sutton was increasing its leverage in order to raise returns.    Just what investments Princeton/Newport and Sabre have made so far isn't known, but a person familiar with their activity says it has been highly profitable, &quot;equal to or better than&quot; rates of returns in Oakley Sutton's other investments. It is an activity that seems to have divided the two principals somewhat. &quot;Risk arbitrage isn't amenable to models,&quot; Mr. Thorp says. &quot;I don't have much of a role.&quot;    Oakley Sutton's highly profitable trading in Storer indicates that its takeover speculation predated Sabre. In Storer, of course, Oakley Sutton had an advantage over other traders: Because it was accumulating the stock for Coniston Partners, it was privy to confidential information about Coniston's buying, including the point at which Coniston would have to disclose that it owned more than 5% of the company.    It would ordinarily be unthinkable for a broker handling an accumulation program to capitalize on that relationship by trading for its own account, takeover experts say, since additional purchases could drive up stock and option prices and perhaps call attention to the accumulation. They say the possible appearance of impropriety alone would deter most firms.    But Oakley Sutton's lawyers say the firm had &quot;all appropriate consents.&quot; What that means, say people close to both Oakley Sutton and Coniston, is that Coniston's Mr. Gollust gave permission for Mr. Regan to trade in Storer using the confidential information and that hence Mr. Regan couldn't have &quot;misappropriated&quot; any information about Coniston's plans. Why Mr. Gollust would have permitted such trading isn't clear; he declines comment other than to say that &quot;it was entirely appropriate in the context of Coniston's position at the time.&quot; Messrs. Regan and Thorp won't say whether Oakley Sutton traded in other stocks it accumulated for Coniston.    Securities lawyers say Mr. Gollust's consent could well obviate insider-trading problems for Oakley Sutton. Insider-trading case law suggests that a finding of misappropriation may be a prerequisite to criminal liability, but courts haven't addressed the issue of consent in precisely this context.    Oakley Sutton's trading in Storer, however, wasn't confined to the period when Coniston was accumulating the stock. Oakley actively traded in Storer, mostly through options, after Coniston's March 19, 1985, filing. Many arbitragers were involved with Storer by this stage, and Oakley Sutton's profits from such trading don't seem inordinately large. Storer eventually was acquired by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. in a leveraged buy-out.    Late in February 1987, about two weeks after Mr. Freeman was arrested in his Goldman offices, Oakley Sutton got a federal subpoena seeking information about its trading and its contacts with Mr. Freeman. During the same period that Oakley Sutton was trading Storer securities, Mr. Freeman was trading the stock even more heavily in his personal account. He was also talking on the phone frequently with Mr. Regan.    Martin Siegel, a former Kidder Peabody investment banker, advised Kohlberg Kravis in the Storer deal, and he has told prosecutors that he leaked confidential information about it to Mr. Freeman at Goldman, according to people familiar with the investigation. Mr. Siegel has pleaded guilty to securities fraud and is awaiting sentencing. Mr. Freeman -- whose indictment on insider-trading charges last year was dismissed -- has denied any wrongdoing.    The Freeman-Regan phone calls appear to be of great interest to the government, which may be trying to determine whether Mr. Freeman may have leaked any of Mr. Siegel's confidences to Mr. Regan and whether Mr. Regan may have told Mr. Freeman anything about Coniston's accumulation of the stock. Oakley Sutton and Mr. Regan also deny that anything improper occurred.    The Freeman subpoena wasn't the only one Oakley Sutton got last year. The firm also received a broad subpoena covering its dealings with Drexel and Michael Milken. According to several people familiar with this aspect of the case, the government is trying to determine whether Drexel may have &quot;parked&quot; stock for Oakley Sutton for tax reasons and whether Oakley Sutton in turn may have done any improper favors for Drexel, such as parking. Parking occurs when one investor buys stock at the behest of another to conceal its ownership. It isn't necessarily illegal in itself, but it has emerged in the insider-trading scandal as an element in suspected takeover conspiracies, as a way to evade net-capital requirements and in other contexts.    Oakley Sutton's lawyers say the firm complied voluntarily with all of its subpoenas, and there was no need to raid the firm for further information. They also say that no one at Oakley Sutton knows of any wrongdoing and that, therefore, no one there can help the government build a case against either Mr. Freeman or Michael Milken.    Yet the raid has convinced Messrs. Regan and Thorp and their lawyers that the government is crudely attempting to pressure them into providing damaging evidence against Mr. Freeman and the Milken brothers. &quot;The tactic failed,&quot; says Mr. Grand, one of the defense lawyers, &quot;and Oakley Sutton remains proud of {its} relationships&quot; with Drexel and Goldman. But the prospect of years of burdensome and disruptive tax litigation, the lawyers say, ensures that the pressure will continue as long as Oakley Sutton doesn't give the government the evidence it wants.    David Denton, an associate U.S. attorney in Manhattan, defends the government's tactics. &quot;Search warrants are used when they appear appropriate in a particular case,&quot; Mr. Denton says, noting that a federal magistrate or judge makes the determination. In Oakley Sutton's case, the government submitted a sealed affidavit to support its request for the warrant. According to people close to the investigation, the affidavit contains information provided by a disgruntled former Oakley Sutton employee who was fired prior to the raid. Mr. Denton notes that federal agents are routinely armed and that the large number of agents used may simply reflect the volume of documents being seized.    But Mr. Grand says the search was &quot;totally uncalled for. There was no claim then or now of any risk of records disappearing. The search was simply an excuse to send 40 to 50 gun-toting agents into Oakley Sutton's premises for the purpose of terrorizing its employees and disrupting its business.&quot;    Innocent as Oakley Sutton may be, the investment firm probably wouldn't face this plight had it adhered to its original mission of conservative hedging. It says much about the climate on Wall Street in the takeover-crazed '80s that Oakley Sutton's 15-year record of nearly risk-free double-digit returns wasn't deemed good enough.    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Coniston Partners&quot; -- WSJ April 12, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>