<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Fujitsu, Fairchild Semiconductor PlanVentures Even Though Merger Is Ended---By Brenton R. SchlenderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SLBELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Although Fujitsu Ltd. has dropped its controversial proposal to acquire Fairchild Semiconductor Corp., both companies still expect to carry out many of their plans to cooperate in semiconductor manufacturing through a series of joint ventures.    At a news conference scheduled for today, Donald W. Brooks, Fairchild's president and chief executive officer, is expected to describe financial arrangements under negotiation for a leveraged buyout by management of Fairchild, a unit of Schlumberger Ltd., as well as other options the company is considering.    According to sources close to Fairchild, Mr. Brooks also is expected to announce that Fujitsu and Fairchild plan to move toward agreements for future technology development, joint manufacturing in both the U.S. and Japan, and exchange of manufacturing rights for new and existing products. All these ventures are based upon blueprints drawn up in recent months as Fujitsu awaited U.S. government approval to acquire Fairchild outright.    &quot;Plan one didn't work, so we're moving on to alternative plans for cooperation,&quot; said Ken Katashiba, vice president for cooperative ventures and spokesman for Fujitsu's U.S. semiconductor operations. &quot;We have been working with Fairchild for months and are continuing to work with them,&quot; he added. &quot;We are still enthusiastic.&quot;    Fujitsu abruptly withdrew its offer -- estimated at $200 million to $225 million -- to purchase 80% of Fairchild, one of Silicon Valley's pioneering companies, after U.S. Secretary of Commerce Malcolm Baldrige and other U.S. officials voiced opposition to the merger, citing continuing trade friction with Japan and national-security considerations. Fujitsu said it had hoped to use Fairchild's technological prowess and extensive sales infrastructure as a foundation for expanded operations in this country, as much to compete with other Japanese electronics giants doing business in the U.S. as to wrest business from American semiconductor companies.    &quot;Going through with the deal by force is not our way,&quot; said Mr. Katashiba. &quot;We don't want to invest in a troubled U.S. company if it isn't welcome.&quot;    The idea of joining forces through joint ventures between Japanese and U.S. chip companies isn't new, and isn't so controversial either. Last fall Motorola Inc. and Toshiba Corp. announced sweeping agreements that would enable Motorola to make Toshiba's big-selling memory chips, and would allow Toshiba to make many of Motorola's popular microprocessor chips. National Semiconductor Corp. works closely with NMB Semiconductor Co., a Japanese concern, to design, make and sell chips in Japan, and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. has close ties to both European and Japanese chip companies.    The Reagan administration reacted cautiously to news of the possible Fujitsu-Fairchild joint ventures. A senior U.S. official said the administration still didn't have enough information on the coming announcement to decide what action to take. But he hinted it probably wouldn't challenge the companies' scaled-down plans. Washington had objected initially because an outright merger of the two companies would have placed all of Fairchild's technology under Japanese ownership.    That Fujitsu might try to find other ways of accomplishing its plans for Fairchild didn't surprise executives of other Japanese chip companies. &quot;It's not like the Japanese to walk away from something like this,&quot; said an American executive of a Japanese chip maker. &quot;And I don't think Fujitsu's problems with the government poisons the atmosphere for getting together in other ways.&quot;    The main obstacle to the idea of consolidating through joint ventures is the ownership of Fairchild by New York-based Schlumberger, which in turn is controlled by French interests. Schlumberger, whose primary business is providing services to the slumping oil industry, is hard-pressed to continue supporting Fairchild, which itself was battered by the recent deep slump in the semiconductor industry. But until Fairchild's ownership is settled, the company can't move forward with joint ventures.    Fairchild would prefer to be separated from Schlumberger in a leveraged buyout by management so that it could proceed with the plans drawn up with Fujitsu. Mr. Katashiba of Fujitsu declined to comment whether Fujitsu is providing any of the financing for a possible leveraged buyout. Sources close to Fairchild, however, say the money for a buyout probably isn't coming from Fujitsu, but from U.S. investors.    Some industry executives are still puzzled why Fujitsu so abruptly dropped its plans to purchase Fairchild from Schlumberger. While Commerce Secretary Baldrige made no secret of his opposition to the merger, other administration officials hadn't yet made up their minds. Even Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who had been described in some news reports as siding with Mr. Baldrige, issued a statement Friday denying that he had taken such a position. &quot;This case is still under review in this department,&quot; Mr. Weinberger said.    Indeed, other U.S. officials acknowledge that if the case had made its way to the Economic Policy Council, a cabinet-level body headed by Treasury Secretary James Baker, the votes could have split down the middle, or even gone in Fujitsu's favor. Only U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter and the Pentagon's export-control office were known to be clearly in support of Mr. Baldrige's position. The Treasury, which wants to keep the door open to foreign investment, leaned toward approving the merger, as did the State Department and the Office of Management and Budget, according to sources close to the companies.    U.S. trade officials concede that an outright rejection of the Fujitsu-Fairchild merger could have weakened the U.S. in its efforts to convince other countries to open their markets to foreign investment. It would be more difficult, for example, for the U.S. to continue to press Brazil to allow U.S. companies to invest in the Brazilian computer industry after saying no to Fujitsu.    The Commerce Department, however, insists that its stand on the Fujitsu-Fairchild merger doesn't detract from the administration's open-door policy. &quot;We're only looking at where you could make an exception (to that policy) when vital national interests are at stake,&quot; said B.J. Cooper, a department spokesman.    Some Japanese businessmen in the U.S. agree that the government's opposition to the Fujitsu-Fairchild merger won't affect the tide of Japanese investment in U.S. technology firms. According to Norio Sugano, president of Fremont, Calif.-based Semix Inc., a distributor of semiconductor manufacturing equipment, the only real significance of the Fujitsu-Fairchild merger was its notoriety, and that hundreds of smaller Japanese tie-ups to Silicon Valley companies should proceed quietly undisturbed.    &quot;Both nations' companies need access to each other's markets,&quot; he said. &quot;Also, Japanese want U.S. technology and American companies need capital. They're still very well suited for each other.&quot;    In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, Schlumberger shares closed at $39.375, up $2.    ---   Eduardo Lachica and Art Pine contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>