<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Country Blues:Deregulation RaisesPrices, Cuts ServicesIn Many Rural Areas---Phone Bill of Mrs. McGinnisIs Up 300% in Nebraska;A Sick Man Misses the Bus---Small-Town Banks Play Safe---By Bill RichardsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> SCOTTSBLUFF, Neb.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As Scottsbluff's mayor, Donald Overman, recalls that unpleasant morning several years back, snow was blowing out of a leaden sky when his eastbound Frontier Commuter Airlines flight set down at North Platte, Neb.    As soon as the door popped open, the crew hastily departed, leaving the plane sitting on the tarmac with Mr. Overman and 20 other bewildered passengers waiting to fly on across the state. The pilot returned to announce that the airline was jettisoning its unprofitable route across Nebraska. He gave the passengers a choice: Fly 200 miles in the opposite direction to Frontier's home base in Denver or stay dumped in North Platte.    Mr. Overman calls it &quot;a pretty dramatic lesson in deregulation.&quot;    For big-city dwellers, deregulation has mostly been a boon. Wider freedom from federal rules has often led to cutthroat competition in everything from interest rates to intercity flights and telephone calls.    But in sparsely populated places like the Nebraska Panhandle, deregulation hurts. Although some 700 banks have branches in New York City and about 40 airlines fly in and out of Chicago, a rural area frequently has only a single supplier of such vital services.    So as regulatory control fades, prices are climbing in these areas -- and service is dwindling. From banks to buses to telephones, deregulation is driving home a hard economic lesson: Big government may not fit with the rural self-image of rugged individualism, but no government is sometimes worse.    &quot;Rural people place great value on the idea of self-sufficiency, but they operate in a framework that is anything but independent,&quot; says George W. Rucker, research director for Rural America, a Washington D.C. public-interest group. Mr. Rucker and others say that federal regulation has long amounted to a subsidy of low-price rural power, transportation, telephone and other services, acting as a form of social engineering to build and maintain rural populations. &quot;In a sense,&quot; says Calvin Beale, a U.S. Agriculture Department population expert, &quot;rural development was propped up by federal regulation.&quot;    Deregulation is underscoring the extent of those hidden rural subsidies as it wipes them out. Mr. Beale and others worry that the process is also hastening the depopulation of some of the same communities that regulation once helped build.    &quot;If the present deregulation trend continues,&quot; warns Sen. Larry Pressler, Republican of South Dakota, a longtime opponent of the trend, &quot;small cities and towns could end up as remnants of the past.&quot;    Since the beginning of the 1980s, nearly half the nation's nonmetropolitan counties have lost population, reversing the widely publicized back-to-the-land trend of the previous decade. Agriculture's problems, farm consolidations and the aging of the rural population have all contributed. &quot;But when you deregulate,&quot; says William S. Duncan, head of the Mountain Association for Community Economic Development in Berea, Ky., &quot;you're making a social decision to become a nation of big cities.&quot;    On the high plains of western Nebraska's Panhandle, a region that is as large as all of lower New England but has a population of less than 100,000, deregulation's impact isn't like that of the dust storms and droughts that sent farmers stampeding in years past. Instead, it is more like erosion, making life a bit more expensive here and a bit less palatable there.    At her desk in Crawford, Neb.'s tiny city hall, Mary McGinnis, 65, holds forth about her telephone bill from Northwestern Bell Telephone Co. &quot;Can you believe?&quot; Crawford's white-haired water commissioner tells a handful of loungers. &quot;The bill on that old el-cheapo dial telephone of mine, it went up nearly 300% since 1984&quot; -- from $7 a month to $27.    In the past, the Federal Communications Commission required telephone companies to charge urban and rural customers the same for service, in effect subsidizing rural service, which is far more expensive because there are far fewer customers to cover fixed costs. But since deregulation, phone companies are passing on more of the actual service cost to their customers, and rural phone bills are soaring.    By itself, a rising phone bill isn't likely to send anyone packing for the city. Still, Mrs. McGinnis says she sometimes finds herself thinking the unthinkable these days -- contemplating a move to a bigger place, like Rapid City, S.D. &quot;It would be nice,&quot; she says, &quot;living close to where things are cheaper.&quot;    The Bus   William Shay is one of a contingent of disabled veterans around Scottsbluff who travel regularly to Veterans Administration hospitals for treatment. He suffers from edema. Twice a month, the 70-year-old former farm laborer leaves his rented room so that doctors can drain off the fluid that balloons his weight to 290 pounds.    Mr. Shay, who has had two heart attacks, used to take the bus to the veterans' hospital in Hot Springs, S.D., some 150 miles north of Scottsbluff. Then came deregulation and the bus route was eventually dropped. Now he waits for the local veterans' office to find him rides and doesn't always get to the hospital on schedule. &quot;That bus,&quot; he says, &quot;was the difference between life and death for me.&quot; Now his life depends on a more haphazard arrangement.    Since bus deregulation began in 1982, more than 3,000 small towns and cities have lost bus service, according to the Department of Transportation. Star Bus Lines, the Panhandle's last remaining local carrier, still has travel posters for Hawaii and Australia on the walls of its Scottsbluff terminal. But a bus traveler headed for one of those exotic destinations must first take Star's 6:30 a.m. bus 40 miles south to Kimball, Neb., then catch the westbound Greyhound for Cheyenne, then wait for the bus south to Denver. The 250-mile trip takes a day and a night. Few people bother.    Darlene Ruth, Star's manager, says the bus line is thinking about ending its scheduled runs and just offering charter service. Under deregulation, big carriers like Greyhound Lines Inc. juggle schedules and routes so fast, Mrs. Ruth says, that feeder operations like Star can't keep up. &quot;You get the impression they don't care about us little people in between the big cities,&quot; she says.    Trucks   Richard Holliday, a blunt-spoken former trucker whose Gehring, Neb.-based Nebraska Transport Co. is the region's biggest truck line, says that since deregulation he has routinely slashed rates for customers on highly competitive interstate-highway routes. But customers in communities off the beaten path, where there is no truck competition, have to pay more than their urban counterparts. Mr. Holliday offers a gloomy prediction for some of the industry's customers: &quot;The mom-and-pop store in some small, out-of-the-way town -- they've had it.&quot;    In a corner booth at the 77 Lounge in Chadron, Neb., far from any interstate, owner Evva Gore whips out a freight bill to show a visitor just how fast her trucking costs are climbing. It costs $13.55 to have three cases of liquor hauled 400 miles across the state from Omaha, up from $12.78 last year.    &quot;When I saw that I said 'bullfeathers,'&quot; says Mrs. Gore, a 27-year veteran of the bar business. The 77 Lounge is up for sale -- not because of deregulation -- and Mrs. Gore says she is looking forward to moving someplace warmer. Meanwhile, she confides that she has worked out a way to beat the price increase: &quot;I drive my motor home to Omaha and tell them to fill up the bathtub with cases of booze.&quot;    Not everyone in Chadron's business community can improvise like Mrs. Gore. James Aspden, manager of Henkens Implement Co., wends his way between bins stuffed with spare farm-machinery parts and stops in front of a 16-foot sickle bar. Mr. Aspden says the device costs only $150, but he has to tack on $50 more to cover trucking charges. When a freak hailstorm caused $25 million of damage to the town last summer, Chadron residents discovered they could find replacements for their shattered storm windows for $20 less in towns with better truck service.    The Bank   When Robert McCulley turned up at the Holiday Restaurant in Kimball, Neb., one evening this past July, more than 50 people crowded into the back room to meet him. Mr. McCulley is no celebrity; he is a broker for E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. And like a growing number of bankers, brokers and other money managers these days, he spends much time in small towns and cities around the Panhandle trying to persuade people to put their money elsewhere than the local bank.    Deregulation means more business for Mr. McCulley and his fellow circuit riders. But it is sapping life from small-town banks and from the communities that rely on them. Under deregulation, many rural banks are forced to pay higher interest to compete with outsiders for deposits. Deregulation has also cleared the way for big outside banks to steal away borrowers who once automatically would have gone to their local bank for cash.    In a report on changes in rural America last year, researchers at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank weighed the pros and cons of bank deregulation and concluded, &quot;On balance, economic activity in many rural communities probably has been negatively affected by higher {loan} interest rates from deregulation.&quot;    Michael Nelson, president of Kimball's First State Bank, estimates that 25% of the money the town's 3,500 residents might have deposited in his bank in the past now goes to brokerage houses and other outsiders. Squeezed for profits, small-town banks are shying away from putting money into uncertain local business ventures. &quot;These days,&quot; says Lewis Mehling, vice chairman of American National Bank in Sidney, Neb., &quot;you're a little less inclined to stick your neck out to help some young person get started.&quot;    Mr. Mehling's bank recently turned down applicants seeking business loans to launch a restaurant and a retail store in Sidney. There isn't much likelihood the businesses will get help elsewhere. &quot;E.F. Hutton,&quot; Kimball's Mr. Nelson points out dryly, &quot;doesn't finance gas stations and clothing stores.&quot;    The Plane   At his insurance agency in Scottsbluff, Mayor Overman keeps a plastic model of a passenger jet behind his desk. It is a talisman of sorts, since Scottsbluff has managed to hold on to some air service since deregulation. But at a price. There are no Supersavers or fare wars. Since 1984, four airlines have come and gone, including the one that stranded Mr. Overman in North Platte. The 150-mile flight to Denver now costs $75, up from $49 three years ago.    (A 1982 federal study showed that following deregulation, the average cost of flying out of a small town had climbed by 16% while the cost of flying out of big cities had declined by 33%. A federal aviation expert says those percentages are &quot;still in the ballpark today.&quot;)    Mr. Overman isn't complaining about the price. He has been to Washington twice recently pleading for federal help to keep Scottsbluff's air connection alive. The city is 400 miles from Lincoln and Omaha, Nebraska's state capital and its financial center. Without air service, the mayor says, &quot;we might as well be in another country.&quot;    Other Panhandle communities are even more worried. Since deregulation, virtually all the region's air service depends on the federal government's Essential Air Service program, which provides subsidies to commuter lines servicing otherwise unprofitable rural areas. The program is scheduled to end next year.    Panhandle officials say that losing air service would be deregulation's cruelest blow. Without it, a distant traveler who wanted to get to Chadron would have to fly to Rapid City, the nearest city with scheduled air service, hire a car and drive 114 miles to reach Chadron. &quot;It would have a drastic effect on our economic development effort,&quot; says Carl Dierks, Chadron's city manager.    Among other problems, Mr. Dierks points out, there would be no air link for nearly 2,000 students who attend Chadron State College, the community's economic anchor. Mr. Dierks is heading an effort to broaden Chadron's agriculture-based economy. But he says one of the first things prospective employers ask about is air service.    &quot;Disaster might be too strong a word to describe the effect of losing our air service,&quot; Mr. Dierks says. &quot;But it would certainly make Chadron a less desirable place to live.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>