<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870722-0113 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> GENI IMNX AMGNPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   A new class of drugs that may aid in fighting cancer, AIDS and other diseases is moving onto biotechnology's center stage.    The experimental drugs are called blood-cell colony stimulating factors, or CSFs. In animal and early human tests, the drugs have boosted depressed numbers of infection-fighting white blood cells to normal and even above-normal levels.    &quot;For the first time, we are able to regulate blood cells,&quot; says David Golde, a researcher at the University of California in Los Angeles. &quot;That is a revolutionary thing.&quot;    CSFs aren't expected to cure cancer or acquired immune deficiency syndrome. But they may help patients with such diseases fight off potentially fatal infections that take advantage of their weakened immune systems.    Scientists caution that the CSFs' benefits to patients haven't been established, and doing so may take years. But preliminary reports on the drugs, including one expected to appear soon in the New England Journal of Medicine, show they bolster certain kinds of white blood cells with remarkable consistency. That has created a groundswell of optimism among medical researchers, who hope the drugs will enable them to &quot;dial up&quot; blood-cell levels in patients as if they were turning up the volume on a radio.    Jerome Groopman, a researcher at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston, says, &quot;Preliminary trials indicate that the CSFs are the most exciting and promising&quot; of biotechnology's immune-system modifiers, which include much-touted drugs like interferon and interleukin-2.    CSFs also are winning acclaim among analysts, who note that the drugs are aimed at well-defined markets. And compared with drugs like interferon, which have broad actions that are difficult to register, &quot;CSFs have very direct effects that make it easy to devise clinical trials needed to get them approved&quot; for marketing, says Stuart Weisbrod, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.    Two of the new drugs are in clinical trials: GM-CSF, made by both Genetics Institute Inc. and Immunex Corp., which promotes infection-fighting cells called granulocytes and macrophages; and GCSF, made by Amgen Corp., which boosts granulocytes.    Scientists often mention a closely related substance, erythropoietin, or EPO, in the same breath with CSFs. EPO, made by both Amgen and Genetics Institute, boosts oxygen-carrying red blood cells and also has proved very promising in early clinical trials.    Scientists working with CSFs emphasize that the benefits of higher white-blood-cell counts induced by the drugs remain to be shown. But many researchers say they believe the drugs will help fight diseases, citing the well-established fact that patients with very low white-blood-cell counts are prone to infections. In fact, patients taking anti-cancer drugs -- which can almost knock out the immune system -- sometimes die of pneumonia and other infectious diseases rather than cancer.    Sadly, such patients often have cancers that might be arrested. Indeed, doctors are more willing to risk giving heavy doses of anti-cancer drugs to patients they might save than to those with untreatable tumors. If CSFs can prevent infections, physicians may be able to prescribe larger and more frequent chemotherapy doses -- perhaps extending cancer victims' lives by years.    Thus, CSFs may turn out to be potent weapons in the anti-cancer arsenal -- without having to pass muster in long, expensive anti-cancer tests. To get marketing approval for the drugs, &quot;I think it will only be necessary to show reduced morbidity from infections rather than from cancer,&quot; says Jordan Gutterman, a cancer researcher testing GM-CSF at Houston's M.D. Anderson Hospital. A spokesman for the Food and Drug Administration says it's too early to comment on possible standards to be applied to CSFs.    Scientists also are testing GM-CSF in AIDS patients. The AIDS virus mainly bludgeons immune cells that GM-CSF isn't expected to revive. But researchers hope that by revving up other immune cells with GM-CSF, they can ward off &quot;opportunistic&quot; infections in AIDS patients caused by bacteria, fungi and other microbes. The drug also may offset immune suppression caused by antibiotics and AZT, the only drug approved so far to treat AIDS.    According to early reports, CSFs cause only minor flu-like side effects, such as fever, chills and body aches. Ironically, three of 18 patients in an AIDS study reported in May developed signs of infection by a tuberculosis-like bacteria after taking GM-CSF. Boston's Dr. Groopman, who codirected the study, says the patients apparently had been harboring the bug without showing it. He explains that before they took GM-CSF their immune systems were too depressed to mount normal responses to the bacteria -- such as fever, a sign that the body is fighting back.    If CSFs are approved for marketing, their uses could expand rapidly -- especially if larger clinical trials support the conclusion that they have few side effects. The drugs might be used, for example, to push normal immune systems into overdrive as a preventive measure in frail, older patients hospitalized for broken bones. &quot;A lot of people die of pneumonia,&quot; says Dr. Golde, the UCLA researcher, who is working with GM-CSF. &quot;I would like to ask whether we could reduce that death rate.&quot;    Scientists' excitement about CSFs stems partly from the light they are shedding on the immune system, a complex system whose actions are controlled by messenger molecules such as CSFs. Last year, for example, Genetics Institute scientists identified a new member of the CSF family called interleukin-3, or IL-3, which apparently affects a broad range of cells and may amplify effects of other CSFs.    Moreover, researchers are finding that CSFs have other roles besides increasing blood-cell counts. &quot;When granulocytes sense bacteria, they get very angry and dump out a toxic substance that's essentially like bleach,&quot; says Robert Kamen, Genetics Institute's senior vice president, scientific affairs. &quot;Their ability to be angered is increased by GM-CSF, so with the drug, we can both increase granulocyte numbers and prime them for action.&quot;    And G-CSF may prove directly useful as a treatment for certain kinds of leukemia, or blood-cell cancers. In test-tube studies, the drug has converted leukemia cancer cells that are multiplying out of control into normal cells, says Philip Whitcome, Amgen's director of strategic planning.    Ultimately, researchers hope to use combinations of CSFs, perhaps with other immune-system hormones, to manipulate the immune system with even more power and precision. Immunex, for example, recently reported that CSFs appear to work synergistically with interleukin-1, another immune messenger, to boost white blood cells. Christopher Henney, Immunex's scientific director, says the company hopes the combination will help offset cancer patients' immune suppression from radiation treatments. </TEXT></DOC>