<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880229-0092 </DOCNO><HL> The Fragmentation of Greater Atlanta Raises Vital Questions About Its Future </HL><AUTHOR> John Helyar (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Andrew Young, the noted former U.N. ambassador, is this city's titular head. But Manuel Maloof, a saloonkeeper who is much less noted, presides over a bigger population as chief executive of adjacent DeKalb County.    RJR Nabisco Inc. announced a headquarters move to Atlanta. But it really settled in Cobb County, in a suburban office-shopping complex.    So it goes in the two worlds of Greater Atlanta. In the suburbs the issue is controlling the growth. In the city the problem is providing for the poor. Atlanta is fragmented, and that raises vital questions: Where is Atlanta going and who will lead it?    There is no question about who leads it in growth. Suburban Gwinnett County has been the nation's fastest-growing large county for three years running. Neighboring Cobb County is a perennial top 10. At the same time, the population of Atlanta proper is shrinking -- down 13% since 1970, to 430,000. Though the city is enjoying a renaissance in once-seedy Midtown and a building boom in tony Buckhead, it is increasingly the repository of the poor and the black.    Blacks make up 70% of the population, including a sizable middle class. With some of the nation's top black colleges and black leaders, Atlanta is a magnet for the best and brightest black Americans. It has the second-largest number of black managers, trailing only Washington, D.C. But for the greater number of blacks, who have little education and low skills, there is little opportunity.    The areas of the city where blacks are in the majority saw just a 4.7% rise in jobs between 1970 and 1985, compared with a 71% rise in Greater Atlanta areas that are more than 90% white. The fast-growth leaders like Gwinnett and Cobb are distant from the black areas of Atlanta's south side, and these counties' many entry-level jobs are difficult to reach from there.    Neither county has been willing to join the rapid-transit system. Neither has much low-income housing. And the suburbs are seen by many blacks as hostile territory: Civil-rights marches and white-supremacists clashed last year in Forsyth County, on the fringe of metropolitan Atlanta.    Forsyth County is about to be engulfed, however, by metropolitan Atlanta, which just keeps sprawling farther out. There is no geographic limit to stop it and no governmental inclination to. Conservative Georgia has no state land-use planning law, and cagey developers are adept at getting their way with the metropolitan area's 42 municipal governments. Each wants its piece of the Big Hustle action.    But the suburbs are choking on the supercharged growth. One main artery that carried 20,500 cars a day in 1975 was clogged with 71,000 by 1985. Gwinnett County dumped three million gallons of untreated sewage into a river this month after its system became overloaded. The state temporarily banned new sewer hookups in some areas. DeKalb County has sued Fulton County to scale down a mammoth commercial complex that would benefit Fulton while burdening DeKalb.    That is symptomatic of the fractured, fractious nature of the metropolis. Atlanta was built by natives whose business and civic interests were indistinguishable. But today's business corps is largely corporate gypsies, operating largely outside the city limits. In a speech to the Atlanta Rotary Club this month, RJR Nabisco's president, F. Ross Johnson, told city civic causes not to knock on his door so much.    Says George Berry, Georgia's commissioner of industry and trade: &quot;We have professional managers now, as opposed to owner-operators; we had the Atlanta Chamber of Commerce for a forum, now every county has a chamber.&quot;    That means that for all its present glory, Atlanta lacks its old visionary leadership. The city that built a ballpark in a year in the '60s can't drum up private-sector support now for a new domed stadium. The city that built a world-class airport while still just a big town can't get off the dime in starting the second field it now needs.    Political leadership has floundered over the city-metropolitan split, too. Some brave souls talk of consolidating metropolitan government, but suspicion and self-interest work against it. Although merging the city of Atlanta and Fulton County, for instance, might make sense, affluent suburbanites don't want the tax burden of poor blacks, and city hall's black politicians don't want whites diluting their power base.    But these politicians are left to run something that is an ever smaller portion of the metropolitan pie, for the suburbs have sucked the vitality out of the city's core. The retail center isn't downtown, but dispersed to the suburbs' huge regional malls. The growth businesses aren't downtown, for the most part, because modern computers and telecommunications free them from having to be bunched together. The conventioneers are downtown, but not any longer than they have to be. The city that brings in the third most conventioneers in the country is also the one where they stay the shortest time.    The city is now developing a $140 million project called Underground Atlanta, a &quot;festival mall&quot; it hopes will restore downtown nightlife. Even its backers say it will have to overcome white Atlanta's fears of crime and blacks. (The city's image of biracial harmony owes more to accommodations between black and white leaders than to the mingling of its people.) And skeptics say that even if it is successful, Underground Atlanta will only create the kind of minimum-wage jobs that much of black Atlanta has to settle for, the very scraps of the service economy.    As the rising tide of the metropolitan economy bypasses the city's poor, some sense rising frustration. &quot;These are breeding grounds for alienation,&quot; says the Fulton County Commission chairman, Michael Lomax. &quot;There is a large underclass that's hopeless and helpless and that's going to be angry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>