<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Pentagon Consultant Said to Be Central To Inquiry; Expanded Charges Weighed </HL><AUTHOR> Tim Carrington and Edward T. Pound (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GD MD UIS LIT </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> CNG JUS DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thomas Muldoon, a defense industry consultant whose clients included Unisys Corp. and Litton Industries Inc.'s Data Systems unit, is emerging as a central figure in the widening Pentagon fraud investigation, according to law enforcement officials and lawyers familiar with the inquiry.    Meanwhile, Henry Hudson, the U.S. attorney in Alexandria, Va., who is in direct control of the grand jury inquiry, said that in addition to pursuing possible bribery indictments, he might seek bid-rigging or other antitrust charges in the case. That would expose contractors to triple damages if they are found guilty, and it could spawn a host of civil suits by competitors who might claim they were cheated out of contracts.    But, he added, &quot;Until we've had an opportunity to review all the evidence, it would be premature for me to tell you that it {the investigation} would fall into that category {antitrust action}.&quot;    Mr. Muldoon, whose office here was searched during last week's Justice Department sweep for evidence, is considered important by investigators because he had ties to a number of major defense suppliers whose activities are under scrutiny. One lawyer familiar with the investigation said prosecutors view Mr. Muldoon as one of a handful of central figures in the inquiry.    Investigators said Mr. Muldoon, a former Unisys employee, set up his own consulting firm to act as a liaison between contractors and the military services who bought their equipment. Investigators stressed his importance to their efforts to unravel the web of suspected improper payments and widespread information-sharing that may have given some Defense Department contractors an unfair advantage over their competitors. But they declined to identify specific military programs with which he was involved.    Mr. Muldoon didn't return repeated telephone messages.    Investigators have searched Litton records related to the sale of communications gear to the military. Unisys is also a major supplier of communications equipment to the services.    In another development, a senior government official said that investigators are looking at ties between a Marine Corps contracting supervisor, Jack Sherman, several consultants and defense electronics companies. The official said that Mr. Sherman is under investigation for allegedly receiving thousands of dollars in illegal payments, but the official didn't disclose the purported sources of the payments. Mr. Sherman's attorney, Louis Koutoulakos, said he wouldn't deny or confirm the allegations.    Among the contractors searched last week by the Federal Bureau of Investigation was the Arkansas office of Whittaker Corp.'s command and control systems unit, a defense electronics concern. Investigators are looking into Mr. Sherman's dealings with the Whittaker unit or a company it acquired, Lee Telecommunications.    Edward Muller, a vice president and general counsel for Los Angeles-based Whittaker, said the company was surprised by the FBI search. &quot;We are currently investigating the matter ourselves,&quot; he said, and declined further comment.    Officials said that some Defense Department employees were paid as much as $3,000 for providing confidential information to contractor representatives. As many as 20 Defense Department employees are under investigation and the number could grow as investigators review wiretap transcripts, materials gathered through search warrants and subpoenas issued by the Alexandria grand jury.    Victor Cohen, an Air Force tactical air expert whose offices were searched last week as part of the probe, has been reassigned, according to officials close to the projects he has been managing. The Pentagon didn't confirm the change, and Mr. Cohen couldn't be reached for comment.    Prior to joining the Air Force staff in 1980, Mr. Cohen worked for Northrop Corp. He is considered a powerful player in electronics and avionics equipment for tactical aircraft.    NBC television also reported that James Gaines, an Navy weapons specialist, has also been reassigned. The Pentagon declined to comment on that report.    In Los Angeles, individuals familiar with the investigation said records of an El Monte, Calif., division of Gould Inc. were subpoenaed by the grand jury. A spokesman for the defense-electronics firm, which is based in Rolling Meadows, Ill., said the subpoena covered &quot;certain information&quot; about the division's Navy electronics work, but declined to be specific.    However, a former executive of the El Monte division said the subpoena may have been related to the activities of Fred Lackner, a Woodland Hills, Calif., consultant whose office was searched by the FBI last week. Press reports have connected Mr. Lackner to Stuart E. Berlin, a Navy electronics official whose office also was searched.    Mr. Lackner resigned from Gould several years ago under pressure from superiors after a supplier provided the company with documents showing that Mr. Lackner had received a payment for steering contracts to the supplier, the former official said. The Gould spokesman said Mr. Lackner had left the company &quot;under uncertain circumstances,&quot; but declined to provide details. Mr. Lackner didn't return telephone messages.    Mr. Hudson, who is directing the grand jury inquiry, said he had some 78 agents from the FBI and 15 from the Naval Investigative Service working full time to develop the case over the past two years. While refusing to identify any targets of the investigation, he said he expects shortly to add to the eight prosecutors currently working on the case. That's a larger commitment of FBI resources than any other recent investigation of white-collar or organized crime.    Mr. Hudson appeared at a news conference with Attorney General Edwin Meese, who strongly disputed assertions by Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa) that the Justice Department failed to aggressively investigate allegations it received before 1985 that many large defense companies and their consultants regularly received classified details about U.S. weapons systems outside of official channels.    Sen. Grassley, a longtime critic of the Justice Department and military procurement procedures, also asserted in a speech on the Senate floor that a high-ranking Justice Department aide blocked congressional testimony in 1985 by a Defense Department investigator that could have exposed the current scandal. &quot;The public must be made aware of the fact that the Justice Department was asleep at the switch,&quot; Sen. Grassley asserted.    The Justice Department has defended its actions in 1985 by claiming that public testimony about the subject threatened to damage pending criminal prosecutions involving a GTE Corp. unit's successful efforts to obtain internal Defense Department planning and budget documents. The company pleaded guilty to conspiracy charges in the case in September 1985. However, all but one of the remaining charges against individual defendants in the case have since been dropped.    As early as 1985, Joseph Sherick, then the Defense Department's inspector general, disclosed that investigators were trying to determine whether as many as 12 other large contractors used consultants to obtain unauthorized access to Pentagon documents. Yesterday, Assistant Attorney General Edward Dennis told reporters that those earlier leads were pursued by the Justice Department, and that some of those investigations are continuing separately from the latest inquiry.    Allegations of bribery weren't part of the earlier investigations, although Mr. Dennis said they &quot;involved the same type of misuse of government information.&quot;    Responding to Sen. Grassley, Mr. Meese asserted the Justice Department has never &quot;had to be dragged into any indictment where the evidence is there.&quot;    The far-flung investigation is also aimed at certain military deals overseas. McDonnell Douglas Corp. furnished investigators records on its consulting relationship with retired Navy Adm. James Lyons, who became a McDonnell consultant last December, two months after stepping down as commander in chief of the Pacific fleet.    According to McDonnell, Adm. Lyons was &quot;retained by the company to provide consulting on issues concerning requirements for the F/A-18 in the Pacific area.&quot; Specifically, he was working to help McDonnell sell the airplane to Korea and Taiwan. Both countries are still weighing such a purchase, along with competing proposals from General Dynamics Corp. to sell them F-16s instead.    Law enforcement officials said they are working to determine whether Adm. Lyons or Melvyn Paisley, a former assistant Navy secretary who also worked for McDonnell on foreign aircraft sales, obtained proprietary data about the competing proposals advanced by General Dynamics. Adm. Lyons couldn't be reached for comment.    Industry and Pentagon officials say Adm. Lyons, a powerful military figure in the Pacific region, had considerable clout with the Asian governments he was retained to approach as a proponent for the F/A-18. Like Mr. Paisley, Adm. Lyons, known as &quot;Ace Lyons,&quot; was a close associate of former Navy Secretary John Lehman, who pushed his advancement. Mr. Lehman criticized the decision by his successor, James Webb, to replace Adm. Lyons as &quot;the revenge of the nerds.&quot;    ---   Andy Pasztor in Washington and Eileen White Read in Los Angeles contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>