<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870126-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Dollar Signs:Greenback's Big DropUnderscores the NeedFor Realigning Trade---U.S. Budget Cuts and StepsBy Tokyo and Bonn AreCrucial, Economists Say---Baker's Denial of U.S. Action---By Art Pine and Paul BlusteinStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The dollar's plunge is telling Washington, Bonn and Tokyo that the time has come to get serious about reducing huge global trade imbalances.    &quot;There has been a significant change in the psychology of the markets&quot; against the dollar, warns Anthony Solomon, the chairman of S.A. Warburg U.S.A. and former president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank. After two years of gradual decline, last month the dollar started plunging against the West German mark and the Japanese yen.    Until recently, Treasury Secretary James Baker was able to dazzle the markets with his considerable skills as a politician. He orchestrated an array of initiatives that included a round of international interest-rate cuts, jawboning, and talk of more economic-policy coordination by major industrial nations.    But these measures haven't yet reduced the U.S.'s runaway $170 billion trade deficit and the corresponding West German and Japanese surpluses. Economists expect the drop in the dollar to start producing improvement in the U.S. trade picture later this year. But they say considerably more needs to be done -- shrinking the U.S. budget deficit and other measures to curb U.S. consumption and bolster investment, as well as action by Germany and Japan to reduce their trade surpluses.    &quot;The markets know that policy hasn't really changed a lot,&quot; says Robert Heller, a member of the Federal Reserve Board. Many analysts believe that last week's near-panic selling of dollars shows that the markets no longer are willing to be assuaged by cosmetics and could send the dollar into a tailspin unless the U.S. and its allies start taking substantive steps to trim back their trade imbalances.    Richard Witten, the vice president in charge of foreign-currency trading operations at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., says the markets have hardened considerably in recent weeks. He notes that traders ignored a long-awaited discount-rate cut by the West German Bundesbank last week and all but sneered at a pledge by Mr. Baker and Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa to &quot;monitor&quot; the markets more closely following their meeting here late Wednesday. The dollar fell in Tokyo in reaction to the ministers' statement.    &quot;A year ago, a discount-rate cut by the Bundesbank would have started a rally and sent the dollar up five pfennings,&quot; Mr. Witten says. &quot;Basically, the markets have lost patience,&quot; he says. &quot;They're looking for concrete solutions.&quot;    The administration concedes that too sharp a decline could backfire. &quot;We recognize that there can be problems if the dollar falls too far too fast,&quot; Mr. Baker said on NBC's &quot;Meet The Press&quot; yesterday. &quot;First of all, it tends to promote a resurgence of inflation. Secondly, it could make it more difficult to finance our debt.&quot; A falling dollar increases the price of imports and can discourage foreigners from investing in dollar-denominated securities, such as U.S. Treasury bills.    Mr. Baker strongly denied suggestions that the Reagan administration has engineered the recent drop in the dollar to induce Germany and Japan, whose exports suffer as their currencies appreciate, to import more. &quot;The fact of the matter is, we have not been talking down the dollar for over a year,&quot; he asserted. He added that the foreign-exchange market &quot;tends to draw many times unwarranted inferences.&quot;    Mr. Baker is scheduled to brief President Reagan about the dollar this afternoon. Officials say he will predict that the record U.S. trade deficit should begin to decline soon because the dollar's fall against the mark and the yen will slow imports and speed exports. But he also is expected to stress that improvement is being impeded by the dollar's modest declines against the currencies of rapidly industrializing nations such as Taiwan and South Korea.    In Frankfurt, Karl Otto Poehl, the president of West Germany's central bank, said in an interview that the bank is prepared to support the dollar to keep it from falling further.    The dollar has declined about 40% from its February 1985 peak, according to the Federal Reserve. The change is helping U.S. companies to compete with foreign producers in both domestic and overseas markets. In particular, imports from Europe are beginning to slow. In addition, the falling dollar, which reduces the cost of foreign investment in the U.S., is one of the forces behind the protracted stock-market rally.    But the dollar's recent plunge after a long and gradual decline threatens to become a destabilizing force. &quot;Some investors say the dollar will bottom out here,&quot; says Scott Pardee, vice chairman of Yamaichi International (America) Inc. and former manager of the New York Fed's currency-trading desk. &quot;But they're forgetting the dynamics of the exchange markets, which is, if you've got a sure thing, you keep running with it.&quot;    Mr. Baker said that &quot;we did see a period of instability last week,&quot; but he stressed that &quot;I have not in my view seen the dollar in a free fall.&quot; Until the recent turmoil, &quot;the orderly and moderate decline of the dollar over the last year and a half has been a good thing for American business,&quot; he said, adding that it will have in the long run &quot;a beneficial impact on our trade deficit.&quot;    But it is becoming increasingly clear that a dollar decline alone -- the primary strategy of the U.S. so far -- won't narrow the trade imbalances sufficiently. The administration itself concedes this and asserts that West Germany and Japan must take steps to stimulate their economies and import more from the U.S. and the rest of the world. The U.S., meanwhile, must act on its own to stop consuming so much and to start exporting its way out of its trade problem, economists say.    This could be painful. The trade deficit means that the U.S. is consuming more than it is producing. &quot;Some kind of spending has to be reduced -- either private consumption or public consumption or private investment has to be reduced,&quot; says William Niskanen, a former Reagan economic adviser who is currently the chairman of the conservative Cato Institute. &quot;I don't expect to see the trade deficit go down a lot until we see that the budget deficit is reduced or we have a recession.&quot;    Barry Bosworth, a Brookings Institution economist, cautions that no matter how the U.S. ultimately chooses to deal with its trade deficit, Americans are in for a decline in living standards until they once again are able to produce as much as they are buying. &quot;There's no way around it,&quot; Mr. Bosworth asserts.    The adjustment will be difficult and politically unpopular. &quot;What we're talking about is a muted version of what debtor countries have had to do,&quot; asserts Paul Krugman, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Americans already are finding that the falling dollar will increase the price of foreign cars, appliances and other imports. &quot;The basic effect of this is it makes us all poor,&quot; Mr. Niskanen says. &quot;We have to make a lot more money to buy products&quot; from Germany and Japan.    Economists agree almost unanimously that resolving the world-wide trade problem requires a three-part solution: Japan and West Germany must stimulate demand at home, in order to absorb more of the world's exports, and the U.S. must pare its budget deficit and spur more savings and investment at home.    Exasperation is increasing in the U.S. over the refusals of West Germany and Japan to prod demand at home. And a consensus is growing in the U.S. that, as Rimmer de Vries, economist for Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., puts it, &quot;in the absence of growth abroad, the U.S. dollar must decline&quot; further.    The impatience of the markets only intensifies the urgency for Mr. Baker and his counterparts in West Germany and Japan to seek a solution to the global trade problem. The U.S. has begun sounding out other industrial nations about the possibility of a finance ministers' meeting in the next few weeks to discuss the issue.    The continuing rise of the mark and yen has heightened economic pressure on West Germany and Japan. As long as the dollar declines, exports from both countries will be hurt. But the impression that the Reagan administration has been pushing the dollar down persists abroad despite U.S. denials, and this has heightened political resentment in both countries, making it more difficult for Bonn or Tokyo to reverse course. The situation embarrassed the Kohl government in the days before yesterday's election -- something Bonn isn't likely to forget.    Mr. Miyazawa said last week that if the U.S. really wants Japan to grow more rapidly, the cause won't be helped by a plunging dollar, which crimps the export earnings that Japan has become so dependent upon. Yesterday, Mr. Baker acknowledged that this is one of the risks of a falling dollar. &quot;If the dollar falls too much, and those economies are depending upon external surpluses {to sustain growth}, it can be counterproductive,&quot; he said.    Although Tokyo technically has kept its previous promises for new stimulus measures, U.S. officials call the steps themselves &quot;disappointing.&quot; In the meeting last week, Mr. Baker tried to get Japan to turn its new tax-revision plan into a vehicle for further stimulus, but Mr. Miyazawa demurred. Japan worries that any further stimulus efforts would only risk rekindling inflationary pressures.    West Germany seems even more intractable. Although conventional wisdom even a few months ago was that Bonn would finally act after this month's parliamentary elections, there have been no signs at all that yesterday's victory by the government of West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl will make any difference. Indeed, even last week's discount-rate cut was little more than a gesture. The West German central bank neutralized its rate reduction by simultaneously tightening credit and limiting its money-supply growth. A West German official here asserts: &quot;We still believe we are on the right course.&quot;    Nor is Washington itself likely to move more decisively, either to reduce the federal budget deficit or to spur more savings and investment. In its report due out this week, the president's Council of Economic Advisers stresses that the U.S. must reduce its budget deficit in order to lower its trade deficit.    But the White House hasn't made deficit reduction its top priority. Congress seems primarily interested in pressing for protectionist trade legislation, a move economists fear could invite retaliation and bring on a world-wide recession. Of course, the protectionist pressures could ease if, as a result of the dollar's decline, the trade deficit finally begins to shrink.    Even if Congress stops short of enacting protectionist legislation, the administration still faces a difficult job. Lyle Gramley, a former Fed member who is currently chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers' Association, says: &quot;Whether we've convinced the Germans and Japanese to do anything really significant remains to be seen. We aren't going to have any more success in giving instructions to them on their fiscal policy than they are in giving instructions to us. And in any case, it will take a long time for the Japanese, particularly, to get their economy to depend more on domestic demand and less on exports.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>