<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890803-0057 </DOCNO><DD> = 890803 </DD><AN> 890803-0057. </AN><HL> Indictments in Chicago:@  Striking at the Heart of the Soybean Pit@  ----@  By Robert L. Rose and Jeff Bailey@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/03/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><GV> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION (CFT) </GV><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The federal probe of commodity trading appears to have cleared one of its biggest hurdles: cracking one of the proudest pits at the Chicago Board of Trade.    After battling for seven months against traders in the soybean pit at the Chicago Board of Trade, U.S. Attorney Anton R. Valukas indicted 19 soybean traders. Mr. Valukas induced at least four of them to cooperate, almost guaranteeing there will be more indictments to come in this city's largest agricultural trading pit.    Cooperation gives the government more witnesses to possible crooked trades, in addition to the undercover FBI agent who first posed as a trader more than two years ago. Defense attorneys say the government might persuade other traders to make deals.    In targeting soybean traders, Mr. Valukas is tearing at the guts of a market that got its start seven years before the 46-year-old prosecutor was born. In many ways, that soybean market is the heart of the institution that began when 82 merchants met above a Chicago flour store in 1848.    It's a place where board Chairman Karsten Mahlmann stops to chat during morning walks on the oak floors. It's a place where top brokerage executives still wade in to buy or sell a few contracts. It's a place where sons follow their fathers into the business, and old hands introduce favored youngsters.    Once there, traders are bound together by the arcane nature of buying and selling things they'll never see nor touch, brokering trades for people they'll never meet and taking more risk in a day than many people do in a lifetime. Standing cheek-by-jowl all day, traders know each other &quot;better than your own wife,&quot; says Jacob Morowitz, a soybean trader and president of a brokerage firm for independent traders.    Today, it's a pit at war, with some longtime traders fighting both the prosecutor and former colleagues. John N. Eggum, a former wheat trader who moved over to beans when the soybean market got hot last year, has agreed to plead guilty to two counts of mail fraud, to give up trading forever and to testify against fellow traders. At least three other bean traders have also agreed to cooperate.    &quot;Everybody's concerned&quot; about the government's investigation, one trader said quietly before the start of trading yesterday morning. &quot;It's scary. You know a lot of people.&quot;    The soybean fraternity has been shattered by the defection in the past few days of Mr. Eggum, who stopped trading and sold his seat after news of the investigation broke last January. One of many Board of Trade veterans who made mid-life career changes to become futures traders, the 47-year-old trader early on was considered a prime target of the investigation. Now that he's made his deal, the question is what he'll tell the government about fellow traders.    Mr. Eggum and his attorneys have declined to comment.    To crack the pits, Mr. Valukas took a lesson from a government investigation of trading in the 1970s. This time, he sent four FBI agents into the pits, wired to record the voices of other traders. In the soybean pit, the job went to Richard Ostrom, who posed under the name Richard Carlson. A balding, stocky man fond of conservative ties, his button-down style blended perfectly with that of the bean traders. Like other newcomers, he went through a period when established traders kept their distance. But his initiation seemed shorter than most. He was friendly, &quot;a guy you could very easily trust,&quot; a grain trader said at the time.    The unmasking of Mr. Carlson and other government moles came in January as the government went on the offensive, serving subpoenas to dozens of traders. It culminated with yesterday's indictments.    &quot;It's like being shafted by a pretty girl,&quot; says Frederick G. Uhlmann, a Rodman andamp; Renshaw commodities executive, said in an interview earlier this year. &quot;They thought he was one of them, and he turned out to be a spy.&quot;    Until this year, Mr. Eggum was much like any other trader in the grain-trading fraternity, known to each other but not the outside world. Now, he's key to the government's success in going after alleged wrongdoing in the bean pit.    After graduating from high school in 1960, Mr. Eggum worked at an amusement park and then bought a bar in DeKalb, Ill. According to George Stratton, a onetime business partner, Mr. Eggum soon married, had children and decided to settle down. Mr. Eggum sold the bar and borrowed money to buy a seat at the Board of Trade in 1978.    Mr. Eggum traded in the wheat pit, and then last year during the drought-inspired soybean rally, moved over, fellow traders say. He did a good deal of trading with a broker named Martin J. Dempsey Jr. That ended when the government made surprise visits to both men's homes. Mr. Dempsey sold his membership Jan. 19; Mr. Eggum sold his a day later.    Mr. Dempsey was charged with conspiracy under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law, known as RICO, 37 counts of mail and wire fraud, and 83 counts of violating the Commodities Exchange Act. Defense lawyers said from the beginning that Mr. Dempsey was a prime target of the investigation. Now 52, he was an altar boy at Chicago's Loyola Academy prep school, where classmates included future achievers such as Neil F. Hartigan, now attorney general of Illinois, and Bill Plante, now a newsman at CBS.    Mr. Dempsey was a long-time member of the grain-traders club. After college and a year of law school, he went to the Board of Trade, moving from clerk to phone man, finally to grain broker. If an invisible hand assisted, that was part of the game. &quot;The Board of Trade was very Irish, and if you were Irish, they watched out for you a little bit,&quot; says a former grain trader.    Most bean traders wouldn't talk about the government's investigation before the 9:30 a.m. start of trading yesterday. To do so would violate a new, unwritten rule in the traders' code of honor: don't be seen talking with outsiders.    Barely five hours later, many were charged with cheating customers or helping brokers cheat customers in commodity trades.    James D. Nowak took his normal post at the top step. Hands in the pockets of his navy trading smock, he chatted with fellow traders. A former commercial lending officer at Continental Bank here and later an official of the Board of Trade's processing arm, he started trading in 1978.    Mr. Nowak was charged with conspiracy under RICO, 56 counts of mail and wire fraud, and 180 counts of violating the Commodities Exchange Act.    A few steps away, Sheldon H. Schneider peered through his black-rimmed glasses at fellow traders below. The quiet, gum-chomping independent trader joined the Board of Trade in 1976 after a decade in sales at a local food company. &quot;Time to better oneself,&quot; he wrote when he registered with the industry's regulatory group.    Mr. Schneider, 46, was charged with conspiracy under RICO, four counts of mail fraud and five counts of violating the Commodities Exchange Act.    Twenty-eight-year-old Bradley S. Ashman was also there, as he's been since graduating in 1983 from the University of Illinois with a degree in marketing.    Mr. Ashman was charged with RICO conspiracy, 13 counts of violating the Commodities Exchange Act and one count of lying to a federal agency.    Also among those indicted was a 20-year grain broker, Bruce W. Mittelstadt. Mr. Mittelstadt, 49, was charged with RICO conspiracy, 16 counts of wire fraud, 39 counts of violating the Commodities Exchange Act and one count of lying to a federal agency.    Other traders and some outside customers have said they regard Mr. Mittelstadt as one of the straightest-arrows in the bean pit. Traders claim he was pressured by the government after committing a minor infraction: executing a trade for Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., a big food processor, after the close. In the traders' view, Mr. Mittelstadt's only crime was to be a good broker for his customers, and his misfortune was to stand near Mr. Carlson. Mr. Mittelstadt's lawyer, James Montana, says, &quot;When the jury hears all the facts, they will see that Bruce Mittelstadt cheated no one and always acted honorably and honestly.&quot;    Mr. Dempsey's son said the former trader had no comment. Mr. Nowak's attorney, James Streicker, said they intend to enter a plea of innocent and to contest the charges. George Collins, an attorney for Mr. Ashman, said his client &quot;denies he's guilty of any of the charges.&quot; Mr. Schneider and his attorney couldn't be reached for comment.    With the defection of Mr. Eggum, traders wonder who else might turn out to be a snoop. Two traders who cooperated with the government in a smaller investigation of trading in the late 1970s earned the undying scorn of fellow traders.    &quot;Your word is your bond down there,&quot; says a 79-year-old former soybean broker, explaining why he pleaded guilty to a crooked trade in 1979 but wouldn't think of testifying against fellow traders.    Today, he's one of the few in this city to consider both &quot;Tony&quot; Valukas and soybean traders his close friends. Then an aggressive defense attorney, Mr. Valukas defended the broker and other bean traders in the long-running investigation in the 1970s.    &quot;He got some experience from my case, I'll tell you that,&quot; the former broker says.    ---   Barbara Marsh contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>