<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880415-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business: Japan Isn't Going to Take Over the World </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   By 1981 Japan was, by almost any standard, in great shape. It had weathered the oil-price shocks of the 1970s and by careful management of monetary policy had kept inflation in check.    In a National Bureau of Economic Research paper, Ryuzo Sato of New York University notes that Japanese imports and exports were roughly balanced at 16% of the gross national product. &quot;The excess of savings over domestic investment,&quot; he says, &quot;exactly matched the government's budget deficit, leaving domestic effective demand and supply in complete equilibrium.&quot;    The Japanese, however, are worriers. Unlike the U.S., Japan is totally dependent on imported oil, and the games the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries played in the 1970s had been highly unsettling. Some Japanese leaders were fearful that the huge government budget deficits would make it impossible to handle any new crisis in the 1980s.    The chairman of Keidanren, the major business federation, was full of doom and gloom. He called for a &quot;philosophy of perseverance&quot; requiring government austerity and individual sacrifice.    The sort of crisis the Keidanren had in mind never materialized. The Japanese consumers, who hadn't exactly been living it up anyway, continued to curb spending and step up saving. Exports soared. &quot;The result,&quot; Mr. Sato says, &quot;is that Japan has achieved a trade surplus to the extent that no other country has ever experienced.&quot;    Is Japan, whose military ventures in the 1930s and 1940s ended in total disaster, about to take over the world by economic means? Not if the Japanese can help it.    While there has been no crisis of the sort the Keidaren feared, there has been a real crisis.    Mr. Sato doesn't put it this way, but the Japanese were embarrassed. A strong U.S. economy had helped Japan get to where is was. Japanese companies had carefully tailored their cars to the U.S. market, the biggest in the world. In Japan, &quot;market research&quot; largely meant finding out what Americans would buy. Signs of weakness in the U.S. have worried the Japanese as much as the Americans.    It wasn't only that a weak U.S. would buy fewer imports. An America worried about its loss of clout in the world would become increasingly protectionist, more inclined to blame Japan for all its problems. It would begin to wonder whether it really was fair for the U.S. to absorb the cost of defending the free world, including such prosperous nations as Japan.    Japan preferred not even to think about the other burdens of world leadership. The dollar is the world currency, subject to all the slings and arrows of international financial markets. Japan didn't want to see the yen exposed to such problems.    So Japan started giving the U.S. economic advice. The U.S. had been doing the same to Japan: Stop exporting so much, stimulate domestic consumption and import more. Japan's advice to the U.S. was to cut its budget deficit; the aim might have been partly to take the heat off itself, but it was good advice nonetheless.    In 1985 the Maekawa Commission was organized to study the matter, and in 1986 called for changing Japan's economy from a system oriented to savings and exports to one slanted toward consumption and imports. An avowed aim, of course, was to promote &quot;international harmony.&quot;    Not a whole lot has seemed to be happening, however, and the U.S. is impatient. Congress is trying to cobble together a trade bill that in effect would punish the Japanese for moving so slowly. It's a bad bill, and if it isn't changed drastically, President Reagan probably will, and certainly should, veto it.    Meanwhile, to keep the Japanese on their toes, U.S. officials keep socking it to them. Last week, President Reagan denied a Japanese request to catch small quantities of certain kinds of fish in U.S. waters, saying Japan had violated an international moratorium on whaling.    Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter threatened to retaliate when Japan blocked a U.S. request for an international panel to resolve a dispute over beef and citrus imports. The Japanese are well aware that their agriculture is highly inefficient. But, as Mr. Sato remarks, they hope to solve the problem the Japanese way: by carefully studying the matter and gradually making Japanese agriculture efficient. It wasn't clear just what Mr. Yeutter proposed to do, but if the Japanese don't cooperate you can bet it will be something.    One reason for Japanese delay on agriculture is that the government is having political problems with its farmers, problems that ought to seem familiar to the people in Washington.    The U.S. claims it merely wants a level playing field, with Japan getting rid of its restrictions on imports. But the U.S. has import restrictions, too; one U.S. official, completely off the record, recently estimated that the score in the restriction game was about even.    The U.S. thinks the other side should have no restrictions and prefers to ignore its own back yard. The Japanese simply don't think &quot;free trade&quot;; they believe everyone needs some restrictions and that need should be respected. Japan tailors its exports to sectors and areas not affected by restrictions. When that Toshiba subsidiary last year broke the rules and shipped strategic goods to the Soviet Union, the Japanese were genuinely sorry.    What's to be done? Japan talks wistfully of globalism. It's all one world and somehow we have to learn to live together. The U.S. multinational companies through the high-dollar era in the early 1980s found they could maintain and in some cases expand exports by moving production to plants abroad. In the current high-yen era, Japan is doing the same thing. This sort of globalism, however, could leave domestic industries without a whole lot to do.    Manufacturing plants are likely to continue moving around, however, until major countries -- especially the U.S. -- decide to stabilize monetary and fiscal policies. There is a lot of talk of stabilizing the dollar, but a stable dollar requires stable economic policies.    For the present, at least, Japan doesn't seem to be suffering. Some jobs were lost when plants moved abroad, but the consumer has taken up the slack by beginning, for the first time since World War II, to live a little.    As Mr. Sato says, Japan still has a long way to go toward improving its standard of living. Consumers have cars, appliances and do a lot of traveling, but their homes are small and inconvenient and public facilities often are inadequate. The transition will be hard, but make no mistake: Japan's aim is a better way of life at home, not world leadership. </TEXT></DOC>