<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890824-0063 </DOCNO><DD> = 890824 </DD><AN> 890824-0063. </AN><HL> Commodities:@  Copper-Futures Prices Resume Rise as Problems@  In Production Remain Dominant Market Force@  ----@  By John Valentine@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/24/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Copper-futures prices resumed their climb yesterday after a pause the day before. Production problems remained the dominant influence.    The September contract advanced 2.50 cents a pound to $1.2785.    The Cananea mine in Mexico, which a judge declared bankrupt on Sunday, will reopen within three months, the company's director was quoted as saying. The mine has a production capacity of 160,000 tons of copper a year.    One analyst said he had heard that the mine would open in mid-October but wouldn't be in full production this year.    In Peru, the labor situation appeared to be improved but still tenuous, according to the analyst. Southern Peru Copper Co.'s Ilo smelter was reported to have been working fully since Monday, and some miners at the company's Toquepala and Cuajone mines were said to have returned to work.    Another report quoted a company official as saying that shipments of copper from the Ilo smelter have resumed, as workers have returned after a one-week strike. The official was quoted as saying that no tonnage will be lost as a result of the strike and that shipments will be rearranged so as to avoid delays. The official, however, noted that Toquepala and Cuajone mines remained on strike. While production at Cuajone was halted, some concentrates have been received at Ilo from Toquepala, and the smelter has stocks for about a week, according to the official, the report said.    William O'Neill, vice president of research for Elders Futures, New York, said it was a &quot;typical Peruvian strike, not complete, and with a great deal of uncertainty.&quot;    In Papua New Guinea, where the big Bougainville mine hasn't been operating since May 15 because of attacks by rebel landowners, the Roman Catholic Church entered the dispute on the landowners' side, according to Reuters.    The mine hadn't been expected to reopen until at least the end of the year because of extensive damage and concern about the safety of the employees. But last week, a mine official said production would resume Sept. 1.    The church said, &quot;Laws must be enacted to recognize the Melanesian concepts of ownership, value and compensation for the land,&quot; according to the report.    Mr. O'Neill said the entry of the church into the situation could intensify the dispute and possibly affect the announced reopening of the mine.    Talks in the 47-day-old strike at the Highland Valley mines in British Columbia are scheduled to resume tomorrow, a news report said. Highland Valley produces about 180,000 tons of copper annually.    Mike Frawley, a metals trader at PaineWebber, New York, said the strength of the copper market in August, normally a slow month, had exceeded expectations, and increased demand was beginning to develop while supplies remain tight.    &quot;There is a lot of buying inquiry for the fourth quarter,&quot; Mr. Frawley said.    Refined U.S. copper production during July amounted to 121,300 tons, down from 142,600 in June, according to the American Bureau of Metal Statistics. The July figure, however, was well above the 112,700 tons produced in July 1988, the report said.    World-wide inventories of copper as of the end of June amounted to 427,100 tons, down from 455,700 at the end of May and only slightly changed from stocks of 423,500 tons at the end of June 1988.    Normally, stocks of copper tend to rise during the summer because of shutdowns of copper-using industries. But in the past three years, demand has been stronger than expected during June, July and August, preventing a buildup of inventories. Demand begins to rise in the fall and reaches its peak around March.    Yesterday, stocks of copper in warehouses of New York's Commodity Exchange again fell, this time by 75 tons to 16,395 tons.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    SUGAR: Futures prices ended slightly higher after first dipping. The October delivery was up 0.18 cent a pound at 14.13 cents. At one point the contract traded as low as 13.79 cents. Prices initially were easier based on a report that India would buy 200,000 tons of refined sugar this week, an analyst said. Earlier this week, there had been expectations that India would purchase as much as 500,000 tons of raw and refined sugar, and the smaller figure reported yesterday was a letdown, the analyst said. Prices perked up when it was reported that Yugoslavia would come into the market next Tuesday to buy 90,000 tons of refined sugar, the analyst said.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most soybean and corn futures prices dipped slightly in quiet trading. Continued rains in Iowa and Illinois doused speculation from earlier this week that a developing dry spell might stunt crop production. With little hint of any major export deals in the works, interest among speculators is ebbing, traders said. Wheat-futures prices were mixed.    ENERGY: Petroleum futures were generally higher despite increased oil inventories in the U.S. The American Petroleum Institute's report on U.S. oil statistics, released late Tuesday, showed an increase of 4.5 million barrels in crude oil stocks in the week ended last Friday to 335.2 million barrels compared with the previous week's level. Initially, as expected, this was a bearish factor for petroleum futures. Crude oil opened lower on the New York Mercantile Exchange. But it recovered as analysts and traders took note that crude oil inventories still were lower than they were a year ago. West Texas Intermediate for October delivery settled at $18.80 a barrel, up 11 cents. November and December crudes were up nine cents and six cents a barrel, respectively. Gasoline and heating-oil futures generally showed modest gains.    COFFEE: Futures prices rose for the fourth consecutive day. The September contract rose 3.68 cents to 83.22 cents. Prices have strengthened as the pressure to sell coffee by Central American producing countries and Mexico has dissipated, according to a New York dealer. Over the past month, huge quantities of coffee that had been held in warehouses in those producing countries at great expense have been sold at almost any cost as prices dropped, the dealer said. Now, however, most of this coffee has been absorbed by dealers in consuming countries and there isn't as great an urgency to sell on the part of those producers. Roasters aren't showing much interest in buying, although their inventories aren't thought to be sufficiently stocked for winter needs, when consumption of coffee is highest, the dealer said. &quot;They're only buying hand-to-mouth at the moment. That's because they have to continue working off more expensive stocks acquired earlier and because they aren't sure if this market has actually bottomed out,&quot; the dealer said. However, he noted, roasters will eventually have to come in for supplies later in the fall. The open interest in futures, which is the biggest in years, he said, reflects both the huge sales to dealers and the anticipation that roasters will begin to buy. He said dealers have been heavy sellers in hedges to protect the price of the coffee they own against price drops. Roasters have bought futures that will protect them against price increases for the beans that they will be buying later on, the dealer said. Open interest is the number of contracts that remain to be offset by either an opposite transaction or delivery of a commodity. </TEXT></DOC>