<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880114-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Deadly Policies: Murder for Insurance, A Crime Hard to Solve, Seems to Be Growing --- Selling by Mail, Big Payoffs May Explain the Increase; Planning Often Complex --- Case of Murdered Executive </HL><AUTHOR> Stanley Penn (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN INS </IN><TEXT>   In the 1944 film classic &quot;Double Indemnity,&quot; Barbara Stanwyck and Fred MacMurray conspired to murder her husband and collect his $100,000 life-insurance payoff. Shocking stuff for moviegoers of the era -- but humdrum now in the wake of a rash of murders for much bigger money.    The probability that your husband, wife or business partner will do you in to fleece the Pru or the Met is still low. But &quot;there are so many murder-for-insurance cases that what was once unusual is now routine,&quot; says George Walker, a vice president of J.C. Penney Co.'s life-insurance subsidiary. &quot;We had 30 homicide cases last year in which beneficiaries are suspect. Five years earlier, we didn't have more than 10 or 11.&quot;    Moreover, many insurance murders have been ingenious and difficult to prove. Crime never pays? Nobody knows just how many champagne sippers and caviar nibblers are giggling over that one.    Homicide detectives and insurance investigators do know of the failures. A typical case is that of Craig Young, found shot to death in 1982 on a road near Houston. Police suspected a robbery gone sour. As it turned out, Mr. Young had been marked for death ever since becoming the president of an obscure Montana corporation several months before.    Last October, a federal jury in Helena found that Jack Dickie, a hunting pal of Mr. Young's, had incorporated the company, installed Mr. Young as president, persuaded him to take out a $3 million &quot;key man&quot; life-insurance policy and then had him killed for the payoff.    Sometimes, sophisticated legal and financial planning is involved. Mr. Dickie collected most of the insurance money through a dummy corporation in Panama. In a Minneapolis case, a minister ordained by his own mother established nonprofit trusts and charities that turned up as beneficiaries after his heavily insured half-sister was murdered. And in a third case, an Oakland man impersonating his wife's former husband duped six companies into issuing $1 million of life insurance in the ex-husband's name. The former husband, a father of three, was murdered for insurance that he never knew he had.    The soaring value of insurance and the ease with which it can be obtained help make insurance murder tempting. &quot;Policies of $100,000 to $500,000 are common now, compared with $15,000 to $20,000 seven years ago,&quot; says Lawrence A. Vranka, an executive assistant at Metropolitan Life Insurance Co.    For example, Linda Von Bergen, a Florida savings-bank manager, carried $5.2 million of life and accidental-death policies listing her husband as beneficiary. In May 1986, the couple joined a group that chartered a fishing boat in Puerto Rico, and while it was at sea, Mrs. Von Bergen drowned. The Coast Guard calls her death suspicious. Some insurers refuse to pay the claims.    Despite the hefty sums, many insurance applications get only casual scrutiny. &quot;For a $1 million policy, there'll be a full-scale inspection,&quot; a New York insurance executive says. But for policies in the range of $50,000 to $100,000, he concedes, information furnished by the applicant is usually taken at face value.    Just how carefully United Pacific Life Insurance Co. checked out Craig Young's application is open to question. Mr. Young, Mr. Dickie's eventual victim, identified himself as the president and sole stockholder of Container Finance Mining Co. The Montana company had purchased mining claims for $2.5 million of promissory notes, which Mr. Young had signed.    Thus, United Pacific didn't blink when he applied for &quot;key man&quot; insurance, the kind corporations often buy for principal officers. &quot;He produced evidence of having $2.5 million of indebtedness,&quot; says a spokesman for Reliance Group Holdings Inc., United Pacific's New York parent. &quot;He was taking out a $3 million policy to cover his indebtedness in the event of his death. On the face, it looked legitimate.&quot;    Mr. Young had met Mr. Dickie, a 63-year-old former life-insurance salesman, while patronizing a big-game hunting service in Montana that Mr. Dickie operated. &quot;Dickie was like a father figure to Young,&quot; says a U.S. Customs agent who investigated the case.    It wasn't surprising when Mr. Dickie named his friend the president of Container Finance. According to federal charges against Mr. Dickie, Container Finance was a shell company that he secretly controlled. It purchased its mining claims, which were greatly inflated to attract unsuspecting investors, from Mr. Dickie's Vanguard World Holdings, a dummy company in Panama.    In signing the notes, Mr. Young fell into a trap. After his murder, the $3 million of insurance proceeds was paid to his estate. Vanguard demanded that the estate pay off the notes signed by Mr. Young. The estate settled for $2.1 million -- money it hasn't got back from Mr. Dickie.    Mr. Dickie was indicted on assorted felony counts, including a charge that he procured the murders of three heavily insured people to collect their insurance. Last October, he was convicted of having caused the murder of Mr. Young and another man. The jury didn't rule on the third death because the body was found outside U.S. jurisdiction. Last month, Mr. Dickie was sentenced to 60 years, and he is serving a 20-year term for a 1984 conviction on unrelated weapons and fraud charges.    Many insurance policies are easy to obtain because they are mass-marketed by direct mail. &quot;There's no face-to-face meeting with the insurance agent,&quot; says John Healy, a New York insurance investigator. &quot;No physical exams. Just cut out the application from the Sunday supplement.&quot;    May Wilson, the half-sister of Minneapolis minister Leonard J. Richards, seemed an unlikely candidate for life insurance. The nurse had been honorably discharged from the Air Force on full medical disability. Over the next 14 years, she was hospitalized many times for physical and mental problems. In the months preceding her 1982 murder, she couldn't do even simple tasks.    Yet during that period, her life was insured for $3.5 million through 30 policies. Most of them were bought by mail through social and professional organizations that she had joined, according to Robert S. Cragg of Minneapolis, an attorney for North American Life andamp; Casualty Co.    The 56-year-old Miss Wilson was found dead, with two stablike wounds to her neck, in the basement of a Minneapolis storefront leased by a corporation controlled by her half-brother. No murder weapon or fingerprints were found.    Some insurers paid on her policies. When North American and Fireman's Fund American Life Insurance Co. refused, Mr. Richards' Cerro Gordo Charity, one of the beneficiaries, sued in federal district court in Minneapolis to collect $450,000 in proceeds. In 1985, the civil-court jury dismissed Cerro Gordo's claims, finding that Mr. Richards had had his half-sister killed to collect her insurance.    The verdict was upheld on appeal last May. The Minneapolis appeals-court panel said Miss Wilson &quot;had little knowledge&quot; of the life insurance issued in her name and had &quot;trusted Richards to handle her financial affairs.&quot;    Mr. Richards has denied the civil court's accusation, and no criminal charges have been brought against him. But the Minneapolis prosecutor is investigating her death. Last March, Mr. Richards was indicted by a Minneapolis grand jury on a charge of having murdered his attorney. He pleaded not guilty and is awaiting trial.    Insurers generally needn't pay if it can be shown that a policy was obtained fraudulently. But proving murder, and then proving that insurance was the motive, is exceedingly difficult.    The difficulties are illustrated by the Von Bergen case. A medical examiner ruled that 46-year-old Linda Von Bergen drowned in May 1986. Shortly thereafter, her father, George Souran, sued in New Port Richey, Fla., probate court, accusing her husband, Harry, of having taken out large policies on her life shortly before procuring her death. He demanded Mr. Von Bergen's removal as beneficiary. Mr. Von Bergen denied the charges.    Before a judge could rule, however, the parties settled: Mr. Souran dropped his civil suit, and Mr. Von Bergen transferred his rights as beneficiary to Mr. Souran. But the case isn't closed. The Coast Guard said last year that her death may have resulted from &quot;criminal activity.&quot; The Federal Bureau of Investigation won't say whether it has evidence of a crime.    In contesting a claim, an insurer risks a costly fight. The beneficiary may sue for payment, plus punitive damages on the ground that without criminal charges of wrongdoing, the refusal to pay has damaged his reputation.    &quot;For the insurance company, it's an economic decision,&quot; says a lawyer for an insurer in the Von Bergen case. &quot;When attorneys' fees begin to approximate the amount of the claim, the insurance company often decides to pay it.&quot;    Five months after Mrs. Von Bergen died, Travelers Cos. paid a $150,000 claim to Mr. Von Bergen, then still the beneficiary. Travelers says it didn't have any reason to refuse because no wrongdoing was found. And American International Group, which insured Mrs. Von Bergen for an estimated $315,000, recently settled with Mr. Souran, the current beneficiary, for $150,000. &quot;Souran threatened litigation,&quot; says Michael Buckley, AIG's attorney.    One holdout is Amex Life Assurance Co., formerly Fireman's Fund American Life Insurance Co. In dispute are policies totaling more than $900,000-$300,000 of them issued 16 days before her death, according to probate-court records. Amex charges in Tampa circuit court that Mr. Von Bergen caused his wife's murder in a &quot;fraudulent scheme&quot; to obtain insurance. Mr. Von Bergen, who couldn't be reached by this newspaper for comment, has denied wrongdoing. Mr. Souran also couldn't be reached for comment.    Other insurers that haven't paid include Lloyds of London ($1.5 million), the Allstate Insurance subsidiary of Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. ($900,000) and Geico Annuity, a unit of Geico Corp.'s Government Employees Insurance Co. ($330,000).    Mike Trial, a passenger on the ill-fated fishing trip, testified in probate court last May that Mrs. Von Bergen stumbled into him on the deck of the boat and that they fell overboard. They screamed for help, but nobody heard them, according to Mr. Trial, in an account in the St. Petersburg Times. He testified that he struggled to help Mrs. Von Bergen stay afloat but that she slipped under. Mr. Trial was rescued by the boat more than three hours later.    James Downey, a West Palm Beach accountant, testified that in 1985 Mr. Von Bergen offered him $100,000 to kill Mrs. Von Bergen on a cruise ship and to make the killing appear accidental, the Times reported. Mr. Downey testified that he previously had had business dealings with Mr. Von Bergen.    In a telephone interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Downey said he didn't take seriously Mr. Von Bergen's alleged offer. But after reading of Mrs. Von Bergen's death, he said, &quot;I felt there was something rotten in Denmark.&quot; He took his story to a Miami insurance investigator.    Mrs. Von Bergen died 12 miles off Puerto Rico. A Coast Guard reservist who boarded the boat during the rescue effort said in an affidavit that the skipper told him that his passengers had ordered him to go far from shore. The skipper had argued that fishing was poor there. &quot;But they insisted, and he agreed,&quot; the affidavit states. </TEXT></DOC>