<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871222-0108 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador  </DATELINE><TEXT>    One of President JoseNapoleon Duarte's top advisers, fearing a possibleassassination attempt by right-wing extremists last month,says he told the Salvadoran leader, &quot;Napo, don't take thiswrong, but I don't want to stand too close to you.&quot;   The warning captured the mood of fear and tension in the capital after President Duarte publicly accused an old right-wing foe, Roberto D'Aubuisson, of complicity in the 1980 murder of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero. Making matters worse, two prominent left-wing politicians chose that same week for a triumphant homecoming, under the auspices of the recently signed Central American peace plan.    Together, the two events provided a provocation to powerful rightists that in earlier years could have led to a massacre or a military coup. But neither materialized. The army didn't revolt. And the left-wing politicians, Guillermo Ungo and Ruben Zamora, attended a dozen rallies, appeared on national television, and formed a coalition with local politicians before leaving the country.    &quot;The rubber band was stretched to its limit, but it didn't snap,&quot; says one high-ranking military official.    Many observers say the right's restraint proves what the U.S. has been saying for some time: The era has passed when the armed forces, along with a few well-connected families, could dominate national politics through terror. Indeed, human-rights activists agree that the incidence of politically motivated murders has dropped sharply since the early 1980s, when gunmen, often believed to be acting in conjunction with security forces or wealthy oligarchs, killed or kidnapped tens of thousands of suspected leftists.    But others say it is too early to declare victory over the death squads. &quot;The capacity of the extreme right to use extreme force and violence to accomplish its aims remains undiminished,&quot; says one European diplomat, who fears for the safety of the two politicians if they return.    Mario Reni Roldan, a soft-spoken surgeon who heads the tiny, left-of-center Social Democratic Party, agrees. Mr. Roldan's party last month formed an alliance with two parties from the Democratic Revolutionary Front, known by its Spanish initials FDR, the political wing of the Marxist-inspired guerrillas who have been waging war against the government for eight years.    (The guerrillas, too, have engaged in terrorism and assassination. Indeed, back-and-forth killing continues on both sides. Three members of the Treasury police were killed last week as they drove near the U.S. Embassy. The next day, a prominent leftist union leader was gunned down in apparent retaliation.)    When Mr. Ungo and Mr. Zamora, two prominent FDR leaders, were in the country last month to test the political waters, both they and Mr. Roldan donned bulky bullet-proof vests for public appearances. Telephoned death threats dogged their steps. And, now that the two are gone, Mr. Roldan says he sleeps in a different house every few nights, and never at his own home. &quot;The tensions are latent now -- but they'll surface again,&quot; he says.    U.S. and Salvadoran officials acknowledge that Mr. Roldan might well be in danger. But they say any attempts on his life would likely come from fringe groups, whose actions can't easily be controlled.    That leaves the U.S. in a difficult position. Officials would like to see politicians such as Mr. Ungo and Mr. Zamora re-enter the country for good, sever ties with the Marxist guerrillas and participate in elections. But they can't guarantee the personal safety of the men, who went into exile precisely because their lives were threatened and their political colleagues brutally murdered.    Washington's efforts to nurture democracy also face significant risks in the investigation into the murder of Archbishop Romero, who was shot as he said Mass on March 24, 1980. The killing gave the left a martyr and help earned this country a reputation for barbarism from which it hasn't fully emerged.    President Duarte appeared to strike a blow at those responsible when he announced late last month that a witness had surfaced fingering Mr. D'Aubuisson as the mastermind of the killing. Mr. D'Aubuisson, a U.S.-trained former National Guard major, had long been suspected of coordinating the &quot;dirty war&quot; against the left reportedly waged by a cabal of military officers, right-wing businessmen and hit men. It decimated the rebels' urban political base several years ago but also killed many apparently innocent people in the process.    But to many Salvadorans, the president's announcement smacked of politics. Mr. D'Aubuisson, the charismatic head of the right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance, or Arena, was nearly elected president in 1982, and remains Mr. Duarte's bitterest political enemy. Moreover, Mr. Duarte's Christian Democrats, whose popularity has plummeted because of corruption rumors and a weak economy, face a difficult round of elections in March. &quot;Duarte is accusing me to maintain a smoke screen to detract attention from the crisis in El Salvador,&quot; said Mr. D'Aubuisson in a local television interview in which he strongly denied the charges.    Raising the stakes, Mr. D'Aubuisson also hinted that he might, if cornered, implicate top military officials who held leadership positions in the security forces at the time many of the killings took place. &quot;If he decided to produce names, dates and phone numbers, doubtless he could implicate the whole army high command, if not in the Romero killing, in different operations,&quot; said a diplomat.    Diplomats and others say such concerns mean the government must follow through with a vigorous prosecution even in the face of death threats -- something it hasn't done in the past. To do otherwise, they say, might confirm the widespread belief that the justice system is a farce.    The dilemma is made more acute by rumblings from right-wing military officers, who disapprove not only of Mr. Duarte's pillorying of Mr. D'Aubuisson, but of the effects here of the Central American peace plan. For example, many officers were incensed when the government released 500 political prisoners under the plan's amnesty provisions.    &quot;The mood is more one of insurrection&quot; than of abiding by elections, says a right-wing coffee grower with close ties to the military.    Such statements aside, few analysts predict a military coup, in part because such a move would likely be followed by a cutoff in U.S. military aid. But top officials aren't shy about telling their concerns to the country's political leaders.    &quot;I am sure that we won't lose the military war,&quot; said Gen. Juan Rafael Bustillo, the head of the Air Force, in a recent speech, as a grim-faced President Duarte looked on. &quot;I hope the political leaders play their part as well, so that the sacrifices of the armed forces won't have been in vain.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>