<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Companies as Citizens: Should They Have a Conscience?---By Michael Kinsley</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The American corporation comes under attack in two new books, both of which accuse it of lacking &quot;responsibility.&quot; But what the authors have in mind by that term reflect very different images of what social and economic role the corporation ought to play.    From the left, or thereabouts, comes &quot;Rating America's Corporate Conscience: A Provocative Guide to the Companies Behind the Products You Buy Every Day,&quot; a team effort by the Council on Economic Priorities (Addison-Wesley, $14.95 paper). Anyone who wishes to lug this fat tome to the supermarket can look up which brand of &quot;non-dairy dessert whip&quot; is made by the firm least involved in defense contracting, what firms have the best employee day-care arrangements, and so on.    From the right, or thereabouts, comes &quot;Boone,&quot; the memoir of Texas takeover artist T. Boone Pickens Jr. (Houghton-Mifflin, $18.95). Mr. Pickens styles himself the avatar of the interests of the small shareholder, and ends his book with a plug for United Shareholders of America (USA -- geddit?), a would-be mass shareholders lobby Mr. Pickens founded last year, which you can join for a mere $50.    The CEP's standards for &quot;corporate responsibility&quot; are: share of profits donated to charity; number of women and minorities among top officers and on boards of directors; willingness to disclose &quot;social information&quot; to nosy groups like the CEP; involvement in South Africa; conventional- and nuclear-weapons contracting, and PAC contributions.    Many Wall Street Journal readers, of course, will disagree with these criteria. They might wish to buy their non-dairy dessert whip from the company that is doing more, not less, to strengthen America's defenses in a dangerous world. The authors, I think, would say: Fine, if those are your priorities. Their overarching concept is one of &quot;corporate citizenship&quot;: the corporation as a political institution that should be dealt with as such. Others, who share the council's general political slant, will find some of its criteria laughably beside the point. Will the world really be a better place if Juanita Kreps and William Coleman snare a few more fat director's fees while Henry Kissinger snares a few less? Who cares?    But differing criteria aside, is it really a good idea to turn the economy into one huge secondary boycott? If consumers decide which brand of peanut butter to buy based on social and political criteria, it stands to reason that they will have to sacrifice economic criteria to some extent. They will either pay more or get worse peanut butter. Or, if there is no real price or quality competition among peanut butters anyway, shouldn't that be of even greater concern to the Council on Economic Priorities?    In short, isn't the CEP misunderstanding the nature of capitalism, a system whose basic structure it does not challenge? The proper social role of the corporation is to produce the best peanut butter at the lowest price, leaving to individuals and to the political system such matters as support for the arts and how much we spend on defense. There's a lot to be said, even from a left-wing viewpoint, for the idea that corporations should keep to their own sphere and not attempt to become all-embracing social-service agencies.    In particular, I am not impressed by corporate charity and cultural benefaction, which amount to executives playing Medici with other people's money. You wouldn't know, from the lavish parties corporate officers throw for themselves whenever they fund an art exhibit or a PBS series, that it's not costing them a penny. The shareholders, who aren't invited, pick up the tab for the parties, too. There's a Catch-22 logic behind corporate charity, which the CEP seems to endorse: It's good for the corporate image to be thought charitable; a good image is good for profits (the CEP will urge people to buy your peanut butter); therefore corporate charity is a justifiable expenditure of shareholders' money. But if it's actually a hard-nosed business decision, why give the corporation credit for generosity? In which case the syllogism unravels.    Mr. Pickens's vision of the corporation is not as a free-floating social and political entity, but as a simple mechanism through which shareholders collectively maximize their profits. When he talks about corporate abuses, he means inept or greedy management, not dumping toxic wastes or closing factories. In fact, the ruthless rationalization he and his fellow raiders have forced on company after company has turned them away from exactly the sort of &quot;soft&quot; considerations for which the Council on Economic Priorities awards points.    Mr. Pickens is a phony in many ways. His &quot;barefoot boy from Texas vs. the Wall Street slicksters&quot; routine is a joke. His suits are as expensive as any, he has a vast public-relations apparatus, and he travels with a praetorian guard of special assistants. Despite his denials, he has taken greenmail, which is hardly a service to the 47 million American stockholders with average incomes of $37,000 whom he claims to represent. But he does represent a theory of the corporation that is more right than wrong. If you believe in capitalism, then you have to believe that the main social function of the corporation is to maximize its own profits in the production of goods and services, which the companies the raiders target have sometimes failed to do.    It's not quite as simple as the raiders and their defenders would have you believe, though. Shareholders are not just shareholders. We are all bundles of interests: We want a profit on our shares, we want clean air and water, we want a just society. Yet the Pickens theory slices off and maximizes just one interest. There is something a little crazy -- not rational at all -- about some bow-tied young investment banker in New York taking steps that will force a company to shut down a plant in the name of &quot;maximizing value for the shareholders,&quot; when the shareholders might include the pension fund for the workers in that very plant, or other workers getting the same treatment from another investment banker down the street. Political action committees and lobbyists protect our interests as corporate shareholders far better than we can protect our political interests in less-organized aspects of our lives. The net result may or may not reflect the true political interests of people who happen to own shares, let alone people in general.    Apart from pure self-interest, the corporate system leads us to act as shareholders in ways we never would act as individuals. Most of us don't try to squeeze every penny out of life. A sole proprietor of a family firm in a small town can sacrifice profits out of sentimental pride in product or community concern in ways that could land a big corporate executive with a shareholder derivative suit, or at least have him looking over his shoulder to see if Boone Pickens or Carl Icahn was coming along to rationalize his hide.    I wouldn't want either Boone Pickens or the Council on Economic Priorities running my corporation.    ---   Mr. Kinsley edits the New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>