<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Some Regional Bells Face Union DrivesAnd Strife at Their Unregulated Units---By Johnnie L. RobertsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR BEL SBC PACTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   Discord at unregulated units of several regional Bell holding companies is testing whether labor-management relations can withstand stresses stemming from the industry's deregulation.    Tensions are rising as the Communications Workers of America steps up efforts to represent workers at unregulated -- or non-telephone company -- units of the seven regional Bells. The 660,000-member union has 295,000 members at the companies, the vast majority of whom are in the regulated telephone companies, and roughly 140,000 at American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.    The union accuses Pacific Telesis Group, Southwestern Bell Corp. and Bell Atlantic Corp. units of firing and intimidating workers, or selectively using bonuses to dampen any ardor for unionism. For example, the union points to a complaint filed by National Labor Relations Board investigators against Southwestern Bell's Mast publications division, alleging the company illegally fired two workers and discriminated against another because of their union activity. The board couldn't reach a settlement with the company, so the case is now being tried before an administrative judge.    The three regional Bells whose units are involved in the disputes say they steadfastly uphold workers' rights to join unions. Pacific Telesis' PacTel Information Systems division says it is only seeking to give all workers a chance to vote for or against the union.    Despite the companies' position, the union says that one of the companies clearly is opposed to union organizing. In a letter to workers before a scheduled vote in February on joining the union, the president of Bell Atlantic's Bell Atlanticom said: &quot;We do not want this union in our company! The union can cause plenty of trouble . . . .&quot; A month later, the union's president, Morton Bahr, told Bell Atlantic's chairman, Thomas E. Bolger, &quot;The management activity has crossed the lines of decency, and that is being charitable.&quot;    The union has made some inroads in the unregulated units, nonetheless. And it is threatening to retaliate against continued resistance at the units by opposing in the political arena further deregulation -- the Bells' main goal -- if the companies don't rein in the units. Several regional Bells warn, however, that the union also would be hurt if regulations aren't relaxed further.    While the spark for the disputes may be the union's organizing, the fuel clearly is changes in the telecommunications industry that result from deregulation. Increased competition is putting downward pressure on prices, wages and employment at ATandamp;T and the regional Bells. The union's capacity to respond to such pressure has been hampered because the Bell system breakup has splintered the union's membership and diluted their influence in the industry.    Since the breakup, ATandamp;T has sharply reduced its work force, resulting in 15,000 union members losing their jobs. Likewise, the work force has been shrinking at the regional Bells' regulated telephone companies. Union membership at the regional companies has remained flat at about 295,000, however, because of organizing at the unregulated units and the return of thousands of operators from ATandamp;T to the regional companies.    In contrast to the shrinkage of the phone companies' payrolls, employment at the regional Bells' unregulated units is growing rapidly. It has jumped to about 30,000 from zero before the Bell system breakup in 1984.    The union fears the regional companies will pay these and their other unrepresented workers at the unregulated units less money than those at the regulated units -- and then use the disparity as a wedge to press for companywide pay cuts.    At the Bell Atlanticom unit, for example, technicians do work similar to that done by phone workers, but earn as much as $8,000 less, the union says. &quot;We think that is a dangerous precedent that undermines the working conditions and standard of living that our union has gained over the years,&quot; says Rick Braswell, a union organizer. A Bell Atlantic spokeswoman says technicians' jobs at the phone company and Bell Atlanticom aren't comparable. Wages at the unregulated unit are competitive, she adds.    Because of the union's concern over pay and other conditions, organizing the growing work force at the unregulated companies is &quot;one of our top priorities,&quot; says Eileen Kirlin, the union's assistant director of organizing.    For their part, the regional Bells have to worry about keeping costs at their unregulated units in line with those at competitors, whose workers generally aren't unionized.    At Bell Atlanticom earlier this year, the union got support for a membership vote from 20 to 30 field engineers. The unit's management hired a labor lawyer and consultant and paid out bonuses; the union says the disbursements were made selectively. While Charlie Zoi, the unit's president, told workers of their right to vote for the union, he also added in his letter: &quot;The law guarantees your right to vote against the union. We would hate to see anyone make a mistake he or she might later regret.&quot;    As a result of the letter, the union says it decided to oppose an increase in subscriber-line charges for long-distance connections -- a rise the Bells want regulators to approve. After Nynex Corp. mediated between the unit and Bell Atlantic management, the union decided to support the proposal after all and call off the vote.    But with the union professing that it is preparing for another vote, and Bell Atlantic maintaining its opposition to the union at Bell Atlanticom, the truce could be short-lived. </TEXT></DOC>