<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870724-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Dutch Publisher's Hostile Takeover BidIs Bad Form, but It Just Might Succeed---By Mark M. NelsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PUBLISHING (PUB)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> AMSTERDAM, the Netherlands  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Like an evangelistbrandishing his Bible, Pierre Vinken holds up a stack ofreports showing recent mergers and takeovers in theworld-wide publishing industry.   &quot;By the next century, there will be only 10, maybe 12&quot; big publishing companies, predicts the 59-year-old chairman of the Dutch publisher Elsevier N.V. As he runs his finger down a list, he notes publishers with revenue two to four times that of his company's. &quot;We want to play in that league,&quot; he says.    Mr. Vinken's attempt to bring Elsevier into the same league with the U.S., British, West German and Australian publishing giants has in recent weeks become one of the Netherlands' most significant corporate battles. Elsevier has launched a one billion-guilder ($480.3 million) hostile takeover bid for another Dutch publisher, Kluwer N.V. The takeover attempt, in a country where hostile bids are rare, has sparked a debate about Dutch management style and shareholder rights.    &quot;Hostile bids just aren't done in Holland,&quot; says Hans Hoyinck, a member of a special Dutch commission on mergers. &quot;But this is an important case in the change of mentality in this country. If Elsevier succeeds in taking over Kluwer, even if it takes a few years, there will be more hostile takeovers.&quot;    Because of an almost impenetrable defense system that companies can erect against hostile suitors, unsolicited bids here almost never work. Not only has Kluwer agreed to merge with a third Dutch publisher, Wolters Samsom Groep N.V., but it also has issued a new class of 4.5 million preferred shares, giving the majority of the voting rights to a management-friendly foundation.    However, some observers say that the defenses won't be enough, and that Elsevier's bid has at least half a chance. Elsevier has amassed on the open market 30% of Kluwer's 2.5 million common shares outstanding, in contrast to 5% for Wolters Samsom. How many Elsevier obtains in its bid can only be guessed at, but the bid seems to be winning favor with the market. Moreover, shareholder groups say, Kluwer's defenses mightn't withstand a court challenge.    The debate has touched a sensitive nerve in a country proud of its traditions, yet trying to compete with the rest of the world. On one side is the fast-growing, aggressive Elsevier, whose tough management and savvy investments have made it the world's leading publisher of English-language scientific literature. On the other side is Kluwer, a more traditional bookseller based in the small Rhine River village of Deventer. It is a leading publisher of Dutch-language legal literature and operates bookstores in Dutch college towns.    Until a year ago, the four top publishers in the Netherlands were rather chummy. Officials from the four -- Elsevier, Kluwer, Wolters Samsom and N.V. Verenigd Bezit VNU, which together claim annual sales of about five billion guilders -- used to meet regularly to discuss publishing issues. It was at these meetings that Mr. Vinken's idea -- Dutch cooperation to meet the world challenge -- took root. But it was also where Kluwer management developed a strong distaste for Elsevier and Mr. Vinken.    Even before he became Holland's only corporate raider, Mr. Vinken, who was previously a brain surgeon, was a business legend. A part-time job as editor of a medical publication led him away from medicine and into scientific publishing. In 1971, after developing a scientific data base for the Excerpta Medica Foundation, he and the firm were acquired by Elsevier.    Chairman of Elsevier since 1979, Mr. Vinken has gained a reputation as a tough and single-minded manager, leading the company to a profitable concentration on high-margin activities. For 20 years, the company's profits have risen an average of 21% annually; its stock price has multiplied eightfold in five years. Elsevier predicts profit will rise 20% from last year's 123 million guilders ($59.8 million) on sales of 1.56 billion guilders.    Besides English-language scientific information, Elsevier also publishes two leading national daily newspapers -- the NRC Handlesblat (circulation 200,000) and the Algemeen Dagblad (circulation 400,000) -- as well as the country's largest news magazine, Elsevier. In the U.S., where it records a quarter of its sales and 35% of its profits, Elsevier owns the Congressional Information Service, a publisher of U.S. government documents. Half its total sales are outside the Netherlands, and more than 52% of its profits still come from publishing scientific journals.    Meanwhile, in tranquil Deventer, where schoolteacher Aebele Everts Kluwer began printing schoolbooks 98 years ago, a company with a very different style publishes translations of things like Stephen King novels and Dr. Benjamin Spock baby-care books. Though Kluwer's name is still associated with school texts and books for the general public, its crown jewel and most profitable enterprise is its legal and taxation publishing division. It's that division that first caught Mr. Vinken's eye.    Kluwer's profit in the past five years has gone up and down, averaging 12% growth annually. This year, it is expected to rise about 20% from 1986's 46.4 million guilders on sales of one billion guilders.    Kluwer prefers independence, but its distaste for Elsevier led it to accept a merger offer from Wolters Samsom. Many analysts believe the combination, to be known as Wolters Kluwer, could force Kluwer to change its style as much as would a pact with Elsevier.    After one recent news conference, when Kluwer's chairman, Joop Alberdingk Thijm, complained that Elsevier was treating Kluwer like a Dutch cow up for sale, Mr. Vinken retorted, &quot;The cow, in its panic, is running straight into the butcher shop.&quot;    But others note that the union would create the largest publishing group in the Netherlands with expected 1987 sales of 1.7 billion guilders. The companies share a compatible list of professional and educational publications, and Wolters would give Kluwer a much-needed push abroad.    Yet few analysts say Elsevier's bid is out of the picture. While at current prices the Wolters bid is worth slightly more than Elsevier's, Kluwer has been forced to buy Wolters shares to prop up the bid's value. The effect is confusion, leading some analysts to predict many investors won't sell their shares to Wolters.    Dutch merger rules allow a company facing a takeover to issue preferred shares with majority voting rights to a management-friendly foundation. Of the 4.5 million preferred shares issued last month by Kluwer, 2.5 million are held by an independent trust controlled by Kluwer management. Elsevier could end up holding a majority of Kluwer's common shares without any real influence on decision making.    There could be legal battles to better define the rules. Or there could be a protracted standoff. Officials at the Amsterdam Stock Exchange are mapping out possible scenarios for July 30, when Wolters's bid closes, and for Aug. 3, when Elsevier's closes. </TEXT></DOC>