<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Tensions Escalate Between Old Enemies India, Pakistan---Recent Military Confrontation WasCrisis Neither Side Seemed to Want---By Matt MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> ISLAMABAD, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When industrialist Yusuf Shirazi attended an International Chamber of Commerce convention in New Delhi last month, he made a pilgrimage mandatory for almost every Pakistani arriving in India: He checked in at the local police station. He repeated the chore before he left India.    &quot;I spent half my time there,&quot; grumbles Mr. Shirazi, a Karachi businessman whose Atlas group is Pakistan's largest manufacturer of motorcycles.    Most Indians traveling to Pakistan must do likewise. Visas for either country take about a month to obtain. Indians traveling in Pakistan and Pakistanis visiting India must spell out well in advance which cities they plan to visit and register with the police at every stop. They risk detention if they deviate from the itinerary.    Such mutual suspicion reflects the recent escalating tension between India and Pakistan. In late January, India and Pakistan each massed more than 200,000 troops along their common border, triggering government ultimatums and fears of a fourth Indo-Pakistan war.    Both governments, which have difficulty communicating in the best of times, attached the worst possible motives to troop movements during military exercises that began at the end of last year. Sabers were rattled. India sealed its border with Pakistan in Punjab. Soldiers on both sides dug trenches.    &quot;Neither India nor Pakistan wanted war but we could have easily gone into war,&quot; Pakistan President Zia ul-Haq told a Calcutta newspaper.    The threat of war has eased in recent weeks, and both sides have agreed to withdraw most of their troops to peacetime positions away from border areas. But suspicions remain. Just this week, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi announced a 23% increase in defense spending to the equivalent of $10 billion for fiscal 1988.    &quot;That war could have loomed so close where there appeared to be no reason for concern other than the reciprocal misperceptions of each other's military exercises is yet another proof of the existence of dangerously intense mutual distrust,&quot; Deane Hinton, U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, said in a recent speech in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital.    On his way to an India-Pakistan cricket match in the Indian city of Jaipur a week ago, President Zia repeated an often-stated promise that relations between the two would improve. Few people in either country share his optimism.    Mistrust is deep-seated, and perceptions so highly skeptical and distorted that it's often difficult to believe the two countries were one until 1947 when British India was partitioned. Pakistan and India have fought three wars since their independence; each sees the other as untrustworthy, irrational and expansionist.    According to government officials and diplomats in both countries, chances for improved relations remain slim. &quot;They can't really improve unless India and Pakistan accept each other,&quot; says a Western diplomat here. &quot;I don't think there's a political willpower on either side.&quot;    &quot;There have been 40 years of mistrust, of blood, of tension,&quot; says A.I. Akram, a hard-line retired Pakistan general and head of his country's Institute of Regional Studies. &quot;There's a fear complex that's real and not going to go away for a long time.&quot;    Border skirmishes are periodic. The two countries are engaged in a conventional arms race that has dragged in the U.S. and the Soviet Union. India and Pakistan also fear the other's nuclear policies. The U.S. Congress is considering a $4.02 billion defense and economic-aid package for Pakistan. The Soviet Union has assured New Delhi that any conventional weapon in its arsenal is available to India.    India was furious after an announcement in September that the U.S. may sell to Pakistan airborne-warning-and-control-system, or Awacs, planes. U.S. officials say the radar planes are to help Pakistan protect itself against incursions by Soviet planes based in neighboring Afghanistan. &quot;Everyone knows Awacs have nothing to do with Afghanistan and the Soviets&quot; but with India, says K. Subrahmanyam, director of New Delhi's Institute for Defense Studies and Analysis, a private think tank.    India, which exploded a nuclear device in 1974, for years has accused Pakistan of secretly developing its own atomic weapons. Ambassador Hinton said in his speech &quot;there are developments in Pakistan's nuclear program which we see as inconsistent with a purely peaceful program.&quot; This was one of the strongest statements yet by a U.S. official on Pakistan's nuclear intentions. In India, there are renewed calls to reactivate a nuclear-weapons program.    India-Pakistan relations have deteriorated considerably since late 1985, when President Zia and Prime Minister Gandhi agreed in New Delhi not to attack each other's nuclear facilities. The agreement was never signed and the Indian premier never carried through a promise to visit Pakistan.    Several measures to increase trade, ease travel restrictions and improve cultural ties were proposed. None has been implemented. A second border-crossing point has been pending for more than a decade (the only border crossing is in Punjab). Newspapers haven't been freely exchanged since the 1950s. Two-way trade, which remains restricted to government companies and a list of 42 items, totals less than $50 million a year. A proposal to increase the list and allow private-sector participation remains bogged down.    In recent months, Mr. Gandhi especially has taken an increasingly belligerent stance in bilateral relations. He repeatedly has accused Islamabad of training Sikh terrorists who have been agitating for a separate Sikh homeland carved out of India's Punjab state. In October he implied that Pakistan had a hand in an assassination attempt against him.    While Mr. Zia remains conciliatory, his stance has opened him to charges of &quot;being soft on India,&quot; as a fundamentalist Moslem leader here terms it.    The specter of invasion remains a common bogy in both countries and a handy diversion from domestic problems. An Indian official, when questioned why Islamabad would want to push the vastly superior Indian armed forces into war, replies that the Pakistan military can't be expected to act rationally because its powers aren't adequately checked by the civilian government.    The Indian press has contributed to the tensions. From the middle of January, newspapers began to run scare stories about Pakistan troops moving toward the border. Maps, with distorted and incorrect images of the Pakistan military buildup, accompanied the stories. Indian officials later admitted that the stories were the result of high-level defense briefings. </TEXT></DOC>