<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880218-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Primary Math: State Contests Are Unlikely to Decide Democratic Nominee --- The Delegates Aren't There For Anyone, and Choice May Have to Be Brokered --- For the GOP, More Nastiness </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's time for Democrats to get out the calculators.    &quot;People are going to discover that it's arithmetically impossible for anyone to win the nomination on the basis of the primaries and caucuses alone,&quot; says Mark Siegel, a member of the Democratic National Committee and a political consultant. &quot;One way or another, it's going to be a brokered process.&quot;    With Iowa and New Hampshire behind them -- and victories for Rep. Richard Gephardt and Gov. Michael Dukakis -- the Democratic candidates now stumble South locked in a struggle that more and more experts and party leaders believe will go the distance.    &quot;There are no knockout punchers in this crowd,&quot; says John White, the former party chairman.    Ready to fight it out on &quot;Super Tuesday,&quot; March 8, are at least two other Democrats besides Messrs. Dukakis and Gephardt: Sen. Albert Gore Jr. and the Rev. Jesse Jackson. The day's contests will award more than 1,300 Democratic delegates, but none of the four candidates are likely to emerge March 9 with more than 400 to 500. It takes 2,082 to win the nomination.    This means the Democratic leader after Super Tuesday would still have to corral 60% or more of the remaining delegates. With so many candidates still in the running, it is an all-but-unachievable task.    Things aren't quite so complex with the Republicans, because they operate under rules more favorable to knock-out tactics. But Vice President George Bush's comeback in New Hampshire, after his humiliating third-place finish in Iowa, seems to guarantee a long struggle with Sen. Robert Dole (whose graceless reaction to his second-place finish raises doubts about his ability to handle the rigors of hardball campaigning). Also still in it are Rep. Jack Kemp and former TV evangelist Pat Robertson.    &quot;This race is going to go on for a long time,&quot; says John Sears, a Republican strategist. &quot;And there is no favorite.&quot;    The Republican candidates will get a chance to flail each other some more in a debate Friday night in Dallas. Their brawl will keep right on rolling, possibly not coming to a conclusion until the June 7 California primary. The pot at the end of that rainbow is the state's 175 delegates, 15% of the GOP total; the winner gets them all.    Thus, Iowa and New Hampshire, the two winnowing states, didn't winnow very much. Out of the running among the Democrats are former Gov. Bruce Babbitt, expected to drop out today, and former Sen. Gary Hart; probably gone is Sen. Paul Simon. Gone among the Republicans, perhaps as early as today, will be former Gov. Pete du Pont. For all practical purposes, though, each side still has four candidates.    For the Democrats, the numbers tell the tale.    Take Mr. Dukakis, the Massachusetts governor, presumably the front-runner. With the party's system of apportioning delegates, the most delegates he can fairly expect to claim the day after Super Tuesday -- giving him benefit of the doubt -- is still under 500. It's pretty much the same story for the three other Democrats.    Meanwhile, time is running out faster this year than four years ago; by the end of Super Tuesday, more than 35% of the delegates will have been chosen, compared with about half that at the same point in 1984.    Some Democrats, notably Paul Kirk, the national chairman, still believe someone can pull it out before the last primary in June. &quot;Before we get to Super Tuesday,&quot; Mr. Kirk reasons, &quot;voters will begin to make a realistic appraisal of these candidates, and they will settle on the guy who has the staying power, the resources and the will to win. They will sense who this guy is. They will know.&quot;    Important in all of this, he says, will be the role of 645 formally unpledged delegates -- party leaders, current and former elected officials -- who will go to the convention without official ties to any of the candidates. Mr. Kirk says he is confident these party professionals will go with a winner. That, of course, is the way he wants it to happen: More than anything else, he wants to avoid a nasty fight.    &quot;I can't imagine in my worst nightmares we walk into our convention and duke it out,&quot; says Lynn Cutler, the party's vice chairman. She believes that in the event of a deadlock, the candidates would sort it out themselves, agreeing on a nominee after the last primary and before the opening of the convention. A multi-ballot convention would be a sight to behold: The Democrats haven't had one since 1952, when they chose Adlai Stevenson on the third try.    For both Democratic and Republican candidates, it is going to be, at the least, a long and nasty process. For the voters, it means weeks of listening to charges and countercharges, and not a whole lot of meaningful dialogue about where any of these candidates want to take the country.    Walter Mondale, for one, is concerned. &quot;This hurts the party,&quot; says the Democrats' 1984 standard-bearer. &quot;We're going to have fights. It's the old Democratic manual: We just open it up again and change the names. Instead of a positive convention, it looks like we're going to have a negative one. It makes people wonder if we're fit to govern.&quot;    The only solace for Democrats, says the former vice president, is that the Republicans &quot;are going to get into the same kind of fight.&quot;    There is already evidence of that. Mr. Dole was burned in the final hours of the New Hampshire campaign by Bush TV ads that charged him with waffling on major issues -- and he seems eager to extract some revenge. When the New Hampshire results became clear Tuesday night, Mr. Bush delivered a graceful speech; Mr. Dole, looking saturnine in the glare of the TV lights, said his message to his rival was: &quot;Stop lying about my record.&quot;    Mr. Dole's remark, recalling his slashing performance as Gerald Ford's 1976 running mate, added to concerns that voters perceive a &quot;mean streak&quot; in him. Should the contest between him and Mr. Bush continue on that track, the issue of the two men's character could prove decisive.    The surviving Republicans move out of New Hampshire hoping to upset each other in the preliminary skirmishes of Minnesota, South Dakota and South Carolina before Super Tuesday. Besides the continuing struggle between Mr. Bush and Mr. Dole, the Super Tuesday contests will pit Mr. Kemp against Mr. Robertson for the hard-line conservative mantle. That struggle, too, has been nasty and may get meaner still.    Super Tuesday involves contests in 20 states, 10 of them in the South and four more on the borders of the old Confederacy. Northern states polling that day include Massachusetts and Rhode Island.    Each of the four leading Democrats brings certain advantages to the Super Tuesday contest, and each is going to get something on March 8, making it less likely that anyone will be declared a big winner. Mr. Gore comes from Tennessee, Mr. Gephardt from Missouri, and Mr. Dukakis from Massachusetts -- all of them Super Tuesday states. Mr. Jackson's base is the black vote in the South, and he will get more of it this time than four years ago, when he had to compete for it with Mr. Mondale.    Delegates will be awarded proportionally to the showing of the candidates in each of the 20 states, with the exception of Maryland, where winner-take-all by congressional district is possible. Anybody collecting more than 15% of the vote in a congressional district gets a chance to collect delegates.    Mr. Jackson's base is those congressional districts where blacks account for at least 15% of the population -- more than 60 of the 167 districts in the 20 states. In North Carolina, for example, nine of the 11 districts meet this standard. In some districts in Mississippi, Mr. Jackson will turn out such a big vote he will force some of his white competitors below the qualifying threshold. &quot;Jackson will be stronger among the blacks than he was four years ago,&quot; says former Mississippi Gov. William Winter.    The enigma in the race is Sen. Gore, who chose not to compete seriously in Iowa and New Hampshire. His biggest advantage is his regional appeal as a Southerner, and his money. He is ready to spend more than $2 million on television. The biggest question about his campaign is that he hasn't been tested. He will be now, by Mr. Gephardt especially. So far, Mr. Gore has dealt largely with foreign-policy issues, in an effort to separate himself from his rivals. But that may not be what blue-collar Southerners want to hear.    By contrast, Mr. Gephardt's get-tough message for U.S. trading partners is expected to have wide appeal in the South, especially among blue-collar workers. Money is the problem. Mr. Gephardt's cash reserves are down to $150,000, though his finance chairman, Terence McAuliffe, says he should pick up $2 million or more before March 8 from big-donor events and matching federal funds already in the pipeline.    &quot;Gephardt can sell,&quot; says Al LaPierre, the executive director of the Alabama Democratic Party. &quot;But the question is how much money he can find to give his message legs.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis, the winner in New Hampshire, is wallowing in cash. At the beginning of this month, he had $4 million, the most of any Democrat in the race. He left New Hampshire yesterday to campaign in Georgia and Florida, where he expects to do well among urban voters.    But in New Hampshire, Mr. Dukakis was able to float serenely above his battling colleagues, offering almost no message beyond his record as governor of Massachusetts. People in the Deep South may not care that much about economic progress in Massachusetts.    Of the four Republicans in the running, all but Mr. Kemp are in good position to stay the course. The New York congressman is broke and needs money quickly to compete. But if he is viewed after New Hampshire as the genuine right-wing article, it may start to flow.    The Messrs. Bush, Dole and Robertson have been almost too successful in raising cash. All of them have now spent more than half the $27.7 million allowed by federal law for their pre-nomination campaigns. They may have to cut back to stay within the law. </TEXT></DOC>