<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Carter's Comptroller Frets Over Globalization---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 09/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MER FORGNBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   John G. Heimann was Jimmy Carter's comptroller of the currency and hence the chief monitor of America's banking health in the late 1970s. Today, as vice chairman of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, his concerns about financial well-being are more global and include capital markets as well as banking. Few bankers are more articulate in defining things worth worrying about. Mr. Heimann does that fairly often in his speeches at financial gatherings.    In his offices overlooking the Hudson River in Merrill Lynch's new World Financial Center headquarters, Mr. Heimann describes how international finance has become a competitive pressure cooker, with young &quot;rocket scientists&quot; trading in new investment &quot;products&quot; described by mysterious acronyms, such as CATS, CARS, FASTBACS, LYONS, TIGRS and COLTS. &quot;Securitization&quot; of auto loans, mortgages or bank loans -- which means issuing negotiable securities backed by such assets -- has become routine. Bonds are &quot;stripped&quot; so buyers can invest in either principle or interest coupons depending upon whether they think prices will rise or fall. Options trading has produced gambits galore.    With all these new capital-market instruments, international capital flows have risen to something like 50 times the volume of world trade. Foreign-exchange transactions exceed $200 billion a day.    High-capacity computers linked with satellite communications make a huge and complex market possible. The new machines can yield global market information instantaneously and manage the complex formulas traders employ.    But real pressure for innovation comes from a search by commercial and investment bankers for new ways to make money. That's because many of their biggest clients are now former clients, having learned to borrow and lend among themselves on a huge scale without the aid of financial intermediaries.    Treasurers' offices in large corporations today often are mini-banks -- if you call the handling of billions of corporate dollars &quot;mini.&quot; They devise their own securities and sell them directly, either to other corporations or the professionals who manage large funds, thereby cutting bankers out of the game. So the middlemen, that is to say banks and investment houses, have to devise instruments yielding more, or offering greater liquidity, or providing better hedging possibilities than the ones investors can buy directly.    &quot;The increased sophistication of the managers, whether they are the issuers of securities or the takers of securities, requires a higher level of competence among capital-market intermediaries to provide value added,&quot; says Mr. Heimann. &quot;That is one of the driving forces behind innovation. You don't need me to buy Treasury bills. What you need me for as an intermediary is to solve very peculiar needs, to come up with ways to solve your problems in ways better than just pressing the button and buying Treasury bills.&quot;    But the innovation, combined with greater internationalization of investment flows, has meant greater uncertainty in investment markets, in Mr. Heimann's view, and maybe greater risk as well.    &quot;All these new products have been created in relatively benign times,&quot; says Mr. Heimann. &quot;So they have to be tested. With all these innovative techniques you have added elements which may have increased the risk if things go wrong. I say may have, but I think most observers are somewhat concerned about this. There's something out in the system that we don't know how to measure accurately.&quot;    Indeed, Merrill Lynch Capital Markets and several other big investment firms suffered a shock from falling bond prices last April. A Merrill Lynch manager had invested heavily in stripped mortgage-backed securities designed for good gains in a rising bond market. When the market fell instead, Merrill took a $275 million bath, which contributed to a total second-quarter trading loss of $377 million.    &quot;Merrill Lynch's problem was a new product that had not been vetted carefully, as we have now learned and everyone else has learned, and it will never happen again,&quot; says Mr. Heimann. &quot;April was a period of considerable turmoil and invariably the testing comes in a time of some turmoil when markets are reacting to whatever the exogenous circumstances are and then the question is how do the new products stand that kind of pressure.&quot;    Globalization raises other questions. &quot;Let's just say that an issuer in Tokyo issues in London and raises Eurodollars and swaps them into Deutsche marks. That process has many counterparties in the chain. Let's just assume that something goes wrong. The transaction is stopped. Where then is the jurisdiction? Would it be the country where the issue took place? I don't know the answer. So there are a lot of unknowns that have to be tested.&quot;    The mere fact that everyone has a contractual relationship with someone else has little meaning if it isn't clear how and where one goes after the counterparty who proved to be the weak link. It is not only a legal problem but also a credit risk problem, since it may be difficult in advance to learn that there is in fact a weak link in the chain. &quot;You have the very real problem that you are increasing your risk because you cannot make judgments on the credit capacity and worthiness of all of your fellow participants.&quot;    Then there is the regulatory question. &quot;You have global markets and global institutions governed and controlled by national laws, national accounting practices and national supervisors, with limited jurisdiction. The supervisory problem is who has the authority, the responsibility?    &quot;You have Glass-Steagall in the U.S., the Big Bang in London, the Little Bang in Canada, no need for a bang of any sort in Germany and Switzerland since they have open banking, and Japan has the equivalent of Glass-Steagall. One of the problems this creates is the lowest common denominator effect. Which markets will create standards which are sufficiently low to drag in the business for economic reasons. You create regulatory arbitraging.&quot;    The Securities and Exchange Commission has reached beyond the borders of the U.S. in recent years to try to grab violators of its insider-trading rules. Western Central banks have worked together on the debt crisis. But Mr. Heimann would like to see an agreed-upon set of banking and capital-markets standards that would have equal application across borders. He thinks recent agreements between the U.S. Federal Reserve Board and the Bank of England on bank regulation might be the beginning of such an effort, even though it doesn't apply to capital markets.    Of course, it is possible that Mr. Heimann's fears are unjustified. Greater complexity may reduce, rather than increase risk in some way similar to the way a Boeing 747 flies much faster than a World War I Jenny and has far more parts but is also much safer. U.S. banks are, on the whole, more heavily regulated than U.S. capital markets, but that has not kept them out of trouble. The global market, with all its complexity, its hedges and its freedom from regulatory intervention may prove to be more airworthy than the more limited markets of the past. But Mr. Heimann is correct in his estimate that we won't know that for sure until the modern global market has been thoroughly tested. </TEXT></DOC>