<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880516-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Insight: Inroads by Iranian Minions in Lebanon Forces Limited U.S.-Syrian Cooperation </HL><AUTHOR> John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   While the world is fixated on the street confrontations in Israel's occupied territories and the endless war in the Persian Gulf, the U.S., Syria, Iran and their accomplices are battling, with far less publicity, over Lebanon's future.    The stakes are high. Iran and its terrorist minions in Lebanon are intent upon exporting the Ayatollah Khomeini's fundamentalist revolution to the nation that once was the crossroads of the Western and Arab worlds. Last week, according to reports from Beirut, forces of the Iranian-directed Hezbollah, or Party of God, forced the rival, Syrian-backed Amal militia to withdraw from parts of the Lebanese capital's Shiite Moslem slums and planted Iranian flags atop the mosques there. Hezbollah's military victories may help to focus the attention of Iran's opponents in Syria and the U.S. and in Lebanon itself.    Over the weekend, Syria deployed its troops around Beirut's southern suburbs, and there were reports it had ordered them to move in. That would be the first time Syrian troops actually have entered the suburbs, where Hezbollah has been holding 22 foreign hostages.    Though President Hafez al-Assad has suppported Iran in its war with Iraq, the last thing the secular Syrian wants in his country's front yard is a Khomeini-inspired Islamic Republic of Lebanon. And while he helped demolish the Reagan administration's earlier attempt to impose order in Lebanon, this time Mr. Assad and Washington may cooperate -- up to a point.    Months of backstage negotiations among the U.S., Syria and the impotent Lebanese government of President Amin Gemayel, conducted mostly by State Department Mideast expert April Glaspie, could bear fruit. But win or lose, Ms. Glaspie's shuttle diplomacy suggests the Reagan administration finally has learned some lessons from its disastrous involvement in Lebanon five years ago, which left hundreds of Americans dead, others held hostage and U.S. credibility in tatters.    In 1982 and 1983, the administration ignored Syria, which it considered a Soviet puppet, on the careless assumption that Mr. Assad's fear of Israel, along with financial inducements from Saudi Arabia, would compel him to go along with Washington's plans for remaking Lebanon. This time, the administration has accepted what former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger figured out 15 years ago: There can be no peace without Syria.    The administration also appears finally to have abandoned the notion, which former Secretary of State Alexander Haig and a handful of aides bought wholesale from the Israelis, that Lebanon's Maronite Christians could be counted on to reform the antiquated National Pact that had kept them in power since 1943.    Ms. Glaspie, who established some rapport with Mr. Assad when she was deputy chief of the U.S. Embassy in Damascus and who now has been appointed U.S. ambassador to Iraq, has been doing what the administration failed to do in 1982 -- press Mr. Gemayel's Christians to share power more equitably with their Sunni, Shiite and Druze Moslem rivals. At issue is how to redefine the powers of Lebanon's traditionally Christian presidency, the parliament and the tattered Lebanese military in a way that reflects the growth of the country's Moslem, and especially its Shiite, population since 1943.    Ms. Glaspie also has had some success persuading Mr. Assad and Mr. Gemayel to talk to each other, something they have refused to do since 1986, when Syria tried to broker its own new deal for the Christians, Sunnis, Shiites and Druze. That may be because the Syrians, whose attempts to remake Lebanon have failed as ignominiously as the Israelis' and the Americans', now realize that Iran and its fundamentalist friends pose a greater danger to Syria's interests in Lebanon than the Reagan administration or, for the time being, even the Israelis.    U.S. officials say Mr. Assad no longer insists that the Christians surrender control of Lebanon's government immediately and is entertaining proposals to gradually increase the number of Moslem bureaucrats, lawmakers and army officers.    But as usual, there isn't any reason to be optimistic about Lebanon's future. Thirteen years of murderous civil war, aggravated by the Palestine Liberation Organization, Israel, Iran, Syria and the U.S., may have made peace impossible. After their recent victories in Beirut's southern slums, Hezbollah and its patrons in Tehran aren't likely to compromise, a concept alien to them anyway.    Many Maronite Christians, made paranoid by a long and tragic history, still believe if they relax domination of their ancient enemies their enclave on Mount Lebanon will be overrun, leaving them, like the Palestinians, without a country.    But in the face of the new enemy -- Islamic radicalism -- the Lebanese Christians, the Syrians and the U.S. have no rational choice but to compromise. </TEXT></DOC>