<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870922-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Chevron's Problems With the Company It Keeps---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 09/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CHV AFRICPETROLEUM (PET)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Chevron Corp. Chairman George M. Keller not long ago received a joke present from his son, a &quot;Wanted&quot; poster describing Mr. Keller in unflattering terms. It was being distributed by the Conservative Caucus, which for several years has been campaigning to force Chevron to pull out of its partnership with Sociedade Nacional de Combustiveis de Angola (Sonangol), a state oil company under the control of Angola's Marxist MPLA government.    The campaign has cut across ideological and political lines. Presidential candidate Robert Dole, along with such unlikely allies as Democrats Dennis DeConcini of Arizona, Ernest Hollings of South Carolina and Lawton Chiles of Florida, last summer backed a trade embargo against Angola that would have crippled Chevron's operations there. The bill was voted down, 61 to 38, but Congress already had eliminated the deductibility of corporate taxes paid to Angola, blocked Ex-Im Bank loans to that country and barred the U.S. military from buying oil products made from Angolan crude. The Senate trade bill, now going to conference with the House, has an amendment by Florida Democrat Bob Graham denying Angola most-favored-nation treatment for six months.    Interestingly, the Reagan administration is not now joining in the push to get Chevron out of Angola. &quot;I talked with George Shultz recently and he thinks we should be there,&quot; said Mr. Keller during a visit to the Journal last week. &quot;We've had very solid support from the State Department and the National Security Agency.&quot;    Nonetheless, Chevron announced last week that it was selling 20% of its interest in the partnership with Sonangol to AGIP S.p.)A, the Italian state oil company. That will reduce its holdings to 39.2% from 49%. Sonangol holds a 51% controlling interest. Mr. Keller says it was mainly the attractiveness of the offer that brought about the sale but, given the rumblings in Congress, the Angolan government also was interested in having another company in the partnership that could take over operations if Chevron were forced to pull out.    Such solicitude toward the concerns of the MPLA probably will make Chevron's critics wonder whom the company was trying to please. Moreover, the sale isn't very likely to end the criticism. Sen. Jesse Helms has been among those appealing to Chevron shareholders to join in the protest.    The Senate embargo debate was harsh at times. Sen. Dole asserted: &quot;We have already tried bribing, cajoling and weaning the MPLA away from Moscow and Havana, for years and years, and it ain't weaned yet. I cannot help but believe that this whole episode has given Castro and Gorbachev a whole new appreciation of the value of American capitalism.&quot;    Of course, American multinational companies have never found it easy to stay out of the way of political fire. There was a time in American history when the primary line of attack was that capitalist interests were dragging the country into wars and disputes. Now, as often as not, the accusation is that the wide-ranging interests of American multinationals give aid and comfort to enemy nations. Mobil found itself in such a spot when U.S. annoyance with Libya began to build, culminating in the air raids against Gadhafi. Oil firms have a special problem because of their wide scope. Caltex Petroleum Corp., a refining and distribution company owned jointly by Chevron and Texaco, operates in 60 countries, for example.    Chevron acquired its interest in Angola's Cabinda oil field in 1984 with its $13.2 billion purchase of Gulf Corp. Mr. Keller sees Cabinda today as one of the best oil prospects in the world. Angola is not a member of OPEC. Most of the oil comes to the U.S. Oil accounts for some 90% of Angola's foreign-exchange revenues, earning it over $700 million annually, most of which undoubtedly goes to wage war. Much has been made of the fact that the Cabinda oil fields are guarded by Cuban troops, presumably paid from the oil revenues, but Mr. Keller says his employees never see the Cubans. The security police in the fields are Angolans.    The political issue is straightforward enough. The MPLA government in Luanda is backed by the Soviet Union. Congress last year cleared the way for the Reagan administration to give direct aid to UNITA, the anti-MPLA movement of Jonas Savimbi. Mr. Savimbi has made slow but steady progress in his war with the MPLA, despite the MPLA's support from Soviet weapons, Soviet officers and some 37,000 Cuban troops. Support for Mr. Savimbi is one of the few foreign policies on which the Reagan administration and Congress are unified, and only recently so.    But Mr. Keller wonders why a Chevron pullout necessarily is dictated by the newfound harmony in Washington. He cites the Caltex experience in Indonesia during the Sukarno regime. It remained in the country and stayed apolitical, he says. When Sukarno was thrown out it was there to provide a bridge between the new government and the U.S.    &quot;I think we have potentially the same thing in Angola. Gulf went through about three governments while it was there. In one year, there were three claimants for the oil revenues. Gulf didn't pay any of them. They put the funds in an escrow account and when the thing was finally settled, paid up with interest to the government.    &quot;The argument from the conservative side is well, look, you're funding this Marxist government and I would have to say, yes, 51% of the oil is theirs and we're paying taxes and royalties on our 49%. On the other hand, our leaving merely means leaving this for one of the European companies to pick up. The government's income would increase because they could certainly make better terms with someone who is coming in now than they did when we came in.    &quot;But the conservatives say, yeah, but you just shouldn't be there. Well, you know you get some interesting things. The government's consultant in the petroleum ministry was that Marxist outfit up in Boston, Arthur D. Little. It's interesting to see how being exposed to the American companies, and there are about 100 American service and supply companies involved there, how they've concluded that they've got to build some incentives into their system. Sure, our example isn't going to solve the problem but our leaving is going to make damn sure that when this war is finally settled that we aren't there.&quot;    This is not an insubstantial argument. A further argument Mr. Keller could have made, but didn't, was that it would be impossible for an American multinational to make consistent, long-range plans in many parts of the world, given the fickleness of the U.S. Congress. Congress in 1975 passed the Tunney amendment barring further CIA involvement in Angola, despite the strong objections of President Ford and Secretary of State Kissinger. This had a great deal to do with delivering the government to the Soviets. Fatuous remarks were made in that debate, such as the assertion by then-Sen. Dick Clark: &quot;If the MPLA wins, the Soviets will be lucky if they can hold on a year or two.&quot;    Mr. Keller may be just as wrong today about prospects for any change. But it is easy to sympathize with an American executive under political attack on this issue. He might well ask why it was that Congress itself needed 10 years to decide which side it was on in Angola. </TEXT></DOC>