<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Voodoo Economics or Voodoo Economists? </HL><AUTHOR> Irving Kristol </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ECO </IN><TEXT>   There are an awful lot of economists around, pressing their opinions upon us. So it may be a good time to remember that economic science is not a science like physics or chemistry. Its closest analogue is meteorology. There is a lot of rigorous analysis involved, and marginal progress is achieved, but the results, so far as understanding and prediction are concerned, have to be approached with caution.    Economists, like meteorologists, are better at predicting yesterday's weather than tomorrow's, and are still close to hopeless when it comes to next month's -- to say nothing of next year's climatic conditions. Not utterly hopeless, mind you. When governments pursue economic policies that are obviously calamitous, most (though never all) economists will foresee calamity. But, even then, the policies have to be obviously calamitous -- i.e., of a kind that Adam Smith, two centuries ago, would have had no trouble in perceiving as such. Short of such an extremity, today's economists have no automatic entitlement to the intellectual authority they often assert or to the respectful deference we tend to grant them.    Both the claim to authority, as well as the deference, derive from the fact that economic analysis today is indeed logically and mathematically so rigorous that noneconomists are inevitably intimidated while too many economists enjoy undue self-confidence. This is especially the case when that analysis flowers into larger theories that, with the aid of a computer, generate numbers to two or three decimal places. This process, while incomprehensible to the layman, holds the promise of precise and comprehensive explanatory power. What is obscured is the fact that the analysis and the theories are based on assumptions that, while plausible, are not always true, or not true for long.    &quot;Other things being equal&quot; is the tacit premise of all such theoretical constructions. In physics and chemistry, they generally are -- the nature of things is what it was, and presumably will be what it is. But human beings are not things, they are purposive creatures shaped by history and expectations. So, when one deals with human behavior, &quot;other things being equal&quot; is a premise that is conditional, not absolute, and has a transiency as well as an indeterminancy that makes large economic theories less solid than economists would have us believe.    Still, we live in a world in which the prestige of science is such that we find it hard to resist theories propounded by bona fide experts. And the experts themselves, of course, are likely to find their own theories so irresistible that, when theory and reality seem to be in conflict with one another, they will -- like the venerable practitioners of voodoo magic -- insist on the theory and accuse the reality of inexplicable insubordination. This phenomenon is especially visible in the behavior of economists over the past seven years.    Take, for instance, the case of our Keynesian economists -- and the majority of American economists, whether politically conservative or liberal, are still recognizably Keynesian when it comes to macroeconomic theory. When President Reagan instituted his tax cuts, most forecast rampant inflation. When inflation subsided and the economy began to recover at the end of 1982, they decided that we were witnessing a &quot;normal&quot; Keynesian recovery based on deficit spending -- though they were mute as to why &quot;normal&quot; Keynesian economists did not foresee this &quot;normal Keynesian recovery.&quot; Such a recovery, they warned, could only be temporary unless the deficit declined.    As the economy grew, along with the deficit, they announced that a dismal &quot;day of reckoning&quot; was imminent. We were living &quot;on borrowed time&quot; and on &quot;borrowed foreign money.&quot; Every year since then they have been saying this, with increasing passion and certainty as the economic reality perversely ignored them. They are still saying this, and they seem to have lost none of their credibility. Most of Wall Street still believes them, most of the media believe them, most politicians (whether Republican or Democrat) believe them. What we are seeing is &quot;voodoo economics,&quot; they insist. It seems to occur to almost no one that what we may be seeing is respectable, buttoned-down &quot;voodoo economists&quot; at work.    Because of this disjunction between economic theory and economic reality, one now hears economists saying the most extraordinary things. Thus, they have taken to denouncing the American people for living in an unreal &quot;credit card economy&quot; -- i.e., for saving too little, investing too little, and spending far too much. In short, the American people are being irrational and self-destructive in their economic behavior. But how can this be? If there is any single bedrock assumption to economic science, it is that most people, most of the time, act in an economically rational, self-interested way. If they do not, then markets are irrational, there is no such thing as economic science, and we would all be better off having our economy governed by a handful of wise men in Washington-an inference many of those of a liberal persuasion are content to draw.    The only reason for thinking that the American people could be engaged in such peculiar behavior would be if the government had foolishly instituted a whole set of perverse incentives -- for example, subsidized low interest rates or subsidized higher wages -- to which the popular reaction would indeed be rational. Such subsidies would ensure future inflation, to which spending rather than saving would be the sensible response. But the government has done no such thing, and none of the critics of &quot;voodoo economics&quot; is even pointing a finger at any such policy.    Yes, it is true that the American people are saving less today than traditionally has been the case. We don't really know why, though one can speculate that it has something to do with the increased worth of their assets -- notably homes and pensions -- which makes them feel more secure about the future. But what we do know is that our corporate community is not complaining about a lack of capital for investment. Such capital is available in abundance. So, whatever is causing that low saving rate, it is not having the deleterious effect it is presumed to have.    In addition to complaining about the rate of saving, our economists keep on complaining about the deficit as if it were, in and of itself, at this time, inflationary. But there is just no evidence for any such intimate connection between deficits and inflation. Britain, after all, is now running a budget surplus but inflation is creeping up in a very disturbing way, while Japan has a sizable deficit with close to zero inflation. And even the most fervent monetarist does not see a threat of inflation from the rate of growth of the money supply that our Fed is now permitting.    The kernel of truth at the root of this familiar polemic is that large, enduring deficits will in the long run result in inflation or recession or both, since they will have to be financed by printing money or high interest rates. It is this kernel of truth that gives our &quot;voodoo economists&quot; their credibility. But they do not know how large those deficits have to be, or how long that &quot;long run&quot; is, just as they cannot claim with certainty that our deficits, in the years ahead, will not slowly decline. They did know, beyond all doubt, that it was impossible for the U.S. economy to reach 1989 with low unemployment, low inflation and quite vigorous economic growth.    We are also told that we are mindlessly burdening future generations with our deficits. But are we? Here, the relation of the deficit to our gross national product is probably the most important indicator. The current ratio is 3.5%, which is high -- though not shockingly high -- by historical standards. Is it so high that an eventual economic collapse is certain? Signals from the financial markets seem to suggest otherwise. We do know that if the rate creeps up, that would be a bad sign. On the other hand, over the past several years it has been creeping down, which is a good sign for the future health of our economy.    So where does that leave us? Well, it leaves us with an economy that seems to be in pretty good shape, and with the further question: Is the voodoo in the economy or in the minds of our economists?    ---   Mr. Kristol is Olin Distinguished Fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and co-editor of the Public Interest. </TEXT></DOC>