<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870302-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev Missile Offer May Open WayFor First Major Arms Accord in 8 Years---By John WalcottStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   While President Reagan struggles to rebuild his administration, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has launched an arms-control offer that the U.S. and its European allies might not be able to refuse.    The Soviet leader announced he is willing to negotiate &quot;without delay&quot; an agreement eliminating U.S. and Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe, without demanding new restrictions on Mr. Reagan's proposed space-based missile defense system, known as the Strategic Defense Initiative, or SDI.    U.S. and European officials said Mr. Gorbachev's announcement might clear the way for the first major nuclear-arms-control agreement in eight years and for a summit meeting in the U.S. between the president and the Soviet leader. U.S. and Soviet negotiators are expected to discuss Mr. Gorbachev's proposal at arms-control talks today in Geneva, Switzerland, U.S. officials said.    Publicly, U.S. officials welcomed the Soviet announcement. Some congressmen also voiced their approval. Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), House Intelligence Committee chairman, said the Kremlin has presented &quot;a remarkable opportunity&quot; by removing &quot;the single biggest obstacle&quot; to a new arms-control agreement.    U.S. officials have been preparing a speech on U.S.-Soviet relations for Mr. Reagan to deliver in the next few weeks, partly to show that the administration isn't buried by the Iran-Contra affair. But administration officials expressed some concern that Mr. Gorbachev's proposal, coming when the president needs to put the Iran affair behind him, could put pressure on the administration to make concessions on other arms-control issues.    Mr. Gorbachev's offer, announced Saturday evening by the official Tass news agency, isn't new. The Soviet leader had agreed to negotiate a separate agreement on medium-range weapons in Europe at his first meeting with Mr. Reagan, in Geneva in November 1985. But the Soviets reversed themselves in January 1986. Since then, Soviet officials have insisted that no agreement on intermediate-range nuclear forces in Europe was possible unless the U.S. agreed to curb research and development of space-based missile defenses.    Even though it isn't new, the Soviet offer will put pressure on the West to eliminate the remaining obstacles to an agreement, including provisions for verifying a ban on medium-range missiles in Europe and the treatment of a Soviet monopoly on short-range nuclear missiles in Eastern Europe.    Under the terms of the agreement now contemplated, each side would scrap all but 100 of its medium-range nuclear missiles. The Soviets would be permitted to retain a total of 100 warheads on SS-20s in central Asia, where the mobile missiles are out of range of Western Europe.    The U.S., which in 1983 began deploying 572 Pershing II and ground-launched cruise missiles in five European nations, could keep 100 medium-range warheads in the U.S. Administration officials said the latest Soviet offer apparently would permit the U.S. to keep medium-range missiles in Alaska, something the Soviets previously had resisted.    Some Western European leaders may have to swallow misgivings about eliminating U.S. nuclear missiles in Europe. They fear that eliminating these weapons could fuel doubts about whether the U.S. would use its strategic nuclear arsenal to defend Europe and could leave the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance more vulnerable to the Warsaw Pact's large conventional forces. But Mr. Gorbachev's offer is likely to be popular with Europeans eager to reduce the number of nuclear warheads pointed at them, and with opposition parties in such countries as Britain, West Germany and Belgium.    Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany said Mr. Gorbachev had removed &quot;the main obstacle&quot; to an agreement on intermediate-range weapons. NATO Secretary-General Lord Carrington called the offer &quot;a substantial step forward,&quot; and Belgian Foreign Minister Leo Tindemans said his reaction to the announcement was to &quot;rejoice.&quot;    &quot;Mr. Gorbachev will reap a big political profit at a very modest military cost,&quot; said one West European diplomat. The official said the Soviets have more than enough long-range and short-range nuclear missiles to hit every target now covered by the 271 triple-warhead SS-20 medium-range missiles within range of Europe that would be eliminated by the proposed agreement.    Western concerns about the nearly 1,000 short-range Soviet SS-21, SS-22 and SS-23 missiles in Eastern Europe have been growing recently, partly because the latest missiles may be accurate enough to carry chemical or advanced conventional warheads that could devastate NATO defenses without the use of nuclear weapons.    Pentagon officials have been insisting that an agreement on medium-range missiles must give the U.S. the right to deploy an equal number of short-range missiles in Europe, but the Soviets are pressing for a freeze on such missiles, which would leave them with a virtual monopoly. &quot;Our position now is to require corollary agreement for the short-range weapons,&quot; said former U.S. arms negotiator John Tower yesterday on ABC-TV's &quot;This Week with David Brinkley.&quot;    Civilian aides to Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger are demanding tough new measures to verify an agreement on medium-range missiles, including on-site inspection of the dismantling of SS-20s and of the facilities that manufacture the missiles. These officials argue that if all U.S. medium-range missiles were withdrawn from Europe, a handful of hidden Soviet SS-20s could be used to blackmail NATO.    Nevertheless, senior U.S. officials concede that by reviving his proposal for a separate agreement on medium-range missiles at a time when President Reagan badly needs some progress on arms control to help put the Iran-Contra affair behind him, Mr. Gorbachev has made it harder for the U.S. to hang tough on issues such as verification and short-range missiles.    By appearing to put an agreement on medium-range missiles within reach, the Soviets also may have made it harder for the administration to adopt a looser interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty or to speed up deployment of SDI defenses, as Mr. Weinberger has urged, without appearing to have torpedoed a new-arms control treaty.    Finally, some U.S. officials suspect Mr. Gorbachev may have cleared the way for an agreement on medium-range missiles partly to pressure Mr. Reagan to reciprocate by agreeing to restrictions on SDI research in order to open the way for a broader strategic-arms-reduction treaty. &quot;He's put the ball in our court and he's done so very skillfully,&quot; said one senior U.S. official.    According to some Western sources in Moscow, Mr. Gorbachev's announcement reflects the position he has held on the issue for some time. These sources speculate that the Soviet leader may have been unable to push through the shift in policy earlier because of opposition within the ruling 11-man Politburo.    Mr. Gorbachev has been more anxious than some Politburo members to reach an arms agreement with the U.S. because a more stable relationship with the U.S. would allow him to concentrate on his program for domestic reform, according to some analysts.    Besides the opportunity presented by the Reagan administration's need for arms-control progress in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal, analysts believe the shift in sentiment within the Politburo may have been influenced by the fact that time is running out if the Soviets hope to reach any arms-control agreement with the Reagan administration.    As if to dispel any notion of political disarray on the issue, analysts said, Mr. Gorbachev emphasized in his announcement that he was making the change following a decision taken by the Politburo and after consultation with the country's secretive military Defense Council. Experts in Moscow said the decision to change Kremlin policy probably was taken at the regular weekly meeting of the Politburo last Thursday.    Some observers in Moscow said they began to suspect that Mr. Gorbachev's position on pursuing an arms agreement with the U.S. differed from the stated Kremlin policy last December, when the Soviet leader personally authorized the release of dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov from internal exile. Soon after his release, Mr. Sakharov made a public statement, which was widely publicized in the West, supporting separation of the medium-range missile talks from the other arms negotiations.    &quot;When Sakharov started calling for this right after Gorbachev sprung him from exile, it appeared that it was with his benefactor's blessing,&quot; said one Western diplomat in Moscow. Mr. Sakharov again publicly advised the Soviet leadership to drop its insistence on resolving all nuclear-arms issues as a package when he addressed the international forum that took place in Moscow last month. At the same time, Mr. Sakharov denounced the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative as technically infeasible.    ---   Also contributing to this article was Mark D'Anastasio in Moscow. </TEXT></DOC>