<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880219-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   YELTSIN WAS REMOVED from the Soviet Union's ruling Politburo.    As part of leadership changes announced at the end of a two-day meeting in Moscow of the Communist Party's Central Committee, officials dropped the 57-year-old Yeltsin as a nonvoting member of the Politburo. He was ousted as Moscow party leader last November after criticizing the pace of Gorbachev's political and economic changes. In an address to about 300 members of the policy-making body, Gorbachev said that the Soviet political system needed an overhaul, and that a future session should be devoted to the problems of the more than 100 nationalities that populate the U.S.S.R.    Personnel manager Razumovsky, 52, and state planning chief Maslyukov, 50, were given nonvoting Politburo status, making them the youngest members.    ---   A GROUP CLAIMED responsibility for the abduction of a Marine in Lebanon.    As Shiite Amal militiamen searched throughout southern Lebanon for Lt. Col. William Higgins, the previously unknown Islamic Revolutionary Brigades said it had kidnapped the chief of a U.N. truce observer team. Higgins was abducted Wednesday near Tyre. In Washington, Reagan said he wanted &quot;to rescue&quot; the Marine, but officials played down the idea of a military mission to gain the officer's release.    A U.N. official said that at the time of the kidnapping Higgins was violating travel restrictions for Americans by failing to have a military escort.    ---   Kohl urged quick Senate ratification of a U.S.-Soviet treaty to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The West German chancellor, on a three-day visit to Washington, also told Shultz that Bonn would accept modernization of short-range missiles, but that it first wanted NATO to chart a comprehensive arms-control strategy.    ---   Anthony Kennedy was sworn in as the nation's 104th Supreme Court justice. He succeeds Lewis Powell, who retired. The installation of the former federal appeals court judge from California fills a seat that had been left vacant for eight months as two earlier Reagan nominations faltered.    ---   The House ethics panel recommended that Rep. Mario Biaggi, a 10-term New York Democrat convicted of accepting illegal gratuities, be expelled from Congress for violating rules of conduct. The recommendation must be approved by a two-thirds majority in the House to become effective.    ---   Delaware's du Pont abandoned his GOP presidential bid, and Arizona's Babbitt withdrew from the campaign for the Democratic nomination. Both had finished poorly in the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary elections. They join Haig, who dropped out of the GOP race last week.    ---   Egypt's chief prosecutor demanded the death penalty for the son of the late President Nasser and 10 other people charged in Cairo in a series of attacks on U.S. and Israeli diplomats. Nasser's son, in self-exile in Yugoslavia, is accused of providing funds for a group that carried out the assaults.    ---   Israel imposed restrictions on the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip aimed at hindering the flow of PLO funds into the territories and requiring merchants to prove they have paid taxes. Officials said the rules are intended to cripple the Palestinians economically unless they stop staging strikes and other acts of civil disobedience.    ---   Panama's president met Wednesday in Miami with Assistant Secretary of State Abrams, a State Department spokesman said. U.S. officials said the drug-trafficking indictment against Noriega was discussed, but that Abrams didn't explicitly suggest the U.S. would seek dismissal of the charges if the military chief left politics.    ---   Nicaraguan Cardinal Obando offered a five-point proposal in an attempt to break what he called an impasse between the country's Sandinista government and the U.S.-backed Contra rebels. The chief mediator at the renewed peace talks called on the Contras to accept a 30-day cease-fire in exchange for government concessions.    ---   South Korea's President Roh named seven incumbent ministers to his cabinet, including two to important economic posts. The reappointments indicate that his administration will be one of continuity. Roh is to succeed Chun next Thursday.    ---   The Kremlin indicated that it would push for U.S. backing during Shultz's visit to Moscow next week for a prompt accord ending the Afghan conflict. In Geneva, the U.S. and Soviet Union accused each other of impeding progress toward agreements to reduce long-range nuclear arsenals.    ---   U.S. mine-sweeping helicopters ended a six-month tour of duty in the Persian Gulf. The four Sea Stallion aircraft were transported aboard the carrier Okinawa, which is leaving the gulf as part of a reduction of U.S. warships. In the northern gulf, naval officials said a French warship found and destroyed a drifting mine.    ---   John Demjanjuk denied being a Nazi guard who operated the gas chambers at the Treblinka concentration camp as his yearlong trial in Israel ended. The retired Ohio auto worker, who has claimed a case of mistaken identity, faces a possible death sentence if convicted by the Jerusalem court.    ---   Italian Prime Minister Goria won a vote of confidence in Rome's lower house of Parliament, overcoming an obstacle in an expected temporary revival of his five-party coalition. Goria had submitted his resignation last week following a series of defeats on Italy's 1988 budget, but was asked by President Cossiga to remain as caretaker.    ---   Dissidents in Moscow said police and soldiers beat hundreds of Lithuanians as they gathered to mark the 70th anniversary of the republic's brief independence. A Soviet spokesman denied the reports. The clash reportedly occurred Tuesday in Vilnius. </TEXT></DOC>