<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0144 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL><AUTHOR> Paul B. Carroll </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> WX GM </CO><IN> EDP ELE TEL </IN><TEXT>      Computer Chips Get Fat   To Gain More Speed   COMPUTER CHIPS are going three-dimensional.    Semiconductor companies have been talking for years about plans to run circuits throughout a silicon block rather than just atop a silicon wafer. Going 3-D would allow for vastly faster and more complex chips, but the intricacies of developing such chips have frustrated previous attempts.    Now, Hughes Research Laboratory, a unit of General Motors Corp., says it has produced a demonstration version of a 3-D chip, and Westinghouse Electric Corp. says it will produce products using 3-D chips by early next year. To form the chips, Hughes and Westinghouse in effect create sandwiches out of several more or less conventional chips.    Hughes says it has developed a system of electrical contacts that overcome any misalignment that would occur between the wires running through the stacked chips. Westinghouse says it gets around the misalignment problem by making the individual chips out of a material that doesn't shrink or expand as its temperature changes.    The 3-D chips' size also can pose problems. A single defect can render a chip worthless, and the larger the chip the larger the chance for a defect. But techniques are being improved that allow a chip to reroute electronic traffic around a defect.    While Westinghouse isn't providing details on the speed of its chips, Hughes's figures for its demonstration device indicate it is eight times faster than state-of-the-art chips, according to William I. Strauss, a consultant with Forward Concepts Inc., Phoenix, Ariz. Hughes also is working on a chip the size of a hockey puck, scheduled to be available in mid-1990, that would be 300 times faster than what's available now, Mr. Strauss says.    Chip specialists say that the chips will be restricted to specialized applications that require heavy-duty number-crunching. But they add that the chips could find their way into many commercial applications.    A Type of Spreadsheet   Spreads Its Capabilities   NEW SOFTWARE for financial modeling on a personal computer has been produced by EFS Management Software Inc., Redwood City, Calif., that lets users track five variables -- typically financial results, products, markets, time periods and competitors -- rather than the standard two in programs such as the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet.    The software, called Compete!, lets an analyst easily spot numbers that may indicate problems, or perform &quot;what-if&quot; analysis to see how a specific change would ripple through the business. For instance, an airline could experiment to determine the optimal fare cut for a particular type of ticket that is generating low revenue at a certain time of the year in a few markets, taking into account how competitors have generally responded.    While this sort of analysis is done currently, it typically takes many hours to produce the sort of result -- using manual computations as well as those from other software -- that Compete! can produce in seconds. &quot;You put your fingers on all these (variables) mentally, but pretty soon you run out of fingers and you have to stop and start all over,&quot; says P. William Bane, chief executive of EFS, which is changing its name to ManageWare Inc.    The software, developed over three years and based on work EFS's founders did at the Boston Consulting Group, is expensive at $20,000 a copy. Also, generating the data the program requires can take weeks. And updating that information generally has to be done manually, because the first version of Compete! has limited capabilities for loading data electronically.    Still, early customers say the effort is worthwhile. Brian Burwell, a consultant at Marakon Associates, San Francisco, says he &quot;became absolutely convinced after three months that we couldn't have done (a particular project) without that model.&quot;    Preparing Standards For   Fiber-Optic Links   FIBER-OPTIC developments will boost the speed of computer networks.    A committee of the American National Standards Institute is nearing completion of standards for fiber-optic networks, which will clear the way for networks operating at 10 times the speed of current ones using conventional wire. That increased speed will become necessary because work stations are doubling in power every year and are producing much more sophisticated images.    Most fiber-optic network products won't become available until 1990, but consultants say companies installing networks for highspeed uses might consider using fiber optics now to simplify the transition, even though almost all will initially operate at conventional speeds. -   Gauging Malfunctions   In Manufacturing Gear   SPY TECHNOLOGY is helping monitor the health of manufacturing equipment.    Monitoring Technology Corp., Falls Church, Va., has introduced a product that takes advantage of the sort of signal-processing technology that the military uses in devices that, for instance, track enemy submarines based on the noises they emit.    While other devices can indicate that a machine may be malfunctioning, customers of Monitoring Technology say that its device can even tell which tooth of which gear is damaged and how it is damaged. John Bair, chief engineer, test services, at Eaton Corp., says his company uses the product to test gearboxes it makes, so it can pinpoint any problems in the manufacturing process. But he says the Monitoring Technology product also would take the pulse of manufacturing equipment and would cut repair time. </TEXT></DOC>