<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871111-0159 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:What Went Wrong in Nicaragua?---By Mark Falcoff</HL><DD> 11/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   As director of Latin American affairs for the National Security Council during the Carter administration, Robert A. Pastor played a crucial role in the events that brought down dictator Anastasio Somoza and ushered the Sandinistas into power. Since 1981, first at the University of Maryland and now at the Carter Center at Emory University, Mr. Pastor has emerged as a major critic of the Reagan administration's policies in Central America, particularly of its penchant for what he calls its &quot;unilateralism&quot; and what he sees as its excessive ideological rigidity. In &quot;Condemned to Repetition: The United States and Nicaragua&quot; (Princeton, 392 pages, $24.95) he has combined history, political science and memoir to explain what went wrong in Nicaragua during his watch, and what should be done about it now.    Mr. Pastor's role in the events of 1977-79 has been a matter of controversy. Thus, in spite of its scholarly apparatus and generally judicious tone, &quot;Condemned to Repetition&quot; is, inevitably, an apologia for his conduct and a post-hoc defense of the administration of which he was a part. In itself that need not detract from its value: There is, in fact, much here that will interest anyone who has ever wondered how our foreign policy is really made.    Mr. Pastor's story has three major themes. First, the Carter administration was pursuing policies in Nicaragua that were utterly at cross-purposes -- human rights and nonintervention. Manifestly, one could not be advanced except at the expense of the other: As it turned out, both were pursued in quantities just barely sufficient to alienate both Somoza and his opposition, without either persuading him to leave or preventing his critics from eventually making common cause with the Sandinistas. Thus, characteristically, in the final phase of the civil war, when a Sandinista military triumph seemed imminent, the Carter people were scuttling around trying to find a way to save the National Guard, the very same force whose morale and fighting capacity had been drastically undermined by their own arms embargo.    Second, other Latin American leaders -- Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Perez, Costa Rica's Rodrigo Carazo and Panama's Omar Torrijos -- behaved in an utterly irresponsible and even outrageous fashion. They assumed that the U.S. commitment to nonintervention was a ruse to keep Somoza in power. Thus, when it appeared that the U.S. was unwilling to act decisively, they took the initiative on their own, often lying to Washington as to what they were up to. In the case of Venezuela and Costa Rica, this meant facilitating the transshipment of arms to the Sandinistas from Cuba, even though Mr. Torrijos himself had told an American envoy that &quot;a Sandinista victory will open the door to Castro. . . . This will end in Cuban hands.&quot;    Third, at the Organization of American States, most Latin American governments, but particularly Mexico, were frankly uninterested in what kind of political synthesis emerged in Nicaragua; the important thing was to get rid of Somoza -- the future would take care of itself. Then as now, &quot;nonintervention&quot; meant whatever the Latin American chanceries thought it meant.    Once Somoza fled in tatters, and the Sandinistas installed themselves in the National Palace, the Carter administration had no choice but to make the best of things and hope that, by humility, sweet reason and generosity, the U.S. might wean them away from their evidently Marxist-Leninist ideology and their preference for alignment with the Cubans and the Soviets. At this point the book experiences an abrupt shift in interpretive direction, and reveals a fiercely partisan purpose. Before, the narrative emphasizes the author's efforts to prevent the Sandinistas from coming to power; now, however, though their conduct would seem to justify his earlier apprehensions, the Sandinistas are seen as reacting as much or more to U.S. domestic politics than to their own ideological and political agendas. This allows him to blame the evident polarization in Nicaragua in 1980 partly on the emergence of Ronald Reagan as the Republican presidential candidate! It is only a slight exaggeration to say that for Mr. Pastor, everything bad that happened in Nicaragua before the advent of Mr. Reagan was in spite of the best efforts of the U.S.; since Mr. Carter departed Washington, everything bad that has happened there is more or less equally the fault of Mr. Reagan and the Sandinistas, who reinforce each other's paranoias.    Thus Mr. Pastor satisfies the current requirement of the left wing of the Democratic foreign-policy establishment -- to be anti-Reagan and anti-Contra without appearing to be (and certainly, in Mr. Pastor's case, without actually being) pro-Sandinista. From Mr. Pastor's analysis we derive no map for future policy except to elect someone to the White House in 1988 who will resume in Nicaragua the policies of the Carter administration, policies that -- in his own recounting -- were not brilliantly successful. There is surely a more interesting lesson to be learned here, but though Mr. Pastor searches around for it, most readers will feel it has eluded him.    ---   Mr. Falcoff is a visiting fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. </TEXT></DOC>