<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870119-0032 </DOCNO><HL> USX, UnionTentatively SetLeaner Accord---Steelworkers Predict PactTo End Longest StrikeWill Win Ratification---By J. Ernest BeazleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> X LABOR GMMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><DATELINE> PITTSBURGH  </DATELINE><TEXT>   USX Corp. and the United Steelworkers union reached tentative agreement on a leaner labor contract, spelling an end to the longest steel strike in the nation's history.    The settlement was approved by union local presidents last night in a lopsided 38-4 vote. The four-year contract now faces rank-and-file ratification by 33,000 union members, about one-third of whom are on furlough. Union officials predicted passage of the pact, which capped a week of almost nonstop talks aimed at ending the 172-day-old work stoppage.    Conclusion of the contract dispute would end a second crisis this month for the embattled steel and oil giant. On Jan. 8, New York investor Carl C. Icahn, who had threatened a takeover of USX, dropped his $31-a-share, or $7.19 billion, bid for the company.    The settlement also focuses attention on a long-delayed corporate restructuring, including an overhaul of USX's troubled steel operations. That restructuring, under study since Mr. Icahn accumulated a hefty USX stake last October, is scheduled for board consideration by month's end.    If the pact is ratified within three weeks, as expected, some USX mills will be able to resume operation as early as next month. That will enable the steelmaker, the nation's largest, to recapture a portion of its orders for the second quarter, seasonally the industry's busiest. It also will enable USX to reassure General Motors Corp., its biggest customer, that it will be ready as a supplier when briefings on the auto maker's 1988 model-year requirements begin this week.    At issue in the strike were USX demands for labor concessions. Bent on returning its struggling steel unit to profitability, USX demanded steep wage and benefit cuts and, more important, the right to assign jobs and reorganize work crews without union interference -- the same issue that prompted an industrywide strike in 1959.    Long embittered by the company's diversification into oil, the union drew a line against further sacrifice. Despite doling out concessions to other producers, the union initially rebuffed USX's calls for leaner work crews and demanded instead that the company curtail its free-wheeling use of low-cost, non-Steelworker labor. With the two sides hopelessly apart, 22,000 millworkers went to the picket lines when their three-year contract expired last Aug. 1.    The settlement, a compromise fashioned by Sylvester Garrett, a veteran steel-industry mediator, generally followed previously reported details. Among the highlights:    --USX won estimated labor cost concessions of $2.45 an hour in the pact's first year, including a 99-cent cut in millworkers' average base pay of $12.28 an hour. Savings will decrease gradually over the course of the contract as some benefits are restored on a staggered basis. At the mediator's suggestion, the pay and benefit cuts were modeled after the union's 1986 contract with Bethlehem Steel Corp.    --Union negotiators won the sharp curbs they had sought against the company's use of non-Steelworker labor -- the union's top priority. Subcontracting has boosted the steelmaker's efficiency but cost the beleaguered union thousands of jobs.    --USX dropped its demand for a clause permitting it to reopen the contract if another major steelmaker files for bankruptcy-law protection. Two major steelmakers, LTV Corp. and Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp., already have wrested labor cost savings through bankruptcy-law filings in the past two years, and USX negotiators were deeply concerned about locking the company into a long-term contract only to see another major competitor take the same route. Haggling over the clause accounted for much of the delay in completing the contract last week.    --USX won the union's assent to eliminate 1,346 jobs through craft combinations and similar programs aimed at boosting labor productivity. In exchange, the company agreed to provide sweetened early-retirement benefits to every two Steelworkers for each job reduced. Moreover, USX promised to recall one laid-off worker for every job eliminated.    --Steelworkers won a complex form of profit sharing that would, according to union estimates, currently restore to workers about 40 cents an hour of their wage and benefits cuts. If the company's steel unit were profitable, the payback would be higher.    --Union negotiators won binding commitments from USX to modernize parts of its Monongahela Valley Works at Pittsburgh, thus ensuring its partial survival, and to avert a permanent shutdown for four years of the aging open-hearth furnaces at the Fairless Works near Philadelphia. However, the union failed to secure similar guarantees for the Geneva, Utah, Works -- a prime candidate for closing -- or for other USX mills.    Though some USX mills may restart soon, it will take the steelmaker months to recover from the contract dispute. Competitors say they don't expect USX to become a factor in high-profit-margin products, such as galvanized sheet for the auto industry, until at least the third quarter. &quot;With USX back, the third quarter will be a zoo,&quot; one big steelmaker's chief salesman said.    It had been clear since last weekend that the two sides in the USX dispute were nearing a settlement. Much of the credit belongs to Mr. Garrett, the mediator, who prodded both sides to middle ground. Under the attorney's tutelage, USX Chairman David M. Roderick and Steelworkers President Lynn R. Williams met several times while their staffs worked into the early-morning hours, exchanging proposals.    Sources close to the negotiations said that the bargaining climate soured late Monday when negotiators learned that LTV, the nation's No. 2 steelmaker, had acceded to the federal government's move to absorb LTV's massive unfunded pension liabilities.    Termination of LTV's pension plans, which account for a major portion of its labor costs, puts USX and other major steelmakers at a severe competitive disadvantage. Though the action had been expected, the awkward timing of the termination temporarily stiffened USX resistance to further compromise. </TEXT></DOC>