<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870924-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors:Foreign Policy, Original Intent and Judge Bork---By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DD> 09/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;Original intent,&quot; Judge Robert Bork tells us, &quot;is the only legitimate basis for constitutional decision.&quot; The proposition at first glance sounds plausible. But questions quickly arise. Can it even be shown, for example, that it was the original intent of the Framers that their own original intent should govern subsequent interpretations of the document they framed?    If this indeed had been their original intent, they would obviously have provided a full record of the Constitutional Convention and made it available at once. Instead of doing this, they kept the proceedings secret at the time and for many years thereafter. The best record, that made by James Madison, was not published till 1840 -- more than half a century after the Convention. And Madison's notes are far from complete. James H. Hutson, chief of the Manuscript Division of the Library of Congress and a notable constitutional scholar, calculates that Madison could take down only about 600 of the 8,400 or so words uttered every hour -- about 7% of each hour's discussion. If we cannot know what the Framers said, how can we know what they intended?    During the half-century before the publication of Madison's notes, the Supreme Court made its decisions without benefit of original intent. This did not bother the court or anybody else. &quot;What can a history of the Constitution avail toward interpreting its provisions?&quot; asked Gouverneur Morris, the chief author of the document. &quot;This must be done by comparing the plain import of the words with the general tenor and object of the instrument.&quot;    Not only did the Framers place far less value on original intent than Judge Bork does but they disagreed vehemently among themselves over their own original intent. James Madison and Alexander Hamilton played leading roles in the Convention and collaborated thereafter in writing the Federalist Papers, the authoritative gloss on the new Constitution. What two men better qualified to say what the sacred document &quot;really&quot; meant? Yet within half a dozen years after the Convention these two authorities were engaged in bitter controversy over the constitutional allocation of powers in both domestic and foreign policy. If the original intenders quarreled among themselves about the meaning of the Constitution, aren't Judge Bork and Attorney General Edwin Meese a trifle arrogant to claim two centuries later that the truth about the original intent of the Framers has been revealed to them?    It is reasonable to assume that when the Framers wanted to be restrictive, they were specific (no person can be elected president until he has attained the age of 35) and that when they wanted to be flexible, they were general. The absence of specification in such phrases as general welfare, regulation of commerce, due process, the &quot;necessary and proper&quot; clause and so on constitutes the Framers' clear invitation to posterity to measure the application by the needs of later days. Judge Bork's admirers place him in the school of Felix Frankfurter; but it was Frankfurter who wrote of these phrases that &quot;their ambiguity is such that the Court is compelled to put meaning into the Constitution, not to take it out.&quot;    Judge Bork is too intelligent to deny these obvious points. &quot;Courts,&quot; he has written, &quot;must not hesitate to apply old values to new circumstances.&quot; The question is fidelity not to the text of the Constitution but to what Judge Bork calls the document's &quot;core values.&quot; But Judge Bork has no monopoly on these core values. Every Supreme Court justice interprets the Constitution in terms of his own understanding of the core values. Justice Douglas in the case of the Connecticut law banning contraception saw privacy as a core value; Judge Bork rejects it as a core value. There is no way that Judge Bork can demonstrate that he is right and Douglas wrong.    Yet he continues to insist that he has the inside track -- that he knows better than Douglas, and no doubt better than Madison and Hamilton, what the Framers really intended. But Judge Bork is not a close reasoner nor much of a constitutional scholar. Thus he writes magisterially, &quot;If judges could govern areas not committed to them by specific clauses of the Constitution, then there would be no law other than the will of the judge.&quot; I would like Judge Bork to show me the specific clause of the Constitution conferring on the Supreme Court the power of judicial review.    Judge Bork reminds one of those dogmatic, right-wing eccentrics encountered on college campuses who like to tease and provoke, and make stimulating teachers and affable colleagues. But there is something basically frivolous about his approach to constitutional interpretation. He loftily rebukes other justices for succumbing to their &quot;moral predilections&quot;; then identifies his own moral predilections with the intent of the Framers. His bias is unconcealed: for business against regulatory government, consumers, women, minorities; for majoritarian government against civil liberties; for the executive against Congress.    This last category shows what a faker this apostle of original intent is. If the original intent of the Framers is indisputable on any point, it is on the allocation of the vital powers in international affairs to Congress. Article I of the new Constitution gave Congress not only the exclusive appropriations power -- itself a potent instrument of control -- but the exclusive power to declare war, to raise and support the Army and Navy and to grant letters of marque and reprisal, this last provision enabling Congress to authorize limited as well as complete war. Even Hamilton, the Convention's foremost champion of executive energy, endorsed this allocation of powers. &quot;The history of human conduct,&quot; he wrote in the 75th Federalist, &quot;does not warrant that exalted opinion of human virtue which would make it wise in a nation to commit interests of so delicate and momentous a kind, as those which concern its intercourse with the rest of the world, to the sole disposal of . . . a President of the United States.&quot;    Is Judge Bork respectful of original intent when it comes to the executive and foreign policy? Are you kidding? As Rep. Barney Frank of Massachusetts has well said, &quot;No judge sitting on a federal circuit court has been more diligent and determined than Robert Bork in seeking to prevent judicial review of executive-branch actions in foreign policy.&quot; He tries to make foreign policy an exclusive executive prerogative by denying Congress standing in the courts, by denying the justiciability of cases and by invoking the &quot;political questions&quot; doctrine. His general position appears to be that actions undertaken by the president in foreign policy should be immune to judicial review. On the Supreme Court, should he end up there, he can be counted on to oppose legislative restraints on the president's claim to unilateral power in foreign affairs.    Now a case can be made for these Bork positions. But that case cannot possibly be made by an apostle, as Bork professes to be, of original intent. In his final statement to the Judiciary Committee Bork made a ringing affirmation of &quot;the need for faithful adherence to the text and the discernible intentions of the ratifiers of the Constitution.&quot; Does he really think that it was the intention of men who had been fighting the arbitrary authority of the British king to give predominant power in foreign affairs to the president? Does he really think that this is what the text of the Constitution says? Judge Bork's belief in the constitutional dominance of the president in foreign policy is irreconcilable with his doctrine of original intent.    Judge Bork is a rather confused fellow, given to facile and pretentious verbalizing in the service of illiberal ends. He would hardly seem what the republic requires on the Supreme Court at this moment in its history.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>