<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870407-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Catholic Morality Has Lessons for Us All---By Joan Frawley</HL><DD> 04/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   When the Vatican released its doctrinal instruction opposing all artificial conception techniques last month, it was not expecting accolades. In recent years, Rome's refusal to conform to changing moral standards has provoked critics to dismiss Catholic teaching as the work of celibate men who seek to oppress women and foment discrimination against homosexuals.    The widening distance between Catholic moral doctrine and the shifting ethical standards of Western society has made it almost impossible &quot;to present Catholic morality as reasonable,&quot; concedes Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, prefect of the Vatican congregation that issues doctrinal statements, in &quot;The Ratzinger Report on the State of the Church.&quot;    &quot;Authentic Catholic ethics now appears to many like an alien body from times long past,&quot; Cardinal Ratzinger has wrily observed, &quot;as a kind of meteorite which is in opposition, not only to the concrete habits of life, but also to the way of thinking underlying them.&quot;    Surprisingly, the American reaction to the newest document, &quot;Instruction on Respect for Human Life in Its Origin and on the Dignity of Procreation,&quot; which opposes such procreational techniques as in vitro fertilization, has been comparatively positive.    The instruction outlines the criteria from which to judge the morality of procreational methods: respect for the human embryo as a person from the first moment of conception, the right of a child to be conceived through the marital act and raised by his parents, and the unique right of spouses to conceive a child through the marital act.    Because it judges artificial conception methods by such standards, the Vatican opposes the experimentation with or destruction of human embryos for any purpose. The document also prohibits embryo transfers, nontherapeutic efforts to change genetic inheritance, and most artificial insemination.    Grudgingly, perhaps, even many Americans who normally have little time for the Vatican's views have welcomed a coherent set of principles that encourages a rigorous assessment of new methods of creating and manipulating human life. &quot;Thoughtful people&quot; can welcome this &quot;considered set of views,&quot; said a New York Times editorial that reflected the position of several other influential newspapers.    This respectful, if tentative, reception indicates an appreciation for the social value of Catholic doctrine -- whatever one may think of its creedal cornerstones.    In the church's view, doctrine offers man a path to salvation. But doctrine is also a reflection of the natural law, designed by God, that the church takes as a reality. Adherence to the fundamentals of natural law -- respect for the inherent value of each human life, especially the most vulnerable; respect for the institution of marriage and the family -- provides the basis for a legitimate and stable temporal order.    Our society's inclination toward ethical relativism virtually guarantees the unpopularity of Catholic moral doctrine. Nevertheless, churchmen like Cardinal Ratzinger remain unmoved by demands that the church should tolerate new ethical norms or risk becoming irrelevant. Contemporary history, the cardinal believes, shows us the tragic consequences of ignoring or rejecting fundamental values.    In the 20th century, attacks against the traditional Judeo-Christian understanding of human life, its sacredness and its rights have been justified in the name of political ideologies like communism or Nazism, scientific progress, or newly identified political entitlements, such as the right to abortion. Often the initial motive -- typically, the elimination of suffering or poverty -- could not have appeared more reasonable. Yet once the taking of innocent human life was condoned, in limited cases, the lives of other vulnerable citizens were also soon at risk.    To take one example, recent historical works about German medical and legal currents during the 1920s and 1930s suggest that the justification for eliminating whole classes of &quot;undesirables&quot; did not originate with Hitler, but in an influential 1920 book written by a jurist and a psychiatrist that argued that some people were indeed &quot;unworthy&quot; of life and should not be allowed to live.    &quot;The Release {Permission} of the Destruction of Life Unworthy of Life,&quot; written by Germans Karl Binding and Dr. Alfred Hoche, expressed the utilitarian values of an emerging secular movement that challenged Christian compassion for the handicapped and infirm, suggesting that the practice of charity toward such individuals was unworkable and should be opposed.    Today, Catholic leaders are criticized for their lack of compassion, because they will not condone violations of what they consider to be natural law. When the U.S. bishops led the fight against abortion during the Supreme Court case, Roe vs. Wade, they were described as blind to the plight of desperate women, whose only recourse was coat-hanger abortions. Now, some Americans perceive equal insensitivity in the hierarchy's opposition to the starving of handicapped newborns and the terminally ill. Yet the growing acceptance of these practices confirms the church's early warnings that legalized abortion would erode the value accorded to human life at every stage.    &quot;It takes just about 30 years in our humane society to transform a war crime into an act of compassion,&quot; Malcolm Muggeridge observed in a 1978 speech that considered the changed status of euthanasia, cited as a war crime at the Nuremberg Trials.    When Rome released its instruction opposing artificial conception techniques last month, U.S. bishops understandably expected a hostile reaction. Providentially -- from the Vatican's perspective -- the instruction's release dovetailed with the Baby M court case. As Americans witnessed the distasteful class war that seemed to dominate the custody fight for Baby M, surrogate motherhood had already begun to shed its innocent appeal.    The stipulations in the contract signed by Baby M's natural mother and father prompted further concerns about the rights of the child. The contract spelled out the natural father's right to demand an abortion if pre-natal diagnosis showed &quot;physiological abnormalities&quot;; if the abortion did not take place and the child proved handicapped, the father was absolved from responsibility for the child.    Surrogate motherhood may have lost its storybook quality, but many Americans still believe the kinks in the Baby M tangle can be smoothed out with legislation or better screening of surrogate mothers. Calling itself an &quot;expert in humanity,&quot; the Vatican is less optimistic. Legislation regulating such practices, or other fix-its, says the document, will not make immoral activities moral, nor will superficial linedrawing prevent the ultimate introduction of radical eugenics. Observing the means by which a woman's ovum is fertilized in a test tube, the document cautioned:    &quot;The connection between in vitro fertilization and the voluntary destruction of human embryos occurs too often. This is significant: through these procedures, with apparently contrary purposes, life and death are subjected to the decision of man, who thus sets himself up as the giver of life and death by decree.&quot;    Already tolerant of the taking of life in the womb and even in the newborn ward, some Americans may ignore or accept the necessity of further deaths to produce a &quot;wanted&quot; child or advance scientific progress. For the Catholic Church, this callousness toward violence suggests the indispensible role of traditional Judeo-Christian ethics, designed to protect man from his inherent drive for Godlike authority over his own world.    &quot;Man continually desires only one thing: to be his own creator and his own master,&quot; notes Cardinal Ratzinger in &quot;The Ratzinger Report.&quot; &quot;But what awaits us at the end of this road is certainly not paradise.&quot;    ---   Miss Frawley is a contributing editor to the National Catholic Register. </TEXT></DOC>