<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880111-0062 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: Stone Age Provides Model for Instilling Business Ethics </HL><AUTHOR> Lionel Tiger </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Though other business problems have taken pride of place since October, that of business ethics has not gone away. An anthropological perspective offers some guidelines to ethical action, suggesting how to make it easy for people at all levels of an organization to behave ethically.    The starting point is that our species evolved in small groups of perhaps 25 to 200 hunters and gatherers, groups in which there was no place to hide. Over 200,000 generations or so we evolved great face-to-face sensitivity and a lively skill for &quot;whites-of-their-eyes&quot; assessments of others. Our communications were verbal, personal and direct, and there were no independent, impersonal forms of information and authority such as writing. We were strongly motivated to cooperate because, first of all, many group members were bound together by blood. Second, there were tangible and critical problems to face in the outside world that required the group to stick together.    We survived this way until the shift to agriculture began about 7,000 to 8,000 years ago. (It took time, however, for it to spread widely; even at the time of Christ half the people on the planet were still hunter-gatherers.) Suddenly, the scale had changed. The problems and opportunities had changed. In apparent response, over thousands of years, we developed the preeminent ethical systems still governing our planet -- Buddhism, Judaism, Confucianism, Christianity, Hinduism and Islam.    Today, we seek to apply these forms of social control, broadly generated by and for small farmers and shepherds, to the might of factories and the scope of missile warfare. This is plainly a strenuous business, the more so because the &quot;basic unit of operation&quot; -- the human being -- remains an upper paleolithic hunter-gatherer. A species perhaps two million years in the making is using ethical systems developed a few millennia ago to govern an industrial system hardly 10 generations old: Here is a profound design problem.    Back to business ethics. And back to the small group, which was lost when the new density that agriculture both permitted and compelled changed the rules. Industry is at most 200 years old. The majority of people reading this probably are no more than three generations away from agriculture; great-granddaddy most likely lived on a farm. Yet we've created no commanding industry-based system to operate our lives. Marxism, which sought to do so, was really a cry of pain about industry at its worst historical period and is now a belligerent anti-ethic if it is coherently even that.    My no-fuss recipe is a blend of the hunter-gatherer's small group ethic and modern business's concept of quality control: moral quality circles.    Rather than discussing how to do the work better or more quickly or more imaginatively or in greater coordination with another group, members of moral quality circles would assess whether what they're doing is right or wrong or neutral or fraught with controversy; or if it poses the kind of problem that should be brought to higher management; or if it is the kind of problem that could in time produce either outright malfeasance or a subtler erosion of employee commitment to the decent purposes of the organization.    The justification for the moral quality circle is that people have a kind of &quot;gene for morality.&quot; We are happy to cheer when the good guys win. We are truly outraged (if not also often fascinated) by bad people who act in conscious rebuke to public morality.    Often people who are bad and are exposed as such become severely penitent. They may kill themselves, go into reclusion or offer wrenching restitution to clear their name. Except for the rare sociopaths, virtually all human beings have a fairly clear sense of right and wrong and receive a distinct message from the pit of the stomach during the contemplation or act of malefaction. (The galvanic skin response, while often put to unreliable and unsavory ends in so-called lie-detector tests, is nevertheless another example of basic physiology that reflects our evolution as an animal with no place to hide.)    These ancient but still-lively emotions can be tied into the nature of organizational life to help overcome the all-too-evident capacity of large groups to yield to &quot;if you want to get along, go along.&quot; My hunch is that moral laxity emerges when members of such groups receive little or no dignified opportunity to define their moral views on practical matters without the risk of endangering their occupational health.    In large groups, a form of moral Gresham's Law drives out the probity that individuals try to sustain in their personal behavior. The moral quality circle should institutionalize the possibility that members of work groups operate at their moral best -- not their compromising worst. If an organization's leaders broadcast the implicit message that they are concerned with the organization's ethical as well as economic health, they can mobilize forces of citizenship and commitment, which are also necessary to an organization's general effectiveness. People are energetic for what they believe in, but they may casually inhibit or sabotage what they consider shabby or wrong. Economics and ethics are not mutually exclusive.    The idea here is simple. But it has the virtue of bringing out the best in human nature, millions of years in the making.    ---   Mr. Tiger is professor of anthropology at Rutgers University. His most recent book is &quot;The Manufacture of Evil: Ethics, Evolution and the Industrial System&quot; (Bessie Books/Harper andamp; Row, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>