<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870819-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Northwest Jet HadLong Takeoff Roll,Investigators Say---This article was prepared byJudith Valente in ChicagoAnd Laurie McGinley in WashingtonAnd Scott Kilman in Detroit</HL><DD> 08/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NWA UTXAIRLINES (AIR)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><TEXT>   The Northwest Airlines jet that crashed Sunday in Detroit had a longer-than-normal takeoff roll and apparently had difficulty lifting off the ground, federal investigators said.    Government officials said they were looking into a number of possible reasons why Flight 255 may have been underpowered as it headed down the runway and attempted to take off. They said the causes could include anything from improper loading of the jet's cargo to pilot error and that probably more than one factor was involved.    Inspectors ruled out the possibility of a serious engine fire or explosion because both of the plane's motors were found reasonably intact. However, other engine malfunctions could have prevented the Northwest jet from completing its takeoff.    Federal officials said the cockpit voice recorder on board the jet taped the sound of a warning buzzer, followed by a computerized voice saying &quot;stall, stall.&quot; The warnings were sounded several times in the cockpit just prior to the crash, which killed all but one of the 155 people aboard. Just after one of the stall warnings, one of the jet's two pilots could be heard uttering an expletive.    A jet stalls when its wings provide insufficient lift to keep it in the air. That happens when the plane isn't moving fast enough. It also can happen if the plane noses up too much, making the airfoil shape of the wing ineffective.    The crew of one airplane that was on the ground during the crash has reported to federal investigators that the Northwest plane climbed at a steep angle after using an unusually large amount of the runway to take off. An air traffic controller told investigators that the Northwest jet got no higher than 150 feet in the air before it crashed.    Officials of Northwest declined to speculate about the causes of the crash.    An official of United Technologies Corp.'s Pratt andamp; Whitney unit, which produced the jet's JT8D engines, said that it hadn't yet been determined whether the plane's engines were operating at full power at the time of the accident. He said that it appeared the engines were working when the jet crashed and that there hadn't been a disintegration of the engines. Witnesses offered mixed reports about whether the plane's left engine was spewing flames prior to the accident, government officials said.    An air-traffic controller reportedly saw blue flame coming from the jet's left engine -- an event air-safety specialists said might indicate a compressor stall. A compressor stall would be a serious condition triggered when fuel going into the engine ignites in places other than the burners.    Regardless of other contributing factors, specialists said the circumstances of the crash raised the fundamental question of why the jet didn't have enough thrust. The plane is designed to be able to take off fully loaded with just one engine.    Investigators also were attempting to determine whether the plane's weight or loading of cargo may have been a contributing factor. They said Northwest records estimated the fully loaded plane as weighing 143,700 pounds, just under the maximum allowable weight for that plane of 149,500 pounds. John Lauber, a member of the National Transportation Safety Board, said investigators had found &quot;nothing remarkable&quot; in the weight and balance of the Northwest jet &quot;at this point.&quot;    According to McDonnell Douglas Corp., the manufacturer of the MD-82 jet, the plane should have been able to lift off at its recorded weight using about 7,450 feet of runway. That should have given Flight 255 plenty of room on the 8,500-foot runway that it used in Detroit.    But safety officials said cargo and passenger weights are only estimates and that the location of the onboard load can be as important as the total amount. The Northwest pilots union said it was checking to see whether the airliner had been loaded properly, saying that Northwest recently changed some of its procedures for placing cargo on MD-82 jets.    Aviation officials also were checking weather conditions at the time of the crash to determine whether wind shear -- a sudden change of wind speed or direction -- may have played a role in the disaster. Thunderstorms had been in the vicinity of the airport earlier in the day, and air traffic controllers had been providing pilots with wind-shear advisories.    Mr. Lauber of the National Transportation Safety Board said that a half hour before the crash, wind-shift alerts caused the airport to reverse the direction that planes were using to take off on the runway used by the Northwest plane. Mr. Lauber said the Northwest crew probably was aware of the wind-shear advisories as they prepared to take off.    According to an airport weather report, the crash occurred shortly after a light rain shower and during moderate winds. &quot;There is no obvious indication that there was any strong wind shear,&quot; said one meteorologist who studied the airport's field meteorology reports at the time of the accident. He estimated that, at the most, a wind shear caused by the passing showers would have cost the Northwest jet 15 knots of airspeed, a change the pilot should have been able to handle.    Meanwhile, a check of Federal Aviation Administration records uncovered a third incident of engine failure involving the same jet that crashed Sunday. As previously reported, the Northwest jet, N312RC, was forced to make emergency landings in the past two years in Minneapolis and San Francisco when one of its engines lost power. In each case, the faulty engine was replaced.    Federal records showed a third such episode that occurred in January, when the plane was forced to return for a landing in Memphis, Tenn., because of low oil pressure in the right engine. That engine was repaired and put back into service, according to the FAA.    Northwest is a unit of Minneapolis-based NWA Inc. </TEXT></DOC>