<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871127-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> RANCHO PENASQUITOS, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>    As recently as the 1960s,the land here was overrun with grazing cattle. Now, it iscovered by middle-class housing developments with names likeWoodcrest Glen, Mountain View and Vista Mar.   But although more than 10,000 houses have been built here -- 2,100 in the past two years alone -- community facilities haven't kept pace. The high school, which was built for 2,000 students, has had to set up temporary classrooms to accommodate an enrollment of 3,100. The town library is so small that only 40 people are allowed inside at one time. And nearby, a major sewage station keeps breaking down. Earlier this year, it spilled more than 20 million gallons of raw waste into an ocean estuary.    &quot;I think Pompeii took better care of its sewage,&quot; says Kathleen Zaworski-Burke, who lives in Mountain View. &quot;People can be pushed just so far and then they resist.&quot;    A growing number of people, particularly in the populous southern half of California, are fighting the notion that more is necessarily better. Up and down the coast, communities are adopting measures to restrict growth. In some communities, the controls halt most new construction. In others, they sharply limit or redirect it. But all of them suggest that Californians are turning decisively from their expansionist past. And that raises an important question: If the region that has symbolized urban sprawl for decades is rejecting it, can the heartland be far behind?    Right now, the nation's economy is in flux and tax breaks are evaporating, but the growth-control movement was prompted by economic boom times. Housing starts last year were the highest in a decade, and commercial construction rose to records. In California alone, housing activity was the highest since the boom years of the 1960s.    The movement has a political momentum that recalls the sudden sweep of Proposition 13, the 1978 California ballot measure that prompted a nationwide wave of local tax and budget cutting. Like that measure, it is creating new political alliances, blurring the traditional distinctions between liberal and conservative. In fact, the clamor for slower growth may be part of the fallout from Proposition 13, which slashed spending on local services while development continued unabated.    &quot;There is a new political power base out there in suburbia that's hard to put your finger on, {but} seeds are being planted that will sweep the nation,&quot; says Mark Baldassare, a political scientist and pollster at the University of California at Irvine.    The ease with which local voter-sponsored measures can be placed on ballots here has spurred the movement in California. But some growth-control efforts are already appearing elsewhere. Dover, N.H., has imposed a moratorium on applications for major housing projects. And earlier this month, after years of traffic jams, voters in Fairfax County, Va., toppled growth-minded members of the county board of supervisors.    Population Environment Balance Inc., a Washington-based environmental group, surveyed 1,650 communities across the country. One in five had instituted various land-use controls, and many of these said they planned to bring in growth-management strategies soon, says Robert Gray, who conducted the study.    But California is doing the most. In Los Angeles, by a 71% majority, voters have approved cutting in half allowable commercial and industrial construction in many parts of the city. The city is also considering sharply reducing new construction permits because of strains on the city's sewage system. Residents of the burgeoning towns of San Clemente, Oceanside and Carlsbad have sharply reduced the number of new houses that can be built each year.    In San Diego, which includes Rancho Penasquitos, voters have given themselves the right to approve or reject construction in undeveloped areas around the city. They also voted to cap the number of housing-construction permits at half the rate of 1986. But the cap is temporary and has loopholes, so Mrs. Zaworski-Burke and other community organizers plan to take tougher measures to the voters next year.    Californians are so willing to halt development that, in one straw poll, almost half agreed with a Draconian proposal to ban new construction statewide until federal clean-air standards are met, according to Richard Dresner, a New York pollster who conducted the sampling.    Fifteen of the 17 growth-control measures put to voters in California communities earlier this month were approved. And they won despite strong opposition from development and real-estate interests. In San Francisco last year, developers and their allies spent $360,000 in a vain attempt to block tough controls on the number of new office buildings. The winning side spent $80,000. And last year in the small town of Campbell, Calif., development interests outspent growth-control supporters 37 to 1 -- and still failed to block a measure imposing a building-height limit.    Some growth-control measures have been challenged in court, but most have survived. &quot;The right of a city to zone itself is a power that the courts tend to guard,&quot; says Douglas Ring, a Los Angeles lawyer specializing in growth issues. Recent U.S. Supreme Court decisions do make it clear, though, that communities must draft controls carefully to avoid landowners' arguments that they have been deprived of the full rights to their land without due process.    Meanwhile, elected officials -- long dependent on developers' campaign contributions and politically inclined to compromise -- are coming under fire from voters who want tougher controls. &quot;There's a tremendous frustration in the community, a feeling of being disenfranchised,&quot; says Lynn Benn, a member of San Diego's planning commission.    Voter alienation is tripping up some politicians. Three-term Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley -- once thought unbeatable -- is in political trouble because he didn't support a recent growth-control initiative. A close ally of his in the city council was defeated earlier this year after she strongly opposed the same measure.    Growth-control efforts attract a wide range of supporters, including liberals and conservatives, environmentalists and urban reformers. &quot;It's a new ball game politically,&quot; says Laura Lake, a leader of Not Yet New York, a Los Angeles anti-growth coalition.    In California's Orange County, a left-leaning former mayor and the fiercely conservative former head of the county Republican organization are working together on an important growth-management campaign. The two say that they get along fine as long as they avoid discussing Nicaragua and nuclear power.    Some critics see the growth-control movement as the indulgence of a self-satisfied middle class. And some charge that there are racist roots. &quot;The fact is that a lot of people don't like seeing Hispanics and Asians around,&quot; says Daniel Garcia, the president of the Los Angeles Planning Commission.    But poor black and Hispanic areas of Los Angeles voted strongly in favor of the citywide growth-control measure that has reduced commercial-construction density. &quot;This isn't an elitist movement; this talk of elitism comes from those who are just taking care of themselves,&quot; says Lawrence Agran, the left-leaning mayor of Irvine, Calif., and a leader of the proposed Orange County initiative.    The changing political view of development matches changes in the urban landscape itself. What started as a flight from cities after World War II is coming full circle. Suburbs are no longer a patchwork of houses interspersed between farmers' fields. Today they are often threaded with expressways and pierced by office towers and regional shopping centers. Between 1960 and 1980, when the nation's population rose 26%, the population of urban fringe areas nearly doubled.    People's hopes haven't changed. &quot;They expect the suburbs to be predominantly residential and uncongested -- your basic Ozzie and Harriet life,&quot; says Mr. Baldassare, the University of California pollster.    But insufficient community facilities are a widespread problem. Public-works projects have suffered from years of government penny-pinching, and some giant bills are building.    Until recently, Washington paid for many municipal facilities and services. But federal grants to cities have dropped to less than 10% of cities' revenues from 25% before the Reagan years.    Roads and highways, in particular, are suffering from overuse. The number of cars and trucks on American roadways has climbed about 63% since 1970 while the mileage of streets and roads has grown less than 5%. Traffic in Rancho Penasquitos is so congested at rush hour that it takes 40 minutes to drive just two miles to a nearby freeway entrance. In Southern California as a whole, drivers on major arteries spend about 10% of their time stopped or barely moving. Unless the freeway network is expanded, that proportion is expected to jump to 50% by 2010.    Supporters of strict growth controls in Orange County are urging residents to pin development to traffic. An initiative, likely to go on the ballot next year, would halt most commercial and residential construction in any area where traffic on major roads doesn't average 35 miles an hour -- an impossible goal, the measure's opponents say. The county is even considering building toll roads to parallel existing freeways, a step that would have been heresy not long ago in the land where car is king.    For some years now, California communities have turned to developers to foot the bill for growth, charging &quot;impact fees&quot; to pay for everything from schools and libraries to highway interchanges. These fees have spiraled in recent years -- amounting to $6,500 and more for each new residential unit in California.    Developers argue that such charges are misdirected, and the levies do raise an important issue: Who pays for growth? Cities and towns have traditionally borrowed to finance new facilities. Then, taxes from a growing population paid off the debt. But lately homeowners have been balking, voting down bond issues for new freeways to still-virgin land or sewage-treatment plants for people who haven't yet arrived. &quot;We're not going to pay for our own demise,&quot; insists Tom Rogers, the conservative who is pushing Orange County's anti-growth initiative.    Developers say that the nation can't turn its back on new construction. They maintain that growth controls are economic suicide. &quot;You cannot stop progress,&quot; snaps John C. Cushman III, the president of Cushman Realty Corp., a commercial real-estate broker based in Los Angeles. &quot;If you stop it, you will kill the goose that laid the golden egg.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>