<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880517-0027 </DOCNO><HL> Class Struggle: Dual Stock Categories Spur Powerful Debate Over Stability vs. Gain --- Shares With Multiple Votes Annoy Corporate Raiders And Many Investors Too --- 'If You Don't Like It, Sell' </HL><AUTHOR> Linda Sandler (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MEGA WPOB </CO><IN> STK SCR TNM TEL PUB </IN><G> SEC CNG </G><TEXT>   The Killer Bs are swarming.    Not the insects, but the nation's most powerful voting shares. They're held by people whose per-share opinions, at least, often count up to 10 times as much as the outsider's -- particularly when raiders are prowling the corporate honeycombs.    Among the holders are Katharine Graham of Washington Post Co., the Bryan family of Media General Inc., Norman Alexander of Sequa Corp., Donald Trump of Resorts International Inc. and the Bancroft family of Dow Jones andamp; Co., publisher of this newspaper.    The stock they hold is in a voting category often called Class B. With it, a few big holders could decide to scuttle a billion-dollar takeover. Hence the apiarian nickname.    With this kind of sting, Media General has a strong advantage in defending itself from Hollywood producer Burt Sugarman. No matter how many public shareholder votes Mr. Sugarman wins at Media General's annual meeting Friday, he'll win control of no more than three seats on the company's nine-member board. Bryan family insiders hold only about 14% of the total outstanding stock but control 70% of the vote through Class B shares held in trust.    Such concentrated power exasperates critics, including some regulators, who would like to discourage companies from creating dual classes of stock. &quot;What is the rationale to permit one class of securities to get a bigger piece of the pie?&quot; asks Melvyn Weiss, a lawyer for shareholders who sued to obtain more money for their weak-voting Resorts International Class A shares.    Wall Street has always had a ready response to quibbles of this type: If you don't like the management, sell. But there's money and power involved here. Short-term gain vs. long-term control lies at the heart of the controversy.    From the point of view of insiders, often a founding family with a long commitment to the business, their voting power protects the company from greedy outsiders. &quot;We're selling investment, not control,&quot; Adolph Coors Co. president Jeffrey Coors recently said at Senate committee hearings on high-powered voting stock.    Nobody is forced to buy stock in a company with Class B shares, the argument also goes; and when a company already in public hands issues such stock to existing shareholders, public shareholders as well as insiders share in it proportionately.    Finally, nothing in the arrangement prevents insiders from agreeing to sell the company to a purchaser who wins their approval. If their relatively small shareholdings entitle them to a relatively small share of the gain, then that's the price they paid for control. What could be more equitable?    In discouraging unfriendly takeovers, however, insider control can prevent quick and real killings, as opposed to possibly rosy futures. Partly for this reason, institutional investors overwhelmingly oppose dual classes of stock that discourage profitable takeovers.    Since 1985, one estimate has it, the number of companies with dual classes of stock has risen to 306 from 119, and more companies are creating two classes during this annual meeting season. Concerned by the trend, the Securities and Exchange Commission is drafting a &quot;one share, one vote&quot; rule that would keep companies that create dual stock issues in the future from listing their stock on public exchanges.    The agency is under pressure to back off. Democrat William Proxmire, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, says the issue should be left to Congress; he will try to cut the SEC's budget if it adopts the rule. The proposed rule, he says, would favor &quot;quick-buck&quot; raiders. In reply, an SEC official has privately chastised what he calls this &quot;attempt to pressure an independent agency.&quot; If the rule survives such bickering and takes effect, as the SEC hopes, it will reserve superstock for companies going public -- as E.W. Scripps Co. has proposed to do -- or making acquisitions.    A grandfather clause would recognize dual-class shares registered before May 15, 1987; but this could spell trouble for, among others, Times Mirror Corp. and A.H. Belo Corp., publishing companies that have or will have registered new superstock after that date.    Issues of principle are also said to be involved. Critics argue that supervoting stock undercuts shareholder democracy. &quot;Whatever the motive, the end result is disenfranchisement,&quot; says Steven Matthews, New York City's assistant comptroller and spokesman for a pension group with $200 billion of investments.    If superstock continues to spread, &quot;the rather fragile existing climate encouraging accountability to shareholders will perish,&quot; predicts Robert Monks, a trustee of the Federal Employees Retirement System and president of Institutional Shareholder Services Inc., Washington consultants. Although investors' power is already limited by other anti-takeover defenses such as staggered terms for directors, he says, equal votes retain an implicit &quot;threat of shareholder action&quot; to keep managers in line.    The talk of shareholder democracy smacks of a red herring to A.A. Sommer, a Washington lawyer and former SEC official. &quot;Institutions are just looking for the premium that goes with a tender offer,&quot; he contends.    Dual stock classes first came into vogue back in the 1920s. In offering the public 180,000 shares in its root-beer business, the Hires family locked up control with 3,872 high-voting &quot;management shares.&quot;    Many such examples later moved Harvard professor William Ripley to warn that if mismanagement should result, &quot;It is the public stockholders . . . who stand to lose.&quot; Soon afterward, the New York Stock Exchange established guidelines that, until abandoned in 1986, kept most dual-class stocks off the premier marketplace. Media General and others were listed on the American Stock Exchange or over the counter.    James Martin, who manages $28 billion of stocks at College Retirement Equities Fund in New York, thinks superstock could become a bigger shareholder issue than South African race policies have been, because there's something more than principle at stake. It's called principal. &quot;When dual stock is put in, it has an impact on the price of your shares,&quot; he says.    Individuals with large holdings often push the dual-stock proposals, but surveys show that 70% to 80% of institutions vote against them. In the future, Mr. Monks believes, pension-fund managers and trustees might draw criticism under federal investment standards for buying stock &quot;that gives you no voice.&quot; He calls it &quot;light&quot; stock.    At Media General, &quot;they've taken this concept to the nth degree,&quot; complains Edward Brodsky, a New York lawyer for Mr. Sugarman. With supershares, the Bryans could retain full power while selling almost all their shares and minimizing their financial risk. Their 70% voting power rests in relatively few B shares held in a trust that's voted by D. Tennant Bryan, 81 years old, and his son Stewart, 49. Mr. Brodsky calls the situation &quot;inappropriate for a big public company.&quot; The Bryans decline to comment.    Washington Post Co.'s chairwoman, Mrs. Graham, has a big equity stake now, but could retain control even while selling most of her shares, company secretary Alan Finberg acknowledges. Through a spokesman, Mrs. Graham declines to comment on this &quot;theoretical&quot; event.    Ordinarily, high-voting shares issued to insiders when a company goes public are rarely traded and can command a premium when they do. But the high-voting shares typically issued now by media and other companies that are already publicly held are pro-rated to all shareholders. When such high-voting shares are sold outside the holder's family, they typically convert into ordinary one-vote-per-share stock.    The process works to increase the voting strength of the remaining inside shareholders, allowing them to sell their weak-voting shares without risking loss of control. For example, over time, Mr. Alexander's voting strength in Sequa, formerly Sun Chemical Corp., could rise to 65% from 43% while his ownership interest shrank to 16%.    While this seems fair -- large and small shareholders play by the same rules -- critics complain that it all works directly or indirectly to enhance the controlling interests without a payoff to public investors. In a 1987 study, Prof. Ronald Gilson of Stanford Law School likened dual-stock creation to a cheap leveraged buy-out: Both increase insider control, but dual-class stock costs insiders nothing, while in a buy-out they would usually pay a premium for the public's shares.    In some cases, ordinary investors can lose even if a takeover succeeds. In 1987, trustees of Resorts International's founder, John Crosby, sold Class B shares at $135 each to New York developer Mr. Trump. When the developer later bid $15 for lesser-voting Class A shares, investors sued to try to get more money. The litigation was interrupted when former talk-show host Merv Griffin agreed to pay $36 each for the A shares. His bid now appears uncertain, but he would have paid about four times as much for Mr. Trump's Class B shares -- with 100 votes each. With equal voting power, a controlling stake would have fetched nothing near that premium.    In 1987, Texas Air Corp.'s chief Frank Lorenzo doubled his supershares' votes, gaining great value without cost -- and without the risk of raising his stake. Since early 1987, the beleaguered airline's market value has dropped to about $460 million from $2.2 billion. &quot;If insiders want total control, maybe they should buy a majority {of shares} or go private,&quot; says Gordon Fines, a mutual-fund manager at IDS Advisory Group Inc. in Minneapolis.    In Media General's case, the Bryans contend Mr. Sugarman isn't qualified to run the business. They also have indicated Media General isn't for sale at any price. Mr. Sugarman says the Bryans owe something to public investors. The case &quot;highlights questions about the obligations of holders of supervoting shares,&quot; says Joseph Grundfest, an SEC commissioner.    Media General stock is trading at less than $46 a share. Mr. Sugarman is bidding $70 for it. No matter how well the company is run, says a shareholder, &quot;If the economy is about to fall apart, maybe the stock will never see that price.&quot;    Washington Post also isn't for sale, according to its proxy statement, which says: &quot;The board of directors understands that Mrs. Graham . . . anticipates that she would not vote her {superstock} for any acquisition.&quot;    Media stocks until recently were good to investors. &quot;If we're dealing with a shareholder-oriented management . . . we might approve a proposal that would make transfer of ownership more difficult,&quot; says Robert Kirby, chairman of the $15 billion-asset Capital Guardian Trust Co., Los Angeles. The trouble is, he says, managers might not be doing well in five years, but the supervotes would still be there. Says Mr. Martin of College Retirement, &quot;You're really signing away a right you may never get back.&quot;    Mr. Sugarman's bid for Media General and his legal attack on its dual-stock defense raised hopes among some that such defenses might be struck down by the courts. Even had his initial challenge succeeded, however, lawyers say it wouldn't have been a real test. Media General was one of a number of Amex-listed companies that went public with dual stocks around 1970. The exchange required them to amend their charters so that all shareholders would have equal voting rights on transactions involving any holder of 10% or more of the stock.    This was intended to discourage inside self-dealing, and wasn't specifically aimed at raiders. That should have worked to Mr. Sugarman's advantage in his bid for Media General, because he controlled more than 10% of the shares. However, a court has held that Virginia law, which permits supervoting stock to veto a takeover, overrides the charter provision. </TEXT></DOC>