<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870316-0001 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN CONCEDED that he was wrong to pursue the Iran arms initiative.    The president, in his weekly radio address Saturday, defended the role of Secretary of State Shultz and Defense Secretary Weinberger, who advised Reagan against the arms sales. Saying he had weighed their advice but decided that the initiative was &quot;worth the risk,&quot; Reagan noted that &quot;they were right and I was wrong.&quot; Separately, an ABC-TV executive said arms merchant Manucher Ghorbanifar used journalist Barbara Walters as a conduit to pass on to Reagan his views about U.S. arms sales to Iran and related matters.    An aide to Bush confirmed a report in the Miami Herald that the vice president helped a Guatemalan who wanted to aid Nicaraguan rebels, suggesting in 1985 that the man contact North.    ---   Police in Spain clashed with about 500 demonstrators near a U.S. air base after about 50,000 people rallied peacefully to protest America's military presence and demand that Spain withdraw from NATO. The demonstration coincided with Defense Secretary Weinberger's two-day visit to Madrid to discuss the future of the bases.    ---   A senior U.S. official arrived in Moscow for two days of talks with Soviet officials. Undersecretary of State Armacost's discussions are to focus on U.S.-Soviet differences over regional conflicts in Afghanistan and Nicaragua, and are expected to prepare the way for Shultz's talks next month with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze.    ---   Saboteurs bombed a railway bridge in southern India, derailing an express train and killing at least 22 people. As many as 123 others were injured, officials said. Investigators said leaflets at the scene indicated that Tamil separatist guerrillas were responsible for the explosion, which may have been detonated by remote control.    ---   A purported Israeli spy said his Defense Ministry superiors were aware of the espionage operation involving American intelligence analyst Jonathan Pollard. Rafael Eitan, named as the leader of a spy ring that recruited Pollard, was quoted in an Israeli newspaper as saying he wouldn't be made a scapegoat in the affair.    Britain said it registered a protest with Israel last October over forged British passports, which the Sunday Times of London said were intended to help Israeli agents in counterintelligence activities.    ---   A U.S. appeals court dismissed a jury's $2 million damage award for Mobil Corp.'s former president in a libel lawsuit against the Washington Post. The court ruled Friday that the Post's 1979 report that William Tavoulareas &quot;set up his son&quot; in a shipping firm doing business with Mobil was &quot;substantially true.&quot;    ---   More than 2,000 Hungarians marched through central Budapest to support calls for democracy and freedom. It was the first time in more than 30 years that Hungary's Communist authorities had tolerated an open demonstration of dissent.    ---   Gunmen in Northern Ireland killed two Irish nationalist guerrillas, including the leader of an Irish Republican Army splinter group. Authorities said the killings in Belfast were part of an escalating feud between rival factions within the IRA. In Londonderry, 11 people were injured in a bombing at a police checkpoint.    ---   South African police said they killed a captured black nationalist allegedly responsible for a bomb attack last year. A spokesman in Cape Town said the ANC member was gunned down when he led police to an arms cache and tried to detonate a hand grenade in an apparent escape attempt.    ---   A pro-Iranian clergyman appealed to a group of kidnappers to refrain from carrying out a threat to kill a Frenchman held hostage in Lebanon. The group said it would kill the captive Monday unless France clarified statements about Paris's continued support for Iraq. A newspaper said the killing would strain Syrian-Iranian ties.    ---   An official in Manila said the government panel tracking Marcos's &quot;hidden wealth&quot; has found that the ousted president and his associates still control vast amounts of funds circulating in the Philippine economy. Meanwhile, Marcos's former political party presented its congressional candidates and reaffirmed support for the exiled leader.    ---   South Korea plans to respond &quot;within a few days&quot; to a March 3 call from North Korea for political and military talks, a Foreign Ministry official in Seoul said. The U.S. has urged Seoul to refrain from rejecting out of hand Pyongyang's proposal.    ---   Finland began two days of voting for a new Parliament. The balloting is expected to give the conservatives a major role in the Helsinki government for the first time in more than 21 years and threaten the current center-left coalition's representation. </TEXT></DOC>