<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0125 </DOCNO><HL> The Constitution: 1787-1987---Anniversary Waltz:Although It Isn't Easy,We the People StriveTo Alter Constitution---Amendment Proposals AriseAnd Disappear Regularly;Balanced-Budget Outlook---The Interpretations of Judges---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>      {Last of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- On the final day of the constitutional convention 200 years ago tomorrow, Benjamin Franklin took stock of the government that the delegates had created. &quot;It . . . astonishes me,&quot; he wrote in a speech that was read for him because of his poor health, &quot;to find this system approaching so near to perfection as it does.&quot;    Franklin might be even more astonished to see that while Americans celebrate this near-perfection during this week's bicentennial of the signing of the U.S. Constitution, some people want to significantly change the Founding Fathers' handiwork.    &quot;This generation is faced with unprecedented problems, and it is time to take a new look at the ancient document,&quot; says Arthur Miller, emeritus professor at George Washington University Law School.    Thirty-two states have called for a constitutional amendment to require a balanced federal budget. President Reagan has proposed an &quot;economic bill of rights,&quot; also including a balanced-budget amendment and another making it tougher for Congress to raise taxes. Conservatives hope for amendments curbing abortions and restoring prayer to public schools. Women's groups are again pushing an Equal Rights Amendment. And a group of prominent moderates favors longer terms for members of Congress and permitting legislators to serve in the cabinet.    But many constitutional experts remain unconvinced of the need for change. &quot;I don't say that nothing in the Constitution can be improved,&quot; says Gerald Gunther, a professor at Stanford University Law School, &quot;but the more I hear from the improvers, the more the Constitution is likely to get worse, rather than better.&quot;    Perhaps even more significant are efforts to change the way the Constitution is interpreted by judges. A relatively new school of economic activists, growing in influence, urges a view of the Constitution that would put a high priority on protecting private property and individual contracts from governmental interference. And Attorney General Edwin Meese is campaigning for a return to the original intent of the framers, as the Reagan administration tries to appoint federal judges who will carry this message to their courtrooms.    Such pressures merit greater attention than the prospects for amendments, says Laurence Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School. &quot;The future of the Constitution depends more on the hands of the people to whom we entrust its interpretation than on any sort of plastic surgery,&quot; he says. Prof. Tribe, a leading opponent of the Supreme Court nomination of federal Judge Robert Bork, says, &quot;The Constitution's future is more at stake, with the congruence of the bicentennial and the start of the Bork confirmation hearings, than is the celebration of its past.&quot; The battle over the nomination of Judge Bork, whose confirmation hearings began yesterday, will focus heavily on constitutional interpretation by judges.    Changing the Constitution isn't easy, as backers of amendments have discovered. One point of contention over amendments is whether they should be left to Congress, which can propose an amendment by a two-thirds vote of both houses, or whether there should be a constitutional convention to propose amendments, as the states urge for their budget proposal. In either case, three-fourths of the states must ratify an amendment. The last amendment was ratified in 1971, when 18-year-olds were granted the right to vote.    Critics fear that a new constitutional convention couldn't be limited to one issue, such as a budget amendment, but would become a runaway convention. Liberals fear that would give conservatives a chance to push prayer and abortion proposals. And some conservatives worry that an open convention would give women's groups a chance to push an Equal Rights Amendment. &quot;There really isn't any way you could stop it if you got into a convention,&quot; says Forrest McDonald, a University of Alabama history professor.    Others say a new convention is simply unnecessary to amend the Constitution. Retired Chief Justice Warren Burger, the chairman of the Bicentennial Commission, says a convention would be &quot;a grand waste of time, not to say money.&quot;    Constitutional experts question who would set rules for picking delegates and for the convention, as there hasn't been one in 200 years, and whether the fairness of the rules could be challenged in court. A convention, writes Michael Kammen, a Cornell University history professor, would be &quot;the largest governmental ruckus the nation has seen&quot; since the Civil War.    It may be an academic debate. President Reagan threatened last week that if Congress doesn't act, &quot;it will be our intention to take the case directly to the state legislatures.&quot; But although 32 states supporting a balanced-budget amendment have asked for a convention, efforts to muster the two additional states necessary to force Congress's hand to call a convention have stalled.    If two more states do call for a convention, &quot;Congress would propose a budget amendment quickly,&quot; in order to head off the risk of a new constitutional gathering, predicts Prof. McDonald, who supports a budget amendment as &quot;almost imperative.&quot;    A budget amendment is only part of President Reagan's agenda. He says he wants to make it tougher for Congress to raise taxes. Although he hasn't disclosed specifics, this presumably would entail amending the Constitution to require that tax increases pass Congress by a three-fifths or two-thirds vote.    Pressures for constitutional amendments to overturn the Supreme Court's school-prayer and abortion decisions are fading. Although the Reagan administration still favors action, Congress has refused to approve a variety of proposals, and the states aren't clamoring.    Amending the Constitution has always been hard. Federal legislators have suggested about 10,000 amendments in 198 years, but Congress has proposed only 33 of them to the states. Only 26 have been ratified, and 10 of those were the Bill of Rights that the first Congress proposed in 1789. Also-rans include having two vice presidents and renaming the country the United States of Earth. And the 18th Amendment, ordering the prohibition of liquor sales and ratified in 1919, was repealed in 1933 by the 21st Amendment.    Yet most recent public-opinion polls show majority support for any of a number of possible amendments, from abolishing life tenure for Supreme Court justices to doing away with the Electoral College.    Modern amendments have a seven-year limit for ratification. The deadline for the Equal Rights Amendment, approved by Congress in 1972, was extended from 1979 to 1982, but the proposal still failed. One amendment, providing for federal regulation of child labor, was approved by Congress in 1926 with no deadline and is technically alive, although dormant. It was ratified by 28 states before the Supreme Court ruled in 1941 that Congress already had the authority.    One set of proposed amendments currently debated involves structural changes in government suggested by a self-appointed, bipartisan citizens' panel led by Lloyd Cutler, former counsel to President Carter, and Republican Sen. Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas. This Committee on the Constitutional System argues that conflicts between the branches of government and weakened political parties have &quot;diminished . . . the capacity of the federal government to fashion, enact and administer coherent public policy.&quot;    To ease the stalemate, the panel proposes increasing House terms to four years from two years and Senate terms to eight years from six, with elections to be held only in presidential campaign years. Panel members suggest permitting members of Congress to serve in the cabinet, easing the Senate majority needed for treaty approval from two-thirds to 51%, and giving Congress authority to limit campaign expenditures.    But Stanford's Prof. Gunther says the Constitution's separation-of-powers system was designed as &quot;one with a lot of built-in frictions.&quot;    Reinterpretation of the Constitution is another matter of debate. Attorney General Meese has criticized &quot;activist&quot; Supreme Court justices and federal judges, primarily moderates and liberals, who interpret the Constitution broadly to protect new civil rights, such as privacy, that aren't mentioned in the Constitution. He and President Reagan, who may have appointed half the federal judiciary by 1989, seek judges who will follow the intent of the framers and of legislators.    A highly visible group of economic libertarians is proposing a judicial activism of another stripe. This group argues that a return to the intent of the framers means changing the courts' priorities to afford greater protection for economic liberties, such as owning and using property and making private contracts, while worrying less about other civil rights. This approach was followed somewhat by the Supreme Court from the 1890s to the mid-1930s, when the court struck down much government regulation of business.    Indeed, these new economic activists argue that constitutional protection against government interference with property is more firmly rooted in the intent of the framers than are many of the civil liberties protected by the Supreme Court in recent decades.    They rely heavily on a provision in the Constitution that forbids state laws' &quot;impairing the obligation of contracts&quot;; on part of the Fifth Amendment that says &quot;nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just compensation&quot;; and on the 14th Amendment, which bars states from depriving &quot;any person of life, liberty or property, without due process of law.&quot;    &quot;These guarantees are as explicit as the First Amendment, but the Supreme Court says they don't mean what they say,&quot; says Richard Epstein, a professor at the University of Chicago Law School. He is one of the leaders of the movement, which, though small in size, is marked by forceful, prolific writers who lend it broader influence. Chief Justice William Rehnquist is an occasional ally.    Taken to logical conclusions, this movement would void much government regulation of business, would treat rent control, historic preservation and zoning as taking private property, and would dispute the progressive income tax as beyond the taxing power authorized by the 16th Amendment.    These economic activists set off alarms among liberals and moderates. When President Reagan earlier this year nominated Bernard Siegan, a University of San Diego Law School professor and leader of the movement, to a seat on the federal appeals court in San Francisco, stiff opposition assembled quickly. The nomination now is languishing in the Democratic-controlled Senate Judiciary Committee.    Despite Benjamin Franklin's claims of a near-perfect system, the constant scrutiny and efforts to change the Constitution would come as no surprise to many of those who ratified and carried out the document beginning 200 years ago. The Constitution, Chief Justice John Marshall wrote in 1819, was &quot;intended to endure for ages to come, and consequently to be adapted to the various crises of human affairs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>