<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870602-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Is a Free Market for Electric Power on the Way?---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 06/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PCGUTILITIES (UTI) </IN><TEXT>   Dan Richard, a San Francisco energy consultant who represents the electric power &quot;cogeneration&quot; industry, disagrees about a lot of things with Richard A. Clarke, chairman and chief executive of Pacific Gas andamp; Electric Co. Especially, he challenges Mr. Clarke's claim, aired here on March 31, that California consumers will end up paying an extra $850 million a year because of a federal law that requires Pacific Gandamp;E to buy power from the independents Mr. Richard represents. Cogenerators insist that, to the contrary, the availability of power from non-utility sources is a good deal for consumers.    The interesting thing about this argument, however, is not so much the level of disagreement -- or the intricacies of the cost calculations on both sides -- but the areas of agreement. Mr. Clarke is not against cogeneration in principle; he only objects to being forced by government to buy power he doesn't want or need at prices he thinks are too high. Mr. Richard agrees that there could be benefits all around from freeing up the market for electric power.    Similar views can be found elsewhere. Virginia Power's chairman, William M. Berry, explicitly proposed &quot;a free market for new electric generation&quot; in testimony before the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission a few weeks ago.    While utilities and independents no doubt could have some rousing arguments over how free-market rules would be written, there is little doubt that modern computerized switching technology makes it feasible to broker power, using methods not unlike the NASDAQ trading system for stocks. Indeed, Pacific Gandamp;E already has an elaborate console in its San Francisco headquarters building where technicians purchase power, at price offers transmitted electronically, from other producers in the region. Mr. Clarke, since he took charge of the company a year ago, has stressed to his employees that marketing is becoming increasingly important in the electricity business.    The law that so heavily promoted cogeneration now is more of a hindrance than help to development of a free market in electricity. It is the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act, better known as PURPA, which was a key part of the massive National Energy Act of 1978. PURPA requires electric utilities to buy power from qualified non-utility producers, better known as &quot;qualified facilities&quot; or QFs. Terms and conditions for these purchases are set by state public utility commissions, and they vary around the country. In California they were written by a populist-minded PUC installed by former Gov. Jerry Brown and they get strong support from forces that have set about to break the &quot;monopoly power&quot; of electric utilities.    &quot;PURPA has changed the rules of the game in the electric utility business,&quot; writes Michael J. Zimmer, president of the Cogeneration Coalition of America Inc., in a letter responding to the March 31 article. &quot;Electric utilities no longer hold a monopolistic grip on electric generation.&quot;    Private power companies, of course, are regulated monopolies, and, as Mr. Zimmer notes, traditionally have operated on a cost-plus basis, as regulated monopolies tend to do. But they are as much at home in a regulatory environment as a tiger in the jungle, and the PURPA environment is no exception. Pacific Gandamp;E is neither unprofitable nor wildly profitable. The price-earnings ratio of its stock hovers around 10. PURPA mainly substituted a new form of price fixing for the one that existed before. It succeeded, however, in diversifying the power sources of electric utilities.    Dan Richard was an adviser to former astronaut Russell L. (Rusty) Schweickart, when Mr. Schweickart was chairman of the California Energy Commission under Jerry Brown. Now he represents an organization called the California Cogeneration Council, which most importantly represents large non-utility firms that generate their own power and undertake to sell what they don't need to electric utilities. Some, such as Simpson Paper Co., are sizable electricity producers.    Cogeneration of the type practiced by large firms such as Simpson can be highly efficient. The preferred method of generation makes use of large gas turbines, developed out of jet-engine technology. General Electric Co., a major supplier of turbines, claims that cogeneration can achieve &quot;system efficiencies&quot; as high as 85%, compared with some 35% for conventional power plants. &quot;Combined cycle&quot; turbines achieve high efficiencies in part because the surplus heat they produce while spinning the generator is siphoned off to run a steam turbine. Thus, very little energy is wasted.    Under the PURPA decrees, utilities pay the independent producers for their electricity on the basis of &quot;avoided cost.&quot; That sounds simple enough. The price can be no more than the costs the utility avoided by not having to generate that power itself. But it is by no means that simple. Estimates of avoided costs are based on a combination of the costs of building new facilities and the cost of running them. Gas turbines have a relatively high operating cost and a relatively low fixed cost. The opposite is true of wind generators.    At any rate, Mr. Richard thinks that Pacific Gandamp;E's estimates of how much the formula puts its costs over what they would be if it were doing its own generating are exaggerated. He and other independents like to point to the cost of Pacific Gandamp;E's Diablo Canyon nuclear plant, which overran original estimates, as high-priced generation that could have been avoided. The cost overruns at Diablo, of course, are heavily attributable to delays caused by the obstructionism of the no-nuke lobby, but that is another story.    Mr. Richard does believe that the PUC made a mistake in one sense. As new capacity of whatever type is added to the system, the old, inefficient capacity it replaces diminishes, which means that the utility's own system becomes more efficient. The avoided cost formula didn't take account of this principle.    The 1978 National Energy Act also had a section called the Fuel Use Act, which barred electric utilities from installing new gas-burning generators. This too gave the cogenerators a special position, since they were less limited if they met certain conditions. Just a few weeks ago, however, the Fuel Use Act was repealed, which means that broader use of gas turbines becomes possible. That, at least, represents an important step in the direction of a freer market in energy.    Mr. Richard wonders if with the advent of his cogeneration industry, it remains necessary to have regulation of power generation. &quot;I think we probably need regulation at the retail level but I am not sure whether we need it on the generating side. If not, generation could be open to negotiated contract and we could experiment with a truly free market. I think the price of electricity might come down substantially under those conditions.&quot;    It seems fairly likely, given the advancing technology in power generation and repeal of the Fuel Use Act, that he is right. If two energy experts with such different views of the effects of a regulatory measure as Mr. Richard and Mr. Clarke can agree that less regulation would be a good idea, maybe it is time for the politicians to take a look as well. </TEXT></DOC>