<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870909-0050 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   House and Senate investigators released evidence portraying a warm relationship between Lt. Col. Oliver North and Vice President George Bush, and showing that Bush aides knew as early as last summer of the Marine's secret Contra arms network.    At a critical juncture in November 1985, the vice president sent a handwritten note to Col. North thanking him for his work in Central America. In addition, a memo prepared by Mr. Bush's staff outlines a planned briefing the following May by an intelligence operative on the &quot;resupply of the Contras,&quot; though testimony by the vice president's top military advisers indicates nothing was in fact said about the Contras during the briefing.    Felix Rodriguez, the same intelligence operative who met with Mr. Bush, had been secretly recruited by Col. North in 1985 to assist in the Contra network, and according to the testimony, the Marine officer felt free to &quot;poke&quot; his head into the session with the vice president. Mr. Bush's staff said they were told in August of last year that Col. North was effectively &quot;chairman of the board&quot; behind a private airlift that was running arms into Nicaragua and was believed to be financed partly with funds from abroad.    When informed by an aide last December of Mr. Rodriguez's deeper involvement with Col. North, the vice president apparently reacted mildly. &quot;I do not remember that it evoked a large reaction,&quot; the aide testified.    The testimony and documents released yesterday have been known to investigators for months, but the material still is potentially controversial for Mr. Bush as he pursues the Republican presidential nomination. There remains no firm evidence linking the vice president directly to Col. North's secret Contra network. Nevertheless, his aides clearly knew more than previously indicated yet were reticent in raising questions of potential illegalities.    Stephen Hart, Mr. Bush's press secretary, played down the significance of the new material, but acknowledged that the vice president's office chose not to mention the &quot;resupply of the Contras&quot; briefing memo when issuing a relevant statement this past May.    The November 1985 note from Mr. Bush to Col. North appears important because of what has since been learned about Col. North's activities. Mr. Hart, however, cautioned that Mr. Bush was unaware of these when he wrote to the colonel, who was a National Security Council aide at the time.    &quot;Now that we know what we know, it has a certain context to it that it did not have when it was written,&quot; Mr. Hart said.    &quot;One of the many things I have to be thankful for is the way in which you have performed, under fire, in tough situations,&quot; Mr. Bush wrote to Col. North before Thanksgiving 1985. &quot;Your dedication and tireless work with the hostage thing and with Central America really gives me cause for great pride in you and Thanks.&quot;    In sworn testimony and again yesterday, Mr. Bush's staff said the Central America reference related to a 1983 trip to El Salvador in which Col. North accompanied the vice president. But the letter also coincides with a major turning point in the Iran-Contra operation. Days before, Col. North had participated in efforts to ship U.S.-made Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Iran in an attempt to win the release of American hostages, and he was beginning to carry out plans to set up what became a covert airlift running arms and supplies to the Nicaraguan insurgents.    In connection with this effort, he had recruited Mr. Rodriguez only months before in September 1985, and the Cuban-born operative had ties of his own to the vice president's office through his longstanding friendship with Donald Gregg, Mr. Bush's assistant for national security affairs. Col. North and Mr. Rodriguez have both testified publicly about their dealings, but the depositions released yesterday provide new details from Mr. Gregg and his deputy, Army Col. Sam Watson.    What emerges is an often strained triangular relationship in which the vice president's staff said they were shut out of key administration meetings related to Nicaragua, while Mr. Rodriguez complained bitterly of alleged profiteering by the private allies of Col. North.    Though recruited by Col. North in 1985, Mr. Rodriguez didn't tell Mr. Gregg of his full involvement with the Contras until after being interviewed by federal investigators last December, according to the testimony, and Mr. Gregg and Col. Watson didn't inform the vice president in turn of their suspicions regarding Col. North.    Mr. Gregg's testimony is studded with references to his concern about potential corruption. Two months before the downing of a cargo plane carrying arms to the Contras last October, he and Col. Watson learned from Mr. Rodriguez of Col. North's involvement in providing lethal aid to the insurgents. The vice president's aide suggests that Col. North withheld information from him for fear of an investigation, but neither he nor Col. Watson pressed for such an inquiry themselves.    &quot;I felt that it would happen as a natural course,&quot; Mr. Gregg said, and his notes of a crucial meeting with Mr. Rodriguez in August 1986 obscure Col. North's ties to the network. Though deleted from the unclassified transcript released yesterday, investigative sources said the same notes also refer to evidence that money was coming from Saudi Arabia secretly to buy arms for the insurgents. Mr. Gregg said he never took the information to Mr. Bush. &quot;I frankly did not think it was vice presidential level,&quot; he said.    Col. North emerges as alternately secretive and condescending toward the vice president's men, and then almost cavalier in risking exposure of his secret role. Mr. Gregg described a morning meeting of White House staffers where Col. North played a videotape of Contra supply operations, which sources said was produced by a conservative fund-raising network headed by Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell and publicist Richard Miller.    Col. Watson testified he was excluded from a restricted interagency group regarding Central America, or RIG, that included the NSC, State Department and Central Intelligence Agency. &quot;I tried endlessly to get into those,&quot; he said. &quot;You walk up to a conversation and you would hear the words: 'We will talk about that in the RIG.'&quot;    Neither Mr. Gregg nor Col. Watson could explain the reference to the Contras in connection with the May 1986 briefing. The memo was prepared by Mr. Gregg's assistant, Phyllis Byrne, who said she got the description from Col. Watson. But he said he was &quot;shocked&quot; months later to learn of Mr. Rodriguez's involvement with the Contras and he didn't recall giving &quot;those words&quot; to Ms. Byrne. </TEXT></DOC>