<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880721-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS CAPTURED the Democratic Party's 1988 presidential nomination.    The party's national convention in Atlanta overwhelmingly endorsed the Massachusetts governor, with California's votes putting him in excess of the 2,082 delegates needed to win the nomination. Dukakis is to deliver his acceptance speech tonight. Hours before the traditional roll call of states, Dukakis and his designated running mate, Sen. Bentsen of Texas, held private talks with Jackson. The discussions were described by aides as part of a promised effort to meld the campaigns.    Jackson, whose name also was entered in nomination, pledged his support and enthusiasm to Dukakis for the fall campaign against the GOP's Bush.    ---   KHOMEINI ACCEPTED a U.N.-backed truce as Iraq called for direct talks.    The Iranian leader, in a statement on Tehran Radio, for the first time publicly accepted a U.N. resolution calling for a cease-fire with Iraq, a move some U.S. officials said would lessen suspicion about Tehran's agreement to the plan this week. As the U.N. secretary-general announced plans to send a team to the Persian Gulf nations to work out details of the truce, Baghdad's foreign minister proposed &quot;formal and direct&quot; talks &quot;as soon as possible&quot; between the two nations.    The Security Council adopted a resolution expressing &quot;deep distress&quot; over the U.S. downing July 3 of an Iranian airliner, killing 290 people.    ---   AN ACCORD WAS ADOPTED on ending the 13-year-old war in Angola.    The governments of South Africa, Angola and Cuba agreed to adopt a set of broad principles calling for the withdrawal of foreign forces from Angola and the implementation of a U.N. resolution assuring Namibia's independence from South Africa. A timetable hasn't been set for either action. Pretoria said negotiations, which are to continue next month, will focus on achieving a series of agreements filling in the details of the principles. The talks, mediated by the U.S., began in May.    A hand grenade attack killed a Namibian soldier and wounded about 20 others in a township outside Windhoek. Swapo guerrillas took responsibility.    ---   The FBI arrested eight men in three states linked to pro-Libyan activities in the U.S. According to a federal prosecutor, one was involved in a potential assassination plot against a &quot;high government official,&quot; reportedly Reagan's ex-aide North. They were held on charges of diverting funds from a student group to support Gadhafi.    ---   The Kremlin ordered the expulsion of a prominent Armenian dissident and stripped him of his Soviet citizenship for campaigning to have the Azerbaijan enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh transferred to Armenia. U.S. Embassy sources said Moscow has asked whether Washington would accept the activist, who has been jailed since March.    ---   The Reagan administration welcomed a Soviet offer to dismantle the Krasnoyarsk radar complex in Siberia, but spurned Moscow's attempt to link the proposal, made Tuesday, with other arms-control issues. The U.S., which sees the installation as a violation of the 1972 ABM treaty, said the radar should be scrapped unconditionally.    ---   A federal judge in Florida sentenced convicted Colombian cocaine trafficker Carlos Lehder Rivas to a maximum life sentence without parole plus 135 years. The judge in Jacksonville, who said the sentence was a sign of society's determination to expunge &quot;this cancer,&quot; rejected Lehder's contention that he was a political prisoner.    ---   Israeli troops killed three Palestinian demonstrators and wounded eight in the occupied West Bank, while riot police battled Arab protesters in Jerusalem's Old City. It was considered the most widespread violence in more than a month, and followed the deaths earlier this week of two Palestinians under disputed circumstances.    ---   India braced for a cholera epidemic as monsoon rains carried the water-borne disease to the capital. Health authorities said 84 people have died in New Delhi this month, and doctors urged an inoculation and education campaign to prevent more deaths. Officials reported 205 cases since July 1, compared with 286 cases in all of 1987.    ---   Peru's police fired tear gas and water cannons to disperse protesters as a nationwide general strike disrupted the country's mining industry and affected other commercial activity. The 48-hour strike began Tuesday. Union officials in Lima said at least 23 people had been wounded in clashes with police and about 740 arrested.    ---   Greece's government identified four Arabs it suspects of being involved in the July 11 attack on a cruise ship in the Aegean Sea. Officials in Athens linked the leader of the attack to the 1978 killing of an Egyptian newspaper editor in Cyprus, which was claimed by the Abu Nidal terrorist group.    ---   Died: John W. Galbreath, 90, real estate developer and sportsman, in Columbus, Ohio, of complications of a weak heart. </TEXT></DOC>