<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880610-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Small Business (A Special Report): In the Trenches --- Beware the Big Contract: A Customer Who Provides Most of the Revenue May Be a Threat to the Business </HL><AUTHOR> Frank Allen </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   AT FIRST, it feels like hitting the mother lode: The young, struggling company lands the fat contract.    The customer is a rich, established giant -- a Chrysler, a Sears, a G.D. Searle, a Bell South.    And the customer wants to buy plenty of the little company's output -- 40% of it, or maybe even 75% or 90% of it -- on a long-term, steady basis.    The entrepreneur thinks his dreams have all come true. Success is at hand. Pass the champagne.    But sadly, what begins as the big break can end as the big breakdown. The danger is that the young company will become a mouse in the shadow of an elephant. And a mouse must stay alert and agile to keep from getting crushed. Consider the experiences of a few mice:   --Genex Corp. got its start in 1977 as a chemistry lab. Soon the Rockville, Md.-based company figured out how to manufacture L-phenylalanine, a crucial ingredient in Aspartame, Searle's popular artificial sweetener. In August 1983, Genex signed a big contract to produce the stuff exclusively for Searle, and the good times began to roll. Revenues tripled in one year to $26.4 million; Searle's orders accounted for $20 million of that.    But in July 1985, Searle told Genex it would drop the arrangement as of October. Genex was stunned. It didn't have any other customers line up to buy the output. The company took a $15.9 million loss for 1985, closed its factory, sued Searle and began the gut-wrenching process of starting over.    --A New Jersey businessman left his big employer in 1982 to go it alone. He was eager to run his own show, but he lacked marketing and sales experience. So he jumped at the chance to become an exclusive supplier for his former boss.    &quot;I bought all the raw materials, delivered the goods, and invoiced once a week,&quot; he recalls. &quot;It didn't work out too well.&quot;    Before long, his customer was getting clobbered by foreign competition. Orders for his product plunged. Inventory piled up. Cash flow slowed to a trickle.    &quot;I was out on a limb,&quot; the entrepreneur says. &quot;I had debts of about $1.4 million. I became insolvent for awhile. A lot of people were hurt. I lost $250,000 out of my own pocket. But so what? It's only money.&quot;    --A manufacturer in Iowa wrangled a big contract with Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. But once Sears had claimed a major chunk of the little company's production, it started squeezing hard on price. Scrambling to keep up with purchase orders from Sears, the little company didn't have enough energy left over to pursue other customers or develop other products. Before long, it went out of business.    --Hurst Performance Inc. signed up to provide Chrysler Corp. with gear-shift mechanisms. Betting on a long-term relationship, the tiny Warminster, Pa., firm accelerated production and started stockpiling inventory for future demand. But Chrysler suddenly cancelled the contract. The future demand never came. Hurst was stuck with $1 million of inventory that had to be turned into scrap.    &quot;I can remember the day Chrysler cancelled,&quot; says a former Hurst executive. &quot;That was a real blow.&quot;    ---   The nature of such business relationships is always delicate. For the entrepreneur, they begin with high expectations. A steady volume of sales seems guaranteed. Overhead expenses are covered, even in the lean, slow months. There aren't any urgent worries about marketing plans or distribution channels.    But more often than not, experts say, the little company becomes the giant's captive. The initial advantages gradually turn into handicaps.    &quot;Captives start losing their competitive edge,&quot; says Victor V. Coppola, director of national emerging business services for Coopers andamp; Lybrand. &quot;They stop using the street smarts and coping skills that got them rolling in the first place. They don't develop new products or internal systems or their own management talent. They become order takers.&quot;    Before long, the elephant dictates. He tells the mouse what to produce and when and how much.    &quot;They beat you down unmercifully on price,&quot; says Gerald R. Hildebrandt, vice chairman of the National Association of Corporate Directors. &quot;When you sit down in negotiations, they are telling you all about your costs, and they usually understate them.&quot;    Since 1970, Mr. Hildebrandt has been a professional director, sitting on the boards of more than 30 companies. He recalls a little company that made an automotive part that retailed for $30 in the aftermarket. But negotiators for one of the Big Three automakers, who had contracted for about 40% of the little company's output, insisted that the part be sold to them for $12.    Price squeezes may be only the beginning of trouble. On his own, the entrepreneur is accustomed to making up his mind quickly and acting before market opportunities slip by. But the giant customer has layers and layers of management, so decisions come slowly. Negotiations sometimes seem to take forever.    What's more, the elephant may balk when the mouse tries to diversify by lining up new customers. And when the elephant himself decides to change his plans, the mouse risks extinction if he can't adapt.    &quot;I haven't seen any nice stories, where the circumstances were favorable to the captive over the long term,&quot; says Coopers andamp; Lybrand's Mr. Coppola, who has been advising small businesses for 21 years. &quot;I checked with 10 or 12 partners here, and collectively, they couldn't come up with one winner.&quot;    Reduced to basics, the captive's relationship with the giant customer is usually grounded in fear. For this article, The Wall Street Journal sought the cooperation of 14 captive companies, representing a wide range of industries. Each has an interesting experience or object lesson worth sharing. One colorizes old movies for Ted Turner. Another provides proprietary software to Bell South and U S West. Still others supply vital goods to such giants as K mart, Ford Motor and J.C. Penney. But all declined to participate, out of fear of retribution from their major customers.    &quot;The paranoia that exists in the captive's mind affects every aspect of his business thinking, every aspect of his relationship with that customer,&quot; says Edward A. Suarez, national partner for marketing and business development at Laventhol andamp; Horwath. &quot;They don't want to take any chance of jeopardizing that relationship. It's ironic when somebody who sets out to take control of his own destiny ends up this way.&quot;    One entrepreneur almost found the courage to talk. John Thornton, founder and president of Network Management Technologies Inc., invited me to his headquarters in Atlanta to meet some of his 31 employees, show me his operations and talk about his relationship with Bell South and U S West, the regional Bell operating companies that account for 97% of his business.    But on the morning of the scheduled interview, I waited in Mr. Thornton's office for about two hours while he agonized over whether to proceed.    Carl Albano, his vice president of operations, explained that his boss had been up since 2 a.m., having second thoughts. Down the hall, Network Management and representatives of U S West were negotiating a new contract. It was a delicate juncture, Mr. Albano said, and the boss was nervous.    Shortly before noon, Mr. Thornton appeared with bags under his eyes, in an open-necked polo shirt that looked as if he had slept in it. He smashed the 14th cigarette butt of the morning into his ashtray and exhaled slowly.    &quot;I'm petrified,&quot; he said. &quot;This is a chance I can't afford to take. If my customers are offended by what I say, I'm dead.&quot;    ---   Mr. Allen is chief of The Wall Street Journal's Philadelphia bureau. </TEXT></DOC>