<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0051 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Agencies Awaken to the NeedFor More Data on Nation's Elderly---By Alan L. OttenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Today's elderly are surprisingly well-off; no, many old people live in poverty. Increasing longevity means the aged will enjoy more years of good health; no, it just means they will suffer more years of chronic illness.    Debates such as these go on in good part because of huge gaps in data on the nation's elderly. Now, however, federal officials are waking to the need to know far more about the wealth, health and habits of old people. The result is a surge of efforts to improve data-gathering by a dozen federal agencies, ranging from the Census Bureau to the Veterans Administration.    More knowledge is essential if governments and the private sector are to shape policy intelligently for this increasingly numerous and heterogenous group -- policy on catastrophic illness, long-term care, community care, transportation and a host of other problems.    &quot;We need reliable and usable data . . . on which we can base programs, programs that do cost a lot of money,&quot; says Ohio Democrat John Glenn, who will head the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, one of several congressional committees prodding the government to do better in this area.    Declares Jacob A. Brody, dean of the University of Illinois School of Public Health, &quot;At present our statistical measurements are sparse and crude, leaving us with gaps and guesses.&quot;    The need for more data is particularly pressing because of the exploding numbers of the aged -- and the fact that they consume a disproportionate share of health care, social services and other resources.    Right now, one in eight Americans is 65 or over; by 2030, almost one in five will be. People 85 and over are one of the fastest-growing age groups: 2.7 million today, about five million by the year 2000, and at least 16 million -- more than 5% of the population -- by 2050, when even the youngest baby boomers will be there. Dr. Brody estimates that if present trends continue, within 10 to 20 years &quot;almost half of deaths will occur after age 80.&quot;    One reason for the sparsity of information is that the number of old people -- particularly those 85 and over -- started its dramatic growth fairly recently, the result of decreased smoking and other life-style changes as well as new medical technology and treatment. By the time demographers and officials spotted the escalating numbers, statistical, financial and other problems retarded efforts to find out more.    Though fast-growing, the 85-and-over group still consists of less than three million people out of the total population of 239 million. Thus, only a few hundred turn up in many sample surveys, far too few to permit firm conclusions. Some surveys don't even collect or break out data on people over 75.    For example, the government's most recent national health and nutrition survey -- which includes physical examinations and laboratory tests to help identify risk factors for specific diseases -- didn't survey anyone over 74. Yet the nutritional needs of elderly people can be very different than those of younger ones.    Many surveys, moreover, lump all the elderly into one huge &quot;65-and-over&quot; category, instead of breaking them into smaller groups. Thus, even the Census Bureau's Current Population Survey, the basic survey between decennial censuses, reports results of a few questions for two groups -- 65 to 74, and 75 and over -- but uses the 65-and-over category on most queries.    &quot;Demographically, socially, economically and physically, the group 65 and over is very heterogenous,&quot; says Cynthia Taeuber, the bureau's specialist on aging. &quot;It's very different to be a 65-year-old married couple with Social Security and an 85-year-old widow without it.&quot;    Budget stringency has reduced sample sizes, made surveys less frequent, prevented analysis of data already gathered and killed plans for new studies. &quot;Budget cutbacks are keeping our data from keeping pace with our policy needs,&quot; asserts Georgetown University demographer Beth Soldo.    For example, the government's national nursing-home survey, originally taken every four years, has slipped to an eight-year interval. The survey studies the number and staffing of nursing homes, as well as the number of patients and why they're there. Among other things, information from the survey could tell policy makers whether nursing homes are understaffed, and whether many patients now in them could actually survive in their own homes if they received more assistance from social-service agencies.    The need for economy has also held to a handful the expensive but all-important longitudinal surveys that follow a group of people over many years. For example, the government would like to know more about the way elderly people move from independent living to community care to perhaps a nursing home or hospital. With such knowledge, planners could better determine whether more community-care facilities could reduce the need for nursing homes or hospitals.    Lack of coordination among data-gathering agencies is another problem. Different definitions of &quot;long-term care,&quot; for example, produce different findings. But efforts to correlate such data are often defeated by indifference or turf battles.    Now widespread efforts are under way to remedy the situation. A National Academy of Sciences committee of statisticians, sociologists and doctors is about to propose scores of changes to get more detailed and sophisticated data on both the &quot;younger&quot; old and the very old.    The Census Bureau, the National Center for Health Statistics and the National Institute on Aging have taken the lead in organizing task forces of the main data-gathering agencies to work on filling gaps in old-age statistics. They are looking, for example, at the possibility of reporting more results by five- or 10-year age groups. They also would like to link health-survey data with Social Security or Medicare records to see the effects of poverty on health or the effects of illness on economic status. And they would like to piggyback a few of one agency's questions onto another agency's survey.    The Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics have already agreed to cooperate on an annual report summarizing their data on the aged, analyzed by five-year age categories.    The National Institute on Aging is financing efforts by other agencies to analyze data already on hand but never used. For example, the Census Bureau's Ms. Taeuber has just broken down 1980 data on the elderly by age, race, economic status and other criteria. This has produced such new insights as the huge disparity in poverty rates among different groups of old folks -- from just over 5% for 65-to-69-year-old men living with spouses or other family members, to 73% for black women over 85 living alone.    Spurred by Congress, the NIA and private groups like the Gerontological Society of America, efforts have begun to use the 1990 census to learn much more about the old and very old. The Census Bureau is already field-testing new questions to discover how many elderly are unable to perform routine daily tasks such as eating and bathing, how much income they get from private pensions, and the number and types of old people in so-called board-and-care homes.    Despite the drive to do better, problems remain. Data-gathering budgets will be as tight as ever, perhaps even tighter. One obvious way to get better information, questioning an extra-large number of people, is both expensive and likely to draw counter-demands for similar treatment for children, Hispanics and other groups.    Nor can survey-takers greatly expand the number of questions on any particular questionnaire; the Office of Management and Budget keeps a tight rein on the size and frequency of all government surveys. Problems of privacy and confidentiality derail some attempts at linking survey information; Social Security and Internal Revenue Service officials, for example, jealously guard much of their data.    Still, as the aged and their demands on society continue to increase, pressures will also mount to know more about them. &quot;The ball is rolling,&quot; says Nathan Suzman, an associate director of the National Institute on Aging. &quot;We've made very considerable strides in a relatively short time.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>