<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0041 </DOCNO><HL> New Trading Scandal Bridges the Pacific --- U.S. 'Go-Getter,' Wealthy Asian Face SEC Ire --- This article was prepared by Bryan Burrough in New York, Julia Leung in Hong Kong And Robert Johnson in Chicago </HL><SO> </SO><CO> MS SCH FBC MER SLH AXP </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><TEXT>   Fred C. Lee was a big man in Taipei. The 38-year-old scion of a wealthy Taiwanese family, director of a state-owned utility, protege of a top political boss, he is described as a meditation-loving Buddhist and a bit of a playboy. &quot;When he is not meditating,&quot; a friend says, &quot;he dates women.&quot;    Stephen Sui-Kan Wang Jr. was a big man on campus at the University of Illinois. Fresh from the Chicago suburbs, he founded a club for aspiring entrepreneurs, formed a business called Resumes Etc. Inc. and, two years ago at age 22, snagged a promising job at the Wall Street firm of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. -- all without graduating. &quot;He's a go-getter,&quot; says J.W. Paquette, who directs Illinois's College of Commerce and Business Administration's student-placement program.    The Asian playboy and the Midwestern kid with dollar signs in his eyes are at the heart of what the Securities and Exchange Commission is calling the second-largest insider-trading case in Wall Street history. The two met at Morgan Stanley, where Mr. Lee, a favored client, was a regular visitor. Yesterday Mr. Wang's father, Stephen Wang Sr., said his son believes he was taken advantage of by the older man. Mr. Wang Jr. was &quot;young and green&quot; and was only trying to please a big Morgan client, his father said.    &quot;He might have let one or two things slip that (Mr. Lee) made money on,&quot; says the elder Mr. Wang. &quot;But he didn't mean to.&quot;    Together, the SEC alleges, the two men hatched a scheme that allegedly rang up $19 million in illicit-trading profits, second only to the 1986 Ivan Boesky insider-trading scandal, in which the now-imprisoned speculator agreed to disgorge $50 million in profits and pay a $50 million penalty.    According to the SEC's complaint filed in a New York federal court Monday, Mr. Lee paid Mr. Wang about $200,000 for confidential information on at least 25 Morgan Stanley investment banking deals. It was Mr. Lee who reaped the $19 million trading profit, dealing for about 30 accounts, according to the SEC.    If the SEC charges are true, Mr. Wang may have been close to transferring his alleged scheme to another large Wall Street firm. Doug Koch, a headhunter at Drummond Associates Inc. who recently was assisting Mr. Wang in a job search, said the young analyst made favorable impressions on several potential employers.    &quot;People on Wall Street are crazy -- this kid is no crazier than the rest,&quot; Mr. Koch said. &quot;He was cocky, very sure of himself and he definitely wanted to stay on Wall Street.&quot; But Mr. Wang turned down several possible offers from small Wall Street firms. &quot;He kept saying these places didn't have the deal flow he was looking for. At the time I didn't know what he meant. Now I guess I do.&quot;    Yesterday, federal authorities moved to freeze Mr. Lee's U.S. assets, serving papers on about a dozen major U.S. brokerage firms and banks, according to people familiar with the government investigation. U.S. officials were still marveling at what they characterized as the blatant nature of the Lee-Wang combination. &quot;They didn't even use offshore banks,&quot; one official said. &quot;It was all just so obvious.&quot;    People familiar with the investigation said the SEC is investigating trading records at, among others, Charles Schwab and Co.; Goldman, Sachs and Co.; First Boston Corp.; Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.    These people said that the trading records already are in the possession of the SEC and that they believe this trading is accounted for in the SEC's allegations that Mr. Lee's illegal trading resulted in profits exceeding $19 million.    In his U.S. trading, Mr. Lee, who also has residences in Hong Kong and McLean, Va., may have been carrying out strategies familiar in some Asian stock markets, former associates suggested yesterday. Financial executives believe that insider trading abounds in the Taipei stock market, where Mr. Lee was an active investor. &quot;Dabbling in Taiwan and Japanese stocks is his favorite pastime,&quot; a Taiwanese executive and friend says.    These associates describe Mr. Lee as, in one friend's words, &quot;a 'bon vivant'&quot; who held a raft of largely honorary positions in his native Taiwan. He was the first president of Kwang Hua Securities Investment andamp; Trust Co., which manages Formosa Fund, one of four trust funds enabling foreigners to invest indirectly in the Taiwan stock market.    Mr. Lee held the largely ceremonial job at Kwang Hua for only several months, between March and October 1986, and quit because of prolonged absences from Taiwan. He was supposed to be promoting the fund and cultivating relationships with senior government officials. But he never took his salary and didn't do much for the company, a former associate says.    In Taiwan, Mr. Lee is regarded as a rich kid who has come to enjoy high social status because of extensive family connections. His &quot;godfather&quot; is said to be Tsiang Yien-si, former secretary general of the ruling Kuomintang party, according to Taiwanese financial executives.    His political ties have helped him secure such prestigious positions as a director of Taiwan Power Co., and he is a former general manager of Taiwan Tea Corp., which trades tea leaves. He also manages a charity fund. He earned a degree in public administration from a Taiwanese college before completing a doctoral degree at a college in Oregon.    Mr. Lee is divorced; his ex-wife and two children live in the U.S. He left Taipei abruptly two years ago, disappearing the morning after a celebration party for Formosa Fund. &quot;Nobody at the party knew he was leaving,&quot; a friend recalls. He later told a friend he left for family reasons. But some in Taiwan believe he left because Mr. Tsiang, his mentor, had fallen from favor.    About the time Mr. Lee was slipping out of the Taipei social whirl, young Mr. Wang was on the plains of central Illinois, working his way through the state university at Champaign. An updated resume he sent to several Wall Street firms in recent weeks says he graduated magna cum laude from there. But although he was considered a brilliant student, university officials say Mr. Wang never graduated, having left several courses unfinished.    &quot;His grade-point average (about a B-plus in 1984) was sufficient for anything,&quot; the university's Mr. Paquette says. &quot;But he didn't finish.&quot;    Mr. Wang grew up the second of four children in suburban Arlington Heights, Ill. His father, a Taiwanese engineer, raised the family after Mr. Wang's mother died when he was 10 years old. In high school, he excelled in economics and finance courses and formed a group of neighborhood youths who mowed lawns and did housecleaning.    At the university, Mr. Wang's entrepreneurial skills drew a flattering story in a local paper. He sold coupon books called &quot;Survival Kits&quot; -- a venture that supposedly ended up $200 in the red -- before starting his resume and advisory business. &quot;If you love what you do, money comes along with it,&quot; Mr. Wang told the newspaper.    According to his resume, Mr. Wang worked one summer at the Federal Reserve Bank in Chicago and another summer at Northrop Corp. in Chicago. Both the Fed in Chicago and Northrop confirmed Mr. Wang's employment with them.    Mr. Wang was one of only 10 of the school's 250 finance majors to land a Wall Street job. At Morgan Stanley, he signed on as a junior financial analyst in a two-year program. His resume says he assisted senior investment bankers on a number of takeovers, including Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co.'s acquisition of Stop andamp; Shop Cos. earlier this year and Manpower Inc.'s unsuccessful defense against a hostile takeover last summer. According to the SEC, the Stop andamp; Shop and Manpower deals were among those about which Mr. Wang tipped Mr. Lee.    According to Mr. Wang's resume, he also worked on deals involving Maritime Beverages Co., Lehigh Press Inc. and Findley Adhesives Co., among others. Until last week he was assisting Centel Corp. in the Chicago-based concern's proxy fight against New York investor Asher B. Edelman.    Co-workers considered Mr. Wang somewhat aloof, and he was known for what some considered peculiar work habits. According to one account, the young analyst liked working odd hours: He occasionally would leave at 6 p.m. and return at midnight to work all night long.    Mr. Wang was to have left Morgan Stanley last week -- the end of his two-year program -- and, said several Wall Street investment bankers, had peppered major securities firms with resumes. &quot;I've talked to several people, and this guy has applied everywhere,&quot; said one investment banker yesterday.    Ira Sorkin, Mr. Wang's attorney, reiterated yesterday that he is studying the SEC allegations, and declined further comment.    Mr. Wang's father says the young Wall Streeter, despite his alleged $200,000 windfall, professes to be penniless. But the son remains hopeful that he'll be cleared of any wrongdoing. In a telephone conversation in which his son denied breaking any laws, the father recalls, young Mr. Wang told him, &quot;Everything will come out all right. Don't worry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>