<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871216-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   GARY HART RE-ENTERED the Democratic presidential campaign.    The former Colorado senator, who withdrew from the race last May following disclosures about his relationship with a Miami model, said in a speech in Concord, N.H., that he was &quot;back in the race&quot; because he is a candidate of new ideas that currently aren't being discussed. Hart didn't directly refer to the springtime controversy, but said rejoining the campaign for the nomination was the &quot;toughest thing that I have ever done.&quot; The move was generally greeted with derision.    Hart's renewed candidacy raises questions about financing. His 1984 and aborted 1988 campaigns are reported to be more than $1.1 million in debt.    ---   SOUTH KOREANS CAST ballots in a direct presidential election.    The Seoul government placed all soldiers and police on alert to prevent any attempt to disrupt voting in the country's first direct presidential balloting in 16 years. Opposition candidates Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam warned the ruling party against trying to rig the election so its candidate, Roh Tae Woo, would win. They predicted chaos if fraud were used. Others feared an opposition victory would prompt military intervention.    Election results weren't expected until today. President Chun had agreed to the direct vote after weeks of anti-government protest last June.    ---   Judge Anthony Kennedy concluded his testimony before the Senate Judiciary panel, which is conducting hearings on his Supreme Court nomination. The federal appellate judge avoided challenging the validity of any specific high court decisions, and said little about how he would rule in future cases.    ---   Israeli soldiers stormed a hospital in the occupied Gaza Strip, pursuing Arabs who threw firebombs and stones. As many as four Palestinians were reported killed and about a dozen others wounded in the continuing violence, which erupted more than a week ago in the occupied territories.    Lebanese security sources said Israeli troops clashed with pro-Iranian guerrillas in southeast Lebanon. The fighting occurred in an area believed used to launch a hang-glider attack into Israel last month.    ---   Reagan said he and Soviet leader Gorbachev disagree about the U.S. space-based antimissile project, but that the differences wouldn't block a treaty on long-range weapons. Following the conclusion of the superpower summit last week, the president said the issue had been &quot;resolved.&quot;    The Pentagon said it had conducted a Star Wars test this week demonstrating for the first time that lasers and other high-powered electrical devices can be operated in space without heavy insulation.    ---   The U.S. prepared to deliver to Honduras the first two of a dozen supersonic F-5 fighter jets. The remainder will be sent by April 1989. Separately, Reagan confirmed that Gorbachev offered to suspend Soviet military aid to Nicaragua in an effort to promote Central American peace.    ---   Mexico reached an agreement to avert a general strike that had been threatened to begin Friday. Under the accord, workers will get an immediate 15% pay raise along with a government pledge to index subsequent wage raises to protect workers against inflation.    ---   France dismissed the chairman of a state-owned explosives manufacturer, Societe Nationale des Poudres andamp; Explosifs, that allegedly sold explosive powder to Iran. Paris's action adds new fuel to charges that European firms have contributed heavily to arming Iran in its war with Iraq.    Iranian gunboats attacked a Greek tanker, setting it ablaze near the Strait of Hormuz. Most of the crew was rescued by Persian Gulf salvage boats. In Tehran, Iranian TV showed Khomeini receiving the families of war victims. The move apparently was designed to refute reports he is ill.    ---   The EPA placed restrictions on a Monsanto Co. herbicide, alachlor. The firm said the curbs shouldn't inhibit its sales &quot;to any significant extent.&quot; Separately, Monsanto reached a pact with OSHA that reduces by more than half a $60,000 fine for recordkeeping citations.    ---   A tornado struck West Memphis, Ark., ripping through shopping malls and apartment buildings. At least six people were killed, and National Guard troops were ordered to patrol the city's streets to prevent looting. Meanwhile, a snowstorm that spawned the tornado crossed the Midwest, driven by 75 mph winds.    ---   Japan pledged at least $2 billion in aid to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Japanese Prime Minister Takeshita formally unveiled the aid package, details of which have been previously announced, at a meeting with Asean leaders following their summit in the Philippines.    ---   Bangladesh freed seven political detainees and lifted a ban on rallies, on the eve of today's Victory Day holiday. The move was viewed as an effort to mollify the opposition, which is campaigning for the resignation of President Ershad.    ---   Kenya began moving Ugandan refugees from the border as fighting between Kampala's soldiers and Nairobi's security forces spread along the countries' closed frontier. Fighting flared Monday as Ugandan troops crossed into Kenya, Nairobi said.    ---   A civil rights group said it would appeal a federal judge's decison in Washington that set aside timetables for enforcement of federal anti-discrimination laws in public schools and universities. A spokesman for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund said the ruling &quot;would gut the authority of the federal government to enforce&quot; bias complaints. </TEXT></DOC>