<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Faded Allure:How Municipal BondsWent From Cash CowTo a White Elephant---Wall Street Sours on ThemAnd Investors Grow WaryFollowing Tax Changes---Federal Inquiries Don't Help---By Alexandra PeersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND) </IN><TEXT>   Seymour Roth tries to be nice, even when the brokers call his Fayetteville, N.Y., home at dinner time.    Politely and patiently, he tells one from a New York securities firm, not for the first time, &quot;No, I do not want to buy any tax-free bonds. Thank you very much.&quot;    At first glance, Mr. Roth would seem to be a municipal-bond salesman's ideal prospect. A resident of a high-tax state who has prospered financially running Roth Steel Corp., a scrap-iron processor, he likes the tax-exempt income derived from helping to finance public-works projects.    The brokers are wasting their time, however. Concerned about the effects of higher interest rates and the possible lack of liquidity of the market, Mr. Roth in October sold almost half his six-figure holdings in municipals in favor of investing in tax-exempt money-market funds. &quot;Don't get me wrong -- I love to clip those bond coupons, and I love getting those checks from New York state,&quot; he says, &quot;but the market's in turmoil.&quot;    There are many people like Mr. Roth these days. Even among investors flush with cash diverted from the jittery stock market, &quot;it's a tough time persuading anyone to go into munis,&quot; says Peter Wagner, an Oppenheimer andamp; Co. broker.    Until recently, the business of selling, underwriting and trading municipal bonds was practically a license to print money. Low-risk municipals were eagerly snapped up by buyers who were happy to accept lower interest rates in return for not paying taxes on the bonds' income. For many individuals, municipals were &quot;feather bonds&quot; -- investments so safe buyers could sleep soundly.    But this comfortable arrangement has disintegrated. Within roughly the past year, both the nature of the $730 billion municipal-bond market and its product have been radically altered.    The overhaul of the federal tax system has diminished municipalities' authority to issue bonds and investors' incentives to purchase them. The market's image has been tarnished by continuing federal investigations of possibly fraudulent bond sales. Investors are still smarting from the 1983 default by the Washington Public Power Supply System on a record $2.25 billion of municipal bonds.    More recently, the industry's resources and self-confidence have been undermined by drastic retrenchments in the public-finance departments of several Wall Street firms, including an abrupt pullout by No. 1-ranked Salomon Brothers Inc.    Municipals, in short, are no longer a faithful cash cow for securities firms and government issuers, nor are they a worry-free vehicle for investors. Municipal-bond prices have become more volatile. Both the supply of the bonds and the demand for them have declined. And there is much uncertainty about the prospects for the industry's recovery.    Not everybody is writing off the municipal-bond business. Several large commercial banks, attempting to exploit their ties to retail customers, have received Federal Reserve Board permission to underwrite all types of municipal securities, beginning next March.    Some Wall Street firms also continue to be major players in the municipals market, including Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. and Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. And some see bright prospects. C. Austin Fitts, the managing director of public finance of Dillon, Read andamp; Co., contends Salomon Brothers was &quot;dead wrong&quot; to bail out of the municipal-bond business. She believes the industry will return to periods of &quot;immense profitability&quot; in coming years, as municipalities sell bonds to raise the billions of dollars needed to rebuild wobbly bridges, deteriorating roads and crumbling sewer systems. According to a 1984 report issued by the Joint Economic Committee of Congress, the nation's bill for such construction and repair will total $1.16 trillion by the end of the century.    Several firms, including Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. and Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., have been enthusiastically promoting municipal bonds to individual investors across the country. Their pitch is that right now the bonds offer almost as great a return tax-free as government bonds yield subject to taxes.    What brokers sometimes don't point out is why: When frightened investors fled stocks after the market crash, most of their money went into Treasury securities and money-market funds, driving up the prices and lowering the yields. So the yields on municipal bonds, which normally run at about 75% of Treasury bonds, are out of whack.    &quot;In the past, when money went out of the equities market into the debt market,&quot; it almost always went into municipals, says Jay Goldinger, a broker for Cantor, Fitzgerald andamp; Co. in Beverly Hills, Calif. But now &quot;there's a tremendous amount of concern&quot; about the safety and liquidity of the municipals market, he says.    This investor resistance comes at an inopportune time. The market has become increasingly reliant on the mercurial individual investor as the tax advantages to banks and insurance companies of buying municipals have been diminished by legislation. Individuals and mutual funds now own 57% of outstanding municipals, up from 33% five years ago, according to the Federal Reserve Board.    Municipal-bond investors have taken some hard knocks. Last spring, bond prices went into a dive of almost unprecedented intensity and velocity. In a market where price moves of a half-point a day are a big deal, municipals went into a free fall of nearly 13 points, a decline in value of almost $130 on each $1,000 bond.    Investor complaints to the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, a Washington-based self-regulatory group that arbitrates municipal-bond disputes, have risen to one a week from two or three a year before 1985, says Christopher Taylor, the executive director. While the default rate on municipals continues to be minuscule at less than 0.05% per year, investors who sell bonds before maturity or invest in municipal-bond mutual funds are finding that market swings erode principal. Even the buy-and-hold investors normally insulated from market problems, he says, were stung by a record rise in bond calls last year and the first quarter of this year, as falling interest rates made it possible for municipalities to refinance their debt at lower costs.    The image of the securities hasn't been helped by the continuing investigation into about $12 billion of offerings sold in 1985 and 1986, many of them by the New York securities firm of Matthews andamp; Wright Inc. At issue in the inquiry being conducted by the Securities and Exchange Commission and other agencies is whether the bonds were sold in violation of federal tax statutes.    The investigation has had a chilling effect on the municipal market because of the questions it raises about the market's relative freedom from regulation. Unlike the stock and corporate-bond markets, municipal issues aren't subject to SEC disclosure or registration requirements. But SEC Chairman David Ruder, along with some congressmen, has stated that he supports increased regulation.    &quot;We used to have every kind of customer buying bonds hand over fist,&quot; says Clayton Brown, the president of the Chicago-based bond firm that carries his name and a 35-year veteran of the business. &quot;But the industry got kind of bloated and a little bit sloppy.&quot;    The chief catalyst for much of the market's upheaval was the sweeping Tax Reform Act of 1986.    A cost-conscious Congress restricted the supply of new bonds by imposing a variety of curbs. The tax law discouraged new issues by limiting the amount of certain types of municipals that can be offered in each state. It has eliminated or sharply curtailed bonds sold to aid local businesses, such as for factory construction, or to finance public-private ventures, such as sports stadiums.    The amount of these &quot;private activity&quot; bonds a state can issue now is limited either to $250 million or to the state's population times $75, whichever is greater. The limit drops in 1988 to $150 million or $50 per capita. Not surprisingly, new bond issuance fell 32% in the first 10 months of this year, according to Securities Data Co., a New York research firm, to $83.9 billion from $121.9 billion a year earlier.    Analysts say some bond issuers are also cutting corners. Formerly, for example, almost all the debt issued by municipalities but not repaid out of state and local taxes -- constituting about 70% of the market -- were secured by so-called debt-reserve funds. These are pools of money, roughly equal to the principal and interest paid on the bond issue for an entire year, set aside for emergencies.    Now, says Kevin Conery, senior municipal analyst at Shearson, issuers are looking to do away with the reserve funds because Congress no longer allows the issuers to earn interest on the parked money. Taking the reserve fund's place are insurance policies and letters of credit from banks. &quot;But a promise to pay is never as good as money in your hand,&quot; Mr. Conery says.    On the demand side, the tax law lessened the advantages to investors of buying tax-free bonds by lowering their marginal tax rates. It also made income from some types of municipal bonds subject to the alternative minimum tax, so that high-income investors can't use them to dodge the tax collector altogether. And it limited how much securities firms can profit on underwriting and marketing the issues.    The legislative assaults that keep the market off balance haven't ended. Casting about for revenue raisers, Congress is considering proposals that would constrain the tax breaks corporations get for buying the bonds and would, in effect, reduce the value of bonds currently selling at a discount.    Ironically, Congress's even harsher treatment of other tax shelters was initially expected to help municipals. But Delaware Treasurer Janet Rzewnicki says that many brokers don't understand the tax law's impact on municipals and that they are simply telling clients to consult a tax expert. &quot;Instead,&quot; she says, &quot;investors are asking, 'What other investments do you have?'&quot;    Mutual-fund data for September, the latest month available, show a 7% drop in assets of municipal-bond funds, to $76.6 billion from $82.4 billion in August.    One result of all this has been a sharp increase in volatility. So far this year, the average daily change in municipal-bond interest rates, as measured by a 40-bond index, has exceeded the change in U.S. Treasury-bond rates by about 36%, according to Paul Mastroddi, associate economist of Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. In contrast, in the first seven months of 1986, before tax overhaul, the volatility of the two was about even.    Ralph Norton, the publisher of the Muni Bond Fund Report, an investor newsletter, says the industry cutbacks have made the prices of municipal bonds more volatile.    The new money that has flowed into municipal-bond funds since the stock-market collapse could aggravate the problem. William Veronda, the fixed-income portfolio manager of Denver-based Financial Programs Inc., says much of the inflow has been from investors who will pull it out as soon as they see the potential for gains in stocks or some other investment.    Even before the tax-law changes and Wall Street's retrenchment, the municipal marketplace was thin with spotty liquidity and little standardization of prices. And as firms leave the increasingly less profitable arena and grow wary of taking big positions in the market, its liquidity lessens, says Neal Attermann, municipal research manager for Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.    Some Wall Street analysts fret that the retrenchment could mean less information -- and, thus, less protection -- for investors. &quot;Who's going to be out there watching what's happening?&quot; asks Jerry Webman, director of municipal research for Prudential Insurance Cos. of America. As yield-conscious investors buy more complicated and riskier debt, he says, the need grows for people to monitor the industry. &quot;I just hope,&quot; he adds, &quot;we aren't doing it from the driver's seat of taxicabs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>