<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870109-0063 </DOCNO><HL> New NSC Chief's Ties to Men Cited in Iran Crisis,Illegal Arms Deal May Cloud Housecleaning Task---By Jonathan KwitnyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Frank Charles Carlucci III, who became President Reagan's fifth national security adviser last Friday, has already ordered wholesale staff changes, and friends who have long enjoyed his loyalty predict he'll cleanse the National Security Council in the wake of the Iran-Contra arms scandal. No one has challenged his integrity.    If there's a shadow on Mr. Carlucci's housecleaning prospects, however, it is other old loyalties -- loyalties he has shown to members of a circle that seems deeply involved in the same shadowy world of overseas arms sales and secret dealings that has been exposed in the Iran-Contra scandal. They are former associates of Edwin Wilson, the former U.S. intelligence operative who amassed tens of millions of dollars by illegally selling U.S. arms, explosives and expertise to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and others. Mr. Wilson is now serving a 52-year federal sentence for weapons exports and for conspiracy to murder at least 10 people, including two federal prosecutors.    Mr. Carlucci says he has never met Mr. Wilson and doesn't believe in guilt by association. But he acknowledges investing great faith in two men who have associated with Mr. Wilson, and who have been linked to -- though never formally charged with -- a plot to steal taxpayers' money on arms shipments to Egypt.    Three years ago, the Justice Department declined to prosecute the two men, Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and Erich von Marbod, who have steadfastly proclaimed their innocence. By various accounts, both were occasional visitors to Mr. Wilson's $4 million Virginia estate while he was still a $32,000-a-year civil servant, and continued friendly relations with him after he was ousted from his Naval Intelligence job in 1976. Gen. Secord regularly used Mr. Wilson's private plane, and had an investment transaction with him.    In a recent interview, Mr. Carlucci confirmed that, as deputy defense secretary in 1982, he overrode the Pentagon's general counsel and personally rescued Gen. Secord's career when the general was suspended because of a grand jury investigation into his dealings with Mr. Wilson. Gen. Secord wasn't indicted, but he later resigned his senior Pentagon post after newspapers reported his Wilson ties.    Some current and former law-enforcement officials who were active in the Egyptian arms investigation are still furious over Mr. Carlucci's reinstatement of Gen. Secord in 1982. Now, Gen. Secord has become a focal point of the current scandal surrounding Mr. Reagan's National Security Council, the house Mr. Carlucci is assigned to clean. Gen. Secord reportedly has been involved both in supplying equipment to the Nicaragua rebels and in aiding NSC officials in the covert shipment of arms to Iran. Twice last month, he invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination in refusing to testify before congressional committees probing the arms sales and Contra money.    But it is to Mr. von Marbod that Mr. Carlucci has the closest ties. Mr. von Marbod was the Pentagon's chief arms-sales official, until he resigned, asserting health reasons, while under investigation in the Egyptian arms scandal. Although it was determined that the transactions Mr. von Marbod had approved had led to massive abuses, it was decided there was too little information to charge him with criminal misconduct.    Mr. Carlucci, who is 56 years old, came to the national security adviser's post with broad experience in several administrations, Republican and Democratic. He first entered government as a foreign-service officer in 1955, held high posts in the Office of Economic Opportunity, the Office of Management and Budget, and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare during the Nixon administration, and was deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency under President Carter before becoming deputy defense secretary during President Reagan's first term. He is expected to be the most powerful national security adviser of the five to serve President Reagan, largely because of his broad government experience and because his services are so needed right now.    When Mr. Carlucci left the Defense Department in 1982 to become president of Sears World Trade, the Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. unit that is now closing its doors, he brought Mr. von Marbod along as a $200,000-a-year consultant.    Roderick M. Hills, former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the original chairman of Sears World Trade, who left it in 1984, says, &quot;Erich von Marbod was at least chief of staff for Frank. Erich read all his mail, answered all questions, went to all meetings.&quot; Susan Clough, Mr. Carlucci's executive assistant at Sears World Trade and a former personal secretary to President Carter, says Mr. von Marbod was one of the three people most influential with Mr. Carlucci, the others being his wife and former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld.    &quot;Yes, I listened to him,&quot; Mr. Carlucci responds, laughing. Mr. von Marbod, now a representative of LTV Corp. in Europe, hasn't returned telephone calls.    The relationship of Mr. Wilson, Gen. Secord, Mr. von Marbod and former CIA officer Thomas Clines was reported by The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post in October 1982. The Journal story concerned a 1979 Egyptian arms deal that later resulted in $10,000 in criminal fines paid by a holding company headed by Mr. Clines, and the repayment of $3 million of an alleged $8 million in illegal profits made by Egyptian American Transport andamp; Services Corp., or Eatsco. The profits came from an arms-shipping contract approved by Mr. von Marbod while at the Pentagon; Gen. Secord also oversaw some aspects of the Egyptian arms sales.    Eatsco was co-founded by Mr. Clines, who also has played a role in the secret National Security Council dealings with Iran. Mr. Clines used funds borrowed from Mr. Wilson to establish Eatsco.    &quot;Manhunt,&quot; last year's best-selling book about Mr. Wilson by Peter Maas, contained charges that all four men owned stock in a trading company that invested, through Mr. Clines's holding company, in a major chunk of Eatsco. All but Mr. Wilson have denied this, and Gen. Secord's lawyer, Thomas Green, complained it was an &quot;outrageous accusation&quot; without &quot;a shred of reliable evidence.&quot; The book's publisher, Random House, has refused his demand for a retraction.    According to 1979 correspondence between Mr. Wilson, his lawyer and Mr. Clines's lawyer, which Mr. Maas made available to the Journal, Mr. Wilson expected an ownership share in the trading company. A Jan. 18, 1979, memo from Mr. Wilson's lawyer says stock will be owned by four &quot;individual U.S. citizens,&quot; but doesn't name them. Mr. Wilson's bookkeeper and companion, Roberta Barnes, told the Justice Department that Mr. Wilson had identified Messrs. von Marbod and Clines and Gen. Secord as in on the deal; she and Messrs. Wilson and von Marbod and Gen. Secord met over dinner in London late that January. During the subsequent investigation, Mr. Clines denied he had any partners besides the Egyptian with whom he started the company, and the Justice Department decided it couldn't prove otherwise.    Mr. Carlucci says he first met Mr. von Marbod when he was proposed for the Pentagon arms job. Mr. Carlucci was so impressed, he says, that he battled the Joint Chiefs of Staff to make the appointment; they had wanted a military officer in the job.    A year after Mr. von Marbod resigned, he followed Mr. Carlucci to Sears. Mr. Carlucci says, &quot;I had assured myself the investigation had pretty well run its course. I even saw the results of a polygraph. I have complete confidence in his (Mr. von Marbod's) integrity.&quot;    But Mr. Hills, the former Sears World Trade chairman, recalls that Mr. von Marbod came to him in May 1983 with startling news: He was being investigated by a grand jury, might be indicted over an arms deal, and would resign if Mr. Hills wanted.    Also, Mr. Hills says, it was only then that he learned that Mr. von Marbod was working almost full-time for $200,000 a year. &quot;Frank never bothered to tell me or our budgetary people he was doing something of this magnitude,&quot; Mr. Hills says.    Mr. Hills says of the investigation: &quot;It bothered me. I told Frank, 'It would have been helpful to me if you had mentioned it before we started.'&quot; Mr. Carlucci says, &quot;I'm reasonably confident I mentioned it to Rod Hills&quot; at the start, but adds &quot;it could have happened&quot; as Mr. Hills says. Mr. Carlucci says he &quot;can't recall&quot; whether he had previously told Mr. Hills the size of Mr. von Marbod's fees.    One idea at Sears World Trade, Messrs. Hills and Carlucci and others say, was to lure foreign consulting clients by offering them Mr. Carlucci's expertise in Pentagon procurement. Once the sought-after clients swallowed the bait of military sales, the company would try to sign them up for consulting on all their businesses. Everyone stresses that Sears's headquarters insisted it would be involved only in consulting, not in actual arms trading.    Though Mr. Carlucci says the military procurement consulting arm he started was a success, Sears senior management ordered drastic cutbacks in 1984. &quot;Our strategy proved to be too diverse and too ambitious,&quot; Mr. Carlucci says. &quot;We decided to focus on consumer goods.&quot; After Mr. Hills left the company, Mr. Carlucci ultimately assumed his titles, though under tight control from Sears headquarters in Chicago.    By the end of 1984, Mr. von Marbod was gone. Last October, with reported losses topping $60 million and more expected, Sears announced it would sell some units of Sears World Trade, eliminate much else, and fold what was left into its retailing division.    Mr. Carlucci then brought a wealthy former Iranian finance minister, Hushang Ansary, to Sears management with a proposal to buy some units and possibly retain Mr. Carlucci as manager. Sears decided to sell the units elsewhere. Says Mr. Carlucci: &quot;In my view the Sears World Trade undertaking was a rather extraordinary venture that brought together a lot of very talented people, that someday will be implemented.&quot;    Asked if Mr. von Marbod might join the National Security Council staff, he says, &quot;No, he's very well situated as is. There's no particular fit here for his talents. I haven't even discussed it with him.&quot; He adds, however, that he had called Mr. von Marbod about the time his appointment was announced.    More details of Mr. Carlucci's relationship with Gen. Secord emerged in correspondence last year between Mr. Green, the general's Washington lawyer, and Mr. Maas's publisher, Random House.    The letters, which Mr. Maas showed to the Journal, disclose a secret struggle within the Defense Department in the months after February 1982, when Gen. Secord was suspended because of the investigation. Mr. Green wrote that he had lobbied William H. Taft IV, then the department's general counsel, for Gen. Secord's reinstatement, but that Mr. Taft &quot;refused to budge.&quot;    According to Mr. Green, &quot;After battling with Taft for a couple of months, we ultimately took our case to Mr. Carlucci in early May of 1982. Carlucci proposed a polygraph examination and he further proposed that if Secord passed the examination my client would be immediately reinstated. Gen. Secord instantly embraced the proposal.&quot;    But, the correspondence shows, Theodore Greenberg, the prosecutor who was handling the Eatsco case, objected to &quot;the compulsion inherent in the Defense Department's decision,&quot; and barred the test.    Gen. Secord's lawyer, Mr. Green, said he then &quot;went back to Carlucci,&quot; who demanded better evidence from the Justice Department. Mr. Green says none came, and Gen. Secord was reinstated May 21, 1982.    Mr. Carlucci agrees with this account, except to say that the negotiations were handled through an aide, Francis West, and that he doesn't recall meeting Mr. Green himself. He says he remembers being briefed several times about the Eatsco investigation, including once before a meeting with the Egyptian ambassador.    He says he favored a quick reinstatement of Gen. Secord because &quot;it was a key point in our relations with the Middle East.&quot; Among other things, he cites Gen. Secord's familiarity with arms matters in the area, including the then-pending and highly controversial sale of Awacs planes to Saudi Arabia.    In 1983, Gen. Secord was called to testify for Mr. Wilson's defense, which was trying to show that Mr. Wilson was working with senior U.S. officials at the time of his weapons sales. But most of the testimony sought from Gen. Secord was ruled irrelevant. </TEXT></DOC>