<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880323-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters: For Taxpayers, Some Last-Minute Tips On Saving Money Under the Revised Law </HL><AUTHOR> Jill Bettner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><TEXT>   With April 15 approaching, accountants have been scouring technical publications, Internal Revenue Service announcements and each other's newsletters. And they say they have found an array of ideas to help high-income clients save on 1987 taxes -- or at least position themselves better for the future.    One catch, though, is that some strategies -- like capitalizing fees for investment advice that are no longer fully deductible -- fall into ambiguous areas of the revamped tax code and haven't been tested.    &quot;There are zillions of gray areas,&quot; says Matthew Kessler, a tax partner in the Chicago-based accounting firm Grant Thornton. &quot;You have to match your aggressiveness with the potential penalties.&quot;    Even tips that appear straight-forward may contain unforeseen pitfalls. Harvey Gettleson, a tax partner in the Los Angeles office of accountants Ernst andamp; Whinney, says tax practitioners &quot;won't know with certainty whether a lot of things will work until the government comes out with a ruling one way or the other.&quot; Developing a body of case law -- interpreting major tax legislation -- routinely takes four to seven years, he says, so issues stemming from the Tax Reform Act of 1986 probably won't even begin to be resolved until 1991.    With that caution, tax advisers offer some last-minute tips:   ---   People subject to the alternative minimum tax might want to avoid using the installment method of reporting a gain from selling property last year, says Tom Ochsenschlager, another Grant Thornton tax partner. Paying the 21% minimum tax on the whole gain now could save them from paying taxes on part of the gain later at higher regular tax rates.    ---   People who paid the minimum tax for 1986 but are paying the regular tax for 1987 should remember when calculating last year's income not to include any refund of 1986 state income taxes that didn't benefit them as a deduction last year. &quot;If it didn't actually save taxes, it's tax-exempt this year,&quot; says William G. Brennan, a Valley Forge, Pa., tax adviser.    ---   A Feb. 29 IRS announcement could let some taxpayers deduct additional interest on multiple borrowings.    Under interest-tracing rules effective for people who borrowed money after Jan. 1, 1987, &quot;the name of the game is to match the highest-interest loan to the most deductible purpose,&quot; Grant Thornton's Mr. Ochsenschlager says.    The portion of interest that can be deducted depends on the category, from trade or business interest, which is fully deductible, to consumer interest, which is only 65% deductible for 1987. The category, in turn, depends on how money is used.    The new IRS announcement gives people who spent the money before last Aug. 4 extra leeway to determine the type of interest. Such taxpayers get to &quot;look back 30 days before they got the money and forward 90 days after&quot; to decide how the proceeds were used, says David G. Smith, a tax manager in Washington for Peat Marwick Main andamp; Co. So, people who had several types of debt &quot;can pick anything they want to out of their expenditures in those 120 days and say it came from any loan they like,&quot; Mr. Smith says.    Taxpayers who spent borrowed money after Aug. 4 can only trace their interest deductions to purchases made within 30 days before and after getting the money.    ---   It may be possible to salvage future tax benefits from miscellaneous expenses that can't be deducted this year.    Any fees, such as those for tax preparation and investment advice, are deductible only to the extent that they and other miscellaneous items exceed 2% of adjusted gross income. But people who fall short of that total may still get some tax advantage out of reporting those expenses other ways.    For example, accountants suggest that sole proprietors of businesses, corporate directors or people who have other self-employment income can report the portion of their tax preparer's fee that goes to figuring that income on Schedule C as a business expense.    Some people who rented out their vacation homes or had other rental income that they report on Schedule E can do the same thing, says Joel Isaacson, director of personal financial planning for New York-based accountants Weber, Lipshie andamp; Co.    Mr. Brennan suggests that investors who paid a financial adviser, accountant or lawyer to evaluate complex investments, such as limited partnerships, might be able to add those fees to the cost of the investments. That would reduce the investor's taxable gain when such an investment is eventually liquidated or sold.    Some tax advisers, however, say that while such strategies appear sound, the IRS will be scrutinizing miscellaneous deductions. Says Grant Thornton's Mr. Ochsenschlager: &quot;If you've always deducted a financial planner's fees, for example, and now you decide to capitalize some or all of that expense, the IRS could argue you've changed your accounting method,&quot; which requires the agency's permission.    ---   Free-lance writers and others who use a home computer strictly for business may be able to write off the cost of their equipment against their 1987 self-employment income. Generally, &quot;you can deduct as expenses up to $10,000 of the cost of any equipment used in a trade or business in the year you buy it,&quot; says Mr. Ochsenschlager. But Ernst andamp; Whinney's Mr. Gettleson sees the rules differently. &quot;The deduction can't exceed your net taxable income from that or another trade or business.&quot;    ---   People with money in frozen bank accounts at least get a tax break.    Before tax overhaul, there was no exemption for interest from frozen accounts even if a taxpayer didn't have access to the funds, says Mr. Ochsenschlager. Now, interest on accounts at insolvent financial institutions isn't taxable until it can be withdrawn. Moreover, he adds, taxpayers can take a casualty loss for the amount of such deposits &quot;if they reasonably think they'll never get the money back.&quot;    There's a hitch, though. Casualty losses are deductible only to the extent that they exceed 10% of an individual's adjusted gross income.    ---   Taxpayers can rely on pending technical corrections and alterations to the 1986 and 1987 tax laws that may favorably affect their returns, tax advisers say.    Accountants expect Congress to pass about 400 technical corrections. Most aren't controversial and are &quot;likely to be effective retroactively, anyway,&quot; says Mr. Smith of Peat Marwick. One change, for example, would let individuals use the same depreciation schedules for both the minimum tax and the regular tax. </TEXT></DOC>