<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0098 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- On Sports:The Three Big Thrills of '87---By Frederick C. Klein</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   I have heretofore avoided writing year-end review columns, reasoning that you don't need me to remind you who won the last World Series or Super Bowl. Indeed, given the journalistic blizzard in which big-time sports events proceed these days, the main emotion many feel when one ends is relief.    This year, though, I think three events are worth recalling, because they remind us why we willingly -- nay, eagerly -- sit through the run-of-the-arena contests that make up the bulk of sporting endeavor. That all three took place during a 14-day period between March 30 and April 12 last make them all the more extraordinary. Sports fiction typically fails because it is never as strange or wonderful as fact.    In chronological order, my 1987 Big Three were as follows: Indiana's 74-73 victory over Syracuse in the NCAA basketball final in New Orleans on March 30; Sugar Ray Leonard's boxing triumph over Marvelous Marvin Hagler in Las Vegas on April 6; and Larry Mize's sinking of a 140-foot chip shot on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff to capture the Masters golf tournament in Augusta, Ga., on April 12. Together, they gave us calculation and surprise, drama early and late, and heroes likely and unlikely. If I left anything out of that list, feel free to include it.    Indiana's one-point win in the NCAA hoops windup was both exciting in itself and representative of what has come to be our most competitive annual fray. I say this grudgingly, because big-time college sports are an ethical morass that can be enjoyed only with one's thumb and index finger tightly grasping one's nose. At NCAA tournament time, though, I can convince myself that the quality of the sport makes the exercise worth it.    A good case can be made that the college basketball season-ender is America's Tourney. There's more than enough talent to go around, it involves small towns as well as the big cities that monopolize our professional games, and the collegiate schedule, while long enough to be an academic burden to the participants, isn't so long that it drains everyone's competitive juices. Also, the players and cheerleaders are cute.    The Indiana-Syracuse match began as a prime example of &quot;coach-ball,&quot; with Bobby Knight of Indiana and Jim Boeheim of Syracuse manipulating their pieces as closely as Kasparov and Karpov. In the end, however, the coaches could only watch as pogo-stick-legged Keith Smart, the littlest Hoosier at 6-foot-1 and about 160 pounds, leaped and whirled his way to 12 of his team's last 15 points, including the winning two on a 15-foot jumper with five seconds left. That Smart was a native of nearby Baton Rouge, La. -- a mere set shot from his Superdome heroics -- added piquancy to the show.    The truth-is-stranger line was stronger at the Masters, where winner Mize, a longtime also-ran, was a home-town boy who had cut his spikes at Augusta Country Club, just across the fence from the august Augusta National course where the tourney is held. As a boy, he had worked the scoreboards during Masters weeks, his mind's eye no doubt substituting his own name for that of the leader of the moment.    But it's doubtful that Mize could have imagined the instrument of his triumph, his first in a golf &quot;major.&quot; He had joined the illustrious foreigners Greg Norman and Seve Ballesteros in the Sunday playoff by playing it safe and clinging to par on a course made treacherous by ice-slick greens. Par fours on the first extra hole, the 10th, kept him and Norman alive, while Ballesteros three-putted himself into elimination.    On the second extra hole, the par-four 11th, Norman reached the fringe of the green in two. Mize pushed his second shot to the right of the putting surface, downhill of the cup. Surrounded by a large eyewitness throng and millions of unseen televiewers, he struck a wedge that hit short of the green, bounced on and rolled right-to-left into the cup. Norman then missed a putt that could have tied. Norman had been in the same position when Bob Tway holed a sand shot on the 72nd hole to win the PGA Championship the August before. Talk about coincidence.    You might be interested to know how the distance of Mize's epic shot was set for posterity at 140 feet. In the press tent, the golfer was asked how long he thought it was, and replied that he didn't know. One reporter guessed 130 feet, another 150. Mize suggested they split the difference. If the shot was ever measured precisely, I haven't heard about it.    Sugar Ray's 12-round decision over Marvelous Marv for the middleweight boxing championship was quite different from the above two. Leonard was already a certified hero, and his was a victory of craft, not chance or last-second derring-do. But it was grand nonetheless.    Leonard entered the ring an underdog because he was moving up in weight to fight the fearsome Hagler, and had traded blows for the record only once in the previous five years. He had not, however, forgotten how score is kept in such affairs, and understood that winning seven rounds would give him the match.    And that, more or less, is what he did, punching in flurries when he could and nimbly flitting away from the bull-like Marv when he couldn't. Leonard's expenditure of effort -- mental as well as physical -- seemed perfectly weighed to equal the bout's duration. It was all he could do to raise his arms in triumph afterward.    Some have opined that Hagler won that fight, but I watched it once from ringside and twice on HBO replay, and thought Leonard came out on top each time. &quot;I took his best shots and kept coming,&quot; Hagler noted in his own behalf. He couldn't have made a better argument for his foe. </TEXT></DOC>