<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Keeping Secrets From the Market---By John C. Boland</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   Early this month, the Securities and Exchange Commission sent its version of a proposed &quot;Insider Trading Act of 1987&quot; to the Senate. For years the agency had resisted codifying the nature of such crimes, fearing that objective law could be gotten around and therefore might cramp the regulatory mission.    In pursuit of its novel theories for widening the scope of what is deemed illegal, the SEC over the years has sidestepped adverse Supreme Court rulings. After a 1983 decision exonerated financial analyst Ray Dirks, who uncovered the scandal at Equity Funding Corp. of America, the commission developed a &quot;misappropriation&quot; theory. Under this theory -- along with concepts borrowed from the Investment Advisors Act of 1940 -- the Commission brought a civil complaint against a former reporter for The Wall Street Journal, R. Foster Winans, for leaking word of coming articles to brokers.    The Supreme Court is due to hear arguments in the Winans case this fall, and the government fears that however little the court may approve of Mr. Winans's actions it may find the government's case wanting. Rejection of the misappropriation theory could undermine the SEC's crusade against insider trading -- and call into question the agency's need for a bigger budget; hence an effort to get the basics of the commission's current theories enacted.    The proposed legislation doesn't appear to break new ground, though a few catchall sections could be used at regulators' discretion to launch legally expansive cases. An accompanying SEC memorandum, responding indirectly to criticism the Supreme Court raised in Dirks v. SEC, argues that the proposed bill is not aimed at establishing &quot;a 'parity of information' theory&quot; in which all players in the stock market would be entitled to roughly equal information. Rather, says the SEC, the legislation &quot;generally prohibits any person from buying or selling securities while in possession of material nonpublic information that was 'wrongfully' obtained or the use of which would be wrongful.&quot;    Wrongfully obtained would mean via &quot;theft, bribery, misrepresentation, or espionage,&quot; or through a &quot;breach of a duty&quot; to maintain a confidence or to refrain from trading. That seems to be basically the state of case law under the misappropriation theory. No breach, no misappropriation -- no crime.    The proposal to bar use of nonpublic information about a tender offer, under another section, is far more strict. Here the law would proscribe trading on information about a coming tender offer if the trader &quot;knows or recklessly disregards&quot; that the information has come &quot;directly or indirectly&quot; from the principal players.    This seemingly could be used against traders at the lowest end of the Wall Street grapevine. If a rumor was at all specific -- like last year's talk that Northwest Air wanted to buy Republic Air -- a trader who bought could be acting in &quot;reckless disregard&quot; of the likelihood that the story, if true, must have come directly or indirectly from a principal player. The provision would certainly empower the SEC to make life miserable for professional arbitragers. Trading on plausible rumors could be a lose-lose situation -- hardly an incentive to risk capital.    The justification for these proposed strictures, as laid out in the act, is much the same as the rationale for the rest of the body of SEC intervention. &quot;The fairness, efficiency and integrity of the nation's securities markets are impaired when corporate insiders or other persons who obtain material nonpublic information relating to an issuer or its securities wrongfully trade . . .&quot; and so on. Prohibitions on such trading are necessary, says the proposed act, to &quot;preserve the integrity of the nation's markets and their ability to serve important domestic and international economic functions, including capital formation.&quot;    Curiously, no evidence to support either assertion is offered in the accompanying memorandum. Nor could the SEC Division of Enforcement, when asked, provide any citations of studies demonstrating a correlation between the presence or absence of certain kinds of trading and the market's capital-forming prowess. The record of this bull market suggests that any correlation may be negative.    The SEC memorandum notes that &quot;recent events demonstrate that insider trading is a serious problem in the securities markets&quot; -- and indeed the market has been hit within the last year or so by the Levine, Boesky, Siegel, Yuppie Five and other scandals. Where is the evidence of impairment, of domestic or foreign capital avoiding this cesspool of license?    On the contrary, the stock market (before and after the current crackdown) has been the hottest game in town. The Levine-Boesky market featured a lively grapevine encouraging speculation. More remarkably, for an investor with a choice between rolling the dice on Merrill Lynch's earnings estimates and rolling the dice on the Republic rumors, a rare circumstance prevailed: the presence of real, accurate information in the market, enabling the smallest investor to speculate profitably.    The assertion, in any case, that a government-defined aura of &quot;integrity&quot; is necessary for the functioning of any market can't withstand scrutiny. When one considers the volume of commercial transactions that occurs outside the securities markets every day, none of it policed by a national Commercial Integrity Commission, it should be obvious that fear of deception isn't the primary consideration governing business transactions.    In the securities markets, one can observe that the U.S. was a formidable capital-creating machine long before the SEC era. In the new issues market, particularly the penny market, the public's appetite for speculative ventures is undeterred by the industry's subterranean ethics. In all these examples, the appearance of broad protection is less important to investors than the hope of profit.    If the rationale for regulation is specious, the argument that investors benefit from the SEC's specific rules has even less merit. The business of regulating the flow of information to the stock market is the business of keeping secrets from the market. If people possessing material information are barred from using it in the market, prices will less accurately reflect business realities. An investor or pension fund that sells Republic Air into a market where the buyout is being whispered gets a better deal than if Northwest's plans are known only to Northwest.    It isn't clear why the SEC believes, in its platonic market view, that the brokerage house trader who sees the first public word over a news wire is more entitled to profit from such corporate developments than a short-order cook in Des Moines whose brother works at Northwest.    Nor is it clear why one trader with a legal right to use nonpublic information deserves a federally protected advantage over other investors. Under the misappropriation theory, investors who own material, nonpublic information -- or come by the information innocently -- may use it to advantage over players who lack such access. For example, a financial reporter may in a day's work sample brokers' views about a company, bounce opinions off analysts, poll traders. And any of these people who sensed the drift of an article, or were told the drift innocently, could legally trade the stock in advance of publication. But if the reporter tipped his drinking buddies, who picked up the check, the SEC would ride to rescue the integrity of the market. If a brokerage house gives &quot;first look&quot; on research to a billion-dollar client, who runs a stock five points before the research reaches the retail clientele, that's legal. Institutions in fact pay premiums for first look or first call. If Joe Retail passes the analyst's assistant a sawbuck for early access-watch out, the integrity of the market is in jeopardy.    Even less beneficial to the average investor is the SEC's regulation of trading before tender offers. This might be called the &quot;Bidder Protection Rule.&quot; A would-be raider may buy up to 4.9% of a target's stock from unsuspecting investors before disclosing his plan -- more, actually, during the 10-day &quot;sneak attack&quot; window before a 13D must be filled. The theory here is that before a certain threshold is crossed, a private market participant needn't tip his hand. Fair enough.    What about somebody who gets wind of the raider's secret plan? According to the SEC's &quot;Insider Trading Act of 1987,&quot; the mere possession of the information is a bar to action. How the information was obtained is deemed immaterial; that is, &quot;misappropriation&quot; or &quot;breach of a duty&quot; isn't necessary for trading to be illegal. The SEC thus not only lifts from a corporate raider the responsibility for policing people under contractual bonds of secrecy (using civil remedies or prosecuting under state theft laws) but also relieves him of the responsibility of protecting his business plan from even accidental disclosure. One has to wonder: Under what distorted theory of property does acting on knowledge, innocently obtained, of another businessman's intentions become a crime?    Whether this will pass muster with the courts is an open question. But it demonstrates how far SEC policy has strayed from its rationale of investor protection. Far from seeking the SEC's old goal of parity of information, the legislation would insist upon inequality, making it a felony for a small investor to discover -- and act on -- a raider's plans. And, of course, it would bar any other prospective acquirer, knowing a sneak attack is afoot, from competing for stock with higher bids.    As the SEC tells it, keeping information and participants on the sidelines furthers the market's efficiency and integrity. And keeping investors in the dark, or hobbled, protects them. The contortions reflect a reality: At the SEC, neither investor protection nor an efficient market is the priority. The SEC's cause is narrower: regulatory muscle, staff and budget. To that end, it pays homage to the day's political mood.    ---   Mr. Boland has written widely on the markets and insider trading. </TEXT></DOC>