<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870130-0023 </DOCNO><HL> U.S., EC SettleTrade DisputeOn Agriculture---Americans Win ConcessionsIn Farm-Products Pact;Showdown is Averted---By Art Pine and Wendy L. WallStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The U.S. and the European Community settled their dispute over agricultural exports, averting scheduled U.S. retaliation that had threatened to escalate into a trade war.    Trade officials from the two sides approved an agreement that will meet U.S. demands that Spain and Portugal roll back tariff increases they imposed on U.S. corn and sorghum as a condition to their recent entry into the Common Market. The increases were designed to bring those countries' tariffs in line with a European-wide standard. Also as a part of the agreement, the EC will reduce tariffs on some 26 other U.S. products, from cranberry juice to chemicals.    The U.S., contending the higher tariffs would have cost U.S. farmers some $400 million in lost sales, demanded that the Common Market pay &quot;compensation&quot; by reducing trade barriers on other farm products. With U.S. farmers already hard-hit by the decline in world agricultural prices, Washington had pressed its case vigorously, threatening to impose 200% tariffs beginning today on a spate of European goods -- including white wine, brandy, endives, olives, carrots, canned ham and cheese -- if the Common Market didn't relent. Currently tariffs on those products are far lower than 200%.    The U.S. announced yesterday that as a result of the accord it would suspend its proposed tariff increases. Settlement of the dispute ended growing fears that the agricultural flap might catapult the two sides into a trade war. The Common Market had served notice it would limit imports of U.S. corn-gluten feed and rice if Washington went ahead with its threatened tariff increases.    Announcement of the U.S.-European accord came as, separately, negotiators representing 92 countries reached final agreement on a timetable and program for the new Uruguay Round of global trade-liberalization talks, including a special accelerated procedure for writing new rules for trade in agricultural products.    The Uruguay accord, which climaxed weeks of internal wrangling by delegates in Geneva, will pave the way for the start of formal negotiations on some trade issues on Feb. 9. U.S. demands that the agreement provide for faster-paced talks on agricultural issues had been a major cause of the delay. The talks are being held under the aegis of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the Geneva, Switzerland-based compact that oversees the international trading system.    Completion of the two agreements marked a victory for the Reagan administration, which has been following a more-aggressive trade posture in recent months in an effort to head off protectionist moves in Congress. Although the two pacts aren't directly related, U.S. officials conceded it would have been almost impossible to launch the global talks on agricultural trade if the U.S.-European dispute hadn't been resolved.    U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter, who negotiated the U.S.-Common Market agriculture accord with European External Affairs Minister Willy de Clercq, noted the pact marked the first time that the U.S. had received full compensation for trade losses resulting from enlargement of the Common Market. Previous U.S. claims have drawn only a token response.    Mr. de Clercq termed the accord &quot;equitable,&quot; but he said it was only a &quot;political settlement&quot; in which the Europeans didn't sacrifice any trade principles. &quot;We wanted to avoid a trade war,&quot; he said. In the U.S., agricultural economists and farm lobbyists said that while the agreement will benefit U.S. grain farmers by averting a trade war, it nevertheless means continuing shrinkage in some European markets for U.S. farmers. Under the agreement, U.S. farmers will be able to compete for only a relatively small amount of Spanish corn and sorghum imports, compared with previous levels. Moreover, the U.S. is likely to meet fierce competition from Argentina and other exporters.    &quot;This is a major setback,&quot; declared Michael Hall, executive vice president of the National Corn Growers Association in Washington    Mr. Hall also expressed concern that the agreement has &quot;noteeth to force the Europeans to live up to what they agreedto.&quot; In an interim accord, reached last summer, the EC agreedto buy 1.4 million metric tons of U.S. feedgrains during thelatter half of 1986; but they actually purchased only 600,000metric tons, Mr. Hall said.   The U.S. will benefit from the accord by averting a broader trade war that would have threatened the U.S.'s principal market for corn-gluten feed, a byproduct of corn-sweetener and ethanol production, economists said. The U.S. exports roughly $450 million of the livestock feed to the EC annually. &quot;I don't think we won any big concessions, but we didn't lose as much as we would have in a trade war,&quot; said Richard Pottorf of Chase Econometrics, Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.    In Chicago, most grain and soybean futures prices rose slightly in response to the news. Fears of a trade war had depressed prices in recent weeks.    Here are the elements of the U.S.-European accord:    --Despite normal requirements that all Common Market countries adopt uniform high tariffs, Brussels has agreed to allow Spain and Portugal enough exemptions to purchase a minimum of 2.3 million metric tons of corn and sorghum from abroad. Although there's no specific allocation for the U.S., Reagan administration officials estimate American growers will win about 1.9 million metric tons of orders. Without the accord, Spain would have had to impose a massive increase in levies on U.S. corn and sorghum -- to between 130% and 140%, from 20% before.    --Brussels will drop its previous requirement that Portugal buy at least 15% of its feed-grain imports from Common Market countries, adding about 400,000 metric tons to the potential market for U.S. and other countries' corn and sorghum exports.    --The Common Market will reduce tariffs or quotas on 26 other products that eventually could provide some $70 million to $100 million a year in business for U.S. exporters. Besides the cranberry juices and some chemicals, the list includes dried onions, avocados, roasted nuts, grapefruit and apple juice, bourbon, cigars, plywood, aluminum sheet, plate and strip metal, aluminum wheels and silicon wafers used in the production of semiconductors.    The chemicals for which the Europeans will reduce tariffs or quotas include bromine and bromide salts, materials used in plastic moldings, tetraethyl lead used as an anti-knock additive in gasoline and intermediate chemicals used in making polyester plastics.    The U.S. will retain the right to retaliate if, at the end of the four-year duration of the accord, it isn't satisfied with whatever long-term solution the Europeans propose. The two sides will begin reviewing the agreement in late 1990. U.S. officials hope that by then the broader GATT agricultural talks will have produced new rules that could prevent the problem that led to the dispute from recurring.    The agreement also calls for the Common Market to keep a pledge it made in an interim accord last July to continue buying U.S. corn and sorghum at 1985 levels through next month. Under that commitment, Brussels has some 350,000 metric tons to purchase before the end of February.    U.S. officials said that even with yesterday's agreement, the likely overall level of sales to the EC remains unclear. The U.S. shipped about 2.7 million metric tons of corn and sorghum to Common Market countries in 1985. But the sales potential now is smaller because farm prices have declined, and Spain is growing proportionately more of the grain it consumes.    The European-produced goods on which the U.S. had threatened to impose 200% duties were chosen to put maximum pressure on France, which has been a traditional hard-liner in agricultural disputes with the U.S.    For the broader, Uruguay Round of trade talks, negotiators agreed on separate timetables and programs for negotiations involving trade in services; patents, trademarks and copyrights; trade-related investment barriers; textiles; natural resources, tariffs, non-tariff barriers and other issues. The Uruguay Round is expected to last at least four years. </TEXT></DOC>