<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0049 </DOCNO><HL> Merrill LynchAide, Israeli FaceTrading Charges---London Branch Staffer TiedTo Use of Inside Data,Earnings of $4 Million---By James B. Stewart and Matthew WinklerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MERSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The Securities and Exchange Commission charged a high-ranking Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. executive in London and a prominent Israeli businessman with masterminding a huge insider-trading scheme that generated more than $4 million in unlawful profit.    In a civil complaint filed in a federal court in New York, the SEC alleged that Nahum Vaskevitch, a managing director in charge of mergers and acquisitions at Merrill Lynch's London office, leaked confidential information about numerous transactions involving Merrill Lynch clients to David Sofer, a Jerusalem-based businessman, who traded in securities affected by the planned transactions.    Mr. Sofer also allegedly spurred others to trade in those securities, although he and Mr. Vaskevitch are the only two individuals named in the SEC complaint.    The case isn't related to the Dennis B. Levine-Ivan Boesky insider-trading scandal that has rocked Wall Street, and demonstrates that the SEC's crackdown on insider trading goes beyond the leads springing from those cases, according to people familiar with the investigation.    The SEC's investigation of Messrs. Vaskevitch and Sofer is continuing, and more charges are likely to be filed, the people familiar with the investigation added. They said the SEC is cooperating with a related criminal investigation by the U.S. attorney in New York.    It wasn't immediately clear how the SEC would obtain the injunctive and other relief it seeks against the two foreign residents if they resist appearing in a U.S. proceeding. Presumably, the SEC would try to enlist the cooperation of the British and Israeli governments. Should criminal charges be filed, the government might initiate extradition proceedings.    Mr. Vaskevitch, a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and Israel, couldn't be reached at his home in London, where a phone-company spokesman said his phone was off the hook.    Mr. Sofer couldn't be reached in Jerusalem.    In New York, a Merrill Lynch spokesman said that if the charges against Mr. Vaskevitch are true, &quot;we are disappointed and angry&quot; with him. The firm said it has been cooperating with the SEC for several months on the matter, and emphasized that the allegedly illegal trading didn't occur at Merrill Lynch and didn't generate any profit for Merrill Lynch.    A Merrill Lynch official said the firm first confronted Mr. Vaskevitch with the SEC's allegations about a month ago, and that Mr. Vaskevitch denied knowing any of the people mentioned in the SEC's charges, including Mr. Sofer, and denied speaking to Mr. Sofer on the telephone. Yesterday the SEC released a detailed list of telephone calls that allegedly took place between Messrs. Vaskevitch and Sofer.    Stanislas Yassukovich, chairman of Merrill Lynch Europe Ltd. and Mr. Vaskevitch's superior in London, said he telephoned Mr. Vaskevitch at home yesterday morning and suspended him from the firm.    Mr. Vaskevitch, 36 years old, was described by colleagues as a member of a wealthy family of Israeli tobacco merchants and &quot;a highly visible and articulate spokesman for Merrill in London,&quot; said the director of corporate finance at a rival firm.    Mr. Sofer, 46, is known as one of Israel's shrewdest and most succesful speculators.    The descendant of a prominent Hungarian rabbinical family, Mr. Sofer made his fortune during the 1970s by discovering oil in the Sinai, then Israeli-occupied. Mr. Sofer used his oil earnings to speculate in the Israeli stock market, generating further profit. Indeed, some Israeli financiers attribute the run-up in the Israeli stock market during the 1970s largely to Mr. Sofer's investing.    The Israeli stock market crashed in 1977, but Mr. Sofer's fortune survived. He had already diversified into real estate in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, and into insurance, and he later invested in the hotel industry. One of his investments was in the Jerusalem Hilton, one of Israel's largest hotels.    Last year an investment group led by Mr. Sofer acquired a large stake in Ampal-American Israel Corp., a New York unit of Bank Hapoalim, and threatened a proxy contest for control of the concern.    The SEC alleged that beginning in October 1984 there were numerous instances of leaks by Mr. Vaskevitch to Mr. Sofer. Among them are confidential details of Herman's Sporting Goods Inc.'s acquisition by Dee Corp.; Pay Less Drug Stores Northwest Inc.'s acquisition by K mart Corp.; Saga Corp.'s acquisition by Marriott Corp.; and plans of an American Cyanamid Corp. subsidiary to buy Par Pharmaceutical Co. All alleged transactions or planned transactions involved clients of Merrill Lynch.    The SEC claimed the group made more than $1 million in profit trading in Pay Less, $734,000 in Saga, and $264,000 in Herman's.    The SEC charged that Mr. Vaskevitch also leaked confidential information about transactions involving Prairie Producing Co., Hammermill Paper Co., Pneumo Corp., CFS Continental Inc., Storer Communications Inc., Color Tile Inc., United Energy Resources Inc., Union Carbide Corp., NL Industries Inc., Safeway Stores Inc., Transway International Inc., Jack Eckerd Inc., MidCon Corp. and Unocal Corp.    Merrill Lynch officials said Mr. Vaskevitch arranged the Herman's acquisition by Dee, but otherwise didn't play an important investment banking role in the transactions. But they said he was briefed on all activity within the mergers and acquisitions department, and typically sought potential European buyers for companies known by Merrill Lynch to be for sale.    According to the SEC's charges, Mr. Sofer used information obtained from Mr. Vaskevitch to trade through accounts at two New York securities firms -- Russo Securities Inc. and MKI Securities Inc., both members of the New York Stock Exchange. The SEC alleged that trading was handled by Joseph Frankel, whom the SEC described as a money manager at Russo and Mr. Sofer's cousin. Mr. Frankel, Russo and MKI weren't named as defendants in the suit filed yesterday.    Russo issued a statement saying that the firm &quot;had no knowledge or reason to believe that any of these transactions were based on the improper use of inside information&quot; and said the firm &quot;has cooperated fully&quot; with the SEC. However, the SEC's court papers said that Mr. Frankel and all of Russo's employees invoked the Fifth Amendment in questioning related to the case.    Mr. Frankel didn't return phone calls, nor did Richard Kalin, a Russo spokesman.    MKI officials couldn't be reached for comment.    Donald J. Solodar, senior vice president for market surveillance at the New York Stock Exchange, said the Big Board intends to further investigate whether &quot;there was any complicity&quot; or lack of oversight on behalf of Russo or MKI.    Mr. Solodar said Big Board computers first detected the irregular trading patterns that led to the government's charges. &quot;We saw situations, activity, trading by individuals who were beyond our immediate jurisdiction&quot; and referred the evidence to the SEC, he said.    The SEC also charged that Michael Jesselson, the son of Phillips Brothers founder Ludwig Jesselson, and Louis Barnett, a Fort Worth, Texas, investor, maintained accounts in which Mr. Sofer shared profits. The SEC also alleged that Mr. Sofer made phone calls to Mr. Vaskevitch from Messrs. Jesselson's and Barnett's offices or homes. Neither was named as a defendant.    Mr. Jesselson isn't a Phillips Brothers employee, although he works in an office maintained by his father at the commodities trading firm, according to a spokesman for Salomon Inc., Phillips Brothers' parent. Mr. Jesselson declined to comment.    In Fort Worth, a spokeswoman said that &quot;Mr. Barnett is not a named party in the suit and he is not involved in any way with the matter. He does know Mr. Sofer, and Mr. Sofer has been an investment counselor to Mr. Barnett.&quot;    ---   Yoram Kessel in Jersulem contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>