<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0007 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   WRIGHT SAID Reagan's peace plan has been superseded by a Guatemala accord.    The House speaker, who helped author the U.S. proposal, said the new accord &quot;has to prevail.&quot; Reagan said he supported the accord signed by five Central American leaders Friday, but said Contra interests must be protected. The preliminary peace pact hands the Contras and their U.S. supporters a major diplomatic defeat and reduces chances that the anti-Sandinista rebels will win more U.S. aid after funding expires Sept. 30.    Managua said the peace plan will succeed only if the U.S. agrees to bilateral talks and an end to Contra aid. The Contras vowed to continue fighting.    ---   THE U.S. HAS FOUND more Iranian mines in the Persian Gulf.    Secretary of Defense Weinberger said recent mine-sweeping efforts have turned up &quot;mines that Iran possesses.&quot; The efforts were mounted after the Bridgeton, a Kuwaiti tanker flying the U.S. flag, hit a mine July 24. It isn't known if Iran planted that mine. Meanwhile, three Navy-escorted Kuwaiti tankers moved quietly into the gulf Saturday, but shipping sources said minesweeping delayed them above Bahrain.    Iran said Soviet oil officials are to visit Tehran soon to discuss plans for shipping some Iranian oil through trans-Soviet pipelines, avoiding the gulf.    ---   Reagan announced new procedures for reporting covert actions to Congress. The new policy specifies that the White House will report such operations within 48 hours after they begin, except in &quot;the most exceptional circumstances.&quot; The changes in procedures may not be enough to head off new legislation.    ---   Walsh broke the silence he has maintained since Lt. Col. North's testimony to congressional panels and said neither popularity nor good intentions will shield anyone from criminal prosecution. The Iran-Contra independent counsel also said immunity granted to panel witnesses may limit evidence but won't hinder prosecution.    Fischer said the White House knew in advance that he was being paid to assist in pro-Contra activities and that his clients enjoyed wide access in the administration. The former White House aide's statements directly contradict Regan's testimony to congressional panels.    ---   Black South African miners began walking off their jobs at 28 gold and 18 coal mines. The 200,000-member National Union of Mineworkers said that by midweek about 100,000 other miners are expected to join the strike, called in a dispute over wages and benefits. About 80% of South Africa's exports are derived from mining.    ---   Libyan jets bombed Chadian troops in the vicinity of Aouzou, a northern Chad town retaken Saturday after 14 years of Libyan occupation. The Chad government said Aouzou, the administrative capital of a 1,000-mile Sahara strip disputed by the two countries, was captured in a counterattack after a Libyan assault on a Chad oasis faltered.    ---   South Korean workers demonstrated in four cities as industry officials warned that as many as 200 companies could be shut by labor unrest. Eighty strikes are under way. Factory workers, coal miners and bus and taxi drivers were among 20,000 workers demonstrating for higher pay, better conditions and the right to unionize.    ---   Philadelphia police found two bodies and four skeletons in a trash-filled apartment that had been nailed shut from the outside. Evidence of an additional skeleton was found in a closet. Police were looking for the tenant, who was evicted several days ago.    ---   U.S. intelligence officials misled Ottawa about the background of postwar immigrants who otherwise might have been denied entry to Canada as Nazi collaborators, a study made for a Canadian government commission said. The panel recommended prosecution of 20 suspected war criminals and investigation of 200 more suspects.    ---   Tamils staged a strike to protest the purported killing of two rebels by Sri Lanka security forces. Separately, the leader of Indian peacekeeping forces sent to end separatist fighting on the island nation said all rebel arms must be turned in by Aug. 18.    ---   A U.S. envoy arrived in Israel to try to persuade Prime Minister Shamir to accept a Middle East peace conference. Shamir has opposed efforts by Foreign Minister Peres to convene U.N.-sponsored talks.    ---   Aquino ordered extra police checkpoints in Manila and a crackdown on illegal firearms in response to last week's killing of a Philippine cabinet minister.    ---   Larry Nelson won golf's PGA Championship, defeating Lanny Wadkins in a playoff at Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.    ---   Died: Nobusuke Kishi, 90, former prime minister of Japan, Friday, in Tokyo, of heart failure . . . Camille Chamoun, 87, former president of Lebanon, Friday, in Beirut, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>