<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Industry Faces Ozone-Layer Challenges---Nations Weigh CurbsOn Certain Chemicals---By Barry MeierStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN DD ALD PSM KLU EUROPENVIRONMENT (ENV)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><TEXT>   In 1930, Thomas Midgley Jr., a General Motors Corp. chemist, stood before a scientific audience and inhaled a whiff of a new refrigerator coolant to prove its safety.    Mr. Midgley showed no ill effects. Since then, uses of that chemical and related substances have blossomed in products ranging from air conditioners to throwaway packaging.    But governments world-wide, and thousands of U.S. companies including GM, now face hard choices as evidence mounts that such compounds are eating away the fragile natural layer of ozone that shields the earth from ultraviolet rays. U.S. officials warned recently, for instance, that 40 million more Americans than previously expected face skin cancer over the next century if global use of ozone-destroying chemicals isn't checked. Substantial ozone loss is also likely to harm crucial plant and sea life and affect the world's climate, many researchers believe.    Evidence of widespread chemical depletion of the ozone layer -- which begins eight miles above the earth's surface -- is far from conclusive. Scientists are still debating the causes behind recent reports of ozone loss over the South Pole and elsewhere. Yet the risks of waiting for science to find definitive answers is too great, officials of some governments say. Of particular concern, some say, is that the huge reservoir of ozone-destroying chemicals already in the atmosphere is growing and is expected to persist for decades. &quot;If we can't control these chemicals now we probably won't get a second chance,&quot; says Victor Buxton, a Canadian environmental official.    This week, some 45 nations, including the U.S. and Canada, are meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, in a bid to hammer out global limits on ozone-destroying chemicals. Some activists believe the process, if successful, could set the pattern for resolving other industrial-pollution dilemmas that threaten all nations.    Getting industry to curb its appetite for these compounds, however, may be a problem. U.S. chemical makers aren't racing to create safer products. Auto makers like GM may face costly plant overhauls, for example. While some U.S. manufacturers are cutting down on these chemicals, others aren't, even when alternatives exist. And American industry uses only about 30% of the world's production of such compounds.    Chlorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, the most pervasive ozone-destroying chemicals, are used as coolants in refrigerators and air conditioners, as solvents in electronics manufacturing and in making plastic foam insulation and foam cups and packages.    The largest producer is Du Pont Co., which markets CFC products under the brand name Freon. Other major producers include Allied-Signal Inc., Pennwalt Corp., Kaiser Aluminum andamp; Chemicals Corp. and Racon Inc. There are other ozone-destroying compounds, such as halons, a chemical group used in high-tech firefighting equipment.    The ozone debate began in 1974 when two University of California chemists, F. Sherwood Roland and Mario J. Molina, argued that CFCs don't decompose in the lower atmosphere as do most other compounds. Instead, they theorized, CFCs slowly drift into the upper atmosphere, where they eventually break down, starting a complex chemical reaction that destroys ozone, a naturally occurring form of oxygen.    Reports of the chemists' work sparked a massive U.S. consumer boycott of aerosol deodorants, hair sprays and similar products that depended on CFCs. In 1978, the Environmental Protection Agency banned CFCs as propellants in most aerosols, resulting in a 40% decrease in U.S. industrial demand for the chemicals.    The action, however, proved only a stopgap. Though the propellant ban still is in effect, CFC sales in the U.S. have since zoomed back to pre-aerosol-ban levels, largely sparked by the explosive growth of such products as foam throwaway packaging, and increasing demand for CFCs as a solvent by electronics manufacturers. Researchers say it doesn't matter how CFCs are used, whether in a spray can or a hamburger package; eventually, they all are released into the atmosphere.    Global sales of the compounds are also rising because, among other things, most European nations didn't follow the U.S. aerosol ban.    Lacking easy targets such as spray cans, consumer action alone isn't likely to blunt the growing use of CFCs. The family car, for example, is filled with CFC-based products, ranging from the coolant in its air conditioner to the padding for its seat and dashboard.    Because of the compounds' pervasive use, U.S. companies that eluded regulation in the 1970s probably won't escape again in any tightening of regulations. &quot;They know the handwriting is on the wall,&quot; says Kathleen A. Wolf, an analyst with Rand Corp., a Santa Monica, Calif.-based consulting concern. In recent months, a number of U.S. concerns such as GM, Ford Motor Co. and International Business Machines Corp. have formed in-house task forces to study ways to reduce CFC use.    The mobile air conditioner, found in the vast majority of American cars, is a major source of CFC pollution in the U.S. CFC-based coolants are frequently released into the air when the systems undergo repair. While some U.S. cities such as Tampa, Fla., are moving to have bus air-conditioner repairmen trap the compounds for recycling, the impact of recycling on the problem is limited. Engineers say about 65% of a car's air conditioner coolant leaks before it ever gets to a repair shop.    Auto makers say they are attacking the problem on several fronts. GM engineers, for example, are looking at tightening existing systems with new gaskets and other devices, says Richard Klimisch, the company's top environmental official. But rather than shoulder the huge financial burden of developing new types of air conditioners, GM is relying on chemical companies to develop alternative coolants, he says.    As was the case during the first ozone-layer controversy, battle lines are forming over who -- CFC producers or auto makers -- will pay for research and development of environmentally safer compounds. GM officials say both Du Pont and the British-based ICI Industries PLC have agreed only to produce test batches of a possible ozone-safe air conditioner replacement coolant known as FC134a.    &quot;They're interested in making (FC134a), but there are questions over who is going to pay for the toxicity testing and the types of (sales) guarantees they want from us,&quot; Mr. Klimisch says. FC134a was first developed in the late 1970s, but both chemical and auto makers dropped work on the compound when government pressure to expand the scope of CFC regulations eased in the early 1980s.    U.S. chemical producers clearly aren't rushing to develop substitutes. Morristown, N.J.-based Allied-Signal, for example, dispatched sales teams nationwide this summer in a bid to get electronics manufacturers to switch to CFCs from other solvents, according to chemical distributors. An Allied-Signal spokesman declined to comment on the matter.    Du Pont, after disputing the CFC-ozone link for 12 years, recently conceded that the compounds could pose a future ozone threat and called for global limits on their use. Company officials say they have restarted research into FC134a but aren't planning heavy spending on it until regulatory action or consumer demand justify it. The principal problem with FC143a production is the lack of a chemical catalyst to produce the substance in commercial quantities.    U.S chemical producers, however, may soon face competitive pressures. ICI Industries has also restarted work on FC134a. A Japanese chemical maker, Diakin Kogyo Co., and a German concern, Hoechst AG, hold FC134a production patents, says Richard Lagow, a University of Texas chemistry professor and a consultant to the EPA on the CFC issue. Both Du Pont and ICI officials say FC134a development is at least five years away.    Some companies aren't waiting. At Digital Equipment Corp. plants in Andover, Mass., and Salem, N.H., water-based systems recently replaced CFCs in some electronics-cleaning processes, says James Rogers, a company environmental manager. He says the Maynard, Mass.-based producer of computers and computer parts has set the immediate goal of capping CFC use followed by a phase-out where practical. &quot;We feel the consequences of underreacting (to the ozone threat) are worse than the consequences of overreacting,&quot; he says.    Other companies could apparently do without the CFCs they currently use. For instance, while some McDonald's Corp. foam packages for its McDLT hamburgers contain CFCs, others don't. A spokeswoman for the Oak Brook, Ill.-based fast-food company says CFC-based packages don't keep a hamburger hotter, but simply reflect CFC use by some of McDonald's foam-package suppliers. McDonald's hasn't yet decided whether to switch suppliers, the spokeswoman says. She adds, however, that the company has met with suppliers in recent weeks to discuss the issue.    World-wide, the pressure also is building to control CFCs. A global approach is critical, say some regulators and activists, because an estimated 70% of the world's CFC use occurs outside the U.S. Intensified demand from developing nations is also projected in future years as their purchases of air conditioners, refrigerators and other items grow.    The global freeze proposals under study at the Geneva meeting this week would exploit the law of supply and demand. By capping CFC production, some regulators argue, prices of ozone-destroying chemicals would rise, forcing users to seek alternatives. That would provide chemical makers with the incentive to develop safer products, they say.    Richard Benedick, the State Department official heading the U.S. delegation at Geneva, said recently that he expects the world's nations to agree by July on the need to limit ozone-destroying chemicals. After reaching a general accord, nations can debate specific limits on the chemicals' uses, revising them downward or upward as scientific data build, he added.    Others are less sanguine. European chemical producers, for instance, still advocate substantial CFC growth. If the global talks stall, Sen. John Chafee (R., R.I.) recently said, he will push for legislation restricting imports of some CFC-based products. The EPA is also under a court-ordered May deadline to decide on added CFC regulations.    Science may not be able to provide policy makers with firm guidance. Preliminary data from Antarctica, for example, indicate that annual ozone loss there may result from both chemical and as-yet-unexplained regional and seasonal factors, says Robert Dezafra, an atmospheric physicist at the State University of New York, Stony Brook.    Yet Mr. Dezafra, a member of the recent U.S. scientific expedition to Antarctica, says he is worried. Every day, he says, the cloud of CFC in the atmosphere is building, pushing the world further along a process it won't be able to reverse. Says Mr. Dezafra, &quot;We got a late start studying this problem and we're getting an even later start finding a solution.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>