<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0045 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Is Likely to Decide to Set SanctionsAgainst Japanese Microchip Companies---By Art PineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)COMPUTERS (EDP)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration is likely to decide this week to impose sanctions on Japanese microchip-makers for violating last summer's semiconductor trade accord.    At a meeting Friday, a subcabinet task force reviewed new Commerce Department data and concluded that Japanese manufacturers are continuing to dump their products in third-country markets despite a provision in the July 31 agreement that prohibits such practices. The group renewed a recommendation made in late February that the U.S. take punitive action. Dumping is selling in foreign markets at prices below the cost of production or fair market value at home.    The issue next goes to the cabinet-level Economic Policy Council, which has scheduled a meeting for mid-week. Although that panel could postpone any judgments in the case, U.S. officials say it's almost certain to recommend sanctions.    Late Friday, officers of several U.S. semiconductor makers met with Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige and a group of senators and congressmen to renew their plea for sanctions.    The panel also is slated to consider whether to retaliate against the Japanese government for refusing to buy U.S.-made supercomputers. Although American manufacturers clearly hold the lead in these highly sophisticated products, Tokyo has rejected U.S. pleas that it force its ministries and agencies to relax their ban on importing these devices. The issue has become an emotional one here in the U.S. American manufacturers already sell supercomputers to non-government buyers in Japan.    U.S. trade strategists still haven't decided precisely how to retaliate on the semiconductor issue. They say the most likely option would be for the U.S. to impose punitive tariffs on Japanese products -- such as laser-printers -- that use semiconductors. They would do that, rather than trying to limit imports of microchips themselves, to avoid hurting U.S. corporations that use imported microchips in the products they make.    Even if the Economic Policy Council agrees to retaliate against the Japanese, the sanctions probably wouldn't take effect until mid-April. Current practices require U.S. officials to draw up a list of potential targets and allow affected parties here to comment on their likely impact. Washington followed similar procedures earlier this year in imposing tariffs on European wine and cheese imports in retaliation for new Common Market tariffs on U.S. agricultural exports. The two sides later worked out a settlement, and the retaliatory tariffs were withdrawn.    The council action this week won't deal with charges by U.S. chipmakers that Japan hasn't lived up to promises in the semiconductor accord that it allow U.S. manufacturers to gain a larger share of the microchip market in Japan.    The subcabinet-level meeting Friday came as the Japanese government, in an 11th-hour effort to ward off U.S. retaliation, told heads of 10 large Japanese semiconductor makers to increase their purchases of foreign-made microchips and to stop dumping in foreign markets. The plea came from Hajime Tamura, the country's trade minister.    U.S. officials said it was unlikely that Mr. Tamura's action would have any effect on the Economic Policy Council's decision this week. The U.S. warned Japan in November that U.S. manufacturers were unhappy with the way the pact was being enforced. Tokyo has announced several moves to crack down on violations, but so far none has succeeded.    Separately, the two countries announced that Japan has agreed to open its markets to U.S. exports of processed pollack and herring. Import quotas have barred such sales in the past.    Specifically, Japan will broaden its quota system and issue enough import licenses to accommodate all U.S. exports of these products. U.S. officials estimate that the move will result in $85 million in additional U.S. sales this year, and that such sales eventually could grow to $300 million annually.    The U.S.-Japan semiconductor accord, negotiated at the request of some U.S. microchip makers, provided for Japanese producers to stop dumping both here and in third-country markets. It also called on Japan to allow U.S. producers a larger share of Japan's own market. However, because the dumping involves actions by private concerns rather than by the Japanese government, it has proved difficult to enforce. </TEXT></DOC>