<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880317-0007 </DOCNO><HL> White House Orders Troops Into Honduras --- 'Training Exercise' Spurred By Reported Invasion By Nicaraguan Forces </HL><AUTHOR> Ellen Hume and John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><G> EXE CNG DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan ordered 3,200 U.S. troops to Honduras in a &quot;training exercise&quot; spurred by what the administration called an invasion of the country by Nicaraguan government forces.    White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the deployment of four battalions from Fort Bragg, N.C., and Fort Ord, Calif., was a &quot;measured response designed to show our strong support&quot; for the Hondurans, following the reported raid against Contra rebels, who maintain bases inside the Honduran border.    The U.S. troops, who are scheduled to leave their bases sometime this morning, will engage in a &quot;emergency deployment readiness exercise,&quot; rather than enter actual combat, officials said. They will be deployed to an air-force base about 125 miles from where fighting between the Contras and Sandinistas has been intense in recent days, according to Mr. Fitzwater.    Under current U.S. law, the administration is faced with limited options of what it can do with its forces. Because Congress has ordered that American troops must stay at least 20 miles from the Nicaraguan border and has barred them from any active conflict, officials said U.S. soldiers probably could do little more than mount a show of strength. Attempts by the administration to encourage Honduras to move against Nicaragua, with U.S. support, haven't met with much success.    None of the Democratic leadership in the House or Senate was notified about the move, unlike when the U.S. ordered troops into Grenada in 1983 or last October when U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf attacked an oil platform that had been converted to a military facility.    House Speaker James Wright said after the announcement last night, &quot;I'm amazed and appalled they would apparently be so eager to send U.S. troops down there. The important thing is for them (Contras and Sandinistas) to get a cease-fire and stop the killing.&quot;    House Majority Whip Tony Coelho (D., Calif.) last night added: &quot;Nothing that we heard today justifies the sending of young men into the jungles of Central America. It appears they want to create a situation to prevent the cease-fire talks from going forward next week and for getting military aid from the Congress.    &quot;We have been notified by the press every inch of the way. The White House hasn't had the decency to call the leadership of the House or the Senate.&quot;    House leaders had met with Secretary of State George Shultz, National Security Adviser Colin Powell and White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker late yesterday afternoon for nearly two hours.    The Reagan administration's eagerness to confront the Sandinistas was clear. U.S. troops were mobilized some time before what Mr. Fitzwater called a formal request for assistance was made by Honduran President Jose Azcona. Mr. Fitzwater said that the U.S. ambassador in Honduras telephoned the request at 7:45 p.m. to Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, and that President Reagan was notified of it at about 8 p.m. and made his decision. A cable letter formally requesting the aid was sent to Mr. Reagan at 8:45 p.m. by Mr. Azcona.    The administration's decision came despite conflicting reports about the nature or scope of an incursion by the Sandinistas. Mr. Wright said yesterday afternoon that Nicaraguan Foreign Minister Miguel D'Escoto had telephoned to tell him that the Sandinista troops that had crossed over into Honduras during heavy fighting in the Bocay Valley border area had been ordered to return to Nicaraguan territory.    Mr. D'Escoto told the Texas Democrat that Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega had been in contact with Honduran government officials to assure them that his government had no intention of invading, Mr. Wright told reporters in the afternoon. The speaker added there would be no reason to consider additional Contra aid as long as the incursion was inadvertent and the Nicaraguan troops are quickly withdrawn.    The Associated Press earlier reported that Mr. Ortega had said Sandinista troops pushed back Contra rebels into Honduran territory and that fighting was raging along the border. The AP said Mr. Ortega neither confirmed nor denied the Reagan administration's claims that Nicaraguan soldiers crossed into Honduras.    The administration's move to send troops coincided with the indictments yesterday of four key figures in the Iran-Contra affair, which involved the diversion to the Contras of funds raised by covert arms sales to Iran.    Noting that Nicaraguan forces have crossed the Honduras border before while pursuing the rebels, some lawmakers yesterday afternoon suggested that the administration may be exaggerating the situation to increase political pressure for a resumption of aid to the Contras, which has been rejected twice by the House in recent weeks. They also pointed out that direct peace talks between the Contras and Sandinistas are scheduled to begin Monday in Nicaragua.    &quot;I am still in doubt as to what the real actions are in Central America,&quot; said Mr. Coelho. &quot;There is questionable trust with regards to the actions of the White House and the State Department&quot; in that region. &quot;I'm highly suspicious,&quot; said Sen. Christopher Dodd (D., Conn.) &quot;We've seen it all too often in the past.&quot;    Legislators broadly challenged the credibility of the Reagan administration, beyond the confused reports on the scope of the Sandinista incursion, in part because the administration has exaggerated the seriousness of similar situations in the past.    Congressional Iran-Contra investigating committees concluded that the administration &quot;misrepresented&quot; intelligence on a Sandinista incursion into Honduras in March 1986, when the late Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey portrayed a short-lived incursion as a major effort in an attempt to muster congressional support for the Contras.    The administration has been in a quandary about how to assist the Contra rebels since Congress cut off U.S. assistance as of Feb. 29. U.S. intelligence and military officials were saying yesterday that it may already be too late to save the Contras, who, they said, have sustained &quot;severe damage&quot; from 2,000 Nicaraguan troops equipped with Mi-24 helicopter gunships and artillery.    The Democratic House leaders raised questions about the administration's report that between 1,500 and 2,000 Nicaraguan troops had entered Honduras.    Among the options the administration considered yesterday was the possibility of the U.S. airlifting Honduran troops closer to the fighting, as it did in 1986. However, the Hondurans have so far shown little interest in attacking the Sandinistas, Pentagon officials said. Administration sources said the U.S. has been urging the Hondurans to mount air strikes against Sandinista base camps in northern Nicaragua and the Hondurans have demurred.    Mr. Fitzwater countered Mr. Wright's contention that Sandinista troops were withdrawing: &quot;As far as I know they're still engaged. No pull-back.&quot;    ---   John Walcott contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>