<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0021 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> DIA P EUROP JAPANCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Oil prices rose on spot and futures markets for the third consecutive day amid further signs of production restraint among members of the oil cartel.    The OPEC secretariat, in an unusual statement, said output from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries was running &quot;well below&quot; the group's 15.8 million barrel a day production ceiling, according to the OPEC news agency.    The secretariat didn't provide an exact production amount. But some analysts in the U.S. and Europe said OPEC output so far this month was running about 4% below its quota set by a December production accord.    Kleinwort Grieveson Securities, for example, is estimating total OPEC production for March at 15.2 million barrels a day, down from about 16.1 million barrels for February. The result, Kleinwort says, will be &quot;massive destocking&quot; that will prop oil prices to $19 a barrel by April.    &quot;The market is in for another surprise shock,&quot; said Ian Gibson, a Kleinwort vice president. &quot;OPEC is going to great lengths to defend its fixed price structure, which will result in a continuation of the bull market in oil,&quot; Mr. Gibson said.    In addition, private industry analysts said crude oil production for Saudi Arabia averaged between 3.2 million and 3.4 million barrels a day in February, far below its daily quota of 4.1 million barrels, according to the Dow Jones International Petroleum Report newswire. Saudi output this month likely will decline further, several analysts said.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange yesterday, crude oil contracts for April delivery rose 24 cents a barrel, to $17.75. Heating oil and unleaded gasoline futures prices also posted gains.    Meanwhile, the spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the premier U.S. crude, rose 25 cents, to $17.75 a barrel, while April North Sea Brent, a major gauge of European oil prices, rose five cents in late trading, to $17.25 a barrel.    Some analysts remained skeptical that OPEC will be able to hold its fixed-price and production quota strategy together. John O'Dea, manager of international energy futures at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., New York, said, for instance, that even if OPEC can restrain production, it won't be able to adhere to the $18 fixed price level until excess inventory levels are drawn down. &quot;The problem still is that there's too much product around,&quot; Mr. O'Dea maintains, adding that he expects prices to continue trading between $16 and $18 a barrel for the coming weeks.    Some analysts, moreover, say OPEC's output is waning not because of discipline, but because it has no buyers for its crude at fixed prices, which remain higher than current market prices. &quot;OPEC production is down because they've priced themselves out of the market,&quot; one trader in New York said.    Nevertheless, U.S. oil companies continue to raise the price they pay for West Texas Intermediate, reflecting this week's price rally. Yesterday, Koch Oil Co., Diamond Shamrock Corp. and Phillips Petroleum Co., among others, raised their posted prices $1, to $17 a barrel.    In other futures markets yesterday:    COFFEE: Futures prices again closed lower, but more than a cent a pound above their intraday lows. The May contract settled at $1.0468 cents a pound, down 2.29 cents. A wire service report quoted Jorio Dauster, president of Brazilian Coffee Institute and head of Brazil's delegation to the London coffee quota talks that ended in failure early this week, as saying that Brazil would be flexible and do whatever is necessary to protect its share of the market. One analyst saw this as an indication that Brazil might sell more freely if it deems this necessary to hold market share. According to another wire report, Mr. Dauster added that this week's price declines have given a distorted view of the real market situation. He said that consumer stocks are low and prices should firm when this becomes apparent. One trade source agreed that U.S. roasters are not as well supplied as they were last fall or at the start of the year. &quot;They have about six to eight weeks' supply,&quot; he said, which is below normal. However, with the real cost of financing inventories still high and ample supplies of coffee in producing countries, it is customary for roasters to in effect make producers carry their inventories for them by dragging their feet on purchases, trade sources said.    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Most futures prices rose, led by a strong rally in the British pound as investors, including several Japanese financial institutions, poured funds into British government securities for their double-digit yields, analysts said. Investors also are favoring the British pound in anticipation of an interest rate cut after the British government unveils its latest budget March 17, said Anne Mills, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. Futures contracts on Japanese yen and West German marks also rallied after Robert Ortner, Commerce Department undersecretary for economic affairs, told a U.S. Export-Import Bank meeting that the yen should appreciate another 10% to 15% against the dollar. &quot;Ultimately the yen could be at 130 (to the dollar) by the end of the year&quot; based on an &quot;exceedingly high&quot; U.S. current accounts deficit, said Jill Cotter, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. But &quot;the dollar could strengthen somewhat in the meantime&quot; on weakness in the Japanese and West German economies before falling back to that level, she added.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat and corn futures prices rallied on rumors that high-level government officials today will be discussing whether the Soviets should be offered export enhancement wheat. Expectations of a dry and hot summer by some traders and reports of a strong conservation reserve sign-up also proved to be bullish to corn prices. A shipping strike in Brazil, which may result in the cancellation of some orders, gave strength to the soybean futures, analysts said.    COCOA: Futures price rose, with the May contract spurting $33 to close at $1,912 per metric ton, in what one analyst characterized as a market &quot;trading in Sterling rather than cocoa.&quot; He said cocoa prices have risen $82 from their recent low of $1,830 a ton Feb. 15. The rise in cocoa has paralleled strength in the British pound, which has risen about 8.5 cents against the dollar over the same period. This has prompted arbitraging in which traders have sold cocoa futures in London while simultaneously buying them in New York, he said. A widespread view that producers are selling less aggressively in recent weeks and that there has been some pickup in demand for beans in London as chocolate makers rebuild their stocks also helped fuel the price rise, the analyst said. The U.S. Chocolate Manufacturers Association, a trade group, yesterday reported that U.S. factory shipments of chocolate and chocolate-type confectionery in December amounted to about 190 million pounds, a rise of 13.9% from the year before. For all of 1986, however, total shipments of slightly more than two billion pounds were up only 0.8% from a year before.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle futures prices plunged on technical factors and a New England Journal of Medicine article that links antibiotics in animal feed to salmonella infections in people, analysts said. The article cast a bearish shadow over the market, which opened low enough to set off technical stops, analysts said. Weak carcass beef prices and expectations of a slowdown in boxed beef movement also put pressure on the cattle market, analysts said. Boxed beef is slabs of meat ready for movement to retailers. Pork belly and hog futures were strong as hog prices continued to align with higher cash prices. </TEXT></DOC>