<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880209-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Independent Counsels: Quo Warranto? </HL><AUTHOR> L. Gordon Crovitz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> JUS EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Congress may soon get its comeuppance for creating independent counsels to harass presidential aides. The prosecutors have been declared unconstitutional and now every one of the executive-branch officials under investigation -- some of whom might have been prosecuted legally by the Justice Department -- could go free.    Judge Laurence Silberman's ruling last month that independent counsels violate separation of powers could end these prosecutions. Unless reversed by the Supreme Court, the ruling almost certainly will invalidate Whitney North Seymour's conviction of Michael Deaver. Mr. Seymour didn't accept the parallel appointment within the Justice Department offered to all independent counsels, and so acted entirely without authority. Mr. Deaver, convicted of perjury, now has a strong double jeopardy claim that he can't be tried again. Alexia Morrison's investigation of former Justice Department official Theodore Olson -- the case that led to the Silberman ruling -- is also clearly in doubt because Ms. Morrison declined the parallel appointment and the statute of limitations is set to expire.    Judging by their public comments, Lawrence Walsh and James McKay think their investigations of Iran-Contra and Wedtech, respectively, will be unaffected because they accepted the parallel appointment. They may be in for a shock.    Lawyers for former Reagan aide Lyn Nofziger last week moved to void Mr. McKay's status as prosecutor. They argued that his actions as an unconstitutional prosecutor fatally tainted his investigation. The law &quot;created no office of independent counsel to investigate and prosecute Mr. Nofziger and conferred no authority on Mr. McKay&quot; to prosecute.    Judge Thomas Flannery has let the case proceed, but he has required Mr. McKay to answer 15 questions posed by Mr. Nofziger's lawyers about his prosecutorial activities between the time he was appointed an independent counsel in February 1987 and when he accepted the parallel appointment in the Justice Department a month later. These activities apparently included calling a grand jury, issuing subpoenas, negotiating plea and immunity bargains with witnesses and sharing confidential grand-jury information with the U.S. attorney in Manhattan. (Mr. McKay filed his answers yesterday, but they were put under court seal.)    Mr. Walsh also began his investigation before accepting the parallel appointment. He was an unconstitutional independent prosecutor from December 1986 until he took the Justice appointment last March. During this period, he convened a grand jury, subpoenaed documents and called witnesses.    At stake is the first principle of due process: &quot;Quo warranto&quot;? Or, by what right does the prosecutor prosecute? This began as a medieval writ punishing landowners for exercising jurisdiction that usurped royal rights. From the 13th century until the 1978 Ethics in Government Act, due process demanded that only the executive branch could prosecute.    The principle of quo warranto suggests that any investigation performed at any point by an illegitimate independent prosecutor is tainted beyond cure.    In the 1974 case of Blackledge v. Perry, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a North Carolina man who argued that the prosecutor acted without constitutional authority when he brought an indictment for felony assault after the defendant had already pleaded guilty to misdemeanor assault for the same crime. The defendant had a due process right &quot;not to be haled into court at all upon the felony charge.&quot; This went &quot;to the very power of the state to bring the defendant into court to answer the charge against him.&quot;    In U.S. v. Macklin (1975), the Second Circuit dismissed an indictment of a New York man because a grand jury sat longer than the legal limit of 18 months. It didn't matter that the extended grand jury didn't obviously harm the defendant -- its actions were nonetheless void. Despite a guilty plea, the defendant got off. Lawyers call this the fruit-of-the-poison-tree principle.    The independent counsels could counter that they would have acted just the same if they had already been Justice Department prosecutors. They might also cite cases where for administrative convenience, courts don't void all improper actions.    Quo warranto, however, raises the most fundamental of individual rights. Certainly these executive-branch officials under investigation by special prosecutors have far better claims for relief based on procedural rights than do the legions of criminals who've walked because of Miranda or search-and-seizure irregularities. Independent counsels are prosecutors gone berserk, and their activities prove the danger posed by prosecutors unhinged from what Judge Silberman called the &quot;accumulated lore and wisdom of career Department of Justice officers&quot;:   --Alexia Morrison vs. Theodore Olson. Ms. Morrison, the former chief litigator for the Securities and Exchange Commission, has been investigating Mr. Olson since May 1986 on charges that in 1983 he gave Congress misleading testimony relating to Superfund. Ms. Morrison has gone to extremes to coerce Mr. Olson into signing away his right to the protection of the statute of limitations, which runs out on March 10. Just before Christmas, she asked a federal judge to jail Mr. Olson on contempt charges unless he waived that right. Judge Aubrey Robinson Jr. said he would have to consider this unusual request, and left Mr. Olson, a Washington attorney, free to spend the holidays with his family. He later rejected Ms. Morrison's request.    --Lawrence Walsh vs. Ollie North, John Poindexter, and others. Judge Silberman criticized Mr. Walsh to show how individual rights are threatened where counsels imbued with &quot;incentives to prosecute . . . focus on one individual.&quot; He referred to a speech Mr. Walsh gave last summer indicating that if he finds &quot;probable cause&quot; that a crime has been committed, he has a &quot;duty&quot; to prosecute. Judge Silberman noted that the official guidelines for U.S. attorneys demand a higher standard. &quot;As a matter of 'fundamental fairness' an indictment should not be sought unless the prosecutor believes that an unbiased jury would convict, a standard which provides far greater protection&quot; to targets, Judge Silberman wrote.    Last May, Mr. Walsh got criminal pleas from Contra fund-raisers Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell and Richard Miller on tax charges that the Internal Revenue Service and Justice Department tax division say weren't crimes at all. The men can demand a reversal of these convictions on the ground that Mr. Walsh was empowered under an unconstitutional statute. (Note that Ms. Morrison is Mr. Channell's lawyer, and so perhaps unlikely to make this motion.)    Mr. Walsh is also reported to be concentrating on extremely broad allegations, such as &quot;conspiracy to defraud the U.S.&quot; This would ignore the &quot;mens rea&quot; requirement of an intent to break the law. As the Democratic majority in the congressional Iran-Contra report concluded, Lt. Col. North and the others thought they were carrying out the policy of the commander in chief. Where is the evil intent?    --James McKay vs. Edwin Meese. Mr. McKay decided there was no evidence arising from the Wedtech affair to charge Attorney General Edwin Meese with wrongdoing. Then press stories appeared alleging that Mr. McKay might make an unprecedented charge against Mr. Meese for violating the law against bribing foreigners by failing to prosecute Robert Wallach, who had sent him a letter about a proposed Iraqi pipeline to Aqaba, Jordan, that was never built.    The letter allegedly suggests that then-Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres might pledge not to blow up the pipeline in exchange for cash. Mr. McKay made a well-publicized visit to the White House to brief officials about Mr. Meese's alleged wrongdoing. This set off diplomatic fireworks. Mr. Peres, now foreign secretary, said that no one ever offered him anything and that Israel wasn't about to bomb Jordan in any case. Iraq and Jordan denied asking for any Israeli pledge.    --Whitney North Seymour Jr. vs. Michael Deaver. Mr. Seymour, the prosecutor who had stationery made up with the eagle of the Justice Department seal facing in the opposite direction, subpoenaed the Canadian ambassador, Allan Gotlieb, in what was a clear violation of diplomatic immunity. The court rejected this prosecutorial abuse, but not before Canada issued several complaints to the State Department.    There is a good chance that these multimillion-dollar investigations will be complete write-offs. Moreover, double jeopardy and statutes of limitation may not give the Justice Department the opportunity to initiate any prosecutions that might be legitimate. In its zeal to persecute conservative executive-branch officials through illegitimate prosecutions, a liberal Congress will have set them free.    ---   Mr. Crovitz is assistant editor of the Journal's editorial page. </TEXT></DOC>