<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880118-0104 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Military: Strength Through Flexibility </HL><AUTHOR> James H. Webb Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP JAPAN LATAM AFRIC </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> DEF </G><TEXT>   The key question for our leaders in the new year is whether, and how, the U.S. can maintain its commitments throughout the world while reducing the size and force structure of its military. We must establish the guideposts that will take us into the next century.    --First, although the NATO alliance is one of the keystones of our military structure, we need to remind ourselves that we are more than a European nation. Moreover, we should bear in mind that no region is better equipped to reassume a great share of the burden of its own defense than Western Europe.    --Second, in economic, cultural and political terms the U.S. is becoming more intertwined with Asia. It is imperative that we match those ties with the military capability to protect our interests and honor our obligations in the region.    The Soviet Union already is placing a greater emphasis on Asia. While the Soviets' force structure in Europe has remained relatively constant over the past decade, they have made marked advances in Asia. They have achieved the historic Russian dream of owning a warm water port in the Pacific, and on any given day two dozen Soviet ships are in Cam Ranh Bay, Vietnam, as are fighter, bomber and long-range reconnaissance aircraft. They have increased their Far East Command by 10 divisions over the past 10 years, and now have 530,000 ground troops in East Asia, in addition to 200,000 spread through Mongolia, the trans-Baikal and Central Asia. The Far East military region has 85 Backfire bombers, and nearly 2,500 combat aircraft. The Soviet Pacific Fleet is the largest of its four fleets, with 840 warships compared with 750 a decade ago.    The Soviets are said to be looking for naval bases in North Korea. They have pursued in recent months a defense relationship with Thailand. For three years running they have attempted to offer a dry dock facility for the Australians in Perth. They have become active in Polynesia and Micronesia. They have continued a close defense relationship with India. And they have done all of this while pursuing vigorously a rapprochement with China.    Our responsibility to meet Soviet pressure globally might logically dictate an increase in our Asian presence that would match their obvious shift in priority.    One element in this equation, obviously, must be Japan. The Japanese have recovered from the devastation of World War II, and most Americans believe it is time for the Japanese to assume more of the burden of defending the way of life we share.    The Japanese have made measurable progress on this score. They have increased their defense spending for several years in a row, and regional security demands that they do more of this. I recommended as early as 1973 that Japan include the defense of its sea lanes in its constitutional interpretation of &quot;self-defense.&quot; Ocean-going activities of that sort would aid our alliance without inciting the concern of other nations in the region.    --Third, we must consider the Soviets themselves. Soviet conventional force structure around the world has been growing, and if force structure cuts are to occur in our own military, we must signal to the Soviets that this is a refinement rather than a reduction of our capabilities.    --Fourth, we must pay greater attention to our own hemisphere. Fully 42% of our legal immigrants over the past 10 years have been from Latin America. Latin America's problems are rapidly becoming our problems. The Soviets and Cubans have been more adept at understanding that than many of our own policymakers.    The Soviets operate roughly 7,600 military personnel in Cuba, and 230 in Nicaragua and Peru. During 1986 alone the Soviets provided more than $600 million of equipment to the Sandinista regime. The Cubans contribute 2,500 troops in Nicaragua. Discounting our Southern Command in Panama, the U.S. has 2,300 troops in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and 932 operating personnel elsewhere in 27 Latin American countries, 643 of those in Honduras.    In Africa, the Soviet Union and Cuba are heavily involved through troop presence and arms transfers. The Cubans maintain military and technical personnel in 17 African nations, with major combat units in Ethiopia, Algeria, Congo, Angola and Mozambique. The Soviets maintain a continuous naval presence off the coast of west Africa.    Additionally, key water routes and bases around the world continue to be at risk. American basing rights in Panama, Greece, Portugal, Spain and the Philippines will be subject to negotiations in the near future, and it is reasonable to assume that we will lose our lease on Guantanamo Bay in 1999. The southern reaches of the Red Sea have been bracketed by the Soviet influence in Ethiopia and its presence in Yemen. The importance of protecting international waterways into and inside the Persian Gulf should be clear.    It will require extremely careful use of a reduced U.S. force structure, as well as a more enthusiastic participation by other friendly nations, for us to meet such challenges. To the greatest extent possible, forces of the future should be free to deploy and to maneuver, to concentrate at a crisis point and project military force at that point -- without the necessity of negotiating base rights or the unavoidable involvement in local conflict that such base rights imply.    Post-INF thinking that conventional forces in Europe be increased because conventional forces in Europe are arguably more at risk without the intermediate nuclear shield does not necessarily mean that this should be a U.S. buildup. Nor does it mean that such a buildup should occur in Europe at all, or even that it be a land-oriented buildup.    Strategy does not dictate that pressure applied by an adversary at one point be countered at exactly that point. If the interests of the U.S. and its allies are threatened or attacked by the Soviet Union in one part of the world, the U.S. could and probably should react at the point most beneficial to its own strengths -- anywhere in the world.    And this is the great strength of seapower. We are not a continental land power, except on our own continent, and we never have been. We are a maritime nation by virtue of our geographic position, economic necessity and political commitment.    U.S. seapower maintains unimpeded access to world markets. It denies our adversaries the use of sea lanes for expansionist or imperialist reasons. It maintains international security and stability, including protection of nations we count as friends and allies during crisis. It enables us, when war comes, to reinforce allies, to multiply the effectiveness of their armies, to inject our own ground forces when appropriate, to become supreme on the land through control of the sea. It provides us the single greatest deterrent to nuclear war, with a nuclear submarine force that fields one-half our nuclear capability at one-fourth the overall cost for the strategic nuclear Triad.    A credible seapower -- which means a naval force that can deploy immediately, stay for as long as necessary, and fight at whatever level of conflict the situation demands -- can affect world events quickly and decisively. Our Navy and Marine Corps meet those criteria. This is exactly what we will need more of in the future. Furthermore, while the Navy and Marine Corps participate with the other services in exercises designed to test wartime readiness, they also are continually participating in real-world operations that are essential to keeping the peace -- today.    It's not necessary to speculate on what would happen if we cut back naval force structure. Those who claim that the past seven years have shown the greatest peacetime buildup of the U.S. Navy -- to 569 ships today -- forget that the decade that preceded this buildup gave us the greatest evisceration of the Navy in its history. When I was commissioned in 1968 there were 931 combatants in the U.S. Navy. By the time we inherited the Indian Ocean commitments in 1979, the Navy had been cut to 479 combatants. Operational commitments did not decrease.    The Navy did it with less, and the result was a hemorrhaging of manpower and materiel. Aircraft carriers deploying to the Indian Ocean commonly spent four months and longer at sea, without so much as seeing land, much less visiting a liberty port. By 1980, the Navy was short 22,000 noncommissioned officers.    I'm not sure we'd be lucky enough as a service to survive that sort of misfortune again.    ---   Mr. Webb is secretary of the Navy. This is adapted from a speech last week to the National Press Club in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>