<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880627-0070 </DOCNO><HL> War Games: Pushing Defense Firms To Compete, Pentagon Harms Buying System --- Value of Inside Information Turns Cozy Relationships Into Reason for Bribery --- An 'Emasculated Civil Service' </HL><AUTHOR> Tim Carrington and Edward T. Pound (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MD BA UTX ML BDM </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Donald Hicks, formerly the Pentagon's research chief, advises the government on military matters -- without pay. He helps devise ways to counter Soviet gains in submarine technology, and he evaluates which Star Wars systems probably will shoot down enemy missiles. Mr. Hicks also is a consultant to five big defense contractors -- for pay. He tells them which Pentagon programs have the best chance of getting funds.    There's nothing wrong with such a dual role, Mr. Hicks says: &quot;Cross-pollination is helpful.&quot; And it is both legal and common at the Pentagon. But President Reagan's emphasis on competition in defense contracting turned what had been a cozy arrangement into something far more serious. Competition did, as advertised, save money, but it also made inside information far more valuable -- and threatening to the entire procurement system itself.    Operation Ill Wind, the code name for the two-year investigation blowing like a typhoon through the Pentagon, is showing that some competitors are going over the line in vying for contracts, which now total more than $160 billion a year.    The current system is one in which a new game of competition has largely replaced the old game of monopoly, in which information is the coin of the realm and in which consultants play both sides of the street. It encourages a form of &quot;industrial espionage,&quot; says Republican Sen. Ted Stevens of Alaska. &quot;It's Silicon Valley come to Washington.&quot; And with information suddenly so crucial, what makes the new Pentagon scandals differ from past ones is the allegations of bribery.    In the past, the Pentagon bestowed monopolies on most major arms makers by awarding sole-source contracts. Contractors producing one wave of weapons systems would huddle with Pentagon aides to map plans for the next generation.    These days, however, more than half the defense jobs are awarded after some type of competition. That has reduced prices on some high-cost items, including attack submarines and fighter-plane engines, but it also has created a frantic market for inside information. Companies struggle to learn in advance what the services want in future systems. And once competitions start, they scramble to find out what rivals might be proposing.    &quot;In a competitive environment, market intelligence is worth more,&quot; notes a defense expert in the White House. Congressional aides studying the unfolding scandal say savvy consultants could buy proprietary information from a military-service employee for $5,000 and sell it to a contractor for $50,000.    But the concerns go beyond the suspected dollars-for-data networks in which some consultants allegedly paid money and gratuities for inside information on multibillion-dollar contracts. They go beyond the investigations of former Navy Assistant Secretary Melvyn Paisley and other consultants named so far in the sweeping inquiry. They go to the question of whether the whole system needs revamping.    The problem, Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci says, is &quot;individuals, not the system.&quot; Former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger agrees: &quot;The system is basically a good one. But a few rotten apples can do an awful lot of damage.&quot;    Others discern wider problems. Virginia Sen. John Warner, ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee, said on NBC-TV's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; yesterday that hearings slated by that panel will &quot;try to examine the procurement process to determine if it's inherently flawed.&quot; And at the White House, staffers are talking about reviving an earlier defense procurement commission headed by Hewlett-Packard Co. Chairman David Packard.    &quot;When the dust settles on this, what I'd like to see is some kind of defense-consultant registration act,&quot; says retired Rear Adm. Stuart Platt, now in the shipping industry.    But consultants aren't the only carriers of proprietary information. In the incestuous world of Pentagon dealings, government employees sometimes directly furnish interested contractors with profitable secrets out of friendship or to curry favor with potential future employers.    In recent months, a Navy office involved in the costly Aegis high-tech cruiser program invited three companies to bid competitively on contracts to provide support services. According to a Navy official reviewing the program, the selection officer was pushed into retirement after he was caught providing one of the three competitors with proprietary information on the other two. A second selection officer was assigned the job but was caught doing the same thing with the second of the three rival bidders. He, too, was edged into retirement. Finally, a third selection officer awarded the job to the only competitor that hadn't seen inside information.    In recent years, &quot;there was never any problem getting competitive stuff on anything,&quot; says a recently retired aerospace executive. &quot;It was considered a disadvantage if you didn't have it.&quot;    The abuses allegedly involve not one network but many small circles of companies, middlemen and government-procurement specialists. Contractors, either directly or through paid consultants, allegedly coaxed or bribed government employees into bending the weapons-buying system for the contractors' benefit.    The current procurement scandal differs markedly from previous messes, which mostly involved contractors billing the government for extraneous items or overcharging for spare parts. The Reagan military buildup ground to a halt in the mid-1980s partly because of perceptions that a lot of the money was being wasted -- on the likes of $600 toilet seats and $400 hammers. Aided by mushy Pentagon rules, contractors demanded government reimbursements for country-club dues, corporate parties and, in one instance, boarding an executive's dog.    Today's scandal, in contrast, goes to the heart of the industry, a peculiar business that consists of many suppliers and only one customer, the Pentagon. It is a business where the sellers work to shape the customer's demands and lobby to make sure the customer hangs on to the necessary buying power. Moreover, the sellers and the customer draw from the same pool of potential employees. Many people work, at different times, for a big contractor, a consulting firm and one of the services. Mr. Paisley worked for Boeing Co., the Navy and his own consulting firm.    Consultants became more pivotal under the revised, more competitive system. According to one Navy procurement official, &quot;there's a fundamental dependency&quot; on consultants. &quot;The Reagan administration funded the contractors but emasculated the civil service,&quot; he says. Although the Pentagon's civilian work force grew during the Reagan years, many procurement offices shrank in streamlining moves.    The Pentagon's reliance on outside advisers was increased by two other trends. Weapons relied increasingly on new technologies emerging not from military laboratories, as in the past, but from the consumer sector. And changing procurement rules -- ushered in by both Congress and the Pentagon during the 1980s -- have created confusion in the industry and in Pentagon procurement offices.    &quot;The government doesn't have the staffing or in many cases the expertise to draft the specifications for the systems the government wants,&quot; says one former Navy official now working as a consultant. Often, a consultant might help the government define a new weapons program and later help a contractor try to win it. &quot;The rules for consultants are not clear,&quot; the man says. &quot;No one has really defined what constitutes a conflict.&quot;    The campaign to make the ponderous Pentagon procurement machine more like a marketplace gathered steam in the Navy early on. John Lehman, himself a former defense consultant who became the Navy secretary in 1981, scorned the sprawling military bureaucracy as &quot;a socialist culture&quot; and set up his own ways of operating.    After bringing in Mr. Paisley from Boeing, Mr. Lehman abolished the Naval Materiel Command, diminished the clout of high-ranking military officers on weapons procurement and systematically shut out the procurement overseers in Secretary Weinberger's office.    Although Mr. Paisley's title suggests that he was involved only with research, he &quot;had broad authority for deals that were outside Randamp;D,&quot; says a Navy official who often worked with that office. Mr. Paisley, a highly decorated fighter pilot in World War II, &quot;was a highflier, an adventurer,&quot; the Navy official adds.    This style contrasted with his more reserved deputy, James Gaines, whom Mr. Carlucci recently reassigned after agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation searched Mr. Gaines's office in a sweep for evidence. In recent days, there have been reports from law-enforcement officials that Mr. Gaines is cooperating with investigators, but one person familiar with contacts between Mr. Gaines's attorneys and prosecutors insists that he isn't cooperating.    Whatever the case, investigators clearly believe that Mr. Gaines would be an important witness who could provide details on questionable links among contractors, their consultants and Pentagon officials. Investigators say he is suspected of providing sensitive information to Mr. Paisley, and they are reviewing any possible financial ties between them.    Messrs. Gaines and Paisley have known each other for about 25 years. They worked together at Boeing in the 1970s and kept close contact after Mr. Paisley left the Pentagon in April 1987, according to law-enforcement officials and Navy employees. Mr. Paisley became a consultant holding contracts with McDonnell Douglas Corp., United Technologies Corp., Martin Marietta Co. and BDM International Inc. His wife, Vicki, was a BDM employee and became a BDM consultant while Mr. Paisley held his Navy job. Investigators say her actions also are under review.    While at the Pentagon, Mr. Paisley himself relied on consultants -- among them, William Galvin, who has emerged as a key figure in the investigation, and William Parkin, formerly a senior official in the Navy's cruise-missile program. The offices of both men also were searched.    &quot;The Navy has always used consultants more than the other services in coming up with specifications for its contracts,&quot; says Rep. Les Aspin, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. The Wisconsin Democrat plans hearings on the issue.    Because the process of designing and acquiring weapons takes years, there are many opportunities to bend it to the advantage of one contractor or another. Ideas for new weapons often begin with contractors, not program managers in the services or military commanders in the field. Often, a consultant or contractor official approaches a program office to discuss a new idea. The office tries to stir up enthusiasm within the military leadership, which might next declare that the system is needed. The service then draws up specifications describing what the new system should be and how it would perform. These specifications can be lengthy and comical; the Army once issued 15 pages of specifications for sugar cookies for the troops.    But the specifications, often written with a consultant's help, can determine which company wins. One Navy office recently proposed specifications for a radio that called for the winning contractor to employ certain experts, with particular educational levels and experience. The demands, it turned out, were drawn from the personnel rolls of one company pursuing the job. A Navy manager caught the rigged specifications and insisted that the procuring office rewrite them.    &quot;The Navy forced contractors to compete, and all this was, one way or another, a way out of the competitive process,&quot; a Navy official says.    Even though competition has stirred an appetite for proprietary information, it has succeeded in prodding arms makers into building better weapons at lower prices, defenders of the system contend. &quot;You can't say you don't want competition because there are people who would get bribed,&quot; former Defense Secretary Weinberger says. &quot;Either way, we're at the mercy of the most dishonest person in a very long chain.&quot;    Mr. Hicks argues that without regular contact with the arms industry, Pentagon bureaucrats would lose touch with technological developments. He also contends that much of the information that consultants share is valuable but not proprietary. He is afraid that the sweeping government investigation will cast all contacts under suspicion. &quot;We've entered into a culture of distrust,&quot; he says. &quot;We've got to stop feeling that everybody is a crook.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>