<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880510-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Identity Problems Plague the Baby Bells --- Their Businesses And Names Are Hazy to Public </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Amparano (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AIT </CO><IN> TEL MKT </IN><TEXT>   During a session of the TV game show &quot;Jeopardy&quot; late last year, host Alex Trebek asked contestants to name one of the seven regional telephone companies commonly called the Baby Bells.    The first contestant, David Traini of New Jersey, shot back, &quot;New Jersey Bell.&quot; Wrong. Richard Cordray from Washington, D.C., chimed in with &quot;Ohio Bell.&quot; Wrong again. The third contestant didn't even try.    Then the host himself got a bit hung up on the answers. After rattling off Bell Atlantic, BellSouth and Southwestern Bell, he stumbled. Unable to pronounce the fourth name on his printed list, he spelled out N-Y-N-E-X and ended up skipping Ameritech, Pacific Telesis Group and U S West altogether.    Such are the Baby Bell blues. It has been four years since they were cut loose from American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. -- better known as Ma Bell -- but they still lack widespread recognition. Though each company has billions in revenues and many thousands of shareholders, a lot of people still don't know who they are or what they do.    U S West sometimes is mistaken for an airline, Pacific Telesis for a tropical disease and Nynex either for a headache remedy or a stock exchange. Furthermore, those with Bell in their names often are considered stodgy, low-tech relics of a bygone era. And a surprising number of people still think ATandamp;T is running the whole show.    &quot;My own mother doesn't know what Nynex is,&quot; laments Robert J. O'Brien, a manager for New York-based Nynex. &quot;She asks whether I still work for the telephone company.&quot; Indeed, his mother, who lives in Philadelphia, can't understand why she keeps getting statements from Philadelphia-based Bell Atlantic Corp. if Nynex is in fact the telephone company. &quot;I've given up explaining it to her,&quot; Mr. O'Brien says.    The cost of the confusion has been substantial, especially in terms of potential new business. &quot;If people don't know what you do, then how are they going to buy your products or services?&quot; asks Steven Permut, a Yale University marketing professor and telecommunications consultant. The answer: they aren't. Nor, for that matter, are they going to have the information necessary to invest in the company.    Naturally, the regional companies have spent a lot of money trying to remedy the situation. Telecommunications consultants estimate that since the breakup of the Bell system in 1984, the Bell operating companies have spent more than $1 billion trying to get their names and messages across. Last year alone, they shelled out more than $148 million on television ads, according to the Television Bureau of Advertising and Broadcast Advertisers Reports, which tracks ad spending. And still their identities remain muddled.    &quot;Becoming a household name is very tough,&quot; concedes Jack L. Sommars, executive director of advertising for Denver-based U S West Inc. &quot;It takes a tremendous amount of dollars.&quot; Mr. Sommars won't reveal U S West's consumer-recognition levels, but he admits that &quot;they continue to be very low.&quot; The same holds true for most of the other Baby Bells.    The reasons for the bad connections are many, but the original catalyst was divestiture. It flung the telecommunications industry into chaos. No one knew the names of the new Bell spinoffs, what they would do, whether they'd be financially viable, where they'd be based or who would lead them. The result: mass confusion for investors and consumers alike.    The companies hoped that their advertising campaigns would take care of the problem. But none of them knew much about marketing, according to C. Sidney Boren, a BellSouth vice president. Ma Bell, for the most part, had always handled their advertising needs. And even then its campaigns had been aimed simply at getting customers to make more calls than they'd already been making; they had never been aimed at meeting customer needs or building brand loyalty and awareness. The reason for that was simple: ATandamp;T was a monopoly and its operating companies didn't have to worry about the competition -- there wasn't any.    But now there was, from such companies as International Business Machines Corp., their rival in the high-tech phone systems business. And the Baby Bells made the strategic mistake of devising ads that were long on glitz and short on substance.    Bell Atlantic's ads, for example, featured silhouettes of a person surrounded by stars, rainbows and laser beams. U S West ran ads that pictured cowboys thundering down hills on horseback. And one of Pacific Telesis's ads showed the construction of the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco.    The ads did, to a certain extent, increase recognition of the corporate name. But they didn't complete the process by telling consumers about their services. In fact, they didn't even reveal what those services were. Admits Cathy S. Witkay, manager of corporate advertising for San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis, &quot;The lingering question was, 'What exactly do you do?'&quot;    Most of the companies recognized the error midway through last year. Since then, they have amended their misguided messages and bombarded the market with new advertisements. Now, at the end of each commercial, Pacific Telesis tells viewers, &quot;We're in the business to move information and keep it moving over telephone lines, over cellular systems, over computer networks we design.&quot; People are shown using each application.    For its business-specific commercials, Nynex went to advertising agency Young andamp; Rubicam New York. The new string of ads, which began airing in November, all end with the following words flashing on the screen: telecommunications, information systems, software, publishing, business services. Moreover, Nynex last month acquired market research and consulting services company CAP International to help it get a better handle on the market place.    Other companies have made similar moves. BellSouth recently announced plans to revamp its marketing program and has begun increasing its marketing staff substantially. According to Jere A. Drummond, a BellSouth senior vice president, the sole aim is to &quot;get rid of customer confusion.&quot;    Finally, and most recently, US West in late April announced plans to remove the Bell name from its three operating units. Henceforth, Mountain Bell, Northwestern Bell and Pacific Northwest Bell will all be known as U S West Communications. According to the company, the move will bolster its corporate identity by dispelling widespread confusion about the link between the units and the parent.    Whether U S West's efforts pay off remains to be seen. But a number of the new ad campaigns already are showing results. Pacific Telesis, for example, last year took a survey of business executives, policy makers and other bigwigs. It gave them a list of companies, of which Pacific Telesis was one, and asked them whether they'd heard of each business and knew what it did. Pacific Telesis' recognition level stood at 90%, up from 53% the year before. As a result, says Diane Olberg, a Pacific Telesis manager, the company's subsidiaries have had a much easier time signing up new business. &quot;The marketing campaign put them on the map,&quot; she says.    Nonetheless, for most of the companies, the struggle for recognition isn't over. &quot;We still aren't as well established as we would like,&quot; says John A. Koten, an Ameritech senior vice president. Similarly, BellSouth's Mr. Boren says &quot;We're slowly getting there, (but) we still have a ways to go.&quot;    Indeed they do. According to Clive Chajet, chairman and chief executive of Lippincott andamp; Margulies Inc., a New York identity consultant, it will take the Bells about 10 years to establish a distinctive presence in the marketplace.    But that's only if they keep on throwing money into their marketing efforts. As Mr. Koten explains, &quot;If you stop, you tend to backslide.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>