<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0029 </DOCNO><HL> Freeing Up the International Skies---By Clyde McAvoy</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROP FORGNAIRLINES (AIR)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><TEXT>   If new Transportation Secretary James Burnley found a cautionary note on his desk from Elizabeth Dole, it likely dealt with what U.S. negotiators are pointing to as &quot;new&quot; opportunities to acquire international air routes. On closer look, what they have in mind is going back to the bargaining table for rights they should have received when they were giving away American markets over the past 30 years.    During that time successive administrations awarded foreign airlines access to our richest travel cities while settling for heavy restrictions on U.S. carriers and a handful of foreign cities in return. That led to the situation today, where, for example, British airlines fly to 16 American cities while U.S. carriers may land at just two British airports, and West German and French airlines service 11 and eight American cities respectively, while U.S. airlines have access to only seven in Germany and two in France.    From the mid-'50s to the mid-'70s, the U.S. was in a unique position to dominate the airline industry. If there was a silver lining in fighting two major wars less than five years apart, it was that it produced a large cadre of well-trained peacetime pilots. This, together with the development of the first commercially viable jet transports by Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, gave the U.S. an enormous advantage. The challenges of the vast distances to be covered, and a hungry market for air travel, honed the talents of a generation of American air pioneers.    In contrast, almost all foreign airlines were government owned and operated. Foreign competition in the '50s was for the most part undercapitalized, inexpert and poorly focused. Today, those same foreign airlines, sheltered from competition for three decades, include the world's largest international airline, Japan Air Lines, and half a dozen of the world's best.    American advantages were piddled away because of a perverse trading mentality, born in the '50s and passed on like a defective gene to today's negotiators. Their approach includes acceptance of the argument that a commercial air service is somehow different from other traded goods and so should be subject to restrictions not applied to other products.    Most insidious of all, American negotiators let themselves be embarrassed by the richness of their country. They became intimidated by the argument that since Japan, for example, is a small country, it would be &quot;unfair&quot; to bargain aviation rights on a city-for-city basis. That argument was but a short step away from the situation today in which Japan has access to 11 American markets, while U.S. airlines may fly to only five Japanese cities.    New cities are not the only coin of aviation negotiations, of course. Pricing freedom, the rights for service by any or all of America's airlines, and the ability to add flights freely would have been worthwhile trade-offs. What negotiators got in return for heartland cities, however, was zip.    Foreign countries sought to constrain U.S. airlines from fully competitive operations until their state-owned flag carriers could catch up. Now that this has happened, U.S. airlines are still denied the right to price their own product in countries with which America runs enormous trade deficits.    The rationale U.S. aviation officials gave was that some of these countries were (straight face here, please) too undeveloped in terms of international airports to permit &quot;ruinous competition.&quot; Therefore, this line goes, it was only &quot;fair&quot; that what slender facilities are available be shared equally -- even though U.S. airlines were far better equipped to use them.    It didn't take U.S. trading partners long to figure out there was no point in rushing in to construct airport facilities that could best be used by U.S. airlines. So it was that Tokyo didn't design its first postwar airport until 1965, and didn't build it until 10 years after that, an interim during which it exploited a growing number of U.S. destinations. A decade later Narita International Airport is already overcrowded and being used by the Japanese to rationalize restrictions on U.S. airlines to a whole new generation of U.S. negotiators. London's Heathrow and Gatwick airports are also outdated, overcrowded and among the most expensive in the world for U.S. airlines to use.    Foreign airlines have grown robust behind protection such as this. U.S. negotiators, rubbing their eyes, have belatedly discovered open skies. Having given away virtually every natural U.S. advantage, they now ask to be staked to a new round of trading. This time the chips are to be cabotage -- the right for foreign airlines to fly U.S. domestic routes -- and permission for foreign ownership of U.S. airlines.    By all means let's have that. This time, though, let's send businessmen to negotiate what civil servants refused to ask for over the past 30 years. While keeping current U.S. markets open -- and even adding to them -- they should establish two simple bargaining positions:    --U.S. airlines must be allowed to apply low fares in foreign markets. All too often international fares are set by governments, as is the case in Japan, Australia and some South American countries.    --In terms of volume, aviation should be treated no differently from cameras or any other consumer product.    U.S.-style deregulation has become a part of the dialogue between the U.S. and almost all of its trading partners. Aviation liberalization has already touched Europe and is penetrating previously closed minds in Asia. Both regions want an even bigger opportunity in the aviation boom market that deregulation has bestowed on the U.S. This means new chances to correct old mistakes.    Let's get it right this time.    ---   Mr. McAvoy is based in Tokyo for a U.S. airline. </TEXT></DOC>