<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0008 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: FBI Woos Librarians to Spy on 'Commie' Readers </HL><AUTHOR> Ann Hagedorn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   If Big Brother isn't watching you, that could be because he's spending a lot of time at the library. But Big Brother, a.k.a. your friendly FBI agent, isn't brushing up his Shakespeare. Actually, he isn't reading at all. He's recruiting librarians as deputies in the fight against Soviet espionage.    Think of it. Thousands of KGB agents have allegedly acquired U.S. library cards -- and they are using them. So your FBI in peace and war has leapt into action, trying to enlist patriotic librarians in the War Against Illicit Research.    Actually, the official agency name for this brave new Cold War counteroffensive is the Library Awareness Program. The FBI sees libraries as proven hubs of espionage activity, and wants librarians to report on what the agency refers to as &quot;suspicious activity.&quot; So far, however, the agency seems mostly to be getting a big &quot;Shhhh!&quot; from the librarians.    At the Broward County Library in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., agents asked for data bases showing checkout records. At the University of Michigan engineering library two agents wanted the borrowing record of a visiting Soviet scholar who frequently used the photocopier. And recently two FBI agents visited the home of a librarian from the New York Public Library to question him about his contacts at the Cuban Mission to the United Nations.    In the past 18 months the FBI has requested counterintelligence assistance from at least 14 libraries, says Judith Krug, an executive at the American Library Association. Ever since a Columbia University librarian publicized a visit from two agents last year, the FBI and the ALA have been locking horns.    &quot;We will use every means at our disposal to cause the FBI to cease and desist,&quot; says Ms. Krug, who heads the ALA's Office for Intellectual Freedom. &quot;This surveillance casts a shadow over library users. They'll begin to wonder who's watching and are they looking at the wrong topics? Are they doing something that could be construed as un-American?&quot;    Nancy Kranich, an associate director of New York University libraries, is just as alarmed. &quot;To send FBI agents into libraries,&quot; she says, &quot;is the kind of behavior we criticize the Iron Curtain countries for.&quot;    The FBI defends its forays as necessary and has no plans to abandon the effort. Earlier this month an agent visited a library at the University of Utah.    &quot;We've seen certain things,&quot; says Susan Schnitzer, an FBI spokeswoman. &quot;We know Soviet agents target libraries for intelligence information and for recruitment purposes. They might be interested in a thesis, say, on robotics, computers or artificial intelligence.&quot;    The &quot;hostile presence&quot; in this country, she says, includes 23,000 students from communist countries, 70,000 visitors and more than 4,500 communist diplomatic and commercial representatives. About one-third of those 4,500, she says, offering no supporting evidence for this claim, are involved in intelligence gathering missions. With only 9,500 agents of its own, the FBI says it needs librarians to &quot;see things&quot; too and to report &quot;suspicious activity.&quot; What that means is a bit puzzling to the librarians, who are expected to help the FBI without pay. Besides urging librarians to stand firm against the FBI, the ALA has filed a request using the Freedom of Information Act for a documentary explanation of the program.    The agents usually come in pairs, say librarians, and often use a patriotic theme. &quot;They appealed to my feelings about being a good citizen,&quot; says Maurita Holland, who heads the University of Michigan engineering library. She was visited twice several years ago. When the agents first arrived, they showed her a copy of an article in U.S. News andamp; World Report about how Americans needed to be careful about high-tech information. &quot;I remember they wanted to close the door to my office and have a meeting. I said the door would remain open.&quot;    Most librarians are quick to label the FBI's visits infringements of privacy rights and First Amendment freedoms. In 38 states, it is even illegal to breach the confidentiality of library checkout records. Moreover, the information in university and public libraries is unclassified. Says Cecil Beach, director of libraries for Broward County, Fla., &quot;Even in our technical library there isn't anything classified, nothing you couldn't get by reading something like Aviation Week.&quot;    Democratic Rep. Don Edwards of California criticizes the vagueness of purpose to the FBI's visits. In a March 30 letter to FBI director William Sessions, Rep. Edwards asked for clarification of the program. He also wants to hold hearings on the issue. &quot;They think they can learn what Russians are doing scientifically if they know what they are reading,&quot; says Rep. Edwards. &quot;But turning librarians into agents is terribly chilling. It's reminiscent of the domestic intelligence files the FBI kept for many years. I thought those bad old days were gone. There are so many strong arguments against this that they'd have to catch a lot of spies to justify it.&quot;    The FBI won't disclose whether its program has resulted in any arrests, although agents like to note that a Soviet employee of the U.N. was arrested a few years ago for receiving classified defense information from a Ghanaian exchange student he originally had hired to copy materials from New York-area libraries. The student subsequently cooperated with the FBI and supplied the classified information to the Soviet at the FBI's behest.    Corporate data bases also have caused anxiety to federal government security stalwarts. In 1986, the FBI, the Air Force and the CIA all expressed concern to Mead Corp.'s Mead Data Central unit, which produces and operates the vast Nexis computer data base of newspapers, magazines, legal and technical publications. But Mead kept the information flowing to all bona fide customers of its service. &quot;We took the position that the information on Nexis had all been previously published and shouldn't be a matter of concern to the federal government,&quot; says Jerry Yung, Mead Data's vice president of government relations. &quot;Their position was that, though available publicly, once aggregated with powerful computer software, it could be used against national interests.&quot;    The National Technical Information Service, a data base of scientific and technical government publications that Nexis carried at one time, might have triggered the visits, says Mr. Yung. Late in 1986, Mead dropped the data base, for business reasons, he says.    The FBI's program has caused a good deal of stir on the U.S. National Commission for Libraries and Information Science, a presidentially appointed commission. Although the FBI won't discuss its library program in detail, the commission heard from Thomas DuHadway, an FBI deputy director, at a closed meeting in January. According to a transcript subsequently obtained by the Bureau of National Affairs, a private Washington publisher, Mr. DuHadway indicated that the agency wants librarians to pay attention when they &quot;see someone routinely, systematically copying microfiche, or stealing things. These are real anomalies of library use and that's what we want to be identified, that's what we want to be notified of. We don't want to be notified about circulation lists. We would like to be alerted if, I think, there's a potential problem.&quot;    Mr. DuHadway said the FBI had visited 25 libraries in the past three years, and that the program has had a &quot;very favorable, fine&quot; response from librarians, with one exception -- the Columbia University incident last year. He did not provide any specific names of cooperating libraries or librarians. Ms. Krug, at the ALA, says she hasn't been able to find any librarians who've doubled as spies. But the FBI has at least succeeded in making us fear that inside the most innocent-seeming librarian lurks an Elliot Ness. So after decades of combating their image as horn-rimmed wimps, the country's librarians are suddenly put in the position of proving they aren't junior G-men-and, of course, of fighting to preserve freedom of thought and information.    ---   Ms. Hagedorn covers law and the courts for the Journal in New York. </TEXT></DOC>