<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880516-0103 </DOCNO><HL> The Ride Gets Rough at Hughes Aircraft --- Loss of Chief, U.S. Inquiry Shake GM Unit </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph B. White (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GM GMH </CO><IN> ARO TEL </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   The ride is getting rough for Hughes Aircraft Corp.    Since May 6, the General Motors Corp. unit has lost its chief executive officer, has been shaken by reports that a federal grand jury is investigating its dealings with a key satellite customer, Intelsat, and has seen its stock drift slightly lower on Wall Street.    Meanwhile, rumors of massive layoffs are sweeping the company's Southern California work force, touched off by Hughes' announcement that it is studying consolidating its missile systems headquarters in Canoga Park, Calif., with its missile manufacturing operations in Tucson, Ariz. Many of the 3,200 jobs in Canoga Park will probably be lost in such a move, some Hughes employees speculate. Hughes, however, hasn't said whether such a consolidation would result in layoffs.    The turmoil has abruptly shattered the relative calm that had characterized the relationship between Hughes and GM. After the Detroit auto giant bought Hughes for $5 billion in 1985, GM managers promised to take a hands-off approach to managing their new aerospace property. But events surrounding the sudden resignation of Albert D. Wheelon, a 22-year Hughes veteran, and the installation of three former GM executives in key Hughes management posts since 1986, suggest GM is moving to tighten its grip.    What long-term impact recent events will have on Hughes and its stock remain to be seen. Hughes earnings continue to improve. And while unwelcome, grand jury investigations are hardly rare in the defense industry, and no Hughes official has been accused of wrongdoing in the latest inquiry.    Still, news of the investigation couldn't have come at a worse time. Hughes is competing hard to win the contract for a new generation of satellites from Intelsat, the 114-nation consortium based in Washington. The board of governors of the satellite telecommunications group is scheduled to meet in Spain next month to choose one of four bidders for the potentially $1 billion project.    Hughes has kept mum about the Justice Department investigation. &quot;You hit my 'No comment' button,&quot; one company spokesman said when asked about it. One stock analyst, who requested anonymity, said Hughes may face problems on the new Intelsat bid. But he added, &quot;I'd be hard pressed to see permanent damage.&quot;    A lot depends on what the Justice Department and the grand jury find as they pursue allegations, which relate to a scandal that engulfed Intelsat headquarters in late 1986.    Intelsat's former director general, Richard Colino, was charged with setting up an elaborate scheme to siphon kickbacks from financing and construction contracts for Intelsat's new headquarters building. In July 1987, Mr. Colino pleaded guilty to fraud and conspiracy charges, and was later sentenced to six years in federal prison. Meanwhile, Mr. Colino's deputy, Jose L. Alegrett, was fired and later fled to Venezuela amid allegations that he had arranged to divert to his bank account money paid by Hughes to certain Latin American consulting firms.    A federal grand jury in Washington, D.C., last month subpoenaed 15 years of consultant contract records from Ford Aerospace andamp; Communications Corp., a unit of Ford Motor Co., which has a $600 million satellite contract with Intelsat. Ford is confident that its executives did nothing wrong. &quot;We're not a target of the investigation,&quot; a Ford Aerospace spokeswoman said.    The grand jury also subpoenaed more than a decade of records from Hughes, specifically seeking consultant's contracts authorized by Mr. Wheelon.    Lawyers familiar with the Justice Department inquiry as well as internal investigations conducted by Intelsat, Ford and Hughes suggest that payments to consulting firms are just one of several areas that the grand jury is studying. A subpoena served on Hughes seeks documents &quot;generated by Intelsat or any Hughes Aircraft Company competitors in connection with Intelsat prime contract awards.&quot; Two sources familar with the situation confirm that Hughes officials found sensitive, internal Intelsat documents in Hughes files. Whether Hughes should have had those documents isn't clear, a lawyer familiar with the situation said.    Further, Justice Department investigators apparently are looking into whether former Intelsat officials solicited kickbacks in connection with satellite contracts, the sources say.    At Hughes, the arrival of the subpoena mentioning Mr. Wheelon, who had headed the Los Angeles company's satellite unit for 15 years until becoming chairman and chief executive in April 1987, created a shock wave felt in Detroit. Within two weeks, the 59-year-old Mr. Wheelon had taken early retirement, and Malcolm Currie, a 25-year Hughes executive who had been running the Delco Electronics division, had been named his successor.    The move exacerbated the uncertainty over GM's growing role at Hughes, formerly a closely held company that prior to the takeover had enjoyed a comfortable life free from accountability to outside investors. But since 1985 Hughes has had to cut its payroll to 75,000 from about 80,000. In that time, Hughes also has filled three top executive slots with people whose roots are in the GM or Delco organizations.    Newly appointed general counsel John Higgins was an assistant general counsel at GM headquarters. Chief financial officer Michael T. Smith was an assistant controller in GM's finance department, and came to Hughes after a brief stint as chief financial officer of GM Hughes Electronics. Vice president of product operations, James M. Hall, came to Hughes from Delco, where he was in charge of manufacturing for GM.    Under GM, Hughes's earnings have grown. In 1987, Hughes earned $521.1 million, or $1.67 a share, on revenue of $10.44 billion. This year, first-quarter profit increased 44% to $252 million after a gain from the sale of stock and an accounting change. In February, GM declared a 2-for-1 stock split for GM Class H shares, which represent a dividend interest in the GM Hughes Electronics subsidiary.    But some Hughes employees who remember the pre-GM life worry that Detroit wants to call more of the shots. That makes some Hughes long-timers nervous, says one employee. But a Hughes spokesman says GM &quot;hasn't come in and told us how to do our business.&quot;    Still, GM has plenty of reasons to be concerned about Hughes. Under the terms of the purchase, GM guaranteed that the value of GM Class H stock held by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute would be at least $30 a post-split share by the end of 1989. The institute held 50 million pre-split Class H shares at the time of the purchase. If Class H share prices were to fall as low as $10 each on a post-split basis, GM's liability could be as high as $2 billion.    Right now the stock is trading on cusp, closing at $29 a share, down 25 cents in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday. Late last month, the stock had traded as high at $31 a share.    But GM chairman Roger B. Smith, who took heat in some circles for the huge sum he paid to get Hughes, says he's thrilled with the unit's performance, so far.    &quot;I read 70% of acquisitions don't turn out the way people want them to,&quot; he said recently, before the Justice Department inquiry became public. &quot;Look at Hughes and EDS (Electronic Data Systems Corp.). I couldn't have wanted anything better.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>