<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Stock 'Parking' Becomes Big Factor in Insider Scandal---U.S. Focus on Activity Helps Case,But Some Question Crackdown---By Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Parking&quot; of stock among securities firms is emerging as a major factor in Wall Street's widening insider-trading scandal.    Well-known individuals and firms have become ensnared on federal charges that they helped Ivan F. Boesky, once Wall Street's biggest stock speculator, to park large blocks of stock. Parking occurs when one investor buys stock, usually a large position, for another who doesn't want to be identified as the owner.    The parking allowed Mr. Boesky, who has admitted to trading on inside information, to balloon his stock holdings and to conceal violations of net capital rules, which are designed to ensure that broker-dealers have enough money available to meet their obligations.    Boyd L. Jefferies, former chairman of Jefferies Group Inc., admitted to parking stock for Mr. Boesky; he has pleaded guilty to criminal charges and is awaiting sentencing. General Electric Co.'s Kidder Peabody andamp; Co. unit paid a $25.3 million civil fine last month to settle parking and other Securities and Exchange Commission charges, without admitting guilt.    The government also is investigating leading Wall Street arbitragers, and current and former officials of Kidder Peabody and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., among others, for possible involvement in parking schemes with Mr. Boesky.    Alan Bromberg, a law professor and securities-law expert at Southern Methodist University, says, &quot;Nobody really worried much about parking among the industry or the regulators. Now it's high profile.&quot;    The government probe suggests that investigators are primarily interested in parking by Mr. Boesky and others that is tied to the broader abuse of trading on inside information. In the one criminal charge to which Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty -- conspiracy to file false documents disclosing Mr. Boesky's holdings in Fischbach Corp. -- parking was only one component of an alleged takeover conspiracy.    Since parking conceals true ownership of a stock, it can enable a corporate raider to secretly amass a large stock position, thus gaining an important strategic advantage over a takeover target. The person or firm parking the stock may gain access to inside information from the raider or his investment banker about a planned bid. And the &quot;parker&quot; may also get guarantees that the stock can be sold to the raider at a profit after a takeover bid is announced. Such schemes may violate numerous securities laws, including requirements that people buying stock together must disclose that they are acting as a group.    The charges made public so far in the government probe suggest that Mr. Boesky often farmed out stock to others so that he could maximize his purchases of takeover stocks, sometimes based on inside information. Under a typical parking scheme, Mr. Boesky would buy stock and then &quot;sell&quot; it to another securities firm, while effectively retaining ownership by guaranteeing the firm against losses. Later, after a takeover bid was announced, Mr. Boesky would buy back the stock and sell it.    &quot;With the Boesky revelations, the Securities and Exchange Commission saw that parking was becoming a tool that tends to corrupt the whole takeover process,&quot; says Robert M. Romano, a partner in the law firm of Morgan, Lewis andamp; Bockius. Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani says that the government's push against parking crimes &quot;isn't really a shift in emphasis; it's where the facts take you.&quot;    Clearly, the government is finding that criminal prosecution of stock parking can be a valuable investigative and enforcement tool. People who illegally park stock run afoul of a variety of securities laws that, while long considered minor, can be criminally prosecuted and can bring a maximum five-year jail sentence for each violation. The government has charged Mr. Boesky and others in parking cases with violating capital and credit limits, falsifying books and records, and breaking rules requiring investors to disclose when they own 5% or more of a company's stock.    The government is using criminal prosecution of parking infractions &quot;largely to put pressure on people to disclose more serious violations&quot; by others, says Mr. Bromberg of Southern Methodist. &quot;It can threaten one of these more technical violations and get a lot of cooperation.&quot;    Government investigators, as previously reported, are focusing on secret records and other evidence suggesting that Mr. Boesky and Drexel officials, including Michael M. Milken, head of the high-yield, high-risk bond operation, engaged in a wide-ranging scheme to profit from corporate takeovers. The government is investigating to determine whether Mr. Boesky and Drexel parked stock with each other to conceal ownership of the positions, people familiar with the probe say. The criminal information to which Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty last April outlined facts that suggest that a conspiracy may have existed to help corporate raider Victor Posner gain control of Fischbach, these people add.    Fischbach was taken over in 1985 by Mr. Posner, who is now Fischbach's chairman. People familiar with the government investigation say that if Drexel, Mr. Boesky and Mr. Posner -- or some combination of them -- acted in concert to gain control of Fischbach for Mr. Posner, then there might be numerous criminal violations of securities laws.    In its probe, the government is focusing on a $5.3 million payment Mr. Boesky's company made to Drexel in March 1986. As previously reported, people familiar with the investigation say that the government has evidence suggesting that the payment actually represented an amount due to Drexel under a suspected securities-parking arrangement.    Mr. Milken and Drexel have repeatedly denied any wrongdoing. Drexel has said that it conducted its own investigation of the $5.3 million payment and found nothing improper about it. The firm says that the payment was for legitimate investment banking services.    A spokesmen for a Posner-controlled company involved in the Fischbach takeover has noted that no one in the company or any related units has been charged in any way.    Stock parking has reared its head before in various forms. It has long been employed by disreputable &quot;bucket shops&quot; in manipulating thinly traded stocks. And during the 1960s takeover boom, conglomerates were suspected of parking stocks with institutional investors -- stock that was on call when a tender offer was announced.    Yet many Wall Street executives and lawyers question the government's recent crackdown on parking. They assert that most stock parking is benign, more akin to loitering than assault and battery. Says Stanley S. Arkin, a prominent criminal lawyer: &quot;I think we are overcriminalizing securities regulation, and it's an area that the Justice Department could in good conscience and more sensibly leave to the SEC or other appropriate agencies.&quot;    Some people say that parking arrangements have long been part of the Wall Street system of accommodating important customers. &quot;Boesky was the most important market factor on Wall Street. Everyone wanted to be on good terms with Boesky,&quot; says Kenneth J. Bialkin, a takeover lawyer at Willkie, Farr andamp; Gallagher.    Mr. Bialkin argues that &quot;there is no more an offense in the securities law called parking than one called speeding.&quot; Parking &quot;can define a whole range of arrangements, most of which aren't illegal,&quot; he says. These are &quot;judgments at the edge, but they are trading judgments.&quot;    Thus, Wall Street executives say that a securities firm participating in a public stock offering may arrange for a large investor to temporarily buy a block of unsold shares; this allows the underwriting syndicate to report that the issue is sold out.    For government prosecutors, illegal parking often may be difficult to prove, says Southern Methodist's Mr. Bromberg. &quot;I sell you some securities, and you buy them back later. Is that parking? Did we have some kind of provable arrangement?&quot; he asks. One government official says that parking agreements frequently are done on &quot;a wink and a nod.&quot;    However, in the Boesky scandal, government investigators gained valuable evidence in certain parking cases because conspirators prepared false invoices to disguise payments.    For example, the SEC charged that Boesky and Jefferies entities secretly held stock positions belonging to the other, and agreed to &quot;buy back&quot; the positions and reimburse each other for carrying costs and any losses incurred in the holdings. Periodically, the two netted out profits on the holdings, the SEC alleged. A Jefferies Group unit sent Ivan F. Boesky Corp. a $3 million invoice purportedly for &quot;investment advisory and corporate financial services,&quot; but which was really part of the illegal parking scheme, the SEC charged.    Defense lawyers also have found parking a valuable legal tool. Early this year, federal prosecutors threatened to indict former Boesky head trader Michael Davidoff on criminal racketeering charges. Instead, Mr. Davidoff's lawyer and Charles Carberry, head of the Manhattan U.S. attorney's securities fraud unit, worked out a deal. Mr. Davidoff pleaded guilty Jan. 28 to a parking-related felony in which he admitted parking stock for Mr. Boesky with a London brokerage firm, Seligmann andamp; Harris, and agreed to cooperate with the government's investigation.    While the government gained a potentially valuable witness, lawyers say that the Davidoff plea-bargain quickly became a model for other individuals caught up in the Boesky probe.    By pleading guilty to a parking-related crime, lawyers say, a defendant may avoid admitting insider trading. In the current judicial climate, insider trading &quot;is the equivalent to having leprosy; they will lock you away,&quot; says one lawyer close to the insider investigation. Many lawyers believe the courts will see parking offenses as technical and not meriting a prison sentence. (Mr. Davidoff is still awaiting sentencing. His lawyer, Paul Rooney, declined to comment, as did Anne Ryan, an assistant U.S. attorney who handled the Davidoff case.)    To date, because of plea bargains, no one has been tried on a criminal parking charge, lawyers note.    Wall Street complaints about the government's parking crackdown are getting little sympathy from regulators. The securities industry &quot;is predicated in part on self-regulation,&quot; says William R. McLucas, SEC associate director of enforcement. &quot;In light of the fact that some members haven't been playing by rules they view as technical, it's hard to argue we shouldn't enforce them.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>