<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871016-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Tokyo Market Is Setting Its Own Course---Increasing IndependenceFrom U.S. Is Shown---By Kathryn GravenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN SB FBC AXP SHE GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Upheavals in the financial markets and securities industry in New York and London are having little impact in Japan, indicating the Tokyo market increasingly is charting its own course.    While the Dow Jones Industrial Average has dropped 13.5% from its peak reached Aug. 25, Tokyo's Nikkei stock average has gained more than 3% in the same period. After the Dow Jones industrials plunged 3.8% Wednesday, the 225-stock Nikkei average followed with a decline of less than 1% yesterday.    And although the drop in the Japanese government bond market the past six months has hurt many Japanese brokerage firms and investors, it hasn't led to the kind of staff and operations cuts that are taking place at some New York and London firms. Japanese brokerage houses still are posting record profits, and their executives expect the boom to last at least through 1988.    &quot;Japanese brokerage houses are strong and are doing very well,&quot; Hideo Sakamaki, executive managing director at Nomura Securities Co., says. Although Nomura's profit from bond trading for the year ended Sept. 30 probably will be down 40% from a year earlier, he says, its net income is expected to show a 30% rise for the same period.    Many market executives and analysts here say that although the U.S. and Japanese markets remain linked, their fortunes over the next few months may well move in separate directions.    &quot;The correlation between price movements in New York and price movements in Tokyo is becoming less and less,&quot; Hisamichi Sawa, first vice president, Prudential-Bache Securities (Japan) Ltd., says.    Ron Napier, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd., says: &quot;I think we are going to get some differentials (between U.S. and Japanese markets' performance). The stock market here doesn't have to follow New York.&quot;    One of the major changes, analysts say, is that domestic developments have become increasingly important to investors in Japan.    Investors who typically have ignored sky-high price-earnings ratios in the Tokyo market have started looking to fundamentals and corporate earnings to support their still-feverish buying. In addition, the Japanese economy has shown more strength than was expected this year, and many economists are forecasting growth of 4% to 5% for next year.    Housing and construction-related stocks have risen, as have retail, travel and leisure, and other issues related to domestic demand. Steel shares, which were hurt by the rapid appreciation of the yen, are bouncing back.    An announcement Wednesday that a leading Japanese cosmetics maker, Shiseido Co., was cutting its earnings estimate nearly 50% caused some investors to worry that their earnings outlook might be too optimistic.    Most analysts, however, say earnings will remain strong for some time. Salomon Brothers, for example, is forecasting 26% to 30% profit growth for the companies on the first section of the Tokyo Stock Exchange for the current fiscal year.    &quot;I think the earnings are clearly there,&quot; Salomon's Mr. Napier says.    This bullish sentiment, along with the success of the first offering of Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp. shares last winter, has significantly boosted trading volume -- and profit for Japanese securities firms.    Last year, Tokyo share-trading volume rose 66% and daily turnover averaged 708.6 million shares. In the first four months of 1987, average daily turnover soared to more than 1.2 billion shares. Volume has tapered off since then, but not enough to cut deeply into brokerage firms' profits, analysts say.    The prevalence of fixed commission rates in Japan helps boost brokerage houses' trading profits. In addition, Japanese companies' relatively low dividends and the absence of a capital-gains tax both encourage frequent trading of stocks, further boosting brokerage earnings.    As a result, institutional investors have pressed for commission rate cuts. Japanese authorities, concerned that some equity trading might move offshore, made some commission cuts this month to try to bring Tokyo more in line with other markets. The cuts were expected to reduce commission revenue by an average of 10%, but Finance Ministry officials acknowledged that foreign brokerage firms are likely to be the most heavily affected.    Nevertheless, foreign securities firms are still clamoring for seats on the Tokyo exchange. Japanese press reports say as many as 15 foreign securities firms will be offered the chance to become members when the exchange expands next year. Six foreign firms became members in 1986.    The Tokyo exchange's board is due to designate the new members Tuesday. According to Japanese reports, six will be from the U.S.: the Japanese subsidiaries of Salomon Brothers, First Boston Corp., Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. and Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.    In addition, four British firms, one from France and two each from West Germany and Switzerland are expected to be selected.    The six current foreign members are Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., the Vickers da Costa unit of Citicorp, Britain's S.G. Warburg andamp; Co. and Jardine Fleming Holdings Ltd. of Hong Kong.    Whoever the new exchange members are, they will increase competition, which may lead to some consolidation, analysts say. But for now, the securities industry in Tokyo is still expanding.    While firms in New York and London are cutting employees, Japanese and foreign securities firms in Tokyo complain about a shortage of qualified personnel.    &quot;The Japanese financial market is still not mature. I think the understaffed situation will continue for a while,&quot; Prudential-Bache's Mr. Sawa says.    Many of the foreign firms that want to gain a seat on the Tokyo exchange and expand their equity business here are the same ones cutting back and restructuring in other markets.    Deryck Maughan, managing director and general manager of Salomon Brothers' Tokyo office, says Salomon still wants a seat despite the cut in commission rates and the rise in operating expenses in Japan.    While the equity market has been delivering profits to Japanese and foreign brokerage firms, the Japanese government bond market has not been so lucrative. The benchmark 10-year bond No. 89 traded yesterday at a yield of 6.04%, compared with 2.5% six months ago. Mr. Sawa estimates that Japanese financial institutions and institutional investors have had losses of 2.5 trillion yen ($17.55 billion) in the Japanese government bond market.    But whether firms will write off those losses is another matter. Many analysts suspect that the losses will never actually be disclosed. Eve Kaplan, an analyst at SBCI Securities (Asia) Ltd., says most of them probably &quot;will just be massaged away.&quot;    Even if the bond market continues to be discouraged by the trend toward higher interest rates, the Nikkei stock average is widely expected to reach more new highs. As institutional investors gradually reduce their bond holdings, new money is expected to flow into the stock market; individual investors, meanwhile, are likely to enter in ever greater numbers ahead of next month's planned second offering of NTT shares.    ---   Michael R. Sesit in New York contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>