<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Religious Rights: A Matter of Property </HL><AUTHOR> Virginia I. Postrel </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> REL CON </IN><G> SUP JUS </G><TEXT>   Religion is in trouble in America -- for reasons that have nothing to do with Jimmy Swaggart or Jim and Tammy Bakker.    While civil libertarians vigilantly guarded the Maginot line separating church and state, the courts have swept across the undefended territory of the free-exercise clause. The Supreme Court's decision last month to let the government build roads through national forest sacred to two Indian tribes is but the latest example of this disturbing trend. Over the past several years, the courts have steadily eroded religious freedom by repeatedly granting government officials control over property central to religious life.    Building a church is a time-honored expression of religious faith, a quintessential example of the free exercise of religion. But it is not a constitutionally protected activity, according to a 1983 decision by the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. A congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses had repeatedly -- and unsuccessfully -- petitioned the Lakewood, Ohio, zoning board for permission to build a new church, or Kingdom Hall, on a lot it owned in a residential neighborhood. The court held that Lakewood could legally zone religious buildings out of virtually all residential neighborhoods, leaving a mere 10% of the city open to new churches.    The desire for a suitable building, the court said, was merely a matter of finances and aesthetics, not the congregation's religious liberty: &quot;There is no evidence that the construction of a Kingdom Hall is a ritual, a 'fundamental tenet,' or a 'cardinal principle' of its faith. At most the Congregation can claim that its freedom to worship is tangentially related to worshiping in its own building.&quot;    That same year, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that the city of Miami Beach could bar Naftali Grosz, an elderly Hassidic rabbi, from conducting daily worship services in his own garage. At issue was a city zoning law that prohibits religious buildings, such as churches and synagogues, in single-family residential areas. Rabbi Grosz's garage services generally attracted 10 to 20 people.    As unsettling as the Lakewood decision was, it at least involved a full-fledged church, parking lot and all. But, thanks to the Grosz ruling, homeowners can now find their living-room gatherings lumped in the same illegal category. By stretching the zoning law to encompass services for as few as 10 people, the court made worship illegal where bridge clubs are not. It also gave zoning boards great power to harass and intimidate minority religions -- especially since a single disgruntled neighbor can launch a zoning investigation.    &quot;If you have 10 people over every Sunday for your Great Books discussion, and you discuss life issues -- the kinds of things you discuss in a church -- if that's allowed, aren't they discriminating against groups that meet on religious grounds?&quot; asks William B. Hollberg, an Atlanta attorney affiliated with the Rutherford Institute, a Manassas, Va.-based group that specializes in defending religious freedom in court.    Ironically, courts have let cities make it not only impossible to build a church, but also illegal for its congregants to tear one down. In 1986, the New York Court of Appeals ruled that the city of New York could legally designate the Church of St. Paul and St. Andrew a historic landmark -- thereby forcing the small Methodist congregation to pour millions of dollars into a large, decaying building. The U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear the case.    Now the church cannot alter the exterior of its building in any way without the hard-to-obtain approval of the city's Landmarks Commission -- much less pull down most of the structure and rebuild, as it would like to. &quot;The Landmarks Commission has the right to tell a church that it has to bleed itself of all resources and put them into its building,&quot; says the church's pastor, Edward Horne. &quot;Even people who support preservation are appalled that there's no money that comes along with it. The Landmarks Commission has the right to say that we keep the church as a museum for the community.&quot; Landmark designations are about 40 times more likely to hit the city's churches and synagogues than other buildings.    In the wake of the Lakewood and Grosz decisions, Scott David Godshall noted in a 1984 Columbia Law Review article: &quot;Absent a religion whose beliefs center on the land itself, religious use of land may, under this analysis, be defined as secular and denied protection. The result, in other words, is a per se rule against application of free exercise analysis to church land use controversies.&quot;    And now the Supreme Court has ruled that the First Amendment does not even protect Indian religions whose beliefs do center on the land itself. The court could have ruled on narrower grounds -- for example, the need to weigh competing uses for the same publicly owned property. Instead, Justice Sandra Day O'Connor issued broad statements about the meaning of the First Amendment's free-exercise clause, statements that dangerously extend the erosion of religious freedom. Free exercise has become, in the eyes of the courts, a mere matter of doctrine and belief -- not of true exercise, of practice.    In her ruling, Justice O'Connor writes that the government may instigate logging and road-building projects that &quot;could have devastating effects on traditional Indian religious practices.&quot; But, she argues, &quot;the affected individuals {would not} be coerced by the Government's actions into violating their religious beliefs; nor would the governmental action penalize the exercise of religious rights by denying religious adherents an equal share of the rights, benefits, and privileges enjoyed by other citizens.&quot;    To rule that wiping out religious practices -- and the sacred space that makes them possible -- does not coerce people to violate their religious beliefs is perverse. It also betrays a watered-down Christian bias. For many of the world's religions, practice is belief, or very nearly so. As Justice William Brennan notes in his dissent, &quot;For Native Americans religion is not a discrete sphere of activity separate from all others.&quot; Nor is it for observant Jews or Moslems or even many Christians.    The Supreme Court's recent ruling shocked many civil libertarians. It shouldn't have, for lower courts had already made the drift clear. Those of us who care about civil liberties, about the First Amendment's guarantees, must now turn our attention to defending the free-exercise clause -- before the only place individuals can exercise freedom of religion is within their own skulls.    ---   Ms. Postrel is associate editor of Reason magazine. </TEXT></DOC>