<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871224-0116 </DOCNO><HL> What Makes Plant Productivity Grow?---By Frank R. Lichtenberg</HL><DD> 12/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Mergers and acquisitions generally increase productivity and are good for the economy. While a majority of individuals gain from such restructuring, they are much less vocal than the minority who lose. The danger is that the latter's calls for legislation to limit ownership changes will be heeded.    The 1987 Mergers and Acquisitions Almanac reports that the number of completed mergers and acquisitions was 926 in 1974, 2,326 in 1981 and 4,024 in 1986, indicating that the number has doubled about every six years. The value of the companies involved in such transactions increased almost sixfold between 1980 and 1986. Some parties -- workers, companies, communities -- adversely affected by this trend have sought protection, particularly if the takeover is hostile. Whether legislation is desirable depends much on whether ownership change increases or decreases efficiency.    Many studies have tried to determine the effect of ownership change on economic efficiency by using firm-level data to measure its impact on such variables as stock price, profit and market share. While these studies have merit, they suffer from two important limitations: First, many ownership changes involve only divisions or parts of companies and it is difficult to assess any such impact from company or line-of-business data. Second, the measures of performance may be related only indirectly, if at all, to economic efficiency.    There is a consensus among economists that the best way to measure efficiency is to measure total-factor productivity (TFP). Productivity means simply the amount of output per unit of input. Firms use several types of inputs (factors) -- labor, capital, materials -- and TFP combines them into a single composite input providing a superior measure.    We have recently completed a study of the relationship between TFP and ownership change, using Census Bureau data on over 18,000 relatively large plants throughout the manufacturing sector in the U.S. About 19% of these plants changed owners at least once during a nine-year period and most of these changed ownership more than once. This allowed the comparison of the productivity of plants before and after a change in ownership with the productivity of plants in the same industry whose ownership didn't change.    The study yielded two important findings. First, the least productive plants in an industry are most likely to subsequently have a change in ownership. The plants that changed owners between 1974 and 1980 had been, on average, 2.8% less productive in 1973 than the plants that didn't. To put this into perspective, the average annual growth rate in productivity by industrial countries between 1973 and 1984 was 0.5%; at that rate, it would take 5 1/2 years to close the 2.8% productivity gap.    The second finding is that plants that changed owners between 1974 and 1980 had significantly higher growth in productivity during those years than non-changers. In fact, the mean shift in productivity of nonchangers was a decline of 0.4% while that of changers was an increase of 0.1%. The difference in growth rates was about 0.8 percentage points for plants that had changed owners in the first half of the period, perhaps because it takes time for the effects of ownership change to occur. Plants that recently had changed owners were still less productive in 1980 than plants that hadn't, but the size of their productivity gap had narrowed.    The findings that the least productive plants are most likely to change owners and that plants changing owners exhibit higher average productivity growth may be explained by a combination of two factors. First, some owners can manage a given plant more efficiently than other owners (and a given owner can manage some plants better than other plants). Second, the productivity that a plant will achieve under a particular owner can't be known with certainty before that owner actually operates the plant. To determine the &quot;quality of the match&quot; between a plant and an owner (or between a man and a woman in marriage), the match must actually be experienced.    Suppose that a firm either builds or acquires a plant. It does so with the expectation that it is well-suited to manage this plant efficiently. If this expectation is realized, the plant will achieve an acceptable level of productivity (relative to the industry average) and the firm will continue to operate the plant. But if the fit turns out to be poor, the productivity of the plant will be low and it becomes desirable for the firm to sell the plant to someone else. Even if the match between the plant and its new owner is of only average quality, the plant's productivity will improve since the original match was a poor one. Bad matches, which result in low productivity, are most likely to end and a subsequent one is likely to be an improvement.    Of course, none of this implies that all ownership changes result in productivity gains, only that they do so on average. In any particular case, a change in owners may mean going from a bad match to one that's worse. While trying to prevent these bad matches may be desirable, it's doubtful governments can devise policies that would accomplish this.    Proposals now being considered to curb mergers and acquisitions would inhibit efficient as well as inefficient changes in ownership. Since the number of potentially efficient changes is greater, these indiscriminate policies will have a negative effect on industrial productivity.    ---   Mr. Lichtenberg is an associate professor at Columbia University's business school. This article is based on research conducted with Donald Siegel, a doctoral candidate at the school. </TEXT></DOC>