<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871006-0111 </DOCNO><HL> What Would Follow a Bork Loss?---By Daniel A. Rezneck</HL><DD> 10/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   The struggle over the nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the Supreme Court recalls the last time the Senate rejected a Supreme Court nominee primarily out of concern over his purported views. The year was 1930. The nominee was another federal appellate judge, John Parker of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. The battle in the Senate over the Parker nomination is illuminating today, both in its similarities to and its differences from the Bork confirmation fight as well as for some tantalizing might-have-beens.    Parker was nominated in March 1930 by President Hoover to succeed Justice Edward Sanford. Only a few weeks before, the Senate had confirmed Charles Evans Hughes as chief justice after tumultuous debate. Despite Hughes's distinguished career, his nomination touched off a revolt of the progressives in the Senate, and one-third of the senators voting opposed the Hughes confirmation. Not until the nomination of Chief Justice William Rehnquist last summer was such a high percentage of opposition again recorded against a nominee for chief justice.    President Hoover in 1930, like President Reagan in 1987, was a politically wounded president. The Great Crash of 1929 had ushered in the Great Depression. The Democratic opposition, having drawn blood in the Hughes confirmation, was spoiling for another fight, with the fall elections in prospect. The balance of political forces in the country was perceptibly shifting from the Hoover landslide of 1928. The congressional elections of 1930 would bring a Democratic House. Powerful interest groups took the field against the Parker nomination, which was depicted as a struggle for supremacy in the Supreme Court. The result was a fascinating political contest, the defeat of Judge Parker, and profound consequences for the country and the court.    At first it was expected that Parker would be confirmed with little opposition. Then the American Federation of Labor decided to fight the nomination because Parker had written an opinion in 1927 as a Court of Appeals judge affirming a lower court injunction enforcing a &quot;yellow dog&quot; contract in the West Virginia coal fields. Such contracts required workers, as a condition of employment, to agree not to join a union. Parker's opinion was based on prior Supreme Court decisions, but a great debate broke out during the Senate confirmation hearings as to whether Parker had correctly interpreted the Supreme Court precedents and whether he was simply following the law as he was bound to do or harbored anti-labor attitudes.    The NAACP also came out in opposition, based on its discovery that Parker, who was a Republican, a rare bird in the South at that time, had given a speech while running for governor of North Carolina in 1920 in which he stated that &quot;the Negro as a class does not desire to enter politics. The Republican Party of North Carolina does not desire him to do so.&quot; The speech was made in response to attacks by white supremacists in the Democratic Party, who accused Parker of pro-black sentiments, and, as his subsequent judicial career showed, he was never an apostle of white supremacy. Indeed, he was later to author an important opinion invalidating the white primary. Nevertheless, the NAACP and other civil-rights organizations joined the A.F. of L. against him.    The Senate Judiciary Committee held extensive hearings at which Parker's presumed views on these issues were explored in detail. Parker did not testify, but sent letters and telegrams to the committee and the Senate responding to points made.    The principal spokesmen for the opposition were William Green, president of the A.F. of L., and Walter White, acting executive secretary of the NAACP. Green testified that Parker's confirmation would mean that another &quot;injunction judge&quot; would become a member of the Supreme Court and that &quot;any member of the judiciary who lends himself to the imposition of such an injustice through the submission of an opinion which legalizes and perpetuates the 'yellow-dog' contract is, in the opinion of labor, unfit to serve as a member of the Supreme Court of the United States.&quot;    White stated: &quot;Entertaining such views as he expressed in 1920 when he sought election to the governorship of North Carolina, we are strongly convinced it would be improper to place such a man as Judge Parker upon the bench of the United States Supreme Court.&quot;    The Judiciary Committee voted 10 to 6 against the nomination but it went to the Senate floor. The Senate was bombarded by thousands of communications on both sides, and lengthy debate ensued. Virtually all of it was on the merits of Parker's perceived views. There was almost no suggestion in the debate that Parker's unquestioned personal integrity and legal scholarship were enough to carry the day. As Republican Sen. William Borah of Idaho, a leader of the progressives and opposed to Parker, put it: &quot;Something more is called for, here the widest and broadest and deepest questions of government and governmental policies are involved. . . . {The Supreme Court justices} pass on what we do. Therefore, it is exceedingly important that we pass on them before they decide on all of these matters.&quot;    There was an engaging candor about the progressives of that era, an absence of cant, and even a sense of humor. The greatest of them, George Norris of Nebraska, told the Senate: &quot;I am frank to admit that I want to see men put on the Supreme Bench who have modern ideas. . . . I do, of course, mean my ideas.&quot; He concluded: &quot;I am opposed to Judge Parker . . . because I do not believe in his ideas.&quot;    The politics of the situation proved too much for the Parker nomination. He was defeated by a vote of 41 to 39. The progressives alone were not numerous enough to defeat the nomination, however.    Ironically, in view of the charges of racial bias made against Parker, some of the decisive votes against him were supplied by Southern Democrats who were the real white supremacists in the Senate at that time. Such virulent racists as Tom Heflin of Alabama -- whose nephew, Sen. Howell Heflin, by a quirk of history may play a key role in the Bork confirmation process -- opposed Parker. They apparently regarded the nomination as an effort by President Hoover to build up the Republican Party in the South and as a challenge to Democratic hegemony there. Commentators at the time also noted the Senate's determination to assert its power against the president and the diminution of Hoover's popularity as prosperity waned and depression set it.    Historical parallels should not, of course, obscure the differences between the Parker confirmation struggle and the current opposition to Judge Bork. Whereas Parker was attacked for supposedly slavish adherence to Supreme Court precedent in the labor field, much of the criticism of Judge Bork is precisely to the contrary: that he is insufficiently respectful of Supreme Court precedent.    Moreover, Parker was a relatively obscure figure when he was nominated, while Judge Bork has been a prominent figure in the academic and judicial worlds for many years. And the progressive opposition to Parker (and Hughes before him) was animated in large part by hostility to the Supreme Court for its alleged favoritism for &quot;property rights&quot; at the expense of &quot;human rights,&quot; while today's liberal opposition to Judge Bork proceeds from opposite premises about the record of the Supreme Court.    Perhaps the most interesting aspect of the Parker confirmation fight was its subsequent fallout. One immediate result was the enhanced political power of organized labor. The focus on the &quot;yellow dog&quot; contract and the proper role of the federal courts in labor disputes led directly to the enactment two years later of the Norris-LaGuardia Act, designed to limit the jurisdiction of the federal courts to grant injunctions in such cases. Had the act been in effect at the time of Parker's decision in the case that led to his downfall in the Senate, he almost certainly would have reached an opposite decision in that case and probably would have been confirmed.    The more profound and intriguing consequence of the defeat of the Parker nomination was the impact of the justice confirmed in his place. Owen Roberts, a Philadelphia lawyer who had been a special prosecutor in the Teapot Dome cases, was nominated by Hoover after the defeat of Parker. The Senate was so exhausted by the Parker fight that Roberts was unanimously confirmed after less than a minute of discussion.    A few years later, when New Deal and state social-welfare legislation came before the Supreme Court, Roberts voted with the conservative bloc on the court on a number of occasions to invalidate such legislation. The result was Franklin Roosevelt's ill-fated effort in 1937 to &quot;pack&quot; the court and create a new majority sympathetic to the New Deal. Although history does not disclose its alternatives, it is likely on the basis of Parker's subsequent judicial career (he remained on the Fourth Circuit and served as its chief judge for many years) that, unlike Roberts, he would have aligned himself with such Justices as Hughes, Louis Brandeis, Harlan Stone and Benjamin Cardozo, and the court-packing effort might well have been averted.    The defeat of Parker thus turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory for his opponents. That suggests perhaps the most enduring lesson of the Parker controversy: Predicting future judicial behavior is a hazardous occupation. Opponents of a Supreme Court nomination should be aware that success has its pitfalls, and they may like the president's next nominee even less.    ---   Mr. Rezneck, a partner in a Washington law firm, writes often on legal history. </TEXT></DOC>