<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0036 </DOCNO><HL> Investigators Search for Clues to CauseOf Continental Jet Crash That Killed 27---By Paulette Thomas and Laurie McGinleyStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TEX GOVMTAIRLINES (AIR)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   If weather contributed to Sunday's crash of a Continental Airlines jet on a snowy runway in Denver, in which 27 people were killed, it probably was only one factor, pilots and aviation specialists said.    The cause of the accident -- the worst in Continental's history and the Texas Air Corp. unit's first involving fatalities since 1978 -- won't be known for several weeks. As many as 50 investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board began searching the icy crash site for clues yesterday. More will be known when investigators complete examining the cockpit's so-called black boxes -- the voice and flight-data recorders, which were found in good condition and flown to Washington, D.C.    The flight-data recorder was an earlier-generation model, however, that doesn't collect such potentially useful information as engine performance. The DC-9-10 that crashed into four pieces was at least 18 years old.    Despite heavy snow and gusting winds, officials at Denver's Stapleton International Airport said, Sunday's weather was within the limits for safe takeoffs. Chicago-based Allegis Corp.'s United Airlines unit -- it and Continental dominate service at the major hub -- also said the weather wasn't unduly severe. &quot;We were not even considering shutting down operations because of weather,&quot; said Jack Ekey, manager of United Airlines' Denver operations.    The Denver accident, coming so soon after the August crash of a Northwest Airlines jetliner at the Detroit airport, which killed 156 people, also may heighten congressional concern over aviation safety.    &quot;What we'll have to find out is what role did the controllers play? What role did the weather play?&quot; said Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D. N.J.), chairman of the Senate appropriations subcommittee on transportation. &quot;It's always the pilot's option (whether to take off) but it's after appropriate advisories from the tower.&quot; Federal Aviation Administration officials insisted, however, that there was no reason to believe air traffic controllers did anything wrong. The issues also are likely to come up today when James Burnley, President Reagan's nominee to be transportation secretary, testifies at his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce Committee.    Even while the causes of the Continental crash remain unknown, the accident also is bound to cast the glare of more safety-related scrutiny on cost-conscious Texas Air, the Houston-based airline holding company whose safety and maintenance practices were recently the subject of congressional hearings. In addition, Continental's sister subsidiary, Eastern Airlines, last March drew the biggest fine in aviation history -- $9.5 million -- for alleged safety and maintenance violations.    Besides weather's involvement in the crash of Continental Flight 1713, investigators will consider the possible role of pilot error -- a factor in the majority of airline disasters. The cockpit crewmen aboard the Continental jetliner, both of whom were killed, were Capt. Frank Zvonek, 43 years old and an 18-year Continental veteran, and his co-pilot, Lee Edward Bruecher, 26. Mr. Bruecher, who formerly flew for smaller airlines, was hired by Continental only this year and wasn't rated by the FAA to fly a DC-9 -- although that wasn't necessary for him to serve as the first officer on the flight. Authorities didn't say who was at the controls.    Some aviation sources said it was possible that ice buildup -- if it occurred -- disrupted air flow, causing the aircraft to wobble. One of the jetliner's wings hit the ground, and these sources speculated that this might have been caused by the pilot's overcompensating. This also could explain why the jet pitched back in the other direction, then flipped over, as passengers described the chain of events. But these aviation specialists emphasized that it is too early to know what occurred.    The carrier, for its part, said, &quot;Continental has an outstanding safety record.&quot; A company spokesman added: &quot;We are distraught over this.&quot; Continental said that the plane had been de-iced 20 minutes before takeoff, and that it had received its daily maintenance check in Wichita, Kan., on Sunday and a maintenance overhaul less than a month ago.    Accidents involving fatalities have been rare at Continental, which, following a spate of acquisitions by its parent company in the past year, is the nation's third-largest airline. Continental's last accident involving deaths occurred in 1978, when a DC-10 crashed in Los Angeles, killing three of the 200 passengers aboard; in that case, Continental later obtained a legal settlement from McDonnell Douglas Corp. over alleged problems with the aircraft involved.    But since 1983, when Continental for three years was involved in Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings to abrogate its high-cost union contracts, some pilots and others have claimed that the debt-heavy carrier has maintained inadequate maintenance and training standards -- on top of heavy performance demands. Although many such critics have axes to grind, their complaints have been unusually loud and persistent.    &quot;The maintenance (at Continental) is gross, and it isn't getting any better,&quot; said Wayne B. Slater, a former Boeing 727 captain at the carrier, who quit recently for a junior position at AMR Corp.'s American Airlines unit. Mr. Slater wrote in a union publication that on one Continental flight, for example, he had to fly a plane with 25 pieces of equipment that weren't working -- no violation of aviation regulations because of equipment redundancies or backups, but a condition that can complicate a routine flight.    Continental has vigorously asserted that the &quot;minimum equipment lists&quot; for its aircraft meet not only federal standards, but a high level of safety standards.    Continental's pilot training programs also have drawn internal criticism. According to a pilot who recently quit his job as a Continental flight-simulation instructor, the airline meets federal safety standards, but &quot;the training there is the minimum you can get away with legally.&quot; Continental pilots, he added, aren't paid for time spent in training, as most pilots at other U.S. airlines are. </TEXT></DOC>