<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Teachers Get More Pay and PowerIn the Wake of Reform Movements---By Gary PutkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   Beverly Warmbrand, a sign-language teacher in New York City's junior high school for the deaf, planned to retire next year -- until her union's new contract came through.    For Mrs. Warmbrand, with 28 years as a teacher, the contract meant a 25% raise over three years to $50,000 a year, plus a big boost in her pension, which is based on final year's salary.    &quot;When we got this new salary, I said I just can't not stay, even though you don't use double negatives around here,&quot; she says. &quot;I'll be staying another six years in the system.&quot;    As Mrs. Warmbrand and many of her colleagues are learning this fall, it pays more to teach.    Bolstered by the education reform movement and new state funds, teacher salaries are hitting record levels and outpacing the gains of average U.S. workers. Almost as important within the profession, teachers are winning major concessions at the bargaining table that give them new authority in hiring and promotions and more say over curriculum, budgets and other areas once the preserve of principals and school boards.    While pay is up, strikes are down, and some states and school systems are hiring more teachers for classrooms packed with the offspring of the baby-boom generation. Although teachers aren't giving up the chronic complaint that theirs is an underpaid -- and underappreciated -- profession, some say the economic outlook for educators is better than it has been in many years.    &quot;There's a supply crunch out there, and schools realize that they have to pay more to attract teachers,&quot; says John Dunlop, head of the bargaining program at the National Education Association, the biggest teacher's union in the country. Jewell Gould, research director at the American Federation of Teachers, the second-ranking union, calls 1987 a &quot;watershed year,&quot; in which teachers are being given more authority than ever in managing schools.    In Rochester, N.Y., teachers settled a new contract earlier this month that will increase starting salaries by 52% over three years and will raise maximum pay to $70,000 a year. Minimum average salaries for Connecticut teachers with a master's degree will be up 31% by next September from 1986-87 pay levels, says the state affiliate of the National Education Association. Under a proposed contract, Minneapolis teachers will gain about 7% in pay and benefits this year -- and new power at each school to share with management the authority on spending and staffing decisions.    Messrs. Dunlop and Gould are quick to point out that big settlements such as those in Rochester and New York City aren't the norm. They estimate that raises in contract settlements this fall will average between 6% and 7% in the first year of the contract.    But that's about double the 3% pay gains in the private sector during the first six months of this year and better than contract settlements for other state and local government employees. According to estimates by the American Federation of Teachers, teachers' mean annual earnings this year will be a record $26,698.    Adjusted for inflation, teacher pay is up only 2% from its previous peak in 1972. Although that isn't much, the average U.S. worker still hasn't recovered all of the real wages lost in the inflationary 1970s.    Teacher job satisfaction also appears to be rising. Although educators are on strike in a few big cities, the number of disputes this year fell to 39, the lowest in almost 20 years.    The teachers' cause has been aided by rising national concern about the quality of U.S. education. Salaries began moving up faster than inflation five years ago, just before the publication of &quot;A Nation at Risk,&quot; a major study by the U.S. Education Department. The findings sparked questions about spreading illiteracy, falling scores on standardized tests and the superior performance of foreign students.    Spurred on by this report and other studies, state governments have increased their support for education by 26% in real terms in the past five years. Some of the funds have gone to make up for federal budget cuts in such areas as early learning for the poor, but big sums have also been earmarked specifically for teacher salaries.    Edward Dorsett, president of the Connecticut Education Association, a statewide union, says the &quot;obvious interest in public school education since the 'Nation at Risk' &quot; -- as well as robust tax revenues from a bustling economy -- spurred enactment of a new education law last year that will provide $300 million in new funds over three years. More than half of the money is designated for higher teacher salaries. New York, Ohio and Maryland are also among states designating funds for higher teacher salaries.    Urban school districts are also concerned about losing teachers to wealthier suburbs. Sandra Feldman, the president of New York City's 64,000-strong United Federation of Teachers, says the city will hire 4,000 new teachers this year; only half of the teachers hired last year are returning. Under the new contract, starting salaries will rise 25% to $25,000 a year by 1988-89.    Teachers say the biggest lasting changes in recent contracts may be the moves to enhance &quot;professionalism&quot; -- giving them more authority to make staffing and budget decisions.    Mimicking a program adopted in 1981 in Hammond, Ind., several public school districts -- including Minneapolis; Rochester; Toledo, Ohio; and Baltimore -- are governing some schools by committee. Teachers sit on the committees, and in some cases are the majority members. Other favored changes are to create new, higher-paid positions for senior teachers and to let teachers decide for themselves who will be promoted -- or retained.    In Rochester, school authorities agreed to scrap the seniority system for transfers and to allow a panel with a teachers' majority to decide who goes where. In Toledo, a veteran teacher assigned to first-year interns has the sole authority to decide whether the interns will be retained for a second year. Under the proposed Minneapolis contract, says union representative Kay Bonczek, teachers are expected to use their new governing powers to pull staff away from special education and back to mainstream classes.    The teachers' new powers have begun to upset some school managers. New York principals complained that their authority was being taken away under the new contract. Rochester principals and administrators filed an unsuccessful suit last year seeking to block provisions of the teachers' agreement that established a mentor system similar to Toledo's.    &quot;You can't run a school by committee,&quot; says Ted Elsberg, the president of the American Federation of School Administrators, a union representing 10,000 principals and administrators. &quot;No union should be able to encroach upon the rights of another.&quot;    The administrators union brought a complaint before the AFL-CIO last April, claiming that its brethren in the American Federation of Teachers were encroaching upon principals' rights. The complaint, which seeks a ruling that would block certain kinds of peer review and management control by teachers, is still pending. </TEXT></DOC>