<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880620-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Special Systems Make Computing Less Traumatic for Top Executives </HL><AUTHOR> William M. Bulkeley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>   During a recent cost-cutting drive, James Orr, chairman and chief executive of Unum Corp., an insurer in Portland, Maine, asked for a daily count on the number of company employees. He was told he couldn't get it. Some data were kept by divisions and so were hard to gather together in one place. Some were in a payroll data base accessible only to programmers.    Mr. Orr persisted, however, and now the answer is at his fingertips whenever he wants it: A specially designed executive information system links personnel data to a personal computer in Mr. Orr's office. &quot;Management knows I'm watching the count very closely,&quot; he says. &quot;Believe me, they don't add staff carelessly.&quot;    Top executives are slowly entering the computer age. Though many remain wary, a growing number of them are demanding that they be given easy-to-use computer systems that let them see electronic information their own companies and outside firms generate. To meet these needs, executive information systems are starting to filter into the halls of power, giving top managers access to the data they want without requiring them to go through a long learning process.    Some executives, of course, use basic personal computers with conventional software. In some executive information systems, terminals or personal computers are linked to mainframes; in others, users load diskettes of data into stand-alone PCs. But executive information systems are different. For one thing, they look different: They have high-quality monitors with bigger screens that can display lots of splashy colors and a variety of detailed charts and graphs.    Senior executives also rarely have to touch any keyboards. They can control their computers by touching the screen or by using a &quot;mouse.&quot;    Executives also don't use the computer nearly as much as most of their subordinates -- perhaps only 15 minutes a day. And when things go wrong, they get quick attention from corporate data-processing experts who aren't available to most departments.    But the biggest difference is that executive computers are used mainly to look at information rather than to create it. &quot;An executive is someone whose main responsibility is to consume reports rather than produce reports,&quot; says Wayne Burkan, a consultant with Comshare Inc., an Ann Arbor, Mich., company that makes executive information systems.    The field is growing. International Data Corp., a Framingham, Mass., research firm, estimates sales of executive information systems doubled to $30 million last year. A tutorial on the systems at a conference of the Institute of Management Sciences in Boston earlier this month drew more than 100 academics and corporate computer planners, up from 25 last year. A new book on the subject by two researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has unexpectedly gone to a fourth printing.    David DeLong, a Harvard Business School researcher, estimates that barely 10% of top executives use any kind of computer now, but the number is growing steadily. For example, I.M. Booth, president of Polaroid Corp., Cambridge, Mass., never used a computer until last year. Now he goes to the office on weekends to prepare presentations for the camera maker's directors using a personal computer that automatically obtains financial reports from the corporate mainframe.    The special systems are catching on partly because researchers have started to believe that top executives' resistance to common computing functions, such as spreadsheets and word processing, often makes sense -- and so software firms are creating packages to fit their unique needs. &quot;The most senior people in an organization literally think differently,&quot; says Mr. DeLong of Harvard. &quot;They spend a lot of time in a more abstract world.&quot;    But using computers to obtain information quickly draws executives in. Robert Scherer, chairman of Georgia Power Co., once learned -- and promptly forgot -- how to write programs. But now he uses his computer first thing every morning to check the status of the utility's nuclear power plants, which he formerly did more ploddingly by telephoning individual plant managers.    Clark Miller, executive vice president of Bank of Boston Corp., says he doesn't need to learn how computers work, and &quot;I'm not that intellectually curious.&quot; But he learned to use a mouse to get graphs in seconds showing changes in the bank's exposure to Third World debt. Before he had the system, he used to order staffers to find three years of monthly reports and draw graphs, and he wouldn't see the results until the next day.    Presented right, computerized information can be much more usable than the briefing books most executives rely on. The computers can produce &quot;exception reports,&quot; highlighting any numbers that fall outside of specified boundaries -- for example, sales data for any division that are, say, 5% above or below plan. David Friend, president of Boston-based Pilot Executive Systems Inc., says the president of one pharmaceutical maker looks in company reports for new products that have sales more than 50% above expectations; the company may invest more heavily in those than it had planned to.    Special graphics let an executive see quickly whether operations are on target. Hicks B. Waldron, chairman of Avon Products Inc., asked that his system be equipped with a color-coded &quot;flag&quot; -- green for above plan, white for on target and red for below plan -- that can be triggered by various operating figures for the company and its divisions as they are displayed on the screen.    Through such devices, the computers let executives focus on trouble spots. Lever Brothers Co.'s foods division, a big U.S. unit of Unilever N.V., recently bought an executive information system from London-based Metapraxis Ltd. Thomas Stephens, the unit's vice president, finance, says that in the past, &quot;I was the only one in management who ruthlessly went through every page&quot; of the company's inch-thick briefing books looking for trouble.    Now, if a number is off, executives can see so quickly and search out the cause using the computer to &quot;drill down&quot; through layers of divisional results. Says Mr. Stephens: &quot;It can get my president asking, 'Why are Imperial margarine stick sales down on the West Coast?' instead of, 'Why are profits down?'&quot; Moreover, the computerized reports can be produced in about half the time of the old printouts.    Setting up systems is expensive. Software ranges from $7,500 to $100,000, hardware (a PC, high-quality monitor, communications link and printer) from $5,000 to $10,000, but the price is often boosted by consulting work to get a program running and to find out what a company needs and what its executives want. Once the systems are operating, special staffs are needed to update and refine them. Mark Wood, product manager for a new executive information system made by Execucom Systems Corp., Austin, Texas, says many companies spend $500,000 to $1 million putting in systems, including executives' time and programmers' work.    Often a company's information exists in several different data bases and must be painstakingly standardized, adding to startup costs. Most executives aren't sure what information they can get. To find out what's most useful, Mr. Burkan of Comshare advises developers to ask executives two questions: What information do they want to see after they've been on a three-week vacation, and what do they least want their competitors to know about their business?    Coupled with electronic mail, executive information systems can help flatten a company's organizational pyramid, letting top officers bypass layers of subordinates and berate or praise field managers directly.    Consequently, some managers fear giving chief executives low-level information. One systems analyst working on a system for American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. executives says: &quot;We've had a lot of problems with divisions. They'll say, 'You can have certain figures, but not all of them.'&quot; At Wyman-Gordon Co., a Worcester, Mass., forgings company, the controller was disgruntled to find other officers second-guessing him about financial ratios, says Thomas Lefort, a former employee who set up the system there.    &quot;The bottom line is, we're talking about power,&quot; says Mr. DeLong of Harvard. &quot;If the systems are worth anything, they're changing the way organizations work.&quot;    Indeed, after Xerox Corp. President Paul Allaire began requiring five-page electronic memos for review meetings instead of 200-page briefing books, he described it as &quot;a culture change disguised as a form.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>