<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880316-0178 </DOCNO><HL> What Can Be Done About the Palestinian Problem? --- Arabs Should Take Gaza Refugees </HL><AUTHOR> Max Singer </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   The sad plight of Palestinian Arab refugees living in Gaza and elsewhere has been brought forcefully to the attention of the world. By their willingness to risk Israeli bullets and clubs to protest, the people in the dismal refugee camps who have been forced to live their whole lives under alien rule demonstrated the strength of their anger and unhappiness. Fortunately there is something that can be done to relieve their suffering.    But it will not be possible to help without distinguishing among three different issues: how Israel should be dealing with the demonstrations right now; how ultimately to resolve the Palestinian problem; and how to reduce the suffering by the refugees that presumably caused the demonstrations.    Whether the Israeli army is using more force than necessary to restore order in the short run is being much debated. No doubt there have been many examples of excessive and wrongful force. But no army ever copes with such a challenge without such examples. And no one has argued convincingly that the Israeli army is doing a worse job of controlling itself than a U.S. or British or Swedish or any other army would do in the face of such attacks. It is not a meaningful moral standard to call on an army to do better than any army can do -- although even the best should try to do better.    There is even more debate about the long run question of how to resolve the overall issue between Israel and the Palestinians and between Israel and the Arab states that are at war with Israel. The Palestinians presumably are the most eager to get things settled, because they don't have any state or territory. The Israelis also have a deep desire for peace, because they have been in a state of war for 40 years, with a draft and regular casualties between periods of active fighting, and because even their existence as a state is still not accepted.    Unfortunately, the Arab states have much less reason to end the war they began in 1948 than either the Israelis or the Palestinian Arabs. Perhaps this is why none of them has even said that it would be willing for Israel to keep the traditional Jewish Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem, which Jordan held for 19 years after expelling the Jews in 1948. Working out peace between Israel and the Palestinians would be difficult even if they were the only two parties involved. But so long as there is no peace between Israel and the Arab states the problem is even more difficult. Not only are there more stringent security requirements, but it is hard to see how Palestinian parties of peace would be able to prevail over Palestinian extremists encouraged and supported by the Arab states that are unready to make peace.    To provide medium-term help to those people whose anguish has been so forcefully brought to our attention by the scenes of violence, we need to go beyond short-term questions about the methods used to restore order -- which is a difficult and dirty business at best. But we can't wait until the long-term question of how to resolve the two wars -- Palestinian-Israeli and Arab-Israel -- is settled.    In the medium term the biggest thing that can be done for the refugees in Gaza is to give them the freedom to decide whether to continue to live there or to live in some other Arab country.    In 1948, as a result of Israel's war of independence with the Arab states, about 600,000 Arabs became refugees from Israel. Within the next few years about 600,000 Jews became refugees from the Arab countries and were resettled in Israel. Both population movements were a drop in the bucket when compared with some 50 million refugees of all religions resettled in the world turmoil of the 1940s. Nearly one-third of the Arab refugees ended up in the tiny piece of Palestine called Gaza, which for nearly 20 years was occupied by Egypt, its neighbor to the West.    For 40 years almost all of the Arab refugees -- in Gaza and elsewhere -- have been compelled by the Arab states to live in refugee camps because the Arab states understood that the suffering of the refugees kept on Israel's border would be a political weapon against Israel. Perhaps this cruel policy was acceptable at first, when it was not known how long it would take to achieve peace (or, as the Arab states intended, to eliminate Israel). But the horror of the past three months demonstrates that this Arab policy is no longer tolerable. Arabs are forcing fellow Arabs to pay too high a price for too long.    Of course, the refugees may prefer to stay in camps in Gaza, instead of settling in other Arab countries, to be nearer to their original homes, and to maximize their pressure on Israel. They never have been given a choice. Now they should be. (Some may stay -- even if it means living under Israeli rule until peace comes -- because living conditions and economic opportunities in the territories are better than those of most of the people of most Arab countries.)    Israel could also contribute to helping the refugees by improving living conditions. But the demonstrations were not a response to poor living conditions. This is clear both from what the demonstrators say and from the fact that living conditions are very much better than they were when Israel took over from Egypt and Jordan.    Of course, getting the Arab countries finally to act decently to the Arab refugees would not be nearly a complete answer to the problem brought into our homes by recent events. Full justice cannot be brought to either Palestinians or Israelis until there is peace.    But if the Arab states gave their fellow Arabs the freedom to choose, at least the most desperately unhappy could choose to leave the territories. This would reduce the overcrowding for those who choose to stay -- at least in Gaza -- and give relief to those who feel most anguished about living under Israeli rule.    ---   Mr. Singer, a Washington policy analyst, has spent much time in Israel.    (See related story: &quot;Israelis Should Talk With the PLO&quot; -- WSJ March 16, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>