<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0130 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Democrats Who Won't Run</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Candidates used to wait until it was actually the year of the presidential election before announcing. No longer. Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis said Monday he would seek the 1988 Democratic nomination. By Memorial Day, he and a dozen other candidates will be trudging through Iowa and New Hampshire in search of the few voters not already turned off by presidential politics. This campaign's boredom threshold promises to be reached even earlier than usual.    In the current issue of the Atlantic Monthly, political analyst William Schneider provides an interesting &quot;Consumers' Guide&quot; to the Democratic presidential candidates -- one we hope he duplicates for the Republicans. It is no fault of Mr. Schneider's but after 19 pages we weren't much able to tell the Democrats apart. Was it Dale Bumpers who wanted to make &quot;competitiveness&quot; his major issue? Did Richard Gephardt or Joe Biden like worker-training accounts?    But what really caught our eye in the article was that the most interesting parts -- a third of the piece -- focused on five Democrats who have already announced they will not, or almost certainly will not, be candidates in 1988. These same Democrats -- Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey, Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York, Sen. Ted Kennedy, Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia and former Gov. Chuck Robb of Virginia -- happened to be the most intriguing and thought-provoking of the people Mr. Schneider talked with.    But none of the above are running. Instead we will have two repeat candidates from 1984 -- Gary Hart and the Rev. Jesse Jackson -- and a collection of newcomers who remind one of, well, Gary Hart. All appear to be technocratic problem solvers, sort of political Mr. Goodwrench types. All are qualified, but none really represent either an exciting reaffirmation of the Democratic Party's liberal traditions (as Cuomo and Kennedy do), or (as Bradley, Nunn and Robb do) a serious challenge to the quasi-isolationist and high-tax positions that have cost the party four out of its last five tries at the White House. Why?    Mr. Schneider correctly points out that Gov. Cuomo, like Sen. Kennedy, is the kind of candidate &quot;who looks strongest, and therefore has the most power and influence, when he is not running.&quot; Both realize that, even post-Iranamok, voters will not be shopping for a new Great Society.    And all candidates find the punishing campaign schedules -- what Walter Mondale called &quot;two years in Holiday Inns&quot; -- a first-order grind. Former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona will spend three months of 1987 just in the state of Iowa. An incumbent governor, senator or anyone else with a full-time job can only run for president if he or she becomes an expert in sleep deprivation. There may be reasons why the last candidate to move into the White House directly from an elected office was young Jack Kennedy in 1960.    Lastly, there is the slew of special-interest groups that every Democratic candidate must clamber over. Feminists, labor-union leaders, homosexual groups, social workers and teachers exercise an inordinate amount of influence over the selection of a nominee and the platform that nominee must run on. It is common knowledge that feminist groups pressured Walter Mondale into hastily selecting Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate in 1984. Somehow we think Mr. Mondale might have wanted more time to reflect on that decision.    Liberal activist groups have already served notice they will make trouble for any Democrat who deviates from their line. Sen. Bill Bradley's vote in favor of contra aid rendered him de mortuis as far as several were concerned. Journalist William Greider spoke for many liberals this month when he wrote that the Democratic Leadership Council -- a group organized by Sen. Nunn, Mr. Robb and other centrists -- had proposed a defense policy that read &quot;like it was written by a Rambo with an M.B.A.&quot;    Democrats claim that after the two Reagan landslides their party learned its lesson and started to move into the mainstream. Maybe yes, maybe no. But party activists who welcome Jesse Jackson, who has embraced both Fidel Castro and Daniel Ortega, but turn a cold shoulder to Sen. Nunn (who has moved leftward in their direction on defense of late) have got some explaining to do to the American people. Sen. Nunn says he isn't running, though he's also said he could join the field later. The need for someone to debate the Rev. Jackson head-on should be an added inducement.    Perhaps someone unexpected will enter the 1988 lists. Perhaps candidates will ignore Democratic National Committee Chairman Paul Kirk's admonition not to attack each other and some real sparks will fly. We hope so. Otherwise, it is going to be a long spring, summer, fall and winter before the Iowa caucuses convene next Feb. 8. Perhaps by then bored voters will try to draft one of the Missing Democrats into the race. </TEXT></DOC>