<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880331-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Trade Tangle: In Construction Talks, U.S. Showed Japanese It Is Often Confused --- Washington Sought Business Many U.S. Firms Didn't; The High and Low Ends --- A Guest Criticizing the Food </HL><AUTHOR> Elisabeth Rubinfein (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON CON </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It didn't help the U.S. negotiating position any when Japan put on a show for some visiting U.S. dignitaries and the guests of honor didn't show up.    Japan had bowed to pressure from Washington and made its new Kansai airport project the subject of a special seminar for a U.S. presidential commission of construction-industry and government officials. But when the show began 18 months ago, the front row of the auditorium remained glaringly empty. The visitors were absent.    &quot;It was an embarrassment,&quot; says Theodore Ury, vice president of PAE International, the Tokyo subsidiary of Pacific Architects andamp; Engineers Inc. &quot;The whole thing was put on for their benefit and they weren't there.&quot;    U.S. government officials who helped arrange the event blame the absence on an unfortunate scheduling snafu. But then, the story of the construction talks is a story of countless snafus.    Although the U.S. and Japan finally signed an agreement Tuesday on construction, it doesn't guarantee business for American companies. Japan worries about a backlash if U.S. companies don't make a concerted effort to take advantage of it. &quot;This just marks the starting line,&quot; says a Japanese government official. &quot;The Americans could get angry again if they don't actually win contracts.&quot;    The construction talks epitomize the problems with America's trade policy toward Japan. The policy focuses on opening the Japanese market to foreign competition sector by sector. But critics say that the U.S. all too often chooses its battlegrounds carelessly and squanders precious political capital on efforts that may do more harm than good. The U.S. approach &quot;reminds me of a Pekingese dog,&quot; says former Vice President Walter Mondale. &quot;We're always going, 'Yip, yip, yip.'&quot;    Sometimes the U.S. picks sectors that aren't very important in overall trade terms; it spent years trying to open the Japanese market for metal baseball bats. Other times the U.S. targets sectors -- such as heavy construction, one of the areas covered by Tuesday's agreement -- in which U.S. companies either aren't especially competitive or haven't demonstrated much interest in competing.    Once it has picked a sector, the U.S. often confounds the negotiations with contradictory demands. It seeks more business for U.S. companies while also insisting on totally free trade, a philosophy that may not bring more contracts to the U.S.    The result: &quot;Acrimony grows, and that friction slops over into other areas and begins to affect the whole relationship,&quot; says Clyde Prestowitz, a former U.S. trade negotiator now at the Carnegie Endowment, a Washington think tank.    A close look at the construction talks suggests that the critics have a point. Since 1986, the U.S. has been pushing for more access to Japan's construction market, where it sees $190 billion of public-works projects alone in the next 15 years. Bilateral talks broke down repeatedly, and both sides threatened retaliation. Some Japanese officials said the situation evoked memories of the 1930s trade standoffs that preceded Pearl Harbor.    The U.S. may have started out on the right track, but American businessmen in Japan complained that the issue became so politicized that negotiators were no longer representing the main interests of the U.S. construction industry. These lie in the high end of the business -- high-technology engineering and equipment. The U.S., however, demanded that Japan give complete access to all Japanese construction projects, including a sector in which U.S. firms aren't especially competitive: such heavy construction as digging ditches and building roads.    Some companies involved in the high end, such as PAE, Fluor International Inc., Austin Co. and Overseas Bechtel Inc., have had offices in Japan for more than 10 years. So far, they have mainly designed and built for foreigners in Japan and for Japanese overseas, but they are now looking to expand their Japanese contracts in Japan. Their priority: high-tech engineering. &quot;No American company in its right mind can expect to be laying stones around Japan,&quot; says Franco Eleuteri, the head of Austin's Asia operations. Japanese companies are just as advanced as U.S. companies in that sort of work and have close relationships with potential clients and sources of financing.    The International Engineering and Construction Council, the most vocal group in the U.S industry, says U.S. heavy-construction companies are interested. But few have offices here. In the 18 months since the visit by the presidential commission, no new foreign companies have established major offices. Says Yoshio Takeuchi, the president of Kansai International Airport Corp., the private company that plans to build the $8 billion airport in the Kansai region: &quot;As far as I know, almost no foreign companies with appropriate licenses have applied to us as yet.&quot;    Construction first became a trade issue thanks to the diligence of a U.S. Commerce Department official, not to the demands of an industry eager for work in Japan. In 1985, Keith Bovetti, the young head of the commercial office of the U.S. consulate in Osaka, was scanning the horizon for new markets American companies could attack. Aggressive and fluent in Japanese, Mr. Bovetti was familiar with the country and well-connected in the Kansai region around Osaka. He got wind of the plans to build Kansai International Airport.    Mr. Bovetti introduced officials of Lockheed Aircraft Ltd. -- experts in the design of airport terminals -- to Kansai Airport officials. &quot;We were essentially told thank you but no thank you,&quot; Mr. Bovetti recalls. He then drummed up interest among other U.S. companies, many of which had no presence in Japan. The issue mushroomed. As political pressure grew in the U.S., Japan finally agreed last summer to easier application procedures for Kansai airport contracts. But the U.S. had expected that the eased ground rules would apply to all public-works projects, and when it found last November that they wouldn't, it broke off talks. After that, the talks were on and off three more times, and the latest U.S. arguments were painfully similar to those of two years ago.    The U.S. and Japan signed the agreement Tuesday under a deadline threat of U.S. protectionist retaliation. But some Japanese government officials fear future criticism from Washington because the pact doesn't guarantee cash quotas to U.S. companies. It opens the door to a potential $17 billion of selected projects, but it is still up to U.S. companies to win the jobs. Most of the project money is earmarked for heavy construction.    Signing at the last minute was more the result of finding acceptable wording than of either side's making major new concessions. A key stumbling block -- a U.S. demand that the Japanese government ensure access not only to selected public works but also to government-sponsored private construction projects -- was resolved through careful phrasing to indicate that the Japanese government would intervene to encourage private Japanese companies to use foreign subcontractors and suppliers in such projects.    The core of the agreement remains a one-time offer under which foreign companies can participate in selected Japanese public-works projects even without having Japanese experience, an idea that had been on the table for more than two months. The U.S. had reverted to a demand that all public-works projects be made available, which would have required a change in fundamental Japanese regulations. The two sides compromised by raising the number of projects in the offer to 14 from seven. Several of the 14 are still embryonic and won't be available for bidding for several years.    The American companies that are already in Japan -- primarily architectural engineering firms and high-tech-equipment sales offices -- say the negotiations have been at best mildly helpful. They want more Japanese business in Japan, especially since Japanese companies are taking away work overseas in both the U.S. and other countries, but they aren't sure the agreement itself will bring them any. They are even less sure about the prospects of U.S. companies that aren't already here. Such companies, they say, will have to establish offices in Japan and commit for the long haul before they can gain from any negotiated access. A. A. Sultan, an independent architect, estimates it would take six years for architectural firms and eight for heavy-construction companies to start breaking even.    Mr. Bovetti started out attacking the problem of the high end of the market, but U.S. political pressures forced the talks to broaden to &quot;construction&quot; at large, muddying the waters. &quot;A whole area of U.S. expertise has been wiped out by hammering on 'construction,'&quot; says Maurice Segal, project manager at URS International, an engineering company. &quot;People latched on to the wrong issue without really studying what the Japanese lack and what they have.&quot;    Politicians such as Sen. Frank Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, say they had to broaden the talks. &quot;To get this issue before the American public,&quot; Sen. Murkowski says, &quot;it had to be tied to something that was capable of being highlighted.&quot; It is easier to appeal in behalf of general-construction companies because they are more widespread and better organized than engineers or equipment makers. Also, if the talks focused entirely on the high end of the market, American indignation couldn't be fueled with headline grabbers like the $8 billion estimate for Kansai; the figure would be around $500 million.    Talks grew even muddier because the U.S. came underprepared. &quot;The problem is that with construction, no one's done their homework,&quot; says Herbert Cochran, former U.S. commercial counselor in Tokyo. &quot;Because people don't understand how the Japanese system works, there's not enough precision in our requests.&quot;    The construction case isn't unique. Talks on telecommunications, agriculture and semiconductors have been similarly plagued. It is true that Japan has repeatedly dragged its heels on market liberalization, infuriating its trading partners. And other approaches to trade -- a strict pursuit of free trade or the use of protectionist barriers -- also cause problems. But many U.S. trade experts worry that by not looking at the whole picture of U.S.-Japanese relations and not picking its fights more carefully, the U.S. lets some narrow industry interests take on too much importance.    They cite construction, noting that it has demanded much high-level attention even though companies aren't unified and the industry isn't a strategic one. The issue even threatened the first meeting of President Reagan and Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita in Washington in January.    Japanese officials and U.S. trade negotiators were unable to strike a deal, so Mr. Takeshita's close aides and top U.S. embassy staffers met behind the scenes starting in early December to come up with a package for Mr. Takeshita to take to Washington. It was a rare involvement of such high-level personnel. The result: the one-time offer for foreign companies to bid on a select group of public-works projects based on overseas, but not necessarily Japanese, experience. The offer is open only to companies from countries where Japanese concerns have participated in public works. This limitation is an attempt to short-circuit accusations of favoritism from South Korea and Europe, where Japan says its companies haven't participated in such projects.    A few weeks before Mr. Takeshita's trip, those who had worked out the offer met in a fancy Japanese restaurant, settled themselves on cushions at a low table and shared a toast to the friendship of their countries. &quot;I didn't want to ruin the mood, but inside I was shaking my head,&quot; says one of the group. &quot;Understandings based on drinks in the evening can fall apart in the cold light of negotiations.&quot;    Two months later, the understanding fell apart.    The U.S. accused Japan of trying to settle problems only on a case-by-case basis. Japan complained that the U.S. raised the ante every time it found itself in hot water. &quot;No matter what we offer on construction, it's not enough,&quot; said one Japanese official before the last round of talks. &quot;It's like a person who asks to be invited to dinner and then complains about the food.&quot;    One reason for U.S. skepticism has been the belief that because Japanese construction companies are major supporters of the ruling party, politicians won't force them to bend. Again a misreading by the U.S., say experts on both sides. The government can't overtly exert control, they say, but because the government gives construction jobs to companies, the companies must follow the wishes of the politicians, not the other way around. The immediate reaction of Japanese construction companies to the Washington agreement was a loud grumbling about the government giving special treatment to foreigners. But &quot;the Takeshita cabinet can do it,&quot; says the deputy chief cabinet secretary, Ichiro Ozawa. &quot;We have the strength.&quot;    The whole process has strained trust on both sides and made one of America's allies a bit less friendly. &quot;There tends to be a feeling that if you just clobber the other side enough, they'll eventually realize the errors of their ways,&quot; says William Sherman, former deputy assistant secretary of state. &quot;But there's a point at which you don't win anymore. The broad agreement has to be that Japan and the U.S. are able to do much more for each other jointly than in some kind of adversarial tug of war.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>