<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Capital Chronicle:Watergate Watch --First Round Over,Another Coming---By Suzanne Garment</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;It's amazing how the gloom has passed today, compared with yesterday,&quot; a White House staffer said in conversation on Wednesday. As of midweek, he was right. President Reagan's advisers had applied their Watergate lessons and gotten themselves a breathing space. But the peace won't last. Administration critics have also learned from Watergate and will stay on the attack.    True, so far the Reaganites have successfully used some political jiujitsu on their opponents.    Once upon a time the enemies of Richard Nixon created the office of independent counsel to wrest from the president the power to investigate crimes by high officials. Then the great god of unintended consequences took over. The counsel's office, shielded from politics, has indicted exactly zero individuals. Further, the counsel's investigation of a case puts severe limits on anyone else's inquiries.    Despite all this, liberals are still respectful toward the office, for they were the ones who created the beast in the first place. So the device is now not a threat but a refuge to a beleaguered administration, and the Reaganites have taken cover. The president's critics deserve the irony.    The Reaganites have also benefited from a certain restraint among the critics. Yes, you can hear Sam Donaldson thundering about &quot;what I think is definitely an illegal constitutional crime.&quot; But there on TV the other night was Watergate's own Bob Woodward explaining that this time we were dealing with &quot;well-intentioned&quot; individuals.    Why the sobriety? Well, the memory of Watergate has undergone a change in this decade. &quot;No one wants another Watergate,&quot; you hear repeatedly. It is remembered less as a bracing bath for the body politic than as a wearying excess. Combined with Mr. Reagan's general popularity, this is a good reason not to charge the battlements prematurely.    But the debate will not stay buttoned up permanently. When you announce to the public that a big misdeed has been done and you have fired the lieutenant colonel who had sole knowledge of it, even your friends say, &quot;Oh, sure.&quot;    Remember, we are not talking merits here, or asking the question of how much of these matters Congress really has a right to know. Congress is now holding hearings to show that the White House illegitimately kept secrets from the legislators. As each supposedly closed hearing has taken place, the congressmen and their staffs have leaked material from it. It is hard to remain solemn about Congress's complaints. But this is Washington. The scandal train has already started rolling.    The cleanest way to get through the controversy would have been to speed the congressional inquiry, dealing with immunity issues beforehand. The White House would have had to stay out in front of the hearings, rather than reacting to revelations day by day. It also would have had to look for ways to counterattack.    But this did not happen. Instead, officials sure to be involved in the hearings have stayed in place as the administration has rushed for a pre-emptive independent counsel.    An independent counsel means, of course, a criminal investigation. So when Congress starts calling witnesses closely involved in the Iran deal, they will -- properly -- claim their Fifth Amendment rights and ask for immunity from prosecution before testifying. They have already begun to do so.    Congress must decide each time whether to grant immunity and, if so, what kind of immunity. Then the independent counsel must concur in the application to the court. This is a recipe for a bitter, protracted mess. Congress will not be able to get information. And this time it will not subside every time the name of the independent counsel is invoked. How long do you think it will take before the legislators start yelling &quot;cover-up&quot;?    Now assume a situation considerably less bad -- improbably so, in fact. Assume that people solve the immunity problem so that congressional hearings proceed smartly. The president has pledged that he will reveal everything. But how long do you think it will take before the hearings start floating the names of people still in office advising the president?    Right now Mr. Reagan, still beloved, is far from any danger of impeachment. A drip-drip-drip attack on presidential withholding of information from Congress and the country is the only thing that could start to make impeachment thinkable. Even if it does not, the process is certain to bleed Ronald Reagan's presidency to death over the course of the next two years and shut the presidential door to the Republicans in 1988.    The really clever Democrats prefer the long, slow death. It is a lot safer to rail endlessly against the Reagan obstruction of justice than to go up against war hero Ollie North before a nationwide TV audience.    Finally, if the bleeding or the escalation starts, the president will not get much help from his traditional supporters. They hate Donald Regan's White House. They think that people of independence and talent have been driven from the place, along with the political ideas -- not just conservative ideas, but any ideas -- that gave Republicans their edge. They blame Mr. Regan for the Iran debacle, because it is the chief of staff who is supposed to keep his president within the bounds of prudence. Some conservatives will be active soldiers on behalf of the administration anyway. Some will not.    Administration tactics so far have ensured a treacherous time to come. It is the president, not the country, who is most in need of independent counsel. </TEXT></DOC>