<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0082 </DOCNO><HL> Blue Cross PlansCoverage LimitsOn Many Tests---By Frank E. JamesStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   A medical-insurance controversy is heating up over Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association's planned new guidelines for the reimbursement of medical tests.    The guidelines, which are expected to be announced at the annual meeting of the American College of Physicians in New Orleans tomorrow, will result in the huge insurer not reimbursing physicians or hospitals for tests done on patients who don't exhibit symptoms. The restrictions include such widely used tests as electrocardiograms, urinalyses, complete blood-count tests, certain X-rays and throat cultures.    Although medical-industry officials say that Blue Cross has lined up a number of medical groups to endorse the cost-cutting move, it may draw considerable fire from other health organizations. Some doctors, especially the College of American Pathologists, are very critical of the new guidelines. They charge that the Blue Cross plan will eliminate many tests that now detect health problems that doctors don't immediately suspect. The quality of medical care for millions of people could suffer as a result, they say. Some critics also assert that the plan goes against efforts to cut health-industry costs through stronger efforts at preventative medicine.    &quot;Blue Cross and Blue Shield should logically be concerned with the economic aspects of testing but our objection is that this isn't the right approach,&quot; says William Zeiler, president-elect of the pathologist organization.    The pathologist association was one of several medical groups consulted over the past three years by the insurer as it prepared its guidelines. Blue Cross and Blue Shield insurance covers more than 75 million people.    The broad purpose of the guidelines is to reduce unnecessary medical testing by spelling out the circumstances under which certain diagnostic procedures are appropriate. Medical specialists have estimated that doctors perform some $10 billion of unnecessary tests each year. Many believe that better guidelines could substantially reduce that amount.    A particular target of the new guidelines, which explain which tests Blue Cross will pay for and which ones it won't, are tests done as part of routine physical examinations when patients don't exhibit specific complaints. One such example would be certain blood tests that look for a wide variety of possible complaints.    Many doctors believe that they should have wide latitude in deciding which tests are appropriate. Among other things, health specialists say they are concerned that the new guidelines may lead to too much guesswork by doctors who will be forced to diagnose patients without as much concrete data. &quot;The diagnosis is the end product of medical evaluation. You can't assume that the diagnosis is known from the outset,&quot; says Dr. Zeiler.    Another critic, Jared Schwartz, director of pathology and laboratory medicine at Presbyterian Hospital in Charlotte, N.C., adds: &quot;Anytime you set up a rigid list you begin to put blinders on, you don't take into account the independent variables of individual patients,&quot; Dr. Schwartz says. He reviewed the insurers' guidelines when they were merely proposals.    Pathologists have a number of specific complaints about the Blue Cross guidelines. One example they cite is how the new rules might interfere with the practice of doing what are called baseline tests. Often when a patient is admitted to the hospital, doctors will run a battery of tests in order to determine the normal levels of certain substances in a patient's body since different therapies could affect them. The pathologists say these tests are often critical for certain types of patients and that the need for them can vary from hospital to hospital and from one region of the country to another.    &quot;We're not trying to promote widespread screenings,&quot; says Dr. Schwartz. &quot;But for many patients the admission to the hospital is the first time in 15 to 20 years that they've seen a doctor. There are many examples in a lot of doctors' experience where some unknown problem, like anemia, was picked as a result of a test done before a patient had hospital surgery.&quot;    Before implementing the new guidelines, Blue Cross plans a yearlong education period, during which time they will explain the new system to the doctors. And how it plans to enforce the new rules isn't entirely clear; presumably some doctors could submit claims saying patients had symptoms that they really didn't.    Among the health organizations that plan to support the Blue Cross plan are the American Society of Anesthesiologists, the American Thoracic Society and the American Academy of Pediatrics. Other insurance organizations also are expected to support the Blue Cross guidelines. </TEXT></DOC>