<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880815-0143 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: NATO Needs to Get Its Message Across </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Bonnart </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><TEXT>   NATO has a communications problem. Although the organization arose because of the evident threat to Western Europe from Stalin's Red Army, it is Stalin's distant successor, General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev, who is stealing the limelight as a peacemaker.    The spate of public proposals for arms control coming from him and other Soviet leaders, and reproduced in Warsaw Pact communiques, is beginning to make a serious impact on the Western public. Intelligent and generally well-informed Westerners are accusing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and their own governments of dragging their feet, and some, more easily suggestible, even claim that the West is hiding aggressive intentions. In a recent opinion poll in West Germany, 50% were said to be in favor of unilateral disarmament.    What these and other normally sensible citizens fail to realize is that this is exactly what they are intended to do. The campaign is aimed specifically at them and serves no purpose other than to achieve the political objectives of the Soviet Union. These objectives are indeed peaceful stability in Europe and in the world in general -- but a stability in which Soviet power remains unchallenged.    For instance, Mr. Gorbachev has repeatedly affirmed that he does not want to split NATO, or force the U.S. out of Europe -- yet this is most certainly his aim. A glance at the world map shows that the emerging Japanese and Chinese superpowers -- each with scores to settle -- will pose such a threat to the Soviet empire in the long- or middle-term that any prudent Soviet leader will need to have a feeling of complete security in the West. Hence the insistence on a &quot;common European house.&quot; The phrase, though recently coined, does not by any means present a new idea: It has been Soviet -- indeed Russian -- policy throughout modern history. But another glance at the same map will show that, with the Soviet Union stretching to the Pacific in the east and the Gobi Desert in the south, such a house would not be European but Eurasian. It would obviously be dominated by the largest power in it -- that is, the Soviet Union. This aim is frustrated by the presence in Europe of U.S. forces, a nuclear arsenal and the cohesion of the Alliance.    Similarly, senior Soviet military figures, such as Defense Minister Gen. Dmitri Yazov and Chief of the General Staff Marshal Sergey Akhromeyev, have stressed that the nature of Soviet military doctrine had changed and that it is now purely defensive. Yet, as U.S. Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci pointed out in his Aug. 2 speech at the Voroshilov Military Academy in Moscow, there has neither been a change in the offensive structure of the Soviet military forces nor has there been any reduction in the resources devoted to building them up. Nevertheless, some in the West accept such Soviet statements as a fundamental change and reproach their governments for failing to take action.    Recent proposals that Mr. Gorbachev has put forward, without acknowledgment of authorship, based on Western ideas, such as those for a verifiable exchange of data on force strengths at the beginning of negotiations, for asymmetrical reductions and for a sufficiency of arms for defense but not for offensive action, appear to have made a deep impression in the West. All of these proposals have been Alliance aims for years -- indeed, since the beginning -- so why, the good citizens ask, does NATO not accept them?    The answer is, of course, that NATO does accept them: Western negotiators have pressed for them often enough but completely without success at previous negotiations. They have presented exactly such conditions as the luckless 15-year-old mutual and balanced force reduction negotiations. What NATO fails to do, however, is get its message across. Although this has been pointed out time and again, the gap between well-sounding Soviet public proposals and the refusal of Soviet officials to accept them at the negotiating table is simply ignored by the Western public.    Although it is obvious that Mr. Gorbachev does not make such statements for purely altruistic reasons, he is also not insincere. He is trying to restructure his country economically, and therefore also socially, in order to pull it into the modern world. To do so he needs to free resources and these can, in the first instance, only come from the military sector. Clearly, therefore, arms control -- and particularly of the more costly conventional forces -- is a primary objective.    However, although a reduction in armaments could undoubtedly lessen tension, it is not a long-term aim in itself. What the West wants to achieve is stability and mutual security, and these can rest only on a foundation of open societies in which members are allowed freedom of self-expression and choice of governments. Hence the Western insistence at the current Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe review conference taking place in Vienna on linking arms control with the human-rights question. As the Soviet and East European record in this respect is more than questionable, Mr. Gorbachev is seeking to bypass it by generating sufficient pressure on Westerners to force their governments to abandon their stance.    What is at issue is that Mr. Gorbachev is trying to have it both ways. He wants to reduce forces and arms all around but, at the same time, is attempting to improve the power position of the Soviet Union. This is, of course, perfectly legitimate -- but there is no need for the West to play his game. Arguments are heard that he is meeting considerable internal opposition for his reforms, that he must reassure the Soviet military hierarchy, and that, therefore, the West should help him out of his predicaments. But it is doubtful that, in such an internal struggle, the West can help him. Any undue concessions -- such as unilateral disarmament in different areas -- would merely be interpreted as signs of weakness and lead to greater demands. In any case, and with all due respect, surely that is the problem.    The West must in the first place help itself. And, since the West's intentions are indeed to maintain security at the lowest possible level of armaments so that its citizens can live their lives freely and in dignity, the actions of the Western powers are correct. However, in the eyes of its own public, it is the West that is seen as obstructing moves to lessen tension.    Action is therefore needed to capture the attention and the imagination of the Western public. NATO should now respond publicly to such public pronouncements and, where it agrees with a proposal, offer to go ahead immediately. It could, for instance, openly declare its force structure and numbers in an agreed-upon area and invite inspections -- and challenge the Soviet Union to reciprocate. This would then force the Eastern negotiators to come clean and either unblock the negotiations or show clearly who is holding them up. It may not advance the tempo of arms control but it would serve, at the least, in refocusing the limelight on where it should be: the Western proposals for peace and security.    ---   Mr. Bonnart edits NATO's Sixteen Nations, a Brussels-based defense periodical. </TEXT></DOC>