<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880421-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Dukakis Victory: Secretary of State As Vice President </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Hunt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   The World Congress Center auditorium in Atlanta will be packed next July 21 when Michael Dukakis, nominated the night before, arrives to announce his vice-presidential choice.    The locals will be ecstatic when the Massachusetts liberal declares that he has selected Georgia's own Sam Nunn. But Michael Dukakis then will toss a bombshell that dramatically changes the 1988 election: Sam Nunn also will be the secretary of state in the Dukakis administration.    The impact will be enormous. The Republicans' strongest case against the Democratic nominee -- his naivete on national-security issues -- will disappear. The suspicion of a selection based entirely on political instead of substantive grounds will be undercut. And a message that the current vice president is largely irrelevant will be strongly delivered.    This announcement probably won't take place; boldness isn't Gov. Dukakis's forte. But if he chooses to abandon conventional caution in the most critical decision of his quarter-century in politics, it would be a way to almost assure a November victory and perhaps improve the prospects for a successful Dukakis presidency.    Skeptics would surface instantly. Liberals would express outrage that the moderately conservative Sen. Nunn be given such an unprecedented position. Cynics would spot an election-year gimmick.    More serious thinkers will pose more legitimate reservations. Harvard's Richard Neustadt, the dean of presidential scholars, recalls the &quot;terrible embarrassment&quot; Franklin Roosevelt suffered in 1943 when he had to remove Vice President Henry Wallace from the chairmanship of the Board of Economic Warfare. &quot;The inherent problem is the crown-prince difficulty,&quot; he says. &quot;The president can fire the secretary of state but he can't fire the crown prince as vice president.&quot;    But upon closer examination, a compelling case for a Dukakis-Nunn ticket, with the Georgia Democrat serving as secretary of state, can be made -- from a policy as well as political vantage point. Politically, Mr. Dukakis should look South for a running mate. More than any other Southerner, Sam Nunn would bring him instant credibility in the region.    Even more important, the Democrats, especially a newcomer like Gov. Dukakis, need to reassure voters about their resolve on foreign policy. &quot;For the past five elections the Democrats have been on the defensive on national-security issues dealing with the Soviet Union,&quot; says Democratic political consultant John Marttila, who has just participated in a huge bipartisan study on voters' attitudes on national-security matters. The Democrats, he says, have to convince the public &quot;that we would embody a realistic toughness and negotiate with the Soviets from strength, in order to reach issues that are very advantageous for us.&quot;    The selection of Sam Nunn to play a paramount foreign-policy role in the next administration accomplishes that. But this can be done only by naming him secretary of state. The state job is clearly superior to defense secretary. And suggestions to make a Vice President Nunn national security adviser are naive and unworkable on two counts. First, that's a staff job that shouldn't go to a high-profile person. Second, there's no way Mr. Nunn would agree to this arrangement. It would be much tougher for him to turn down vice president and secretary of state.    Mr. Nunn's greatest liability, particularly to followers of Jesse Jackson -- who must leave Atlanta with enthusiasm if the ticket is to have a chance -- is his conservative record. Many liberals, including those around Mr. Jackson, wouldn't be pleased with his prominent role. But making the Georgian secretary of state would at least signal that his role will be mostly in national security and not in the domestic issues that most Jackson voters care so deeply about.    Finally, any time George Bush tried to boast of his experience at the top level of government, there would be a dramatic reminder of how impotent the vice presidency has been. Some scholars have called for abolishing the office; Mr. Dukakis could pose the choice between that route or the one he has chosen. George Bush loses either way.    But if it's a political ten-strike, is it a workable idea and does it make sense governmentally? Most constitutional experts see no problems; the incompatibility clause in Article One refers only to members of Congress not being executive-branch officials. Clearly it would upgrade the lowly status of the number two office. &quot;Something like this could strengthen the vice presidency,&quot; says Richard Moe, chief of staff under Vice President Mondale. &quot;And if there's compatibility, I see no reason it couldn't work.&quot;    This wouldn't create the kind of who's-in-charge confusion like the bizarre effort eight years ago to pick Gerald Ford as Ronald Reagan's running mate and as a sort of a co-president. A secretary of state is not an equal of the president.    Gov. Dukakis's rhetoric on foreign affairs has often seemed simplistic and naive in this election year. But, based on the people he turns to for advice, he's not an ideologue. Sam Nunn has moved to the center on foreign policy in recent years; on issues from arms control and dealing with Soviets to the Middle East, he should be compatible with a President Dukakis.    It may be that Mr. Dukakis figures he doesn't have a national-security problem in November. But if he thinks that, his biggest political decision next year may be whether to run for a fourth term as governor of Massachusetts.    ---   Mr. Hunt is chief of the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>