<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880913-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Coming a Cropper: Farm-Policy Fumbling On Soybeans Shrinks U.S. Share of Market --- Despite the Demand, Farmers Idle Their Land and Grow Other Crops for Subsidies --- Next: Chickens From Brazil? </HL><AUTHOR> Scott Kilman and Bruce Ingersoll (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM EUROP FREST </CO><IN> CMD MON </IN><G> AGD CNG </G><DATELINE> CAMERON, S.C.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Cemetery Road, at the edge of this farming community of 536 people in Calhoun County, lies a pile of rubble -- all that is left of a soybean processing plant that until last year had been the town's biggest employer. The cause of its demise: a 50% plunge in the size of the county's biggest cash crop, soybeans, over the past five years.    Here and elsewhere, in places from the Deep South to the Great Plains, the American soybean boom has gone bust.    Once the &quot;miracle bean&quot; stood as the brightest hope of American agriculture. Now U.S. output is falling for the third consecutive year; yesterday, the Agriculture Department forecast a 23% drop in the 1988 crop. This means that for the first time since American breeders redesigned the Manchurian native to thrive on these shores, America will have grown less than half the world's soybeans. With millions of fertile acres idle, the U.S. is close to running out of its second most valuable crop, after corn.    &quot;We are just realizing that the U.S. isn't the only ball game in town,&quot; says John Hane, a Fort Motte, S.C., farmer. South American growers, he says, &quot;are taking away our crop from us and making us look like asses.&quot;    Don't blame market prices or demand. On the contrary, prices for processed soybean products are strong and, partly because of the drought, headed higher; some farmers who use the beans for feed may lose money on their hogs and chickens. By the fall of 1989, there may be shortages of soybeans, used in cooking oils and other human food as well as in animal feed.    Despite all this, farmers seem reluctant to grow the crop without government assistance -- help they frittered away in a splintered lobbying effort.    Foreign farmers are fast plowing new acreage for soybeans to meet demand around the world. American processors are laying plans to import soybeans that won't be grown on the U.S.'s idle acreage. At the Chicago Board of Trade, speculators swap rumors of bargeloads of South American soybean oil moving up the Mississippi River.    If all this seems weird, it is. The short, if cynical, explanation is that producers of corn, wheat, rice and cotton command powerful and cohesive lobbies. Soybean growers do not. But that is oversimple. The growers themselves, hoping to enjoy the best of both the subsidized and free-market worlds, pitched their own wrenches into the agricultural policy machinery and now suffer the consequences.    By 1984, policy makers were eager to refloat a floundering farm economy with lavish subsidies for corn, wheat, rice and cotton -- which farmers call program crops. Income-support payments and price-support loans guaranteed growers of these crops profits in return for setting aside big chunks of their usual planting acreage. For rice and cotton growers came a bonus in the form of marketing loans, costly export subsidies that compensate farmers and exporters for selling U.S. commodities abroad at low prices.    Soybean growers lacked a consensus toward subsidies. For years, in fact, their strongest lobby had looked askance at subsidies, confident that market demand for the wondrous protein source would ensure higher profits. In the farm legislation that took effect in 1985, soybean support prices were low. No marketing loans were offered. Nor were farmers permitted to plant soybeans on land idled by corn, wheat and cotton &quot;set-asides.&quot; Because government subsidies are based on an average of five consecutive harvests, planting soybeans for one season on program cropland would penalize a farmer for several years.    Since then, U.S. soybean acreage has shrunk by 15%. On world markets, American agriculture has been made to look much like General Motors in the 1970s, a lumbering giant slow to size up its competition. The vast, empty refining vats amid the rubble of Cameron's former Continental Grain Co. plant attest to the cost.    The plant sprang up in the 1960s, a few years before the buff-colored bean was engineered into a new source of protein for a hungry world. While U.S. farmers had planted a few soybeans in the past, processors lifted the crop from obscurity in the 1970s and made it America's biggest farm export. Its champions, ranging from farmers and processors to Agriculture Department officials, put technicians to work on recipes for tofu, meat lookalikes, gravies and bread -- all made from soybeans.    &quot;When you start thinking about future applications of soy protein, it can boggle the mind,&quot; gushed a promotional brochure by Archer Daniels Midland Co., the leading U.S. processor.    At the same time, costly overseas promotion made the soybean a staple of diets in Japan, Korea, West Germany and elsewhere. Prices in the 1970s doubled, showering farmers with cash they invested to double their production by 1979 to 2.26 billion bushels, the biggest crop ever. The American Soybean Association, a farmer lobby, chose to risk price swings in the market in order to avoid limiting production and exports.    Then came the farm crisis of the early 1980s and the 1985 farm act. By early 1988, the stage was set for a soybean shortage. In February, Rep. Jerry Huckaby, a Louisiana Democrat, tried to help soybean growers by introducing a bill to provide them with a marketing loan. Rep. Dan Glickman, a Kansas Democrat who chairs the House Agriculture subcommittee on wheat, soybeans and feed grains, held hearings on the soybean industry's dilemma, and he and others pressed ahead with legislation designed to increase soybean acreage.    That began a political fiasco that killed the industry's chances for a 1988 recovery. In what a congressional aide called &quot;the North-South war,&quot; the soybean association split along regional lines. Southern soybean farmers sought a marketing loan in hopes of lifting exports but wanted no expansion of soybean acreage, which might depress prices. At the same time, growers in the Midwest, where soybean yields are 50% higher, mostly wanted a chance to plant more beans without their subsidies being penalized. But they opposed a marketing loan for precisely the same reason the Southerners objected to increase acreage: It might depress prices.    &quot;The politics of soybeans are very confused,&quot; says Illinois Rep. Edward Madigan, the ranking Republican on the House Agriculture Committee. Says soybean-association President James Lee Adams, of Camilla, Ga., &quot;We were in a terrible quandary at the time.&quot;    After flip-flopping on the issue, the growers' group declared itself opposed to both a marketing loan and an acreage expansion in 1988. The waffling outraged legislators and doomed efforts to expand production. By then it was March, too late to change the farm program in time for 1988 plantings. &quot;It would have just added to the confusion,&quot; Mr. Adams says.    Nevertheless, he concedes, &quot;we haven't had our act together. . . . Making policy for the American Soybean Association is a lot like trying to load a wheelbarrow full of frogs. We get a few of us on board, and others start jumping ship.&quot;    With soybean stockpiles now expected to fall to a dangerously low three weeks' supply by next summer, the government has since sweetened the pot. Under the $3.9 billion drought-relief package enacted last month, farmers can without penalty shift at least 10% of their land from program crops into soybeans for one year, and perhaps as much as 25% at the Agriculture Secretary's discretion.    Changes in the farm program may be too little and too late. Some 14 million acres of U.S. soybeans have effectively shifted to South America. There, the planting season begins next month, and Argentina and Brazil are expected to increase their plantings by 20% and 15%.    In the U.S., corn subsidies are still so attractive that LeRoy, Minn., farmer Russell Roe plans to switch only 15% of his corn acreage to soybeans. U.S. soybean plantings are expected to rise by only two million to three million acres next spring, half the increase expected in competing South American nations.    Bit players such as Australia are weighing into soybeans, and nations unsuited to growing them are planting alternative crops. Heavily subsidized rapeseed production in Western Europe has risen 60% in the past four years, lessening the European Economic Community's dependence of U.S. soybean meal and strengthening it as a competitor in world vegetable oil.    The decline in America's share of the world soybean trade, totaling $10 billion a year now, will be tough to end. The U.S. share is expected to tumble to less than 60% in the coming year from 86% in 1982. The number of domestic processing plants -- crushers and refiners -- has fallen 28% in the past 10 years, to 88.    More are on the verge of closing. Decatur, Ill., a processing town deep in the Farm Belt, has conceded its title of &quot;the soybean capital of the world.&quot; Ponta Grossa, Brazil, and Rosario, Argentina, are new contenders.    Here in Cameron and the rest of the Southeast, a major soybean-producing region, the cost of farm-policy machinations has run especially high. Mr. Hane, the Fort Motte farmer, planted only 250 acres in soybeans this spring, just one-third as much as six years ago. &quot;When you plant soybeans, you are totally on your own,&quot; Mr. Hane says. &quot;With the others, the government protects you from low prices.&quot;    Soybean seed sales skidded last spring in South Carolina, and dealers were forced to destroy tens of thousands of bags. Luther Wannamaker, president of his family's seed business, is glum about the prospects for soybeans. Farmers have planted pine trees on many former soybean fields under a government program that pays them $45 an acre each year to idle land. Other acreage is in subsidized crops such as cotton. &quot;Program crops are too attractive,&quot; Mr. Wannamaker says.    Only two of the five soybean processing plants within 100 miles of Calhoun County are still crushing soybeans. Lessened demand from the processors is further dulling farmers' incentive to grow them here. Yet the drought, reduced competition and higher transportation costs have worked to increase the prices on soybean products. Livestock raisers are smarting from an 80% increase in the cost of soybean meal, a principal feed ingredient.    Steve Pittman, a Fort Motte, S.C. farmer, says rising feed costs will wipe out profit on his 450-hog operation this year. The plant closing is &quot;a sad waste,&quot; he says. &quot;We lost a golden opportunity.&quot;    Southeastern poultry producers fear withering soybean supplies will force up prices on other commodities. Joe Hatfield, president of Fieldale Farms Corp., a Baldwin, Ga., poultry grower, says the cost of feeding soybean meal to chickens could make them too expensive to export.    He also worries that Brazil might take advantage of its expanding soybean crop to develop its poultry industry -- and exports. &quot;We could be facing South American competition for chickens,&quot; he says.    At Sylvia's restaurant in downtown St. Matthews, the seat of Calhoun County, a knot of farmers mulls international trade issues over lunch. &quot;We fought low prices. Then the weather,&quot; says Pallie Wiles, a soybean farmer in a John Deere cap. &quot;Now it's the South Americans.&quot;    The closing of the Cameron plant dashed farmers' hopes of expanding markets for their promising new crop. With the plant vanished the jobs of 58 residents and the line of trucks that snaked into town during the annual harvest. Along Cemetery Road, &quot;it's going to be right quiet this fall,&quot; says David Summers, president of the Golden Kernel Pecan Co., across the road from the plant site.    Says Mr. Wiles, &quot;It's a tragedy, what's happening.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>