<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Hunts Proposing to Sell Major PortionsOf Two Concerns to Settle With Lenders---By Leonard M. ApcarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FBCTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> DALLAS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Hunt brothers, through their investment advisers, are informally proposing to sell major parts of their two leading energy companies to raise cash and settle the multibillion dollar legal battle between the brothers and their lenders, according to banking and Hunt-company officials.    The overture is the first concrete attempt in months by the Hunts to reach an out-of-court settlement, and is a sharp reversal from the elaborate corporate reorganizing plans Hunt lawyers have submitted to the federal bankruptcy court here. Those plans have called for the Hunts to continue operating their companies over the next 10 years while they pay creditors.    If the banks accept the settlement proposal, sale of parts of the Hunt's Placid Oil Co. and Penrod Drilling Co. would strip the brothers, Nelson Bunker, William Herbert and Lamar, of major parts of the corporate empire bequeathed to them by their father, the late H.L. Hunt.    So far, at least some representatives of the Hunts' 23 U.S. and foreign bank lenders are viewing the latest plan skeptically. They don't believe that Placid Oil, a major independent oil producer, and Penrod, which owns one of the world's largest offshore drilling fleets, could fetch the $1.5 billion that is due the banks. Both firms are insolvent.    First Boston Corp., which has been working behind the scenes for Placid in its Chapter 11 bankruptcy court proceedings while it works out a plan to pay its debts, has summoned bankers and their lawyers to a meeting here Thursday, when it is expected to formally describe the proposal.    The meeting would come a little more than a week after a new federal district judge presiding in the Hunt lawsuit against its banks appeared to raise several questions about the merits of the Hunts' case against the banks. That lawsuit, which was filed in June 1986 and eventually led to Placid's plea for bankruptcy court protection, accuses the banks of fraud, breach of contract and violation of banking laws for their refusal to restructure Placid and Penrod loans.    According to Stephen Susman, the chief Hunt lawyer, Judge A. Joe Fish at a hearing last week asked Hunt attorneys why the banks and the Hunts need to question still more witnesses in a discovery process that started last April. So far, 28 individuals, including bankers and Placid and Penrod executives have been questioned. The deposition of W. Herbert Hunt alone went on for 21 days.    Judge Fish also asked Hunt lawyers why the Hunt companies haven't made arrangements to pay back the banks and argue later about whether the banks have committed fraud or negotiated in bad faith, Mr. Susman said. At one point, he said, the judge asked the Hunt lawyers why the banks have to negotiate in good faith.    &quot;One could read as hostile&quot; the judge's questions, Mr. Susman said, though he downplayed the queries. Sometimes judges, he said, &quot;say one thing publicly even though (they) may do another thing. I don't think it is a very good indication of what he's going to do.&quot; Mr. Susman added, however, that after studying &quot;a bunch&quot; of Judge Fish's decisions he detected that the judge &quot;has a reputation for being pro-financial institutions.&quot; But again he cautioned that he didn't necessarily believe the judge's past opinions mean much in this case.    Mr. Susman said he didn't know anything about any settlement plan drawn up by First Boston. A spokesman for the Hunt brothers and their entities said on Friday that he wasn't aware of the latest settlement proposal or a meeting scheduled for Thursday.    Still, the lawsuits, which originally sought a total of $13.8 billion in damages from the banks, are expected to be scaled down sharply. Mr. Susman said he plans to drop allegations that the banks violated antitrust laws by conspiring to consolidate the offshore drilling industry. After investigating the charges, Mr. Susman said, &quot;I am persuaded that we couldn't prove damages. We caught the banks from doing something illegal before they pursued it.&quot; The antitrust claims, which were filed by Hunt lawyers who later were dismissed, sought $10.6 billion of the total damages.    The struggle between the Hunts and their lenders centers on whether the banks refused to restructure $1.5 billion in loans to Placid and Penrod after promising that they would do so. The banks deny any wrongdoing, but the Hunts say that the banks' stubborn refusal to bend forced the companies to default on the loans last year when energy prices plummeted and Placid and Penrod's financial woes deepened.    The outlines of the proposed settlement are sketchy. John H. Laeri Jr., a First Boston managing partner, would say only that &quot;settlement talks have been under way for a while,&quot; with the encouragement of the bankruptcy judge presiding in the Placid case and that of the William Herbert Hunt Trust Estate. Both entities sought bankruptcy court protection to stop the banks from seizing collateral pledged to the Placid and Penrod loans.    Bankers close to the negotiations said the plan calls for the banks to be paid $1.5 billion possbily as earlier as year-end providing that the Hunts can sell Penrod's drilling-rig fleet and Placid's domestic refineries and energy reserves for a total of $1.5 billion. The plan would be a &quot;global&quot; settlement, according to Henry W. Simon Jr., the bankruptcy lawyer for the Hunts, meaning that if the settlement is accepted, it would not only speed to a conclusion the district court suit but also the related Chapter 11 proceedings of Placid and the William Herbert Hunt Trust Estate. Mr. Simon refused to elaborate on the proposal.    The Hunts, however, wouldn't sell their valuable energy reserves in the Dutch North Sea, nor would they abandon their controversial plan to drill in the Gulf of Mexico's Green Canyon. Also, the Hunts wouldn't auction the real estate held by the trusts for the three brothers -- 71 properties in eight states, valued at about $289 million.    Bankers were skeptical of the proposal because estimates submitted by the Hunts in bankruptcy court proceedings indicate that Placid and Penrod's assets now are valued at a total of $745 million because of today's depressed energy market, including the North Sea and Gulf of Mexico operations. One bank official doubted that First Boston would provide a letter officially valuing the assets at the $1.5 billion the brothers are proposing to pay the banks. Also, bankers said, Penrod and Placid owe at least $300 million in accrued interest that the First Boston plan apparently doesn't address. </TEXT></DOC>