<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Task for Reagan Is to Find ConservativeAcceptable to Democrats for Powell Post---By Stephen Wermiel and Ellen HumeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan faces a difficult challenge in filling the new Supreme Court vacancy: While he would like to pick a young, aggressive conservative who could influence the law for decades, his nominee must be able to win quick approval from the Democratic-controlled Senate.    The vacancy was created by the unexpected retirement of 79-year-old Justice Lewis Powell, a cautious moderate who has been the pivotal vote for the court's liberal wing in upholding affirmative action, the right to abortion, the separation of church and state and certain other individual liberties.    Justice Powell cited his advancing age and the fear that a recurrence of health problems could handicap the court in the future. Although he said he currently is in good health, he missed two months of court proceedings in 1985 following surgery for prostate cancer.    Justice Powell's departure will give President Reagan his third court appointment -- and his clearest chance yet to sharply alter the court's balance.    But the prospect of a major change also has brought warnings from Democrats on the Senate Judiciary Committee, who said they would take a closer look at this nomination than has been given previous ones.    The immediate front-runner for the vacancy is U.S. Court of Appeals Judge Robert Bork, a prominent and respected conservative who appeals to different elements within the administration.    He would face tough questioning about his conservative views and his role as solicitor general in firing Watergate special prosecutor Archibald Cox at President Nixon's order in 1973. But his experience as a jurist and law professor, and his recognized intellectual ability, would make him a strong nominee.    However, he is 60 and some administration officials would prefer a younger nominee whose tenure would last well into the next century.    The selection process, which began at the White House and Justice Department over the weekend, will hit full stride today. A senior administration official said White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker, Attorney General Edwin Meese and White House counsel A.B. Culvahouse will go over a list of about 10 names early this afternoon, hoping to present President Reagan five choices later today.    Judge Bork &quot;will clearly be at the top of the list,&quot; said one administration official.    Another strong contender, administration officials said, is Patrick Higginbotham of Dallas, a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals in New Orleans.    Others on lists at the Justice Department and White House include U.S. Appeals Court Judges J. Clifford Wallace of San Diego; Richard Posner and Frank Easterbrook, of Chicago; Cynthia Hall of Pasadena, Calif.; Ralph Winter of New Haven, Conn.; Anthony Kennedy of Sacramento, Calif.; Roger Miner of Albany, N.Y.; and Laurence Silberman of Washington. Also on a White House list are Sens. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah) and Howell Heflin (D., Ala.).    Before the choice is made, the president must consider the political thicket into which the nomination will be sent. Last summer, when the president picked Justice William Rehnquist to succeed Chief Justice Warren Burger, and nominated Judge Antonin Scalia to the court, Republicans controlled the Senate and the president still had more than two years remaining to his term.    But with the change in power in the Senate, liberal Democrats would like nothing more than to have a Supreme Court nominee who was so controversial that they could hold up confirmation until next year, when the pending presidential election would make action unlikely.    Democrats on the Judiciary Committee say they will take a closer look at this nomination than they did at Judge Scalia's because this selection may change the court's delicate ideological balance. If the nominee &quot;has a predisposition on every one of the major . . . social issues . . . I think there will be some controversy,&quot; said Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.), the committee's chairman, on CBS's &quot;Face the Nation.&quot;    Even Sen. Alan Simpson (R., Wyo.), Senate minority whip, interviewed on the same program, said, &quot;I think we have to have someone who can be confirmed.&quot;    The Supreme Court vacancy may create a political dilemma for some Democrats. Sen. Biden and another committee member, Sen. Paul Simon (D., Ill.), are running for president. Both will face pressure from civil rights constituencies to stop a conservative nominee. At the same time, untoward delay of a strong nominee could hurt them.    Democrats haven't directly said they would object to Judge Bork, but Sen. Biden gave thinly veiled hints fellow party members consider the former Yale Law School professor controversial. Judge Bork is a forceful conservative who advocated restraint by judges and narrow interpretation of the Constitution long before Attorney General Edwin Meese.    Besides his age, Judge Bork has another liability in the eyes of administration officials who prefer longevity in the next justice: He is overweight and a heavy smoker. Apparently aware of this health problem, Judge Bork recently took up tennis and cut back on his smoking.    He also has been one of the slower judges at producing opinions on the appeals court in Washington, D.C., where he sits; his colleagues attribute this to boredom with the job.    Indeed, since Judge Bork hasn't hired law clerks for the fall of 1988, there has been some suggestion he plans to leave the appeals court next summer if he doesn't get a shot at the Supreme Court.    Judge Bork wouldn't comment.    President Reagan faces a problem if he chooses to name Sens. Hatch or Heflin. The Constitution prohibits federal lawmakers from accepting other government posts for which the salary has been increased by the current Congress. Judicial salaries were raised, effective March 1. White House aides, who studied the problem over the weekend, apparently found no way around the prohibition.    Whoever the president picks is likely to become a strong ally of the court's conservative wing, which recently has consisted of Chief Justice Rehnquist, Justice Scalia, Justice Byron White and Justice Sandra O'Connor -- President Reagan's first appointment and the court's first female justice.    Justice Powell often has been the fifth, and least predictable, member of that wing. His departure put Justice White in the swing-vote position, producing a more solid conservative block.    The court's 5-4 decisions help illustrate Justice Powell's record. In the last six years, he has been in the majority in 134 of 189 cases decided by 5-4 votes -- 71% of the time. When he has been part of the 5-4 majority, only about 25% of the decisions have been liberal.    But among those 25% are some landmarks.    Last year, Justice Powell helped form a 5-4 majority to strike down Pennsylvania's law restricting abortions. In decisions this year and last year, he provided the fifth vote to uphold a number of affirmative action plans, both voluntary and court-ordered.    Justice Powell also joined the court's 54 decision in 1982 that children of illegal aliens have a right to a free public education, and he was part of the majority in 1985 that struck down federal aid to parochial schools to pay for remedial education.    In 1978, he wrote a 5-4 decision that upheld affirmative action in education but struck down rigid quotas.    In 1983, Justice Powell wrote the court's decision that a prison term could be unconstitutional if it was disproportionately long for the crime. In recent weeks, he joined the court's narrow majority prohibiting jury use of statements about victims' suffering in deciding whether to impose the death penalty, and to expand the free-speech rights of public employees.    But he has been part of conservative victories as well.    This term, he wrote the decision rejecting evidence that the death penalty may be racially biased.    In 1982, he wrote the ruling that gave President Nixon absolute immunity from lawsuits for damages growing out of his actions as president. And in 1973 he wrote a decision refusing to give as high a priority to claims of discrimination based on poverty as to claims of racial bias. </TEXT></DOC>