<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881109-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business: Will Common Sense Ever Prevail in GATT? </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON CMD </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Once again the machinery of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is functioning, trying to push the world's nations toward freer trade. The negotiations of the Uruguay Round will take a few years to complete, in part because that's simply the way GATT functions, and in part because these negotiations may be the most ambitious yet attempted.    The first GATT round in 1947 seemed to have a lot going for it. The U.S., the only major nation with a healthy economy, was ready to throw open its market to the rest of the world. This generosity, to be sure, had its self-serving aspect. The U.S. was the only nation that had lots of exportable goods; for the U.S., free trade was very good business.    In the event, some six dozen nations signed the agreement, committing themselves to reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade. This was quite a commitment, and the agreement was only a piece of paper. Who would administer it?    Not to worry, the planners said. The International Trade Organization, a United Nations agency, would tend to that. At that point, the grand plan began to fall apart. The U.S., more than ready to accept the global concept of free trade, was not at all ready to accept the notion that a U.N. agency would decide whether a shipment of peanuts, say, was in violation of GATT rules and principles. Macroeconomics was fine, but microeconomics was something else. The ITO died aborning.    Since then GATT has lived pretty much by its wits. It acquired a secretariat, although the group had little power. Whenever any major decision loomed, the organization had to go to its members. At best that took a great deal of time, and at worst nothing important was decided.    In the circumstances, GATT's achievement has been remarkable. Tariffs are hardly a matter of consequence anymore, and GATT has even made some headway against non-tariff barriers. Indeed, GATT can claim a good deal of the credit for the impressive growth of world trade in the postwar years.    All along, however, GATT has displayed its limitations. With little real power, it has a tendency to sweep difficult problems under the rug. When Japan's car makers began cutting deeply into the U.S. market, U.S. car makers were disturbed. As jobs appeared threatened, there was a push for protectionist measures by the U.S. So someone came up with the neat idea that Japan could &quot;voluntarily&quot; limit its auto exports to the U.S. Export or import restraints plainly were violations of GATT principles, but within GATT it was decided that as long as the restraints were voluntary they were okay. Japan parceled out each company's share of the permitted exports, a quota system that was surely far from what GATT's planners had in mind.    In the past 40 years, GATT's dispute-settlement mechanisms have become less and less effective. U.S. firms claim GATT moves too slowly, and it's true -- therefore they press for unilateral U.S. action to punish alleged violations of trade principles, and they often get it.    Congress now has passed a new trade bill, containing much free-trade rhetoric. But the bill more or less leaves matters up to the president. If the new president wants to be a protectionist, the legislation gives him the weapons he needs.    One issue GATT has never been able to face is what to do about agriculture. Farmers in the U.S. and elsewhere have great political power, so a structure of subsidies and import restraints has been built up to protect them. All of this has been largely exempt from GATT examination -- until now. The Uruguay Round is supposed to come to grips with the problem.    The intervention in agriculture is long overdue. GATT statistics show agriculture has not shared fully in the post-World War II trade expansion. Agriculture accounted for 13% of world merchandise trade last year, down from 46% in 1950. To be sure, farm exports have grown, totaling $325 billion last year, up from $28 billion in 1950. But they have grown far less rapidly than other merchandise exports.    The export pattern has some interesting aspects. Despite U.S. complaints about foreign barriers to American farm exports, the U.S. last year accounted for 12.3% of the value of world agricultural exports. France was in second place, with 8.1%, while the Netherlands was third with 7.4%. In the past 25 years, in fact, industrial countries as a group have become larger exporters. Developing countries, where agriculture is often the major industry, have been left with a diminishing share of world agricultural trade.    Obviously, things are a little out of kilter.    The GATT negotiators face two very different problems: What to do, and how to get it done. The original plan for GATT was conceived by economists, and it has long been almost impossible to find economists who disagree with the essential wisdom of free trade. In theory it all seems so simple. Trade is a two-way street, and if you want to sell goods abroad you have to buy from abroad. It's common sense. But common sense often has trouble overcoming political reality. The GATT negotiations inevitably will require compromises. In addition to agriculture, such contentious and longignored issues as intellectual property and trade in services are on the agenda.    Discussing agriculture at a National Bureau of Economic Research conference last year, a participant suggested that &quot;every country is a sinner. It may be that, all for political reasons, none of us will be able to save ourselves completely from this sin for a long time. . . . We may have to work out agricultural trade policy on that premise. If so, we had better admit it and try to agree on a common rule.&quot;    A common rule, however, is only the first step. GATT badly needs new administrative machinery. A variety of proposals has been offered. Some critics favor restructuring GATT so that it would resemble the International Monetary Fund. Other ideas are less radical. One is a permanent negotiating committee so that new ideas would not always have to wait five or 10 years for a new &quot;round.&quot;    GATT has to have the ability to move quickly along lines recognized by the signers of the agreement. Problems don't go away when they are simply ignored. In the lack of movement toward operating efficiency, there is likely to be still more unilateral U.S. government action to placate impatient businessmen.    GATT has accomplished a great deal over the past four decades. But it must do more if common sense ever is to prevail. </TEXT></DOC>