<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870805-0143 </DOCNO><HL> Volcker: Not a Man for All Seasons---By Preston Martin</HL><DD> 08/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   The changing of the guard at the Federal Reserve is now almost complete. The Volcker era has ended and the Greenspan era begins. What lessons can be drawn from the Volcker reign, lessons to buttress the Greenspan board during the inevitably stormy years to come?    As one who served at Paul Volcker's right hand during 49 months of his tenure, I will begin with one unqualified accolade: Mr. Volcker is a splendid crisis manager; indeed, he is most in tune with a universe in the midst of melee. But neither is Alan Greenspan a stranger to the role of consultant during difficult times.    Both the departing chairman and his successor are pragmatists, not theorists. Mr. Volcker talked monetarism to the benefit of Federal Reserve independence in policy making, but he practiced a largely judgmental approach. Mr. Greenspan will also make judgment calls, and what is upside down can be righted. But researchers have to keep trying to find indicators such as M1 and commodity prices that can serve to guide monetary policy. There is hidden danger in a purely judgmental approach: Succeed in it and you trigger media attention, even adulation.    In our media-dominated society, it is no wonder that Mr. Volcker has been virtually deified, and it is certainly to his credit that he usually kept his head when all about him were losing theirs -- sometimes over him. And I give credit where credit is due for his achievement in helping to eradicate inflation. But I do not credit all of the disinflation to the Fed.    There were factors outside monetary policy that contributed to bringing down inflation: Oil and other commodity prices fell; foreign competition in U.S. markets stepped up; and the strengthening dollar made foreign goods a bargain and vacations abroad inviting. Disinflation was aided by slow growth and no growth in our major markets overseas, particularly by the drying up of Latin American demand. The tax revolt and reductions in state and local governmental spending growth offset the largesse of our federal agencies and bureaus. To understand the lessons I will get to later, it first helps to retain some perspective about what one individual can and cannot do.    The board Mr. Volcker inherited from Arthur Burns was composed of former staff members from the Fed, from Congress and from the Council of Economic Advisers -- Washingtonians who saluted when Mr. Volcker ordered tighter money and higher interest rates. They knew the need and they needed his strength to get monetary policy tough.    Once the tight-money die had been cast, Mr. Volcker deserves a medal for persistence and resistance to the unprecedented pressures in 1980, '81 and '82 from small-business men, farmers, home builders and the host of other groups that screamed that they were being &quot;ruined&quot; by Fed policy. The word was conveyed directly by home builders in messages sent on two-by-fours piled high in the Fed anteroom. Pickets actually surrounded the Fed's building, a marble palace on Constitution Avenue. Farmers threatened to tie up Washington with a tractor blockade.    But while Mr. Volcker deserves high marks for his performance over a difficult eight-year period, it is imperative to learn from his record -- the high points, the middle ones, and even the few lows.    Mr. Volcker was the man for the season, the right man at the right time to contribute to disinflation, the optimum official to deal on an ad hoc basis with the Latin debt emergencies that started with Mexico on the Fourth of July in 1982. He was at his best when dealing with foreign central bankers to shore up or to bring down the international position of the dollar.    On the other side of the ledger, his view was flawed in 1984 and 1986 when the danger of recession loomed larger than the peril of reinflation. Though he could patch up the debt situation, he was less farsighted when it came to consideration of alternative, long-term approaches. He was never able to control his fear of deregulation of commercial banking when changed markets and international competition demanded deregulation as the key to survival.    As to monetary policy specifically, my eight or nine dissents from Mr. Volcker's policies were never based on conclusions that policy was implemented incorrectly or that judgment should not be used. My dissents were based on a difference as to objectives. Federal Reserve monetary policy cannot be based on a single indicator of the economy or prices, not even on the money supply.    That center-stage placement of the monetary aggregates was correct in 1979; it was not then possible for the world's largest central bank to continue to concentrate its efforts on stabilizing short-term interest rates when the money-supply spout was overflowing. The October 1979 &quot;Saturday Night Special&quot; -- the unprecedented news conference announcing that monetary targets had largely superseded interest-rate targets -- was right.    However, the March 1984 tightening of monetary policy based on Mr. Volcker's view that the economy was overheating was wrong. Mr. Volcker's opposition to the first in the series of discount-rate reductions in 1986 was wrong. Without that series of cuts we could have had a global recession, undermining the management of the mega-debt burdens in the U.S. and elsewhere. To his credit, Mr. Volcker subsequently reassumed the leadership in pushing for further discount-rate reductions here and abroad in 1986, after his defeat at the hands of the majority. But when I reflect overall on the Volcker regime, I see a critical period during which, yes, we turned the corner on inflation, but unfortunately remained too long and too deeply obsessed with whether and when it would return, missing opportunities to channel our energies toward growth at an earlier stage, in 1983 or 1984.    Now for the lessons. It's important to remember that some decisions are not made by the board itself, nor by the Federal Open Market Committee, but by the chairman, in between meetings. The April 1987 slight tightening in defense of the dollar is one example. Had this move come to a vote, it might well have been defeated by the board's Reagan appointees. My 49 months as vice chairman lead me to conclude that the complex responsibilities of the American central bank on monetary policy, safety and soundness issues, bank regulation, and other objectives are too complex to be the responsibilities of one man. That is lesson number one from the past eight years.    At the Securities and Exchange Commission, each commissioner is wont to (and permitted to) have his own staff independent of the general staff. The Fed could be strengthened by imitating this structure.    Lesson number two -- a more serious one -- regards the attitude of the Fed chairman toward the board of directors and the officers of the Federal Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve System was designed to elicit and solicit the views of those community leaders who serve as directors of the Fed Banks. In late 1985 and early 1986 we received as many as nine requests from the Fed Banks for discount-rate reductions, stemming from the real-world perception that economic growth was slowing unduly and that we were running the risk of a recession here and abroad. By February 1986, most of these requests had been batted down at board meetings.    The point is that policy is best served by strong board members who have the opportunity to receive information and analysis from independent staff and the chance to debate at length and without restraint on the direction of the economy and the Fed's moves to influence it. Policy debates at the Fed are too short and the staff information too one-sided. At Federal Open Market Committee meetings, Fed Bank presidents should be encouraged to present alternative economic scenarios prepared by their own staffs. Even the chairman and the board staff can project wrongly.    Unless you were there, an &quot;insider,&quot; you cannot comprehend the power at play in consensus building, the frustration at times in accepting those decisions for the sake of market stability, and the compelling case at other times for dissent and even for taking your vote public for reasons of conscience. Without strong players and better rules for the game, one man's single-mindedness, however well-motivated, can ossify the policy process. When that happens, the criteria brought to policy making, while outdated, remain immutable. Not even Paul Volcker is a man for all seasons.    However able a chairman is, one person's judgment is risky given today's global financial system, the colossal international flows of capital, the radically changed financial institutions around the globe, and a raft of new financial instruments that have changed the most basic financial relationships. Diversification in thought and counsel is as healthy as diversification in portfolios. Let us hope that the president selects strong individual board members, not all from Washington, and that policy information and policy development be shared with them so that, in truth, they can be full participants under the leadership of the chairman. One final thought -- being outvoted doesn't mean you resign. I should know.    The Fed's founding fathers had just that kind of structure in mind almost 75 years ago. The lines are blurring; the priorities changing. To everything there is a season. Let us return to the safer situation inherent in participative management of monetary policy, of bank regulation, of international financial issues, in this complex, ever-changing world.    ---   Mr. Martin, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, 1982-86, is chairman and chief executive of H.F. Holdings Inc. </TEXT></DOC>