<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871012-0125 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Scary Asbestos</HL><DD> 10/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Asbestos scares people.    The discovery of a white, powdery material left over from previous construction work prompted administrators of Apalachicola (Fla.) High School to postpone the start of classes this fall while they determined whether the material was asbestos. Similar concerns at Clara Barton High School in Brooklyn, N.Y., resulted in the school's being shut down for the fall term, and its students farmed out to other schools in its district. The fear that asbestos fibers may have been accidentally dislodged during a removal process this past summer threatened the opening of nine Cabell County, W. Va., schools.    That asbestos causes lung cancer has been known and widely publicized since 1939, when the surgeon general of the Navy described the health risks of excessive exposures to asbestos-containing materials in shipyards. But over this period, neither the government, politicians nor the media have made much effort to help the public understand when asbestos is dangerous and when it is not dangerous.    During the next year, the scare stories should proliferate. A new rule drafted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under orders from Congress, and taking effect Saturday, will require inspection of more than 100,000 school buildings throughout the country's 45,000 school systems for &quot;friable&quot; asbestos (dry, crumbling material that can become airborne). In cases where the substance is found, cleanup and maintenance plans will also be required.    This process might be manageable, except for the EPA's requirement (enforced with a $25,000-a-day fine for noncompliance) that the schools publicly announce the presence of asbestos-containing material whenever it's found. The problem with this requirement is that it often causes undue alarm among parents and school workers who've received no help from their government in putting asbestos in perspective. The EPA does not require removal if the asbestos does not pose a health threat, but the reasons for this alternative often get lost amid the emotionalism.    As the new rule takes effect, the EPA should be making its own highly public announcements to clear up misconceptions about the extent of the asbestos threat. The first thing it should do is disabuse the public of the notion that asbestos is unsafe at all levels of exposure. This fact gets lost in such EPA estimates as that roughly one-third of the nation's schools have asbestos problems. This amounts to a potential risk, the agency says, to 15 million children, and 1.3 million teachers, administrators and staff. Little wonder people get scared.    But the EPA itself acknowledges that the number of people among the 16 million it designates as &quot;at risk&quot; who will actually be exposed to dangerous friable asbestos is negligible. The preponderance of scientific knowledge on asbestos strongly argues that there is no evidence that low-level exposure to asbestos in such settings as schools causes either asbestosis or mesothelioma (which affects the lining of the lung and abdomen), the two cancers most often resulting from exposure. Indeed, almost all asbestos-related cancer deaths recorded to date have occurred among people who worked in industries with high levels of exposure to asbestos material -- such as shipyards and building construction -- levels not found in schools.    To put asbestos in perspective, we should consider how it rates among other risks of daily life. The risk of succumbing to lung cancer from smoking just one cigarette a day is estimated to be at least 1,000 times greater. And the risk of dying in an automobile accident is at least 10,000 times greater.    In fact, the greatest threat posed by asbestos in schools is its removal. Higher levels of asbestos are usually found in a building for up to five months after it has been removed than before. Many buildings mainly require competent maintenance or repair of asbestos material rather than complete, costly removal.    Congress and the EPA bear partial responsibility for instilling in the general public such overheated fears of asbestos. They have made &quot;environmental risk&quot; an issue that attracts great amounts of concerned publicity. But for all the time and money spent on these matters little progress has been made to help the public understand the complexities of making judgments about environmental risks -- or the relative absence of such risks. Instead, the EPA will do what federal regulatory agencies tend to do -- simply coerce a response from the country's independent local school districts. Perhaps someone ought to coerce the EPA to make a more forthright effort to tell the nation's parents what science knows about asbestos. </TEXT></DOC>