<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POINDEXTER IS EXPECTED to provide data on Reagan's Iran-Contra role.    The general counsel of the Tower Commission said the former national security adviser will present to the congressional panels &quot;new and different&quot; information on &quot;what the president knew and didn't know&quot; about the sale of arms to Iran and the private network of support for Nicaraguan rebels. Meanwhile, as the select committees prepared to open public hearings today, investigators still lack a full understanding of what became of the money involved in the affair, six months after the disclosure of the initiative.    Congressional investigators questioned former Maj. Gen. Secord in private about the affair. He is scheduled as the first witness at today's hearings.    ---   A Gary Hart campaign official said that the Miami Herald hadn't &quot;substantiated the charges&quot; that the Democratic presidential candidate spent much of last weekend with a woman other than his wife. The woman denied spending the night at Hart's house. Political experts believe the story endangers Hart's campaign.    ---   The Supreme Court upheld a decision by a California state court barring Rotary International from ousting a local chapter that decided to admit women. Separately, the court also ruled that an objective, national standard, rather than varied, local community values should be used as part of a legal test of obscenity.    ---   Reagan said the U.S. soon will present a draft treaty at the Geneva arms-control talks calling for a 50% reduction in long-range missiles. The president, in a statement noting a new round of arms negotiations, said a treaty limiting such weapons &quot;is within our grasp.&quot; Talks currently are being held on intermediate-range arms.    ---   A Conrail engineer was indicted on charges of manslaughter in connection with the Jan. 4 collision of three locomotives with an Amtrak passenger train in Maryland. Sixteen people were killed and about 175 injured in the crash. A grand jury found that the engineer had operated the locomotives in a &quot;grossly negligent manner.&quot;    ---   South African riot police fired tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse a campus protest in Johannesburg against tomorrow's all-white parliamentary elections. More than 130 people, including U.S. and British-based journalists, reportedly were detained. Police moved in just before black activist Winnie Mandela was to address the rally.    ---   Reagan has decided to form an advisory commission on the AIDS crisis. The president, however, stopped short of endorsing a proposed major education and public relations program to halt the spread of the disease.    ---   Philippine President Aquino accused the U.S. of failing to provide promised military aid, saying Manila's troops can't fight the country's communist insurgents with &quot;our teeth and our hands.&quot; In the central Philippines, the military reported that 16 soldiers were killed in an ambush by the rebels.    ---   The South Korean government warned opposition leaders at a special 10-day session of the National Assembly that it wouldn't retreat from its decision to suspend debate on constitutional changes and would crack down on any dissent. The warning came as about 2,000 people demanding such changes scuffled with police.    ---   Waldheim said he would take legal action over a Justice Department decision to bar him from entering the U.S. because of allegations that he participated in Nazi war crimes. The Austrian president also said he planned to appoint a commission of military historians to review his wartime past.    ---   Pope John Paul II concluded a five-day visit to West Germany with a call for religious freedom in the Soviet bloc and praise for those who opposed the &quot;mass hysteria&quot; of the Nazi era. The pope, who met with Chancellor Kohl, also appealed for a united Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals.    ---   A Tokyo government panel proposed spending more than $40 billion over the next 15 years to develop a space shuttle, a Japanese economic newspaper reported. The plan also includes development of a platform for satellite communications and deployment of weather observation gear.    ---   Radio Kabul reported that former Afghan leader Babrak Karmal is in the Soviet Union for medical treatment. Over the weekend, China's official Xinhua news agency reported that Karmal, who stepped down last year, had been arrested and jailed.    ---   Lebanese Premier Karami announced his resignation, citing his cabinet's failure to resolve an economic crisis generated by 12 years of civil war. There wasn't any immediate reaction from President Gemayel over the move by the nine-time prime minister.    ---   Nancy Reagan said she wouldn't offer any apologies for looking after the president's &quot;personal and political welfare,&quot; defending her involvement in White House affairs as a proper role for a spouse.    ---   U.S. defense officials said they were puzzled over Canada's intention to purchase nuclear-powered submarines for northern patrol duties. The officials said it appeared that Ottawa was more interested in asserting sovereignty claims to Arctic waters than in improving the West's military forces. </TEXT></DOC>