<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Should Give Peace Plan a Chance---By Lawrence A. Pezzullo</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   In bringing forth their peace agreement, the five Central American presidents have dramatically altered the political chemistry in the region and created a momentum that carries with it the real possibility of turning their countries toward peace and away from war. While the agreement may have imperfections, it deserves greater support than it is now getting from the U.S. American ambassadors in the region evidently now have been instructed to highlight its weaknesses. That is shortsighted.    The proposal initiated by House Speaker Jim Wright and agreed to by President Reagan unquestionably served as a catalyst for the agreement the Central American leaders signed a few days later in Guatemala. Costa Rican President Oscar Arias deserves praise for his determination and leadership in bringing his counterparts into a process that he had initiated earlier and that was served by contributions from the Contadora Group. Together, the Central American leaders are committed to gambling on peace and to taking control of their own destinies.    In a situation that called for deftness the Reagan administration has been ham-handed, grudging and unresponsive. One consequence has been the abrupt resignation of special envoy Philip Habib. Instead of demonstrating a willingness to participate and contribute, the White House has adopted the role of kibitzer.    By any reasonable account, the Central Americans have issued an opening for peaceful change. The incentive for the U.S. to get behind it and to avoid blowing the cold air of doubt from above ought to be obvious. With the Iran-Contra scandal still an open wound and his presidency in its twilight, President Reagan, who has little to show for all his investment in the region, may stand to gain the most. It may even be rationalized that his consuming support for the Nicaraguan Contras will have served to make the Sandinistas negotiate with a measure of good faith. He may, in fact, achieve a foreign-policy success that so far has been beyond his grasp.    His personal commitment is crucial if the plan is to be refined and carry any chance of success. Initially welcoming its announcement, the president has left the plan open to continued nitpicking by his vice president, secretary of defense and, most recently, by an assistant secretary of state. Mr. Reagan must take a stronger, more positive lead if the rest of the administration is to be motivated to work with, and not against, the plan. Tests of American resolve will come often and at many levels. As a mark of our earnestness in ensuring that the plan has every opportunity to succeed, Washington should inform Moscow that it supports the plan and would view Soviet cooperation as a positive sign.    Another figure central to the success of the peace plan is Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega. The Ortega I knew when he came to power and while I served as ambassador in Managua was inward-looking. I can only assume that he has learned that conflict with his neighbors is shortsighted and ultimately contrary to the long-term interests of Nicaragua. I failed to convince him of what he apparently appreciates now: that Nicaragua will be secure only in a peaceful Central American region.    President Ortega has taken the important first step of moving closer to his neighbors. They are naturally skeptical. He has to deliver at home to prove himself to his Central American peers and to observers abroad. The Sandinista military he commands must be substantially reduced in numbers and be rid of Cuban advisers. We don't know yet whether this was discussed when he visited Cuban President Fidel Castro in Havana last week. We do know that Mr. Castro said he endorsed the overall plan.    Mr. Ortega should act promptly by reopening the newspaper La Prensa, permitting Radio Catolica to resume broadcasting, turning off the government propaganda in the mass media, and lifting restrictions against the free operation of opposition political parties. He knows full well that world opinion will take note of such steps immediately.    Except for Costa Rica, which has no standing army, security forces in other countries will be skeptical, using arguments similar to those of the Sandinista forces against diminishing their strengths. It will not be at all easy to build the trust between governments and armed forces that will be required for any peace plan to have a chance. Mistrust is historic and strong. In the end, only the Central Americans themselves can alter the future.    Even though some Democrats see the Reagan-Wright initiative as a bait-and-switch and conservative Republicans denounce the Central American agreement for abandoning the Contras, the juxtaposition of events has raised a glimmer of hope about a return to some bipartisanship in American foreign policy. With very rare exceptions, we haven't seen much of that for a generation. Nor have we seen Latin leaders who are involved in war stake their futures on peace. The involved parties have yet to settle on the alignment that ensures the best chance for success. They need our assistance, not our resistance.    ---   Mr. Pezzullo, ambassador to Nicaragua from June 1979 to August 1981, is executive director of Catholic Relief Services. A related Americas column appears nearby (See: &quot;The Americas: Costa Ricans Don't Have High Hopes for Peace Plan&quot; -- WSJ August 21, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>