<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880614-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Court Says U.S. May Be Sued Over Vaccines --- Justices Rule That Agencies Are Subject to Claims That Allege Damages </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT ACY MNCF TAXES NVA DD MCA </CO><IN> PHA FIN BNK REL CON BON CHM </IN><G> SUP EXE JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled that the federal government may be sued for damages for negligence in approving vaccines for public use that are defective or unsafe.    In a 9-0 ruling, the justices dealt a major setback to the government, saying federal agencies aren't immune from lawsuits for damages alleging that approved vaccines caused the diseases they were designed to prevent.    In an opinion written by Justice Thurgood Marshall, the high court rejected a broad argument by the Reagan administration that the federal government can't be sued for alleged negligence in any safety-related regulatory program. &quot;We intend specifically to reject&quot; that argument, Justice Marshall wrote.    The ruling came in a lawsuit against the government by the parents of a nine-year-old Pennsylvania boy who allege that he was paralyzed by polio as a result of taking an oral polio vaccine dose. The parents allege that the government was negligent in approving the use of the Sabin oral vaccine in 1963 and that the specific lot of vaccine taken by the boy in 1979 was virulent.    The parents separately sued Lederle Laboratories, a unit of American Cyanamid Co., maker of the vaccine. That suit was settled privately, and details haven't been disclosed.    A federal district court refused to dismiss the suit against the government in 1986, but a federal appeals court in Philadelphia last year ruled that the suit was barred by federal government immunity to such claims.    The legal issue is the extent of an exception to a federal law that generally allows suits against the federal government for accidents caused by federal employees doing their jobs. The exception bars such suits when the government action is a matter of discretion for a federal agency, rather than a required step.    In the case of the polio vaccine, the high court said there was no discretion on the part of federal officials. The high court said there should be a trial to determine whether the claims of negligence by federal officials can be proved.    Sentencing Rules   The justices agreed to review the constitutionality of a new system of sentencing criminals in federal courts, an issue that has deeply divided federal judges. Since the new system took effect last Nov. 1, 103 federal judges have ruled on its validity, with 59 striking it down and 44 upholding it, according to Judy Clarke, director of the San Diego Federal Defenders program, which represents accused persons who don't have private lawyers.    The new system was drafted by the U.S. Sentencing Commission, which was created by Congress in 1984, and is composed of federal judges, private individuals and an executive branch official. The commission issued a set of rules that give judges a range of possible sentences for particular crimes, aimed at reducing disparities in sentencing for similar offenses and at increasing the likelihood of jail time for some white-collar criminals.    Those challenging the rules argue that the commission makeup violates the Constitution's separation of powers and that the Constitution doesn't permit Congress to delegate to a commission authority to decide criminal sentences.    The justices will review a test case involving charges of cocaine sales by a Kansas City man, who pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 18 months in prison and fined $1,050 for conspiracy to sell drugs.    Safety Standards   The justices ruled 7-2 that companies that try to influence the development of product safety standards by private industry groups aren't immune from antitrust suits by competitors. Such safety standards are commonly developed by private organizations in the construction industry and then are recommended to state and local governments to be included in building codes.    In 1961, the high court ruled that companies aren't liable for violating antitrust laws if they try to lobby government officials to take steps that are anticompetitive. Yesterday, in a decision written by Justice William Brennan, the high court declined to extend that immunity to petitioning private standard-setting organizations.    The case involved the National Electric Code, which sets standards for wiring, adopted by the National Fire Protection Association. TBG Inc., a conduit manufacturer, sued Atcor Inc.'s Allied Tube andamp; Conduit Corp. unit for trying to have the standards exclude TBG's conduits. A jury awarded TBG $3.8 million, which may be tripled under federal antitrust law. A federal judge threw out the award, but a federal appeals court in New York reinstated it in April 1987. Yesterday, the high court affirmed the award. Justices Byron White and Sandra O'Connor dissented.    Home Loan Bank Bonds   The justices refused to hear an appeal questioning whether states may require financial institutions to pay taxes on interest from Federal Home Loan Bank bonds. The court's action leaves intact a Maryland Court of Appeals decision upholding the state's corporate franchise tax. For financial institutions, the tax is 7% of net income, including interest on Federal Home Loan Bank bonds.    Maryland National Bank, a unit of MNC Financial Inc., included $2.8 million in Home Loan Bank bond interest in earnings for 1979 through 1982, raising its tax bill $197,310, and sued for a refund.    The Maryland Tax Court ruled in the bank's favor, saying that federal law bars states from taxing interest on Home Loan Bank bonds. But the Maryland Court of Appeals upheld the state's tax.    The Justice Department filed a friend-of-the-court brief saying federal law isn't clear but concluding that the Maryland tax is valid.    Other Cases   --The justices refused to hear an antitrust appeal by Alberta Gas Chemicals Ltd., a Canadian producer of methanol, alleging that its business was hurt by Du Pont Co.'s 1981 acquisition of Conoco Inc., which it claims violated federal antitrust laws. Alberta Gas is jointly owned by Allarco Developments Ltd. and Nova Corp. of Alberta. The lower federal courts dismissed the suit, which sought divestiture of Conoco and more than 250 million in Canadian dollars in damages.    --The justices refused to hear an antitrust appeal by actor Paul Newman and director George Roy Hill in a suit charging that MCA Inc. and its Universal City Studios Inc. unit conspired to fix the percentage of film revenue paid to artists. Lower federal courts dismissed the claims.    --The court let stand a December 1987 ruling that required the city of Yonkers, N.Y., to desegregate its school system and make subsidized housing available to low-income residents. </TEXT></DOC>