<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880505-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAELI FORCES BATTLED Moslem militiamen in southern Lebanon.    As part of its search for Palestinian guerrillas, the Israeli military shelled a Syrianheld town and battled pro-Iranian Hezbollah guerrillas deep in Lebanon. Israel reported that three Israeli soldiers and more than 40 Arabs had been killed in the fighting in the Bekaa Valley. The military then announced that Israel's two-day drive had ended and all participating forces had returned to their bases. Beirut condemned the incursion.    Two Arabs died in clashes with Israeli troops in the occupied territories as violence erupted in response to a PLO call for a &quot;day of confrontation.&quot;    ---   Warsaw accused strikers of terrorizing workers who tried to return to work. It threatened harsh action in response. As Solidarity-led strikes spread to a second Gdansk shipyard and a copper mine in western Poland, the country's Roman Catholic bishops sent a delegation to Krakow and Gdansk to mediate the labor turmoil.    ---   Reagan credited the Soviet Union with making progress on human rights and acknowledged that the U.S. has its own problems with homelessness, racial bias and unemployment. The president also conceded that there is little chance he and Gorbachev will sign a strategic arms pact at their summit in Moscow later this month.    ---   U.S. health officials unveiled an eight-page AIDS pamphlet that is to be mailed to all American households, the first-ever nationwide mailing about a public-health crisis. The booklet, mandated by Congress in December, explains in simple and direct language how the disease is transmitted.    ---   Meese is expected to be criticized in an independent counsel's report for failing to disqualify himself from criminal investigations involving his friend Robert Wallach, according to law enforcement officials familiar with the year-old inquiry. The report is scheduled for release around the end of the month.    ---   A series of explosions destroyed a space shuttle fuel plant in southern Nevada, killing one person and injuring more than 150 others. The blasts at the Pacific Engineering facility in the town of Henderson followed a fire caused by malfunctioning equipment.    ---   Three French hostages were freed by Shiite Moslem extremists in Beirut, the French Embassy in Lebanon announced. The men, held since 1985, left for Paris. The release, amid reports that France agreed to pay a ransom, came four days before the French presidential election.    ---   Angolan peace talks concluded in London, and delegates from South Africa, Angola, Cuba and the U.S. reported progress toward ending the 13-year-old war. Assistant Secretary of State Crocker, speaking at the close of two days of unprecedented talks, said differences between opposing sides in the conflict could be resolved.    ---   A U.S. appeals court extended the deadline for the government's illegal-alien amnesty program in New York state. The program was to expire yesterday. The move gives many aliens with U.S.-born children on welfare another two weeks to register. New York sought a 60-day extension.    ---   Chinese dissident Fang Lizhi urged less Communist Party control and rejected demands that he stick to science and refrain from social issues. The astrophysicist, speaking in Beijing, also stressed that economic development and political change go hand in hand.    ---   Norway launched a criminal investigation into the disappearance of 15 metric tons of heavy water, a close chemical relative of water that can be used to help produce nuclear weapons. Oslo said the inquiry will focus on a 1983 shipment of heavy water to a West German firm. The air-freight shipment never arrived.    ---   Nicaragua ordered a radio station closed for a day and temporarily barred two others from broadcasting news programs, accusing them of &quot;spreading false information&quot; about a workers' hunger strike. Police also thwarted an anti-government rally by rounding up about 25 opposition leaders.    ---   President Aquino barred Marcos from returning to the Philippines for the funeral of his mother, who died in Manila of pneumonia and diabetes. But the ousted leader, living in exile in Hawaii, vowed to &quot;exhaust all possibilities&quot; to re-enter the country.    ---   Jackson said he can still capture the Democratic presidential nomination despite losses to Dukakis in Tuesday's primaries in Ohio and Indiana. Jackson, who won the primary in the District of Columbia, also urged uncommitted party leaders to remain neutral until the July convention.    ---   &quot;Fat Tony&quot; Salerno was convicted of a racketeering conspiracy to rig bids in the construction industry. The federal court jury in New York, however, acquitted the member of the Mafia's ruling &quot;commission&quot; of tampering with Teamsters union national elections. Two co-defendants also were acquitted of the tampering charge.    ---   A federal judge in Boston declared a mistrial in the fraud and conspiracy trial of political extremist Lyndon LaRouche, six aides and five LaRouche organizations. The judge acted on complaints from five jurors about the length of the trial. </TEXT></DOC>