<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0019 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Investigators are questioning the accuracy of Attorney General Edwin Meese's testimony to Congress about the Iran-Contra affair, and are pursuing new allegations that Lt. Col. Oliver North destroyed sensitive files last November, law enforcement officials said.    Independent counsel Lawrence Walsh, according to these officials, is looking into both issues as part of his expanding inquiry into suspected attempts to cover up or misstate aspects of the scandal.    Mr. Walsh and his team of attorneys want to determine whether Mr. Meese provided incorrect or misleading information to the Senate Intelligence Committee last December, when the attorney general testified under oath that President Reagan didn't give prior approval to initial Israeli arms sales to Iran, law enforcement and administration officials said.    The independent counsel also is delving into whether Mr. Meese approved or helped draft a chronology of the secret arms sales that lawmakers and Federal Bureau of Investigation agents now consider misleading and faulty, officials familiar with the probe said.    Meanwhile, officials confirmed a story that appeared in yesterday's Washington Post. The Post reported that Col. North's former secretary has told Mr. Walsh's investigators that she helped destroy various documents pulled from the colonel's files the evening before officials for the administration's probe began combing through White House files dealing with the secret arms sales.    In exchange for her testimony, the secretary, Fawn Hall, is slated to formally receive immunity from prosecution after the necessary papers are filed with the court, law enforcement officials said. The filing is expected shortly, they said.    According to law enforcement officials familiar with her statements, the secretary recounted how she and Col. North destroyed a stack of printouts of computer memos and internal White House messages found in the colonel's office or pulled from his safe during the evening of Nov. 21, a few days before he was fired from his National Security Council post.    Plato Cacheris, the secretary's attorney, said last night that his client received a letter from Mr. Walsh granting her immunity. &quot;The next step probably is an appearance before a grand jury,&quot; Mr. Cacheris said.    It isn't clear what information was destroyed, or how much of the material has been recovered by investigators from a back-up system that stored certain computer messages and information in the White House for limited periods of time. A law enforcement official said the amount of material involved &quot;appears to be rather extensive.&quot; Other officials said that the FBI and congressional investigators are looking at other resources in an effort to determine what happened, and whether the action amounted to obstruction of justice.    Mr. Walsh and Justice Department officials declined to comment on the matter, while Col. North and his attorney have declined all comment on the investigation.    The Los Angeles Times last year reported that some of Col. North's files were destroyed in late November while Mr. Meese was in the midst of his internal review of the Iran-Contra affair. But in the past, Justice Department officials and FBI Director William Webster indicated that any destruction, if it occurred, appeared to be part of routine NSC procedures to purge offices of copies of certain classified documents.    Yesterday, however, senior law enforcement and administration officials disclosed that the FBI and Mr. Walsh believe that the alleged destruction before the internal probe began wasn't routine and involved some documents that could have shed light on the role of Col. North and his superiors in the Iran-Contra affair.    Officials said the latest disclosures prompted investigators to examine the role of former National Security Adviser John Poindexter, who was Col. North's boss at the NSC. Vice Adm. Poindexter approved in advance Justice Department plans to start reviewing NSC files on Nov. 22. By then, he was aware that other administration officials disputed his and Col. North's recollections of how the secret sales developed, investigators said.    Other questions about what Attorney General Meese told the committee pertain to a fundamental, public dispute at the highest levels of the administration about President Reagan's involvement in the early phase of the secret shipments to Iran.    In his testimony to the intelligence panel, Mr. Meese supported White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan's assertions that the president didn't authorize in advance any Israeli weapons shipments to Iran in 1985, investigators said.    Publicly, Mr. Meese has maintained that the president didn't find out about the Israeli actions until early 1986. But preliminary versions of the administration's own chronology of the affair contradict Messrs. Meese and Regan on that point.    Moreover, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane has asserted in public and told investigators in closed-door testimony that Mr. Reagan gave the green light to the Israeli arms sales in the summer of 1985, before the plan got off the ground. Administration officials have said that Mr. Reagan initially told a presidential commission that he gave general approval to the Israelis in advance, but he later changed his testimony and supported the recollections of Mr. Regan. </TEXT></DOC>