<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880823-0017 </DOCNO><HL> Trial of ZZZZ Best's Founder Will Offer Inside Look at Workings of a Bold Scam </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Akst (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BCY </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Depending on whom you believe, Barry J. Minkow is either a ruthless, precocious criminal genius, or a puppet used by mobsters to bilk the public.    Those conflicting images will be presented to jurors in U.S. District Court here this week as Mr. Minkow and another defendant go on trial on fraud and conspiracy charges in connection with the spectacular collapse of ZZZZ Best Co., the carpet-cleaning business that the 22-year-old Mr. Minkow founded as a teen-ager.    Whatever the outcome, the trial will yield a peek inside a scam so brazen and bizarre that it fooled novices and sophisticates alike, costing them more than $70 million, prosecutors say.    Few cases can muster a stranger cast of characters, from a white separatist who supposedly kept a picture of Hitler on his office wall to a nearly blind, 265-pound albino cocaine dealer known as &quot;The Ultimate White Man.&quot; Gangsters, call girls, death threats, gambling sprees and drugs also played a part, investigators say. The trial, says one, &quot;is going to be a circus.&quot;    The principal lawyers for the two sides contrast almost as much as the images they will present of Mr. Minkow. Assistant U.S. Attorney James Asperger, 35, is easygoing, scholarly, and possessed of glittering credentials, including clerkships with conservative Supreme Court Justice William Rehnquist (now chief justice) and liberal California Supreme Court Justice Stanley Mosk. His colleague, 34-year-old Gordon Greenberg, is a veteran prosecutor of money-laundering cases.    Their main adversary, 46-year-old David Kenner, is one of the best-known criminal lawyers in Los Angeles. Quick-witted, combative and flamboyant, Mr. Kenner has defended many narcotics and white-collar suspects.    During the trial, witnesses will describe taking tours of huge refurbishing jobs that didn't exist. Bankers will describe buying nonexistent equipment for lease-back to ZZZZ Best. And investors will recount how they gladly handed over their life savings.    Mr. Minkow started the carpet-cleaning business in his parents' Reseda, Calif., garage six or seven years ago -- the date is in dispute -- when he was 15 or 16.    By last summer, ZZZZ Best was a public company with a market capitalization of more than $210 million. It grew ostensibly by getting into the fire- and water-damage restoration business, and claimed that insurance contracts for such work accounted for about 90% of revenue.    But the refurbishing business didn't exist. ZZZZ Best turned out to be a giant Ponzi scheme, moving money in frantic circles while plotting the acquisition -- financed by junk bonds -- of a big legitimate business, Flagship Cleaning Services Inc., a unit of Northern Foods PLC in London.    ZZZZ Best filed for bankruptcy last year as the fraud unraveled. Investigators sifting the wreckage have been astounded by the scope and daring of the scheme.    While the company was alive, for example, ZZZZ Best executives had promised to show outsiders that they were refurbishing an eight-story building in Arroyo Grande, Calif. But they were horrified to learn that the tallest building in town was just three stories. So one of Mr. Minkow's lieutenants photographed a small building while lying on his back on the sidewalk, according to one defendant who has already pleaded guilty. The angle made the structure look huge, and the ploy worked.    Another time, when an Ernst andamp; Whinney auditor demanded to see a ZZZZ Best job site, the schemers showed him through an unfinished San Diego office building on a weekend, according to witnesses and a Los Angeles Police Department report filed with Congress. They got the keys from the leasing agent by claiming to be prospective tenants with out-of-town executives coming to visit. Then they put up phony signs, and the auditor was fooled.    The auditor later demanded to see the finished job. Mr. Minkow's lieutenants were at first unable to rent the building. Near despair -- one says he considered blowing up the place -- they finally got it by agreeing to a seven-year lease with a $500,000 security deposit. Then they spent $1 million in seven days, and got the job done with less than 24 hours to spare. The accountant visited and was fooled again.    Two of Mr. Minkow's chief lieutenants say in interviews they were continually amazed they could pull off such ploys, and they veered between terror and hilarity as they moved from crisis to crisis.    Mr. Minkow, meanwhile, allegedly made weekly payments to the Jewish Defense League, which had learned that he had ties to Thomas G. Padgett, a man the league claimed was a Nazi. The JDL denies it shook down Mr. Minkow, and Mr. Padgett denies being a Nazi, insisting that what appears to be a swastika on his ring is a Nordic folk symbol.    At the end, prosecutors allege, Mr. Minkow looted the company with the assistance of aides such as Jack N. Polevoi, a former neighbor who pleaded guilty to conspiring to launder $712,000 in ZZZZ Best funds in Las Vegas last summer. Mr. Polevoi, who admitted losing $42,000 of the money in a four-day gambling binge there, also pleaded guilty to tax fraud and conspiring to trade on inside information.    No one disputes that a gigantic fraud occurred -- 10 of the 12 original defendants have pleaded guilty -- but Mr. Minkow has decided to stand trial. The risks appear high. The only defendant sentenced so far is Mr. Padgett, who headed a dummy company that funneled the bogus insurance jobs to ZZZZ Best. He got eight years, despite cooperating with authorities. A federal grand jury has heaped so many charges on Mr. Minkow that he faces up to 403 years if convicted of them all.    And the prosecution will seek to pin the blame squarely on Mr. Minkow, whom it will portray as charismatic, calculating, and amoral. In an evidentiary motion, prosecutors cite the case of one person who said that when he served Mr. Minkow with papers in a small-claims suit brought by his wife, the young executive's associates beat him up. And when the man tried to retrieve his fallen eyeglasses, he says, Mr. Minkow stomped on them and laughed.    The prosecution also has videotapes of Mr. Minkow presiding, relaxed and confident, at elaborate ceremonies honoring his crooked associates and such outsiders as auditors from Ernst andamp; Whinney, lawyers from Hughes Hubbard andamp; Reed, and loan officers from Union Bank in Los Angeles (which a Bank of Tokyo Ltd. unit has agreed to acquire from Britain's Standard Chartered PLC).    In contrast, Mr. Kenner, the defense attorney, says he'll claim duress. He will cast Mr. Minkow as an immature and unwilling pawn terrorized by mobsters into participating in the fraud. After all, Mr. Minkow and his company were involved with several reputed gangsters, including the late Jack Catain, a convicted counterfeiter and suspected loan shark who was Mr. Minkow's partner for a while and even had offices in the same building.    If Mr. Minkow was a slave to mobsters, he suffered in a gilded cage. While chairman of ZZZZ Best, he lived in a home that recently sold for almost $1 million, drove a BMW and a Ferrari, and at his peak was worth over $100 million on paper.    Painting him as hapless and helpless won't be easy. For instance, authorities say that as ZZZZ Best was collapsing, Mr. Minkow wooed a young woman executive at a unit of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York, even flying her to Los Angeles for dates. She in turn allowed him to borrow $2 million against restricted ZZZZ Best stock, according to the Los Angeles Police report to Congress; the stock proved worthless as collateral when Mr. Minkow failed to repay the loan.    There was a final indignity. A check from Mr. Minkow reimbursing her for travel expenses bounced. </TEXT></DOC>