<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861229-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/29/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   PEKING OFFICIALS OUTLINED changes in China's election rules.    In an apparent attempt to satisfy a major demand of student protesters, the official People's Daily reported that more than one candidate would be allowed to run for seats in local people's congresses. The candidates apparently could include members of non-Communist parties or groups. The changes, effective next year, also include reducing the number of deputies in the national parliament to 3,000 from 3,500. The moves followed several weeks of pro-democracy student demonstrations in nearly a dozen Chinese cities.    China's national radio reported the arrests of three workers who took part in rallies in Nanjing, where students gathered for a fifth day of protests.    ---   REAGAN BEGAN a vacation as a post was formed to deal with the Iran scandal.    The president left Saturday for a six-day stay in California after appointing departing NATO envoy David Abshire as a new cabinet-level counselor. Abshire, named Friday, is to coordinate the White House's detailed response to the various investigations of the arms sales to Iran and diversion of funds to Nicaragua rebels. The move reflects Reagan's hope to gain some control over the controversy. Abshire won't be conducting his own inquiry.    U.S. and Iranian officials are to meet today in The Hague to discuss the return to Tehran of more than $500 million in assets frozen after the shah's ouster.    ---   Israeli Premier Shamir was cleared of allegations that he ordered the killing of two Arab bus hijackers in 1984 and that he knew of a cover-up, Israel Television said. The former head of Israel's security service had implicated Shamir, but a Justice Ministry inquiry found the evidence unreliable.    A former Israeli nuclear worker pleaded innocent to charges of treason and espionage. Mordechai Vanunu, who indicated that he was abducted from Rome and brought back to Israel to stand trial, is accused of leaking Israel's atomic secrets.    ---   Marcos loyalists staged a motorcade through Manila to urge rejection of the Aquino administration's proposed national constitution. A plebiscite is scheduled for Feb. 2. Supporters of the exiled Philippine leader also burned back issues of Time magazine after the news weekly announced that Aquino would be &quot;Woman of the Year.&quot;    ---   Striking French train engineers called for demonstrations in Paris and other cities this week as part of a dispute that has disrupted rail transport throughout France for nearly two weeks. Prime Minister Chirac scrapped vacation plans after unions rejected an offer by the state-owned railway to resume wage talks following a return to work.    ---   Islamic Jihad denied a claim of responsibility made in its name for the attempted hijacking last week of an Iraqi jet that crashed in Saudi Arabia, killing at least 62 people. The pro-Iranian terrorist group also released in Beirut a photograph of American hostage Terry Anderson, one of five captives it claims to hold in Lebanon.    ---   NASA plans to include an escape system to pull astronauts from a crippled spacecraft as part of the agency's revamped design for the space shuttle, the New York Times reported. NASA officials admitted that the $50 million system is useless in the first two minutes of powered flight.    ---   Dissident Andrei Sakharov thanked the Kremlin for his release last week from internal exile, but said improvement in Moscow's human-rights record &quot;lies ahead.&quot; In an ABC-TV interview, Sakharov also said Reagan's space-based antimissile system was a &quot;technical possibility,&quot; but that it could be overcome by &quot;a strong opponent.&quot;    ---   Pravda urged unity among the Soviet Union's 15 republics in an apparent attempt to discourage riots such as the one in Kazakhstan Dec. 17-18. The Communist Party newspaper didn't refer to the rioting, prompted by the ouster of the republic's leader, but called for rejection of attempts &quot;to put local interests ahead of those of the nation.&quot;    ---   South Africa may be planning to build an airstrip on an island off Antarctica that could be used for testing nuclear missiles, London's Observer newspaper reported. It said Israel may help construct the $5.8 million runway. In Johannesburg, security forces sought a black nationalist guerrilla who killed two white police officers.    ---   Jordan's King Hussein met in Amman with Egyptian President Mubarak in what diplomats said was an attempt to form a common stand for next month's Islamic conference in Kuwait. Details weren't disclosed. The Iran-Iraq war, fighting in Lebanon and Mideast peace efforts are expected to be discussed at the Jan. 26 parley.    ---   Died: John D. MacDonald, 70, mystery writer, in Milwaukee, of complications following heart surgery. . . . Elsa Lanchester, 84, character actress, Friday, in Los Angeles, of bronchopneumonia. </TEXT></DOC>