<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Ascending Star:Sen. Nunn of GeorgiaRises Through RanksInto Presidential Scene---Democratic Defense ExpertGains Status in the CapitalBut May Trouble Liberals---A Barry Goldwater Approval---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   So far this week, Georgia Sen. Sam Nunn has questioned the secretary of state on national security strategy, quizzed Pentagon officials about defense spending and lunched with the Reagan administration's top budget official. U.S., British, Japanese and Australian news organizations are all pressing the senator for interviews.    Suddenly, the spotlight is on a cerebral Democratic senator who isn't particularly telegenic, doesn't generate a lot of passion and likes to talk about NATO infrastructure funding, counter-mine capability and the Navy's JVX tilt-rotor aircraft.    In the past two months, Mr. Nunn -- who has been almost a cult figure on Capitol Hill and in defense circles -- has gone public. The new chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, he is emerging as perhaps the most influential lawmaker in Congress, with a chance of affecting the outcome of debates on three of the most contentious issues of the pre-election year: aid to the Nicaraguan Contras, the Strategic Defense Initiative and the defense budget.    Mr. Nunn, who has no experience in national political campaigns and hasn't yet demonstrated any broad political vision, has nonetheless been cast as a potential presidential contender capable of capturing the South and ending the public perception that his party is weak on defense.    Former Democratic Gov. Charles Robb of Virginia, who is urging him to run for president, believes that Mr. Nunn is &quot;right at the head of the Democratic class.&quot; Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey, a former basketball star, likens Sen. Nunn's senatorial talents to the athletic talents of Chet Walker, a Philadelphia 76er he regarded as &quot;pound for pound and inch for inch the perfect professional basketball player.&quot; And former Sen. Barry Goldwater of Arizona, the conservative Republican who worked with him on a landmark defense reorganization effort, says he could support Mr. Nunn for president.    Mr. Nunn, born 48 years ago amid the dogwoods and azaleas in Perry, Ga., named for Commodore Perry, has an unconventional political profile -- one that might be troubling for many of the Democrats' core constituencies.    The Democrats' newest prospect for recapturing the White House is, like their last president, a farmer from Georgia. He is a defense expert whose only military experience is in the Coast Guard, where he taught swimming and played on the golf team. He is a former Chamber of Commerce president who was &quot;not in the least bit sympathetic&quot; to the Vietnam War protests and sided with President Reagan more than half the time in important Senate votes.    &quot;He can dominate national security policy for the next two years,&quot; says Ann Lewis, the national director of the liberal Americans for Democratic Action. &quot;Or he can spend that time on the road talking to small groups of Democrats trying to explain to them why he voted against the Equal Rights Amendment twice, voted against Democratic budget alternatives and efforts to protect Medicare recipients.&quot;    Former Defense Secretary James Schlesinger says Sen. Nunn already &quot;carries great weight&quot; in the legislative arena. A Democrat with a rare following among Republican colleagues, Mr. Nunn expects to use his new position as a pulpit for his gospel of preparedness and prudence.    But Mr. Nunn has an unusual catechism: He argues that the Reagan administration has mismanaged its defense buildup. He contends that the Pentagon hasn't tailored its basic military strategy to current geopolitical realities. He maintains that Congress misunderstands its role in defense policy. He worries that President Reagan almost jeopardized American security in his meeting with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev at Reykjavik.    &quot;It is a dangerous world with a lot of people out there who don't have our values or our economic or political philosophies,&quot; he says. &quot;We like to take care of our own business, but we don't have the luxury of taking a position that is essentially isolationist. If we do that, the world will be a much more dangerous place.&quot;    Mr. Nunn's position on the commanding heights of the military-political establishment on Capitol Hill is part of a Georgia political tradition. Both Sen. Richard Russell and Rep. Carl Vinson, Mr. Nunn's great uncle, were chairmen of the Armed Services committee, and Mr. Nunn traces his interest in the topic to long family dinner discussions with Mr. Vinson. But that tradition may become a disadvantage as Mr. Nunn becomes a national figure; some defense experts like Larry Smith of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government believe that Mr. Nunn's views are too parochial, limiting his ability to forge a national consensus on defense issues.    Since winning his Senate seat in 1972, Mr. Nunn has labored quietly, mastering the details of military policy, asking questions even when the television cameras aren't present, reading the documents and reports that many other lawmakers consigned to their aides or to the trash bin. &quot;The key to him,&quot; says Republican Sen. William Cohen of Maine, &quot;is that he's always well prepared.&quot;    So when a vacuum appeared in the Democratic Party, Mr. Nunn was there, ready to fill it. He became the party's answer to critics who wondered whether the Democrats weren't turning soft in the years after Vietnam. Dozens of Democratic candidates, worried that their dovish voting records or their opposition to aid to the Nicaraguan Contras might defeat them, turned to Mr. Nunn for cover.    &quot;Having him appear for me demonstrated that I wasn't a soft-on-defense liberal Democrat,&quot; says Rep. Buddy MacKay of Florida, whose opponents stressed his opposition to Contra aid. &quot;That visit did more good for me than almost anything I did in the election season.&quot; But Mr. Nunn, once regarded as cautious to a fault, also campaigned for liberal Democrats, including Sen. Tim Wirth of Colorado and Sen. Alan Cranston of California.    When Mr. Nunn is faulted on defense matters, it is by conservatives complaining that he has too much influence with a Republican administration. &quot;The administration, instead of fighting strongly for its programs, has tried to figure out what Nunn will accept,&quot; complains Henry Walther, the executive director of the U.S. Defense Committee, a pro-defense lobby in Washington. &quot;As a result, the administration is always caving in to his demands.&quot;    The Georgian, whose powers are such that he persuaded liberals Frank Church and Hubert Humphrey to switch positions and support the neutron bomb, isn't much of a revolutionary. &quot;I don't think he breaks with conventional thinking, but I think he tries to mold it in more imaginative directions,&quot; says Jeffrey Record, a former Nunn defense aide who is now a senior fellow at the Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis.    At the heart of the Nunn view of foreign and military affairs is the importance he places on U.S. conventional-warfare capability. He believes that substantial steps must be taken to improve allied non-nuclear forces in Europe and that an agreement reducing the number and capabilities of Soviet tank armies in Europe should precede any nuclear-arms agreement between the two superpowers.    &quot;Reykjavik has made me realize how narrow our view in this administration has become and how little consideration is being given to overall defense,&quot; Mr. Nunn says. &quot;We rely too heavily -- far too heavily -- on nuclear weapons, but the solution isn't sweeping nuclear arms-control proposals. Just because we take away the nukes doesn't mean we'll have a conventional balance. We can't afford to end up with a supply-side arms-control policy the way we took away taxes and then thought we'd get rid of the budget deficit.&quot;    Removing this emphasis on nuclear weapons, Mr. Nunn acknowledges, might require the U.S. to reinstitute a military draft. It would also force the allies to rethink how they deploy their European forces. He wonders why the U.S. should be committed to reinforcing Europe with tanks when the Europeans, particularly the Germans, could do it more efficiently themselves. He worries that the U.S. military hasn't developed enough flexibility.    &quot;If we were to get in a war in Europe and the Persian Gulf, the Pentagon computers would explode,&quot; the senator says. &quot;They'd find the same forces had to be in both places at the same time.&quot;    Sen. Nunn is well known in European capitals for his efforts to persuade U.S. allies to make more substantial contributions to Western defense. &quot;If we do not have allies that are going to do their part, there is no need for the American taxpayer to spend billions and billions of dollars,&quot; he said during the 1984 debate on his amendment that could have removed as many as 90,000 of the 326,000 U.S. troops in Europe. The amendment failed, but he won the concessions he was seeking from the allies.    Sen. Nunn also has been developing some broad thoughts about U.S. military strategy based on the notion of what he calls &quot;a much broader firebreak between conventional and nuclear war.&quot; He believes American military strategy ought to focus on Soviet weaknesses -- bad lines of supply and communications, unreliable allies, lack of access to the sea -- and concentrate on the West's strengths of ocean access, tactical airpower, anti-submarine warfare capabilities and advanced technological weapons.    At the same time, he believes that if the Soviets invade Western Europe, the allies should reply with deep aerial strikes and commando and partisan raids into Eastern Europe. He believes a principal allied goal should be to deny the Soviets access to the sea, targeting the Soviet merchant marine and fishing fleets as well as its navy.    The senator has supported increases in spending for the Strategic Defense Initiative, but not as much as President Reagan requested. He was the author of report language on a defense authorization bill last July that SDI threatens to &quot;absorb an inordinate proportion&quot; of defense research and development money.    Although &quot;we have to move forward to exploit the U.S. technological advantage,&quot; he said at a press conference late last year, it is just as important to develop technology to destroy tanks without endangering U.S. infantrymen engaged in conventional conflicts.    He sees the East-West struggle as the dominating conflict in the world, but he faults the administration for trying to force all foreign-policy problems into that mold. &quot;I don't think the Soviets are smart enough or diligent enough to cause trouble everywhere in the world,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't give them that much credit.&quot;    The Nicaraguan Contra issue provides a glimpse of Mr. Nunn's world view. He believes Nicaragua is &quot;ruled by Marxist-Leninists, homegrown but foreign-sponsored.&quot; He favors military aid to the rebels and in a Senate colloquy last March said the U.S. ought to be &quot;firmly committed to the cause of democracy in the Americas.&quot; Increasingly, though, he has come to believe that the administration sees Contra aid as an end in itself and that it hasn't fashioned achievable long-term goals in the region that would sustain public support for the assistance. And he believes the U.S. isn't focusing on the most important problem in Central America, the economic future of the region.    At the same time, Mr. Nunn deplores the development of a Vietnam Syndrome in which, as he puts it, &quot;America is reluctant to take steps in behalf of important countries because {we think} we're incapable of not plunging head over heels into war.&quot; He says he had doubts about the war himself, but they sprang from his frustration that the U.S. did not do enough to win the war. Today, he wonders how Vietnam could have been considered a vital American interest.    In his new role as Armed Services chairman, the master of detail is likely to urge Congress to redefine its role in defense matters and to concentrate on broad principles. He worries that Congress is more willing to change the number of muzzle bore sights the Army orders and to pare the Navy's request for parachute flares than to engage in debates on fundamental policy.    &quot;Our preoccupation with trivia,&quot; he said in a floor speech last year, &quot;is preventing us from carrying out our basic responsibilities for broad oversight.&quot;    But Mr. Nunn also must decide, perhaps as early as the next month or so, whether he will heed the siren calls to run for president. &quot;This decision is a peculiarly personal one,&quot; says Gordon Giffin, an Atlanta attorney and a close Nunn adviser. &quot;He won't seek a lot of advice.&quot;    The senator hears men like Mr. Robb telling him that he could sweep the South and adding that the Iran arms affair has shown that, as the former Virginia governor puts it, &quot;on-the-job training in foreign affairs is not as good as hard experience.&quot; He hears Maynard Jackson, former mayor of Atlanta, saying that he has &quot;the balanced approach and the fiscal conservatism the party needs to win in 1988.&quot;    But he says the &quot;odds are against&quot; a campaign, largely because such an effort could throw away all the influence he has built on Capitol Hill. For that reason, the vice presidency seems even less attractive. &quot;Even under the most favorable circumstances,&quot; he says, &quot;being in the Senate is more appealing to me.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>