<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880420-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Oil Change: OPEC Nations Move To Market Gasoline Directly to Consumers --- They Want to Extend Role Beyond Producing Fields; Refiners Welcome Step --- Retail Prices May Stabilize </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST LATAM AFRIC </CO><IN> PET MON TNM </IN><TEXT>   Chances are good that the gasoline you pump into your car is made from OPEC oil. Before long, an OPEC nation may own the filling station, too.    Venezuela already owns half a refinery in Lake Charles, La., that supplies 7-Eleven stores with gasoline, half of another refinery in Corpus Christi, Texas -- and wants to buy more. Kuwait has built up a service-station network in Europe under the aptly named Q8 brand and is setting its sights on Asia -- and the U.S.    In fact, most of the 13 nations in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries are quietly working to extend their reach from their oil fields to gas pumps in the U.S. and elsewhere. Saudi Arabia is negotiating with Chevron, Exxon, Mobil and Texaco to buy a piece of their refining assets, industry sources say. Abu Dhabi, Ecuador, Libya and the warring nations of Iraq and Iran are on the prowl for refinery stakes in oil-consuming nations. Even cash-strapped Nigeria is close to linking up with one or more U.S. refiners.    OPEC's reach toward rank-and-file consumers -- through the &quot;downstream,&quot; or the refining and marketing, segment of the business -- holds the broadest implications for global oil markets since the Arab oil embargo 15 years ago. If the pace picks up as quickly as expected, it could raise new political issues in the U.S. and other nations dependent on oil imports. However, consumers will probably benefit as the oil exporters expand their war for global market share to the street corner.    The exporters' strategy would resurrect the oil industry of the 1960s -- but this time with OPEC, rather than the Seven Sisters, in control. When the seven giant multinationals controlled most of the world's petroleum from wellhead to gasoline pump, the &quot;upstream&quot; segment, the production of crude oil, was integrated with the downstream sector. But as OPEC members nationalized the oil giants' crude reserves in the 1970s, this vast, integrated industry controlled by a handful of companies became a thing of the past.    But not forever. In the parlance of oil economists, the OPEC nations are seeking to &quot;reintegrate&quot; the industry -- this time by linking their oil production operations to the refineries and marketing outlets, which the companies still dominate.    The pumping of gasoline, home heating oil and other petroleum products by OPEC members has hardly reached groundswell proportions yet. But some experts predict that this year alone, OPEC members will double their sales of refined products to 27% of all the oil they export.    The degree of their success may determine the future of thousands of traders and speculators. The volatility of oil prices caused by the breakup of the old system gave birth to the New York Mercantile Exchange and an entire industry of spot-market and futures trading. But in the future, OPEC control of both crude-oil and refined-product prices could eventually create a relatively stable price environment, some observers suggest. &quot;If you liked the oil business of the 1960s, you'll love the 1990s,&quot; says Antonio M. Szabo, the manager of petroleum planning for Bonner andamp; Moore Marketing Consultants.    Although no one predicts a return to the dirt-cheap fuel prices of 20 years ago, the change &quot;cannot be negative for consumers -- only positive or neutral,&quot; says John H. Lichtblau, the president of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation. He and others suggest that fuel prices should be held down because the OPEC nations will bring new competition to the downstream markets and also will run as much crude as possible through any refineries they purchase.    That's if another politically inspired oil crisis doesn't erupt. But Franco Reviglio, the chairman of Ente Nazionale Idrocarburi, sees a possible strategic threat from OPEC's rising clout. Even though the Italian energy company itself is among the refiners discussing joint ventures with &quot;reliable&quot; producing countries, he warns: &quot;The producers already control the upstream. If they control the downstream, too, the next oil shock will be a horrible one.&quot;    So far, neither Kuwait nor Venezuela, the pacesetters of the movement, has resorted to gasoline-price wars or other forms of deep discounting. But some refiners nevertheless worry that crude-oil exporters could begin subsidizing their fuel outlets. The front line of any future OPEC battles for market share, such as the price war that triggered the 1986 oil crash, &quot;would be product prices rather than crude prices,&quot; predicts the London brokerage firm of Phillips andamp; Drew.    Although OPEC's moves could hurt oil companies and even OPEC itself, the incentives for both sides to link up may be overpowering. Oil is afflicted with a double glut: OPEC has surplus crude production, and refiners have excess capacity. &quot;There's a lot of interest from both sides,&quot; says Duke R. Ligon, who helped establish Venezuela's two joint ventures in the U.S. as the head of energy mergers and acquisitions at Bankers Trust.    In a world awash with oil, prices of OPEC crude oils have eroded from $40 a barrel in 1981 to the current $14 to $18 range. More important, OPEC's oil output has fallen from 30 million barrels a day in 1979 to fewer than 18 million barrels a day. By grabbing captive outlets in consuming countries, OPEC members win guaranteed customers. And OPEC enjoys a buyers' market for refineries, which are selling at less than replacement value.    &quot;Direct market access has become an overriding necessity for the producers,&quot; says Juan Chacin, the president of Petroleos de Venezuela.    On the other side of these transactions, many refiners welcome OPEC partners. Establishing such a partnership is a way to ensure crude supplies at the best possible price. And by selling an interest in excess refining capacity, companies can put assets to fuller use and raise cash as well.    Scores of oil companies in Europe and in the U.S. are proposing to sell equity positions in their refineries, some valued at more than $1 billion, to OPEC countries. Many companies, such as Houston-based Coastal Corp., are negotiating with the national oil companies of OPEC countries. Sun and Crown Central Petroleum confirm holding talks with Nigerian National Petroleum Corp., and industry sources say Arco's Lyondell unit is discussing selling an interest in a Houston refinery.    One U.S. oil company is proposing to buy another refinery to add to its refining facilities and then spin them off to a new unit. The new company, in turn, would be jointly owned with Nigeria, which would swap crude rather than pay cash for its equity share. John P. Venners, a Washington-based negotiator of OPEC oil-supply contracts for U.S. petroleum refiners, is taking a similar approach -- as a personal investor. He has established a new company, Prime Oil, to purchase refineries and is seeking a co-owner among the crude producers of Africa and South America.    Some crude-oil exporters have long harbored ambitions in refining and marketing. In 1972, Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, then the Saudi oil minister, proposed that the kingdom become a &quot;partner&quot; with the U.S. by supplying it with crude and investing in its refineries and service stations. In the 1970s, before the fall of the shah of Iran, National Iranian Oil Co. negotiated to acquire 50% of certain refining and marketing properties of Ashland Oil, but the transaction wasn't completed.    When crude-oil prices were escalating, OPEC had little incentive to move downstream. But now, with both oil prices and OPEC's crude output at low levels, the exporters see a chance to expand markets for their petroleum by going downstream. OPEC's initial inroads into refining have come only in the past five years -- largely because of the Venezuelan and Kuwaiti efforts. Their strategies differ. Venezuela wants 50-50 joint ventures; Kuwait prefers full ownership.    Venezuela's national oil company has so far obtained direct outlets for 500,000 barrels a day of its crude exports -- equivalent to 21 million gallons -- through Ruhr Oel and Nynas Petroleum in Europe and Citgo Petroleum and Champlin Refining in the U.S. &quot;Our target,&quot; Mr. Chacin says, &quot;is to increase this participation to some 700,000 barrels a day in the near future.&quot; Some of that increase could come from Citgo, co-owned by Southland Corp., which also owns the 7-Eleven chain. Ronald Hall, Citgo's president, says the joint venture would &quot;like to buy another refinery.&quot;    The biggest players in Europe -- the Kuwaitis -- trace their downstream involvement there to a fateful 1981 OPEC meeting when a Gulf Oil official cornered their oil minister to inquire, over a cup of coffee, whether he would like to buy Gulf's European assets for $1.    &quot;That got our attention,&quot; recalls Nader H. Sultan, the president of Kuwait Petroleum International.    The bargain offer was only for certain assets. But it led to two years of negotiations and Kuwait's eventual acquisition of Gulf's two refineries and more than 3,000 service stations in Europe. That made the cash-rich exporter one of Europe's major purveyors of gasoline and whetted its appetite to move into retailing elsewhere.    So far, Kuwait's downstream operations in Europe account for the marketing of one-fourth of its OPEC crude-production quota of nearly one million barrels a day. Mr. Sultan notes &quot;aggressive expansion plans&quot; to spread the processing and marketing of fuels beyond Europe to the Far East and the U.S. But, he says, &quot;It's getting more difficult to do a deal&quot; because of the rising competition from other producing countries also seeking refineries.    Much of other OPEC members' new enthusiasm for downstream assets overseas has been sparked by the apparent successes of Venezuela and Kuwait. A few months ago, Hisham Nazer, Saudi Arabia's current oil minister, approached Chevron, Exxon, Mobil and Texaco for advice on how the kingdom, which has huge export refineries at home, might go downstream abroad. A follow-up team from Saudi-owned Arabian American Oil Co. is collecting the proposals for Mr. Nazer.    Among them, according to industry sources, Mobil offers to sell the Saudis a share of its Naples, Italy, refinery; Exxon proposes an interest in its European refining and marketing operations; and Texaco, trying to sell $5 billion of assets to help it emerge from bankruptcy proceedings, puts a West German and three U.S. refineries on the table. Some 40 other companies also have sent proposals to Mr. Nazer.    In addition, officials of several other crude exporters -- including Rilwanu Lukman, Nigeria's oil minister and OPEC's president -- say they intend to acquire shares of overseas refineries. Several non-OPEC producers -- including Cameroon, Colombia and Mexico, which has a refining stake in Spain -- are in the market, too.    Oil experts suggest that the downstream push not only will affect global oil markets but could change the composition of OPEC as well. &quot;Those with refining and marketing assets will find their interests and priorities diverging from the rest of OPEC,&quot; says Petroleum Finance Co. in a recent report. And outside OPEC, it could cause political repercussions, including a U.S. debate over national security.    &quot;The prospect of giant integrated companies which could, in a future crisis, be responsive to governments injects an unprecedented political dimension into oil supplies,&quot; says Melvin A. Conant, a Washington consultant on the Mideast. &quot;What are the foreign interests of that government? Are they compatible with those of the consumer?&quot;    But many say OPEC's downstream investing should discourage political cutoffs of supplies. &quot;It tends to enhance the energy security of the consumers,&quot; says Philip K. Verleger Jr., a visiting fellow at the Institute for International Economics. And industry officials say refining links with OPEC countries should serve national-security interests better than rising imports of petroleum products from foreign-owned refineries. It's a &quot;win-win&quot; situation, says James W. Kinnear, Texaco's president, who expects to sell refining interests to Saudi Arabia within a year. </TEXT></DOC>