<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871015-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Lifting the Lid:Their Secrets Revealed,Abu Nidal's TerroristsAre Becoming Targets---Mideast Group Botches PlanTo Bomb London AirportAnd Loses Its U.S. Agent---Madrid Doctor's Double Life---By William M. CarleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST EUROP </IN><TEXT>   Someday, no doubt, there will be a movie. The characters:    --A respected Madrid physician. At home he heals the ill. Abroad, he conspires to kill innocent people by organizing a terror group's bombings of airports and other places that make plenty of work for other doctors.    --A naturalized American citizen, based in Puerto Rico, who allegedly recruits talent for the group among embittered Palestinians living in America.    --A middle-aged Palestinian, mastermind of the group, who has operated out of offices in Syria, Lebanon, Libya and Warsaw. He finances the group partly with profits from gray-market sales of Soviet-bloc and other arms by a shadowy Polish corporation.    --A frightened Libyan youth in London, recruited as a gofer in a plot by the group to stage a hand-grenade assault at Heathrow Airport. He runs to Scotland Yard and tells all he knows.    These men and others like them inhabit the all-too-real world of Abu Nidal, nom de guerre of Sabri al-Banna. The group bearing his name (translation: Father of the Struggler) has achieved notoriety as one of the world's most murderous terrorist organizations.    Once cloaked in secrecy, the group is finally losing its precious anonymity. Security forces from several countries have collected a wealth of information on its structure, leadership, financing, training and method of operation, even pinning down its long-suspected relationship with Poland.    The upshot: The group has suffered several serious setbacks -- perhaps accounting for its inactivity in recent months -- although it is far from being put out of business.    Two alleged Abu Nidal lieutenants -- the recruiter in Puerto Rico and the physician in Madrid -- have been arrested. The doctor has been convicted. Intelligence sources assert the two have functioned as the senior Abu Nidal operatives in America and in Western Europe. &quot;They aren't just a pair of bomb-throwing youngsters,&quot; says one U.S. intelligence official.    In a breakthrough in April, Venezuelan security police burst into a Caracas apartment and arrested Mahmoud Mahmoud Atta, the naturalized U.S. citizen, who had been living in Puerto Rico. The Venezuelans had him flown to New York. At Kennedy International Airport he was arrested by Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and bundled off to jail.    Now in a federal detention center in New York City, Mr. Atta is fighting extradition to Israel to stand trial on charges arising from the bombing and machine-gunning of a civilian bus. Through his attorney, he vigorously denies he is a terrorist. In Beirut, however, the Abu Nidal group has issued a statement that it will retaliate against the U.S. if it extradites Mr. Atta. And Mr. Atta has been identified by a cousin and former terrorist as an Abu Nidal recruiter.    Though the Abu Nidal organization hasn't conducted terrorist attacks in the Americas up to now, Mr. Atta's mission, an intelligence analyst says, was to carry the group's bloody campaign against the U.S. to these shores. Mr. Atta's arrest has compromised Abu Nidal's fledgling American network -- agents now know some of its members -- and this has brought Abu Nidal's plans for a Western Hemisphere operation to at least a temporary halt.    In London, the arrest and the conviction of Rasmi Awad, the Madrid physician, also have hurt the terrorist organization. The Abu Nidal group staged the notorious December 1985 attacks on two airports, in Rome and Vienna, which killed 20 and injured 101. Hand grenades Dr. Awad was to pick up in London were to be used in a third and simultaneous attack, this one on passengers at London's Heathrow Airport.    Recently, attacks by the Abu Nidal group have waned. The last major operation came in September 1986, when terrorists killed 22 people and wounded six at a synagogue in Istanbul. Analysts are debating reasons for the decline. Some believe Abu Nidal may be shifting from terrorism to political activism within the Palestinian movement. The U.S. bombing of Libya, long a patron of Abu Nidal, may have curtailed some of its operations. Syria's recent closing of Abu Nidal offices in Damascus, under pressure from Britain and the U.S., may have set the group back. Tougher security measures adopted by European governments have made terrorism more difficult. And the arrests of several of the group's members -- including Mr. Atta and Dr. Awad -- have helped thwart attacks.    Even so, Abu Nidal's group still appears to be getting bigger and stronger. Thought to number only 300 or so until last year, it has since enjoyed &quot;explosive&quot; growth and now has more than 1,000 members, says Yahya Sadowski, a Brookings Institution scholar in Washington.    Most of the recruits are joining a new militia Abu Nidal has formed in Lebanon, a departure in tactics for the group. What formation of the militia means for the future isn't clear. But some believe that sooner or later Abu Nidal will resume terrorist attacks. &quot;It's only a matter of time and who the target will be,&quot; says a former Central Intelligence Agency man who has studied the Abu Nidal group for years.    In its role as a leading international terrorism group, Abu Nidal focuses its attacks on Jewish institutions and moderate Arab nations, such as Jordan, which might make peace with Israel. It has practically waged war against Britain since 1983, when three of its men were given long British prison terms for trying to assassinate the Israeli ambassador.    In retaliation, the group has killed British diplomats in Athens and Bombay; bombed two Greek hotels catering to British tourists, injuring 32 people; and bombed British Airways ticket offices in London, Madrid, Islamabad and Rome. In the Rome bombing, one person was killed and 14 were wounded.    Abu Nidal has also hit U.S. targets. It was Abu Nidal that hijacked the Pan American World Airways' jet in Karachi last year; 22 were killed and more than 100 injured.    Born in 1937, Sabri al-Banna, later to become Abu Nidal, was raised in Jaffa, near Tel Aviv. Jewish militiamen drove his family from the area in the 1948 war that established Israel. The family settled on the West Bank of Jordan but was overrun again by Jewish forces during the Six-Day War of 1967. Abu Nidal joined the Palestinian Liberation Organization but later left it to form his own group.    Though not the largest terrorist outfit in the world -- the Iranian terror apparatus is much bigger -- Abu Nidal's group is well-financed and highly organized. Senior operatives who plan its terrorism rarely take part in actual attacks. The operations are usually carried out by much younger members (the bomber of the British Airways office in Rome was only 17), who have little knowledge of the senior organizers. Mr. Atta's attack on the bus in Israel was an exception to this rule, and one that has proved costly to Abu Nidal.    Mr. Atta, born on the West Bank in 1953, emigrated to Puerto Rico in about 1974 and eventually operated a Texaco gas station there. Some of his relatives also went to Puerto Rico, among them a younger cousin, Salah Hariz.    Mr. Hariz, implicated with Mr. Atta in the attack on the bus (and currently serving a life sentence on murder charges), gave Israeli police a lengthy account of terrorist activities. The account has been filed in federal court in New York as part of Israel's effort to extradite Mr. Atta, who escaped after the bus raid.    According to Mr. Hariz's statement, Mr. Atta told him in 1984 that he had joined a group for training in &quot;weapons, grenades and bombs.&quot; Among other members of the group in Puerto Rico were Farid Khalil, 35 years old, who ostensibly was studying history on the island; Mahmad Khalil, 30 years old, who distributed Abu Nidal pamphlets in Puerto Rico; and Mahmoud Mansiri, 43, who later went to New York City &quot;to conscript people for the organization,&quot; Mr. Hariz's statement says. In some cases the names are aliases, common practice in the Abu Nidal group.    In June 1985, Mr. Hariz's statement continues, Mr. Atta arranged for him to fly to Syria for training. En route, in Amsterdam, he telephoned a number in Damascus and identified himself with his alias, Mahmad Ziad. He was met at the airport by an Abu Nidal employee and ultimately taken to an apartment where he was housed with six other young men, aged 18 to 20, who also were to be trained as terrorists.    The others seemed to be students from the West Bank, but Mr. Hariz was told &quot;that I should not ask too many questions&quot; about them in case he was ever arrested. For nearly a month, the training consisted of political lectures. The recruits were forbidden to leave their apartment without phoning the Abu Nidal office for permission. They were reimbursed for food expenses based on their grocery-store receipts.    For training in weapons, Mr. Hariz was driven across the Syrian border into the Bekaa Valley of Lebanon. There, he says in the statement, he and others spent 10 days learning to use M-16 and Kalashnikov rifles, revolvers, hand grenades and Molotov cocktails. Another month of lectures in Damascus followed. The recruits then spent two weeks in the Bekaa in training that included night hikes and simulated ambushes.    Afterward, Mr. Hariz returned to Puerto Rico. He got a new American passport that wouldn't reveal a Syrian visa. In February 1986, he flew to Israel and joined Mr. Atta in their family's former village on the West Bank. There, they planned their first attack.    The target was one of the Israeli civilian buses that ply the West Bank and have become, for Arab residents, symbols of Jewish domination. Near a bend in the road between Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, the two men waited one evening in April of last year. At dusk, a bus slowed for the curve. Mr. Hariz hit it with a firebomb. Mr. Atta raked the bus with a submachine gun, according to the Hariz statement.    The driver was hit in the chest and began losing control of the wheel. A passenger, though hit by a bullet in his shoulder, crawled to the driver. &quot;I said to the driver, Give it gas,'&quot; the passenger recalled later. &quot;I held the wheel and told the driver, according to the road, when to accelerate and when to brake while he was lying (bleeding) with his head fallen back.&quot; The bus roared out of range of the submachine gun.    The passenger recovered, but the bus driver was mortally wounded. Mr. Hariz was arrested, tried for murder and sentenced to life in prison. Mr. Atta escaped and made his way back to Puerto Rico.    Mr. Atta's relatives warned him that Israeli police were looking for him, and he moved temporarily to Caracas. But while on a trip to Mexico City, he was spotted by an intelligence agency, which snapped a picture of him on the street. (Venezuelan police later showed the picture to him.) Shortly after his return to Caracas, he was arrested.    Who tracked Mr. Atta down isn't known, though Israeli intelligence and FBI agents are said to have been involved.    British police, meanwhile, had tracked down and arrested the grenade-toting Dr. Awad in December 1985. A Jordanian, he practiced medicine for years in Madrid, where he lived with his family in a fashionable neighborhood. But, leading his double life, he also organized Abu Nidal attacks throughout Western Europe. By the time his agents actually set off their bombs, he would be back in Madrid attending to his patients.    Intelligence agents had suspected for years that Madrid was the center of Abu Nidal's Western European operations but had never been able to pin down the ringleader. Their break came when a young Libyan, later identified in court proceedings only as &quot;Mr. I,&quot; was drawn into an Abu Nidal plot.    Mr. I, as an aeronautical-engineering apprentice for Libyan Arab Airlines, had been sent to London for additional training at British Caledonian Airways. In July 1985, he was surprised by a telephone call from a Libyan official in Tripoli. The official said he would send Mr. I a package that he was to keep until someone came to collect it. Mr. I agreed.    Mr. I, however, had earlier been part of Libyan student opposition to Moammar Gadhafi's regime. He feared that the regime had learned this and that the call was part of a plot to kill him. He contacted Scotland Yard and was told to cooperate with the Libyans for a while.    A week later, Mr. I got further instructions in a call from the Libyan official. Obeying, he went to the Libyan airline office at Heathrow Terminal 2 on Friday, Aug. 23, to meet the 2 p.m. flight from Tripoli to pick up his package. Among the arriving passengers and crew members was a man in flight uniform with a co-pilot's three stripes. He addressed Mr. I by name, sat down and began putting four ball-shaped, aluminum-wrapped packages into a plastic bag.    &quot;Did you have any trouble going through customs?&quot; Mr. I asked, according to his later testimony in the trial of Dr. Awad in London.    &quot;No, I just had (these four) in my pocket,&quot; the man replied.    &quot;Four what?&quot; Mr. I asked.    &quot;Four grenades.&quot;    Mr. I took the bag and, following instructions from Scotland Yard, carried it to a room in a nearby Holiday Inn occupied by detectives. They later replaced the live grenades with dummies.    The next morning the Libyan official telephoned Mr. I again to say that a Mr. Meghdar, wearing a black suit, would meet him later to fetch the bag.    If Mr. Meghdar sensed danger, he would carry a book in his right hand. Mr. I was to wear a gray suit -- and if he sensed danger, he would a carry a newspaper in his right hand. Either signal would abort delivery of the package. But if all seemed clear, Mr. Meghdar would say, &quot;Give Mr. S the book.&quot; To which Mr. I would respond: &quot;It is green.&quot;    Four weeks later, on Sept. 21, the time and the place of delivery were specified in a telephone call. As instructed, Mr. I emerged from the Warren Street subway station, near the Oxford Street shopping district, at 4 p.m. on Sunday, Sept. 22.    Mr. Meghdar appeared, carrying his book in his left hand, indicating no alarm. The two exchanged passwords and began to walk. Mr. Meghdar took the bag of grenades.    &quot;Are they primed (to explode)?&quot; he asked. Mr. I said he didn't know.    Mr. Meghdar walked away, climbed into a red Fiat and drove off. There was a sudden surge of activity in the area, heavily covered by detectives in disguise. Some had surreptitiously photographed the exchange. Others, driving taxis, pursued the Fiat and forced it to the curb a few blocks away. Mr. Meghdar, who turned out to be Dr. Awad, was arrested. Later, Spanish police raided his apartment in Madrid. There they found documents linking him to Abu Nidal. At his trial in England, the doctor denied he was a terrorist but was sentenced to 25 years in prison for &quot;conspiracy to cause an explosion.&quot;    Repercussions from the Atta and Awad cases continue. The FBI, one source believes, is closely watching Atta associates in Puerto Rico and New York. The U.S. and Israel are also weighing the extradition of Mr. Atta in the face of Abu Nidal's threat. The extradition hearing is scheduled for November. In Britain, documents turned up in the Awad case led to several other terrorist suspects. Britain has expelled several. Says a British official, &quot;We are still investigating leads from the case.&quot;    ---   Some Terrorist Attacks by Abu Nidal Group    April 10, 1983 (Lisbon) Moderate leader of Palestinian Liberation Organization is shot to death.    Sept. 23 (Between Karachi and Abu Dhabi) Gulf Air jet explodes, apparently resulting from bomb aboard, killing 111.    March 28, 1984 (Athens) British diplomat is shot to death.    Nov. 27 (Bombay) British diplomat is shot to death.    Dec. 4 (Bucharest) Jordanian diplomat is shot to death.    March 21, 1985 (Rome, Cyprus, Athens) Grenade attacks on 3 Jordanian airline offices wound 5 people.    April 4 (Athens) Rocket hits Jordanian jet taking off, fails to explode.    July 11 (Kuwait) Bombs at two cafes kill 8, injure 89.    Sept. 3 (Athens) Hand grenades thrown at hotel swimming pool injure 19 British tourists.    Sept. 25 (Rome) Bomb at British Airways office kills 1, injures 14.    Nov. 23 (Malta) Egyptair jet is hijacked, Egyptian commandos storm plane, 58 die, 24 are wounded.    Dec. 27 (Rome, Vienna) Hand grenade and rifle attacks on El Al desks at two airports kill 20, wound 101.    Sept. 5, 1986 (Karachi) Pan Am jet is hijacked, 21 killed, over 100 injured.    Sept. 6 (Istanbul) Synagogue is attacked, 22 die, 6 are wounded.    Sources: U.S. State Dept.; British Foreign Office. </TEXT></DOC>