<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890822-0089 </DOCNO><DD> = 890822 </DD><AN> 890822-0089. </AN><HL> Murky Numbers on Black Economic Progress@  ----@  By James J. Heckman </HL><DD> 08/22/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   Two very different stories of black economic progress are current in the media. The first correctly notes that since 1960 black men and black women have gained relative to white men in terms of median income, earnings, hourly wage rates and occupational status. These gains were largest in the 1960s and early 1970s but they were not eroded in the troubled late 1970s and 1980s. The educational status of blacks has improved relative to that of whites and large numbers of blacks have entered high status occupations where they were previously rarely found. Many advocates of this story point to affirmative action as a likely cause of black economic progress.    The second story correctly notes the deterioration in black family economic status over the same period, a growing gap in the difference in real incomes of black persons compared to white males over much of the past 30 years and the decline in labor force participation of black men compared to white men, even for men aged 25 to 54, the prime working age. Black unemployment rates have remained at their historical two-to-one ratio compared with white rates and have risen above that ratio in urban areas. Proponents of the second view have focused on the black underclass as a major social problem.    There is no contradiction between these two views of black economic progress. Affirmative action and equal opportunity may have helped; but the federal statistics that support the first point of view collect wage data only for people who are interviewed and who are attached to the labor force. The main source of information on annual changes in black earnings -- the U.S. Excluded from the official measures of economic progress are individuals who are out of the labor force altogether or who have only marginal attachment to the labor force.    There is considerable evidence that black attachment to the recorded labor force has declined relative to white attachment. In 1960, the labor force participation rates of black men were very close to those of white men. After 1960, black male labor force participation rates began to decline relative to white male rates. This drop-out phenomenon was not confined to older persons. Labor force participation rates decline for prime age males after 1960. But the drop-out rate was much higher for black men. By 1982, fully 12% of prime-age black males were not in the labor force and therefore were not counted in the statistics supporting the more optimistic account of black progress. The comparable figure for whites is 5%.    The published wage and salary data exclude marginal workers. As the proportion of blacks in the labor force declines and as more blacks enter the unstable marginal worker category, the official statistics on black status relative to white status become increasingly unreliable since a greater proportion of blacks than whites are entering marginal status.    Charles Brown of the University of Michigan has estimated that two-thirds of the measured gains in the relative median income of black males over the period 1965-1975 -- the period that witnessed the greatest black male progress -- was due to the omission of marginal black workers. A more refined estimate by Wayne Vroman of the Urban Institute reduces Mr. Brown's estimate to a still sizeable 25%.    In addition to the exclusion of the earnings of marginal persons who are surveyed, there is the additional problem that some marginal persons are not surveyed at all. The Bureau of the Census estimates that it undercounted 6% of the black population in 1980 but just 0.7% of the rest of the population. The black undercount rate in major cities exceeded 9%. For black males age 40 to 44, the undercount was in excess of 18%. The undercount is concentrated in neighborhoods with low income and high crime rates. Although the Census Bureau has improved its procedures over time and the undercount rate has fallen for all races, the percent reduction in the white rate of undercount since 1940 is twice that of the black rate. (Leading survey statisticians predict an increase in the undercount for blacks and other minorities in the 1990 census -- one reason why the bureau has agreed to do special recounts in inner cities.)    A substantial portion of the measured relative wage growth of blacks may be due to the omission of low-wage blacks from the official statistics. Many omitted persons are probably lower wage workers, and therefore the growing rate of omission of blacks relative to whites may have led to an artificial acceleration in the measured rate of black progress.    An additional source of bias in the measured statistics is the growth of nonreported income by predominantly white higher income persons in the Current Population Surveys. In 1947, only 2% of persons interviewed failed to report all of their income. By 1985, 30% failed to report income. The U.S. Census attempts to impute incomes to low income persons to compensate for this under-reporting, but its methods overstate earnings and incomes, leading to further distortions. Nonreporting rates are highest in the high-income occupations. The U.S. Census imputation procedures produce a downward bias in estimated income and earnings for well-paid jobs. Because proportionally more whites than blacks are in occupations for which incomes are imputed, the observed growth in black relative economic status may also owe something to the trimming of the upper reaches of the white earnings distribution.    Of course, there are unreported factors pushing black incomes up. Largely anecdotal evidence on the underground economy suggests that it is large and growing. It is estimated that more than 25% of male ghetto dwellers derive their income from illegal activity. Studies of ghetto youth reveal that illegal activities -- principally drug dealing -- constitute the greatest source of market income for young men.    Criminal activity is linked to opportunities in the mainstream economy. We should not be surprised to find that many participants in the underground economy are making sizeable incomes -- certainly larger than they could have earned in the conventional economy. Although the source of the growth would be disquieting, proper measurement of uncovered activity might reveal greater growth in relative earnings of minority workers than is reported in the official statistics. It is naive to assume that all the persons in the inner city who are undercounted are poor.    As things now stand, we can only guess about the earnings and activities of uncovered persons. Until we make more concerted efforts to discover the unmeasured, the old adage &quot;out of sight-out of mind&quot; applies. We are likely to continue to neglect important social trends affecting persons of all races.    ---   Mr. Heckman is a professor of economics at Yale University. </TEXT></DOC>