<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881104-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH AND DUKAKIS BATTLED for support in the last days of the campaign.    As the presidential race approached its final weekend, the Republican candidate suggested that he could balance the federal budget by 1992 while resisting tax increases. Bush also rejected allegations of racial overtones in his campaign as &quot;grossly unfair.&quot; The Democratic nominee pledged to spend $400 million a year to banish illegal drugs from U.S. schools, and he accused Bush of befriending drug kingpins. Dukakis also asserted that millions of voters were giving his underdog campaign a &quot;second look.&quot;    The two presidential candidates were spending millions of dollars on a spate of television and radio commercials to be broadcast until Tuesday's election.    ---   A COMPUTER &quot;VIRUS&quot; INFESTED an international information network.    The virus, a program concocted by a saboteur, infiltrated the computerized network late Wednesday, closing hundreds of workstations and several supercomputers in the U.S., Europe and Australia. The bug was transmitted through electronic mail services provided by a research arm of the Pentagon that is used by universities and research institutions to tap into idle computer power and to share data.    Computer security consultants said the virus itself wasn't that damaging, but demonstrated how even the most sophisticated networks can be sabotaged.    ---   Foreign mercenaries attempted to overthrow the Maldives government, and Indian paratroopers were dispatched to the string of coral islands in the Indian Ocean to aid embattled President Gayoom. At least 12 people were killed in a battle with loyalist paramilitary troops in the capital, Male. Scores of hostages were reportedly taken.    ---   Thatcher told Polish leader Jaruzelski that the West would provide financial aid to Poland when authorities begin a &quot;real dialogue&quot; with Solidarity. The British prime minister made her remarks on the second day of a three-day visit to Warsaw. She also laid a wreath at the grave of a pro-Solidarity priest slain by state police in 1984.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir refused demands by possible coalition partners to annex the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and expel Palestinians from the territories, an aide said. Meanwhile, Labor party officials reportedly are considering ousting Peres as leader because of the party's poor showing in Tuesday's general elections.    ---   The U.N. General Assembly condemned Israel for killings, deportations and other allegations of human-rights violations against Palestinians in the occupied territories. The assembly also called for the withdrawal under international supervision of all foreign forces from Cambodia, ruled since 1979 by a Vietnamese-backed government.    ---   The Marcoses will comply with a federal judge's order for fingerprints and voice and handwriting samples as part of a U.S. inquiry into possible criminal activity, the Associated Press reported. The deposed Philippine leader and his wife were ordered to appear at FBI headquarters in Hawaii next week or face contempt charges.    ---   U.S. officials said Soviet refusal to destroy a Siberia radar complex is prompting the White House to consider expanding strategic-arms programs. The U.S. contends the radar violates the ABM pact. The steps being weighed include reversing the planned dismantling of three nuclear submarines and accelerating space-weapons testing.    ---   A California study suggests that &quot;even a moderate increase&quot; in the recommended daily allowance of calcium could lower individuals' chances of fracturing their hips later in life. The report, published in a British medical journal, provides the strongest evidence of calcium's benefits in preventing such fractures.    ---   Riot police in South Korea clashed with thousands of students demanding the arrest of former President Chun, accusing him of corruption and human-rights violations. Police said more than 20,000 students from about 80 colleges in Seoul and a dozen other cities took part in what were described as the worst protests in recent months.    ---   Algerians voted in a referendum on constitutional changes widely viewed as a confidence test of President Chadli Benjedid's handling of riots last month. The balloting is the first step in a program that eventually may permit independent candidates to run for office in the one-party African nation.    ---   Yugoslavia was given an ultimatum by the president of Serbia: Unless the leaders of Kosovo step down within days, Serbs and Montenegrins would stage a protest migration from the mostly Albanian province. Kosovo's officials dismissed the threat.    ---   Pakistan said it shot down an intruding Afghan warplane inside its borders, and Afghanistan claimed Pakistani jet fighters downed two aircraft in Afghan territory. Western diplomats in Islamabad also reported ground fighting along the frontier.    ---   A Kremlin spokesman said Soviet criminal law will be revised by year end and &quot;there will be no basis to speak about political prisoners.&quot; It wasn't clear, however, whether all laws used to prosecute people for political beliefs would be repealed. </TEXT></DOC>