<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880112-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Yellow Light: Chrysler Hits Brakes, Starts Saving Money After Shopping Spree --- As U.S. Car Sales Turn Down, Company Seeks to Show It Now Is Recession-Proof --- A Job for the Gang of Ford </HL><AUTHOR> Melinda Grenier Guiles and Paul Ingrassia (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> C </CO><IN> AUT </IN><DATELINE> HIGHLAND PARK, Mich.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Chrysler Corp. executives love life in the fast lane.    In a recent $2 billion shopping spree, they picked up a big defense contractor and rival American Motors. But the real fun began when they got Lamborghini, the Italian auto maker. Robert Lutz, an executive vice president, zipped down a Detroit expressway in one of its famed roadsters -- doing a breezy 130 miles an hour. Gerald Greenwald, the company's No. 2 man, won't say how fast he went; only the policeman who handed him a speeding ticket knows that.    Chrysler, the Comeback Company of the Decade, now realizes there may be speed limits in the business world as well -- and it is slowing down quickly.    In the past three months, it has slashed its white-collar work force 10%, delayed by a year the rebuilding of an aged plant in inner-city Detroit, reduced white-collar overtime payments and even ended an employee eyeglasses benefit that had survived the company's earlier brush with bankruptcy proceedings.    The reason for this abrupt switch: Chrysler has heaped a lot on its plate at a time when car sales, the bread-and-butter of its earnings power, are dropping. The American Motors purchase and a slew of smaller moves such as a fledgling program to export cars to Europe have sharply raised Chrysler's break-even point, the number of cars it must sell to avoid losing money. Ford Motor Co. has displaced Chrysler as Detroit's lowest-cost producer, acknowledges Chairman Lee Iacocca.    So at Chrysler, the go-go years are giving way to the go-slow years. The company faces its sternest test since its comeback. As it does so, it is both haunted by its past -- when it went hat in hand to the government for lifesaving loan guarantees -- and disciplined by its fear of an increasingly competitive future.    Not that Chrysler is desperate, or anything close to that. But it is determined to prove, once and for all, that it can break with the past, when its earnings evaporated almost instantly in virtually every auto-industry recession. &quot;The management of this company has zero doubt&quot; that Chrysler will remain profitable whenever the next recession hits, says Mr. Greenwald, chairman of the Chrysler Motors unit. The fact that other people still wonder is frustrating. &quot;What do you want from me?&quot; he asks. &quot;To wish the next recession would hurry up so I can prove myself?&quot;    Chrysler may not need a full-fledged recession to prove itself. The current downturn may be challenge enough. Last year Americans bought 14.9 million cars and light trucks (including minivans and Jeeps), 7.3% below their record purchases in 1986. Chrysler figures that sales could drop about 5% this year, and they are likely to drop again in 1989.    The downturn may or may not prove severe, but it is certain to be exacerbated by unprecedentedly tough competition, not only from imports but also increasingly from cars that the Japanese are producing here. By 1990, Japan's auto makers will have the capacity to build as many cars in the U.S. and Canada as Ford. That could mean excess capacity as high as five million vehicles -- one-third of last year's sales -- some analysts say.    Capacity already is a problem for Chrysler, which took on three more assembly plants when it bought American Motors. In November, Chrysler began its first round of temporary plant closings and production cuts since 1983. The actions resulted from slow sales of several models -- including the new LeBaron coupe, the Dodge Daytona and two aging &quot;K cars,&quot; the Plymouth Reliant and Dodge Aries. The company soon will announce the permanent closing of one assembly plant.    Complicating matters are manufacturing glitches that have delayed or slowed the introduction of several new models Chrysler needs to attract the affluent buyers who have shunned its cars for years. One of these, the Premier, is especially important. It is the first model in the new Eagle brand of cars that Chrysler plans to sell through the 1,400 dealers it added to its distribution network when it picked up American Motors. (The Eagle line isn't to be confused with the Eagle model formerly sold by AMC.)    That company's popular and profitable Jeep models were a major reason Chrysler made the acquisition. But Chrysler figures it can get the most bang for its buck by creating a new line of cars that appeals to Jeep owners -- typically young and upscale types who now buy, say, a Saab to go along with their Jeep.    All this is causing Mr. Iacocca to shift his focus from plotting corporate strategies and acquisitions to the more mundane business of selling cars. Recently, for example, he got directly involved in choosing the bird in the symbol for the Eagle division. He also chewed out some executives for pricing several models too high. &quot;I am back in the car business,&quot; he declares. &quot;I decided not to go into politics and I bought American Motors and I like cars.&quot; Mr. Iacocca says underlings now will find &quot;the leash a little shorter, because I think we're getting into really uncharted waters now as to what will make us a world-class competitor in the 1990s.&quot;    What made Chrysler a competitor in the '80s were the K cars. Among their attributes were a remarkably versatile chassis and four-cylinder engine. Chrysler adapted both as the base for a whole generation of vehicles, including the now-ubiquitous minivans. Sometimes it stretched too far: With too little power initially, the LeBaron coupe floundered. But mainly, Chrysler showed just how far a company could run with limited resources and lots of pluck.    The pluck stems from the personalities of Chrysler's top six executives, who are known around Detroit as the Gang of Ford, because that is where they all came from. The best-known, of course, is Mr. Iacocca, who once responded to a question about why Chrysler's cars were selling well by saying, &quot;The dogs seem to like our dog food.&quot;    His bluntness, though natural, can be purposefully employed, as it was last summer when Chrysler was indicted for disconnecting the odometers on test-driven cars and then selling them as new. The practice &quot;went beyond dumb and reached all the way out to stupid,&quot; Mr. Iacocca announced, and he promised that it wouldn't be repeated. He effectively defused the issue.    The men around Mr. Iacocca are much the same. They don't mince words. On Oct. 22, for example, just after the stock market's crash, the company's treasurer, Frederick Zuckerman, publicly predicted that &quot;the dollar will go to hell&quot; and that the U.S. will probably see &quot;a horrendous bear market.&quot; As Chrysler PR men hastily slapped together a press release to modify Mr. Zuckerman's remarks, one executive called a colleague to say, &quot;Have you looked out in the back yard? Zuckerman's slipped his leash.&quot;    This atmosphere produces lively sessions when Chrysler's Big Six -- Messrs. Iacocca and Greenwald, along with R.S. (Steve) Miller, Bennett Bidwell, Harold Sperlich and Mr. Lutz -- meet in executive committee. &quot;It took us about three years to practice letting one person talk and finish before another one jumped in,&quot; says Mr. Greenwald.    Among these men, formal lines of reporting accommodate individual feelings, sometimes at the expense of logic. Mr. Bidwell is the company's sales chief but reports directly to Mr. Greenwald instead of to Mr. Sperlich, the president of Chrysler Motors. That's because Mr. Bidwell didn't want to report to him, Mr. Sperlich acknowledges. &quot;What the hell's the difference?&quot; he says.    At General Motors Corp. or Ford the difference would be the world, but Chrysler is less formal, more freewheeling. &quot;A lot of us are renegades,&quot; says Mr. Greenwald. &quot;Renegades and hell raisers,&quot; says Mr. Sperlich, who was fired from Ford even before Mr. Iacocca's celebrated sacking.    Until now, at least, this less formal structure has led to an unusual degree of executive latitude. Five years ago, Mr. Miller, who now is vice chairman and chief financial officer, literally flipped a coin to negotiate Chrysler's purchase of a suburban Detroit assembly plant from Volkswagen AG. He and VW's negotiator locked themselves in a hotel room near the plant and agreed not to leave until they settled on a price. They narrowed the gap from $100 million to $5 million, then stalled. &quot;Finally I said, 'Look, I'll flip you for it,'&quot; Mr. Miller recalls. He called heads and won. (The VW negotiator kept the quarter.)    But don't get the wrong idea, Chrysler executives caution. &quot;We tend to be outgoing and colorful, but we aren't fools,&quot; says Mr. Lutz, who heads trucks, components and international operations. &quot;We know how to run a business.&quot;    Mr. Iacocca, for his part, says he knows how to run the rest of the Big Six. &quot;The care-and-feeding-of-the-animals manual I know, OK? You've got to watch that they don't go off on all their own tangents because they're so aggressive.&quot; But he adds: &quot;I would always rather have a guy that I've got to rein in a little.&quot;    For now, Mr. Iacocca is reining in the whole company, as it enters a period of consolidation instead of expansion. The expansion may eventually pay off big. Meanwhile, though, Chrysler is closely watching costs.    Chrysler's break-even point now stands at 1.8 million vehicles a year, far above the 1.1 million point that Mr. Iacocca vowed to maintain two years ago. The rise isn't entirely alarming -- Chrysler sold about 2.3 million vehicles last year, partly because the acquisitions have added to its sales base -- but the break-even point is higher than Chrysler would like it to be as it heads into the trough of the industry's sales cycle. Mr. Greenwald vows he can bring the point down to 1.5 million vehicles if he must, though he contends that Chrysler's sales strategy should make that unnecessary.    The strategy is to move deeper into trucks, including Jeeps and minivans, and go upscale in cars. The former largely means raising production. Chrysler already has increased Jeep output through a new labor contract at the former American Motors plant in Toledo, Ohio -- for one thing, Saturday overtime work now is allowed -- and has converted an auto plant to a second minivan plant. Since these popular truck models generally carry higher margins than cars, Chrysler is counting on the added output to raise profits.    But going upscale in cars is a trickier proposition because Chrysler has traditionally had less prosperous buyers than GM and Ford. Now it is taking aim with three new models, the Chrysler New Yorker, Dodge Dynasty and Eagle Premier. Success is crucial with all three, because Chrysler, being far smaller than GM and Ford, literally can't afford big mistakes. &quot;We can't have too many bombs,&quot; concedes Mr. Iacocca, &quot;where you spend a billion dollars {to develop new models} and then don't sell them.&quot;    The New Yorker and Dynasty actually are variations of the same car. Both are full-sized, near-luxury sedans aimed at 50- to 60-year-olds, a market now up for grabs after decades of domination by GM. Both cars, however, sport the same angular boxy styling that has flopped for GM in recent years. The Chrysler cars may fare better because they are priced lower than competing GM models, but their success won't be measurable for a while because manufacturing hitches slowed initial production.    The Premier, which made its debut last month, may prove an even tougher sell. Jeeps' young, well-heeled buyers simply aren't attuned to shopping for cars in a Jeep store. They have long avoided cars previously sold by Jeep dealers under the Renault and American Motors labels, mostly because the cars' quality was low.    Chrysler appears determined to get high quality on the Premier. It temporarily halted early production, and thus delayed the model's launching, to correct problems with some parts. But consumers aren't easily swayed. &quot;The tough part is how long will it take&quot; to get a good car line for Eagle, says Mr. Iacocca. &quot;That's hard work.&quot;    So will be making two other purchases pay off: Lamborghini and a part interest in another Italian auto maker, Maserati. Lamborghini, more of a boutique than a business, sold just 312 cars last year (averaging more than $125,000 each). But Chrysler hopes to increase sales tenfold over time while retaining what Mr. Lutz terms the &quot;arrogant outrageousness&quot; of the cars. Meanwhile, a luxury sports coupe that Maserati is designing and making with Chrysler is 18 months late because the Italian-made molds for the car's body were faulty.    Other acquisitions -- including Dallas defense contractor Electrospace Systems Inc., Gulfstream Aerospace Inc., a consumer finance company and a commercial lending operation -- have produced fewer headaches. They also are providing a real plus, says Mr. Miller: enough non-auto earnings &quot;to help us better withstand the up and down cycles&quot; in the industry.    Chrysler's biggest asset, amid all these challenges, is that its trial-tested management team seems to be stable. Last February Mr. Iacocca signed a lucrative contract to stay for four more years, and he seems to mean it. In fact, right after the stock market's crash, he turned down an invitation to appear on ABC's &quot;Nightline&quot; to answer call-in questions from viewers. Says a Chrysler official: &quot;We didn't want to start the 'Iacocca for President' speculation all over again.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>