<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Disarray GrowsWithin NATOOn Arms Policy---Differences Cloud ProspectsFor U.S.-Soviet AccordOn Reduction of Missiles---By Gary PutkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Western arms-control policy is falling deeper into disarray, clouding the prospects for a U.S.-Soviet agreement to reduce nuclear missiles in Europe.    New differences on the missile issue broke into the open last week, revealing deeper disagreement within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization than at any time since Soviet negotiating moves in February raised hopes for an accord.    Recent interviews with U.S. diplomats and Western European government officials also make clear that NATO's defense policy is split on other fronts, including how to answer recent Soviet shifts in talks on conventional forces and chemical weapons.    The Soviets have proposed the removal from European soil of all U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles, meaning those with a range between 300 and 3,000 miles.    In a departure from previous statements, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl said Friday that any missile agreement also must include warheads with a range up to 300 miles. NATO defense ministers meeting in Norway, meanwhile, called for the world-wide elimination of U.S. and Soviet missiles with a range of 600 to 3,000 miles, splitting with the official U.S. draft treaty in Geneva that allows each side to keep 100 such warheads outside Europe.    How Friday's developments will affect the Geneva talks isn't immediately clear. The NATO defense ministers' stance was in line with U.S. statements that it would prefer a world-wide cut in missiles, but was still an unusually frank statement of defense specialists' uneasiness about a possible accord.    NATO officials in Brussels, who asked not to be named, say that Mr. Kohl's statement and other West German reservations are potential stumbling blocks to an accord, since most of the weapons under discussion in Geneva are based on or aimed at German soil.    For now, the so-called tactical nuclear weapons Mr. Kohl referred to on Friday aren't even on the Geneva agenda. Last week, other West German spokesmen were insisting on the right to add missiles in Germany after an accord.    &quot;The Germans can't make up their minds,&quot; says one NATO official. &quot;They're making everyone pay for their neurosis.&quot;    U.S. officials previously have rated the chances of an accord as high. But Secretary of State George Shultz has said the U.S. won't force Western Europeans to accept an accord they don't want.    Britain last week substantially endorsed the U.S. stance in Geneva. But the British privately are pressing the U.S. to commit other nuclear forces to Western Europe to replace any missiles that are eliminated, which could upset the Soviets. French officials, meanwhile, say they want simultaneous progress on reducing conventional-force imbalances. And in interviews all over Europe, NATO commander Gen. Bernard Rogers has continued a drumbeat of criticism against the arms accord Washington and Moscow seem to have in mind.    James Steinberg, an arms-control specialist at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, says he isn't sure that the U.S. and the Soviets will conclude a missile agreement this year. More worrisome, he says, is the seeming lack of an overall NATO arms-control plan, and the potential that gives the Soviets to exploit Western differences.    &quot;The West does not have a notion of what the balance of forces should be,&quot; says Mr. Steinberg. &quot;We unanimously agree that we have an imbalance, but we don't have any idea what it would look like if it was better.&quot;    Recent East-West talks on non-nuclear forces also have underscored Western differences.    Responding to a NATO initiative last year, the Soviets agreed to exploratory talks in Vienna aimed at setting up a new negotiating forum for reductions of conventional forces, in which the East bloc has big numerical advantages. Long-established negotiations, called the Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction talks, or MBFR, have gone on for 14 years with no progress.    The new NATO idea was to expand the area of potential force reductions to all of Europe, not just the central-front area covered by MBFR. But the U.S. has insisted that the new negotiations, if they start, should take place on a NATO-to-Warsaw Pact basis. France, which is outside NATO's military structure, wants each country to speak for itself. The talks about talks have been going on for two months, but NATO countries can't even agree on what to call them.    Meanwhile, in the multilateral United Nations Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, the U.S. recently has found itself at odds with Britain on the touchy subject of verification. The conference is the main negotiating forum for chemical weapons.    The U.S. has long argued for the right of automatic &quot;challenge inspections&quot; of alleged chemical-weapons facilities as part of any agreement to reduce or eliminate these deadly agents, a concept the Soviets have rejected. In an attempt to break the logjam, Britain proposed that countries would have the automatic right to send challenge teams to a suspected production or storage site, but gave the challenged country the right to offer an alternative explanation before permitting inspection.    Within the past three months, U.S officials say, the Soviets have accepted the concept of the British plan, while the U.S. has continued to insist on automatic right of inspection. </TEXT></DOC>