<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870519-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Court Rules That 1866 Civil Rights ActIsn't Limited to Blacks for Bias Charges---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR TAXESFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled unanimously that two parts of a 121-year-old civil rights law, originally passed to help combat bias against blacks, may be invoked by whites alleging ethnic discrimination.    In two decisions, the justices said the provisions of the 1866 Civil Rights Act should be read broadly to prohibit any form of discrimination that Congress may have viewed as racial at the time it passed the law.    Written by Justice Byron White, the decisions provide a powerful weapon for whites of different heritages fighting discrimination. Because the term &quot;race,&quot; as used in the 19th century, encompassed ethnic groups, the court's ruling covers bias against persons with a wide range of national and religious origins.    The new application of these laws is especially significant, civil rights lawyers say, because they provide for bigger damage awards than other, more recent discrimination laws.    One provision of the 1866 act, now known as Section 1981 of the federal code, says that all persons have the same right as white citizens &quot;to make and enforce contracts.&quot; This section is used with increasing frequency in employment discrimination cases. The other provision, now called Section 1982, gives all persons the same right as white citizens to own, lease, buy, sell and transfer property. This section is often used in housing bias cases.    Barry Goldstein, a lawyer with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, said that under both sections, a person may be able to collect compensatory and punitive damages. By contrast, under the often-invoked 1964 civil rights law that prohibits job bias, a worker is limited to an award of back pay. Court judgments under federal fair housing laws also are limited.    &quot;Corporate employers and real estate people understand this message quickly,&quot; Mr. Goldstein said.    It wasn't until the 1960s that the Supreme Court said these laws could be used to challenge discrimination in the private sector by employers and landlords. Since then, blacks have used the laws with growing frequency. In the past decade, the laws have been invoked by whites on occasion, but without the certainty of a Supreme Court ruling, until yesterday. The Supreme Court's seal of approval will encourage use of the laws. Mr. Goldstein said Hispanics, for example, would benefit.    The court's rulings came in two very different cases. In one, the justices ruled that a U.S. citizen, born in Iraq, may sue St. Francis College in Loretto, Pa., for alleged discrimination in denying him tenure as a professor. Upholding the ruling of a federal appeals court in Philadelphia, the high court said the contract provision of the 1866 law &quot;was intended to protect from discrimination identifiable classes of persons who are subjected to intentional discrimination solely because of their ancestry or ethnic characteristics.&quot;    In the other case, the justices reversed the ruling of a federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., that had dismissed a suit under the property section of the 1866 law. The high court reinstated the suit by the Shaare Tefila Congregation, a Jewish temple in Silver Spring, Md., which alleged that its civil rights were violated by people who in 1982 sprayed the building with anti-Semitic slogans and symbols.    The high court said congressional debates in 1866 show &quot;that Jews and Arabs were among the peoples then considered to be distinct races. . . .&quot;    In both cases, the next step is likely to be a federal district court trial.    Pension Liability   The justices, tied 4-4, failed to resolve conflicting appeals court rulings over how much weight judges should give to the decisions of trustees of multi-employer pension plans in setting the liability of companies that withdraw from such plans.    A multi-employer plan provides benefits to employees of different companies in an industry. In 1980, Congress discouraged employers from withdrawing from such funds and leaving shortfalls in benefits. Congress required that a withdrawing company pay enough to cover the projected costs of pensions due its employees. The amount is determined by the plan's trustees, with the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. overseeing the process.    As part of the 1980 law, Congress said the decisions by the trustees should be presumed by courts to be correct. But federal appeals courts have differed over the validity of the provision. In one case, the federal appeals court in Philadelphia invalidated the deference to the trustees. The pension corporation and a Teamsters union local appealed to the high court.    But with Justice White not participating, the high court deadlocked. The tie upholds the appeals court's decision against the trustees, but doesn't set a national precedent that other appeals courts must follow. Justice White didn't explain why he skipped the case.    Union Discipline   In a decision important to the construction industry, the justices ruled 6-3 that a union may discipline members who go to work as supervisors for companies with which the union has no contract. The decision assures construction industry unions some control over the practice by members of jumping around from jobs as skilled workers to jobs as supervisors with nonunion contractors.    In an opinion written by Justice William Brennan, the high court said federal law prohibits union discipline only of workers who, as supervisors, become the collective bargaining representatives of their employers. The decision, upholding the ruling of a federal appeals court in San Francisco in favor of an International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers local, rejected the position of the National Labor Relations Board.    Justice White, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Sandra O'Connor, dissented.    Retroactive Tax   The high court agreed to review the constitutionality of retroactively applying a 1984 tax-law provision to impose federal estate tax on holders of short-term notes issued by public housing agencies.    A federal judge in Los Angeles ruled that public housing notes were exempted from federal estate taxes by a 1937 law, but that a 1984 law was intended to change the practice and apply the estate tax to housing notes. However, the district court said that applying the estate tax retroactively in two cases was unconstitutional.    The justices agreed to hear the appeal by the Justice Department, which represents the Internal Revenue Service. The IRS is seeking to apply the tax retroactively to about $260 million of the housing notes, in about 160 cases, most pending in administrative proceedings. </TEXT></DOC>