<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0161 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Lily-White GOP Is Bad for Democrats, Too </HL><AUTHOR> Hodding Carter III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Everyone has had a say about the Democratic convention, and now some must even pretend to await with eager anticipation the Republicans' gathering in the New Orleans heat and humidity. Given the likely tedium of the event, a little pre-opening folderol is forgivable. The Lord of politics knows there is not much raw material to work with, so the spin merchants must do their best with what's available.    In one regard, their task is truly formidable. What defies acceptable explanation, though it is not beyond eventual redemption, is the monochromatic face the assembled GOP will present the world. In a nation in which more than 20% of the population does not claim direct European ancestry, the Republican Party has managed to make itself look like the Dixiecrat Party of 1948 -- and proud of it.    If that were simply bad news for the Republicans, which in the long term it is, given the nation's demographic trends, the GOP as lily-white suburb would be of passing interest. Not since Eisenhower has a Republican presidential candidate or president made more than a nominal effort to reassert a connection between the modern party and that of Abraham Lincoln.    For Barry Goldwater, hunting &quot;where the ducks are&quot; meant bidding for the unreconstructed haters who formed the cadres of the new, post-Eisenhower Republican Party in the Deep South. Richard Nixon fashioned an entire strategy for electoral victory around the white South, in his straightforwardly slimy way. Gerald Ford, no Nixon, simply went with the flow of party inertia, while Ronald Reagan said everything that had to be said about his position by opposing every civil-rights proposal that came along for virtually all of his public life.    But this is not something that should worry just the Ripon Republicans and others mindful of their party's honorable heritage. It is a bad thing as well for the Democrats, for that growing minority of non-&quot;mainstream&quot; Americans, and for the country as a whole.    At first glance, it may seem absurd to suggest that the Republicans' abdication of all meaningful connection with non-white America is anything but a plus for the Democrats. The Atlanta convention demonstrated what an extraordinary array of new political talent is massing under the Democratic Party's tent, much of it wearing black, brown and yellow faces. Big-city mayors, impressive congressmen and women, legislators and county officials: They trooped before the television cameras to give visual evidence of the party's rich diversity. As a result, in many parts of the country, Sun Belt included, the party's future looks considerably brighter than its present.    But being given a virtual gift of most minority groups makes the Democratic Party less sensitive to their real needs. It encourages quick fixes with content on the one hand, while tempting the Democrats to go looking for their &quot;ducks&quot; in traditionally Republican ponds on the other.    Having entire groups of voters in the bag is not good for a party, since it also means the party can afford to look away from old commitments and creeds. It defers the necessary effort to reshape a Democratic Party that can endure as a cohesive national force with principles that are in harmony, rather than continue as a party of so many disparate parts that its platform must be crafted as a masterpiece of equivocation and contradictory generalization. And, conversely, it encourages the notion abroad in the land that whatever the Democrats offer in the way of a social agenda has less to do with conviction than with special-interest politics, a raw appeal for bloc voting.    This one-party identification has major drawbacks for blacks and others who vote overwhelmingly for Democratic candidates and enter politics through the Democratic Party. Like the South of old, they are partners in a Faustian bargain. For the reality (and illusion) of short-term gain and programmatic attention to their needs, they must give up their political souls. They become automatic additions to the Democrats' political math and are valued at a discount accordingly. They are also cast as mindless automatons, willing to march to the same tune no matter what their own differences, needs and aspirations may be.    Last, but certainly not least, they are left outside the window, noses pressed against the glass, when the Republicans take the White House. Those who are allowed in do not speak so much of their peoples' needs as their own ideological conformity with their white mentors. Since the GOP is the presidential party at least until November, and has been for much of the past 20 years, that makes for a lot of long, cold winters of political discontent.    Finally, in one all-important way this white/non-white political division is a terrible thing for the nation as a whole. It legitimizes racism by those inclined to it in the majority and encourages a new form of segregation. The thinly disguised racism of the Bush campaign's attempt to exploit Jesse Jackson's visibility at the Atlanta convention is illustrative.    What Bush campaign manager Lee Atwater and his backgrounding minions very explicitly tried to do was capitalize on lingering white antipathies to the fact of black power of any kind. That's the way the Southern GOP was built back in the 1960s, and it's called polarization. It cannot be called either democratic or decent.    The people who will come together in the middle of the month in New Orleans reflect the way things are, but they can also help begin the necessary process of change. Not the least of those whose attitudes and actions will be absolutely central to that process will be George Bush himself.    By most reports, he is no racist, closet or overt. In his own tentative way, he has tried to distance himself recently from the more costly civil-rights gaffes of the administration. His choice of a running mate and his acceptance speech give him a chance to do far more. His campaign themes and the policies he advances will establish new directions or reassert old ones for the Republicans.    His options are neither subtle nor complex. He can decide to do business as usual, Reagan-administration-style, and complete the process of segregation by party. That is where his campaign aides have been tending up to now. Or he can redeem his party's soul and immeasurably strengthen his nation's future by drawing upon the Republican Party's earliest impulses. They happen to be the best this nation has to offer.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>