<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870402-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Chip Sense and Nonsense---By Georger Gilder</HL><DD> 04/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN IBMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   This is the economic landscape that stares at Malcolm Baldrige through his window at the Commerce Department: The U.S. has created 14.4 million jobs over the past five years with rising per capita incomes. We have been increasing employment far faster than any other major industrial country, including Japan. We have enjoyed the second-longest economic recovery of the postwar period.    In 1986, U.S. companies produced some $188 billion of electronics goods, more than twice that produced in all of Asia. American companies hold about 70% of the world computer market and produce about 57% of the world's semiconductors when you consider the huge output for in-house use at a handful of major U.S. firms. Value added in the computer industry is shifting toward small computers that are now about 90 times more cost effective than mainframes and toward software. The U.S. lead is largest in desk-top computers, and over the past decade we have increased our market share in software from under two-thirds to more than three-quarters.    For the past five years the U.S. has enjoyed a surge of microchip imports from Japan. The resulting trade gap resulted chiefly from a key strategic decision by the world's largest chip maker, IBM, which produced about $3 billion of advanced semiconductors in 1986. Faced with an unexpectedly large but unpredictable market for its personal computers, IBM resolved to import huge volumes of basic memory chips from Japan rather than invest in special plants to build these commodity items in the U.S.    The IBM decision was a brilliant success. The Japanese plus Texas Instruments' Miho facility produced huge volumes of chips and within two years drove down the price from about $8 to around 50 cents for 64K Dynamic Random Access Memories; then they proceeded to launch production of 256K (four times the memory capacity) and one megabit (four times again the memory) generations. Since memory chips constitute about a third of the manufacturing cost of personal computers, the Japanese chips allowed IBM and other U.S. firms to drive the price of computers to new lows and expand the market at a pace of about 30% a year.    Nonetheless, the U.S. did not fall behind in memory-chip technology. According to McKinsey andamp; Co., Texas Instruments became the most profitable semiconductor producer in Japan and introduced a prototype 4-megabit DRAM at about the same time as the Japanese producers. (The 4-megabit design would permit all the working memory in a typical personal computer to be put on one chip.) Most significant of all, IBM probably became the world leader in the technology. Today, in Essex Junction, Vt., it is pioneering the production of very fast one-megabit chips on eight-inch wafers (increasing the chip yield nearly 40% over Japan's best six-inch wafers), and at the recent International Solid States Circuits Conference, IBM introduced an impressively manufacturable 4-megabit design. The company thus is poised to reenter mass production of basic chips should that be strategically desirable in the future.    Because IBM decided not to mass produce 64K or 256K DRAMs, the company -- and the U.S. -- may have increased its lead in semiconductor technology over the past four years. While the Japanese chip revenues are puffed with money-losing commodity semiconductors, U.S. production totals, including IBM, are dominated by more complex and ambitious designs.    Here's the rub. The figures constantly cited by the Semiconductor Industry Association and by U.S. government officials do not include IBM, ATandamp;T and a few other big in-house producers. To the Japanese, these numbers resemble auto market-share figures that leave out Toyota and Nissan.    In any case, reacting to a catastrophe theory of American semiconductor market share that left out IBM, U.S. trade officials imposed a pricing agreement on Japan. In an act of stupidity unparalleled since Smoot-Hawley, the U.S. forced Japan to more than double the price of its commodity memories. According to a concept of &quot;fair market value&quot; apparently cribbed from some primitive East European pricing guide, the Commerce Department declared war on the U.S. computer industry, effectively excepting IBM. According to the pact with Japan, U.S. computer firms would have to pay twice as much for memory chips as their Japanese competitors that make the chips in-house.    The computer industry is what the contest is all about. The Japanese do not make chips for their health; they make them for their computers and other electronic products. To attack the U.S. computer industry in order to save the U.S. semiconductor industy is simply crazy. Obviously, the U.S. computer firms rushed to circumvent the agreement any way they could, resorting to the gray market and Korea, and making plans to move manufacture of U.S. computers offshore as fast as possible.    Therefore, the agreement broke down. In the interests of U.S. competitiveness, it had to break down. Even the various provisions about increasing the U.S. share of the Japanese chip market became unenforceable because of a recession in the computer industry and because U.S. companies do not supply the chips needed by still thriving Japanese producers of consumer electronics.    Meanwhile, the three U.S. semiconductor companies that may have benefited in the short run from the agreement began to complain of Japanese &quot;violations.&quot; Democratic politicians, who lacked telling objections to economic conditions under the Reagan administration, began carping about the &quot;trade gap.&quot; Spurning advice from economists who could refute the mercantilist superstitions of trade balance and lacking advisers who understood the technological complexities, the Reagan administration collapsed.    Jeopardizing thousands of relationships between U.S. and Japanese electronics firms, the administration has made it far more difficult for U.S. semiconductor firms to penetrate the Japanese market except possibly on the basis of forced quotas. But semiconductors, critical to the production of end products, can be purchased in the long run only on a basis of trust and predictability, with just-in-time delivery and fail-safe reliability. By constantly imposing special export controls for nonsensical national security concerns and changing policy from month to month in response to utterly spurious emergencies, the U.S. government has become the chief obstacle to U.S. competitiveness in electronics.    Herbert Stein on this page recently stripped away the layers of illusion and superstition surrounding the theory of the balance of payments. In a world with global money markets on line 24 hours a day, there is no more reason for a trade balance between any two countries than between any two American states or companies. The U.S. currently is dominating world electronics markets because it is following a global strategy consistent with the increasing integration of world information technology.    This means that like every other major nation we will have to be dependent on foreign producers for many critical parts and materials. As long as we teach more students sex education and cooking than physics and calculus, we must depend on immigration for key technical personnel. The alternative is a real decline in U.S. competitiveness. We cannot do it alone.    Although the Japanese need to reform their increasingly restrictive tax rates and monetary policies, Japan is not a problem for the U.S. It is a supreme and precious asset of world capitalism. Not only do superb Japanese manufacturers supply the U.S. with crucial goods and technologies, but they supply the U.S. economy with an indispensable flow of investments. Not only did Japan save the U.S. economy by tripling auto gas mileage when OPEC tripled the price of oil, Japan also has spurred tremendous creativity and resourcefulness in U.S. electronics.    Some analysts believe the U.S. is becoming excessively dependent on Japan for vital supplies of capital equipment. This is a minor problem that can be quickly solved by IBM and the Pentagon, if they insist, without wrecking the international trade system. But the key ingredients in electronics are not machinery or materials, but ideas and inventions. To imagine the Japanese will dominate the age of information because they have the purest silicon and industrial gases is like predicting the Canadians will dominate world literature because they have the tallest trees.    If the government wants something to do, there are plenty of useful roles. It could begin with a defense education act that helps the schools teach math and science. (Opening a DRAM plant in North Carolina, Mitsubishi discovered that it had to use graduate students to perform statistical-quality control work done by line workers in Japan.) Then the government could reform immigration law to allow admission of workers to support our increasingly gargantuan entitlement- state, and technical personnel to man our high-tech and defense industries. Finally, the government could expend its trade powers defending U.S. patents, copyrights and other intellectual property against Asian nations that let their citizens steal it. Thus the government could reward U.S. achievement rather than protect U.S. sloth.    With recent breakthroughs in superconductivity, bioengineering, computerized chip design, parallel processing, and artificial intelligence, we are entering an era of limitless opportunities. The politicians, however, continue to live in a 19th-century fog of territorial fears and mercantilist fantasies. Peter Drucker tells us, &quot;Don't solve problems, pursue opportunities.&quot; That is the supreme message of the day in electronics.    ---   Mr. Gilder is finishing a book on the computer industry for Simon andamp; Schuster. </TEXT></DOC>