<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0035 </DOCNO><HL> The Pacific:Fijian Coup Overthrows Australia's Conventional Wisdom---By Peter Coleman</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SYDNEY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The most lasting impact in Australia of the Fijian military coup is the realization how unstable the South Pacific has become since New Zealand's Lange government scrapped the ANZUS Treaty in 1984. For years it has been an article of faith in Australian defense and foreign-policy thinking that the South Pacific region, in the words of both the 1985 official Defense Report and the 1986 Dibb Report, is &quot;one of the most stable in the world.&quot; As recently as February, in fact, the Australian defense minister, Kim Beazley, described the South Pacific in Parliament as &quot;an area characterized by peace and stability.&quot; Only a few weeks ago the Department of Foreign Affairs submitted to a parliamentary committee a report that formally canvassed the possibility of a military coup in Fiji and ruled it out.    The military coup in a country with which Australia has close economic and military links and which about 80,000 Australian tourists visit each year is but the most dramatic illustration for Australia that the era of stability is over. It also has focused attention on the increasing Soviet and Libyan activities in the South Pacific as well as on the need to rethink defense policies based on a no-threat-for-10-years scenario.    The Fiji crisis really began in Prague in 1978 when a meeting of the World Federation of Trade Unions resolved to establish a Pacific Trade Union Forum to encourage leftist trade unionism and anti-Western policies throughout the Pacific. The Australian union leader, John Halfpenny, who had attended the Prague meeting, was the principal organizer of the new Pacific Trade Union Forum, and both the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the Australian government helped finance it. It is now active in more than a dozen Pacific states and in Fiji the new Labor Party became its political arm.    The Labor Party's policies are anti-nuclear, anti-French and anti-American. It proposed, for example, to follow New Zealand's policy of banning visits by U.S. nuclear-powered or -armed warships. In coalition with the Indian-dominated National Federation Party it attracted enough Fijian votes to defeat the Fijian Alliance Party in the recent elections, and Labor's Timoci Bavadra became prime minister. Fijians then found themselves being ruled by a predominantly Indian government that had upset the traditional balance whereby the Fijian half of the population controlled politics, the land and the army while the Indian half controlled business and the economy.    It was fears of this kind rather than of the Fiji Labor Party's foreign policy that led to Lt. Col. Sitiveni Rabuka's coup, although in a further complication of the events, the supporters of the coup are generally pro-Western, pro-American and pro-Australian in foreign policy. There is, for example, no possibility that they would ban visits by U.S. warships. Australians consequently find themselves for the first time in a position with which Americans are well familiar: having a military dictatorship that they must condemn supporting policies they consider essential.    It was perhaps fortunate for Australia that this coup took place while Foreign Minister William Hayden was on a three-week European tour. The reason is that Prime Minister Bob Hawke -- whatever the concessions he has to make to the anti-American left wing of the Australian Labor Party -- is more deeply committed to the Western alliance than Mr. Hayden sometimes seems to be. Mr. Hayden seems to get a kick out of needling the Americans. In any case, Prime Minister Hawke made no move to recall Foreign Minister Hayden during what is the gravest foreign-policy crisis Australia has faced since New Zealand scrapped ANZUS. Mr. Hawke took it upon himself to handle all the developments.    Having taken center stage, however, Mr. Hawke has had a problem: how to avoid making the situation worse while not appearing to be impotent. He did an effective balancing act. Mr. Hawke emphatically condemned the coup and called for the reinstatement of the democratically elected Bavadra government. But he also implicitly acknowledged the popularity of the coup among Fijians by looking for ways of involving deposed Fijian Prime Minister Bavadra in any new political arrangements that may be made. He deferred consideration of trade sanctions and ruled out military intervention unless necessary to evacuate Australian tourists. (Australian warships are standing by near Fiji.)    All this is in stark contrast to the behavior of the New Zealand prime minister, David Lange, who offered New Zealand military assistance if Fijian troops in the Sinai peace-keeping Multinational Force wanted to return home to overthrow the military government. (There was no evidence whatsoever that they would do any such thing.) Mr. Lange also accused members of the former Alliance government of financial corruption, naming two of them, and explaining the coup as their response to probable exposure.    But if Mr. Hawke was more sensible he also risked looking indecisive. In this context he suddenly broke off diplomatic relations with Libya and closed down the Libyan Embassy in Canberra. The Australian government has been increasingly concerned about Libyan sponsorship of revolutionary causes in the South Pacific and troublemaking among Aborigines in Australia. These concerns were the cause of a recent, dramatic, pre-dawn flight to and from New Zealand by Foreign Minister Hayden for hurried discussions about Libya before he left for Indonesia and Europe. It had become clear that Australia could not go on plausibly warning South Pacific states against Libya while it continued to give Libya a base in Canberra. Although it had nothing to do with the Fiji crisis (in which Libya has played no role), it may be remembered as the most decisive, public action the Hawke government took during that crisis.    Not that there has been any shortage of other theories of outside intervention in Fiji. The hand of the Central Intelligence Agency, for example, was quickly seen by those who see it everywhere. Did not Gen. Vernon Walters recently visit Suva? Did not the former prime minister, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, visit Hawaii soon after his defeat in the recent elections?    But the only outsiders who played a destabilizing role in Fiji were Australians: ones like John Halfpenny, who formed the Pacific Trade Union Forum and the Fiji Labor Party that undermined the touchy racial balance of the island and dramatized a new and troubled era in the South Pacific.    ---   Mr. Coleman is a Liberal member of the Australian Parliament and editor of the monthly magazine Quadrant. </TEXT></DOC>