<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871016-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Land Lunacy Is Choking Japanese Cities---World-Real Estate MarketsAlso Are Threatened---By Karl SchoenbergerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Three angry young men with samurai swords and a homemade pistol barged into the luxurious Tokyo home of Taro Ando, chairman of Sumitomo Realty andamp; Development Co., one day in January.    They seized Mr. Ando's wife but surrendered to police without harming anyone after tossing a Molotov cocktail out the window and showering the garden with leaflets condemning Sumitomo Realty for allegedly driving up land prices. The attack was one of a series on the Sumitomo group by obscure right-wing extremist organizations that blame Sumitomo and other major developers for the land-speculation lunacy gripping Japan.    Few people condone the extremists' tactics, but their righteous indignation strikes a chord in Japanese society. Real-estate prices have run so wild that many people can't afford to buy a home or apartment. The nightmarish cost of land is choking urban redevelopment and sapping domestic economic growth.    Residential land prices in the Tokyo area soared an average 93% in the year ended July 1, according to the National Land Agency. Prices tripled in Yokohama, Japan's second-largest city, in the period. A modest house outside Tokyo now sells for as much as $2 million.    The problem has unsettling consequences far beyond the new generations of landless middle-class Japanese who despair at living their lives in cramped, rented living accommodations. Japanese money threatens to distort real-estate markets across the world. Hawaiian condominiums and New York skyscrapers are dirt cheap to Japanese investors, enriched by the strong yen.    The debate over Japanese property inflation places much of the blame on aggressive land purchases by developers, including large concerns such as Sumitomo Realty. Also faulted are bankers, who offer easy credit for land speculation; &quot;urban farmers,&quot; who keep choice city turf off the market; politicians, who don't dare rescind tax breaks for those farmers; and government officials, who fail to apply available remedial legal measures.    The mania to concentrate business activity in the Tokyo area has also contributed to the property rush, as has the arrival of waves of foreign bankers who make frenzied demands on limited office space. Similarly accused is a tax system that discourages people from selling inherited land and encourages them to protect capital gains by pumping windfalls back into the hyperinflated land market.    Above all, it is the real-estate speculator known as the &quot;jiageya&quot; who has been singled out for contempt. The jiageya, sometimes loosely translated as &quot;land shark,&quot; assembles small parcels of land into large blocks for resale to developers. Because land appreciates substantially when it is unoccupied and ready for development, land sharks have an unsavory reputation for driving out stubborn tenants.    To be sure, Tokyo isn't the only place in the world where greed is tearing neighborhoods apart. But in old central-Tokyo neighborhoods such as Kanda, just north of the Imperial Palace, fending off the jiageya has become a way of life for many residents. Consider the tale of Yutaka Take, the 71-year-old proprietor of a used-book store.    Mr. Take has conducted business since 1948 in a pre-World War II wooden row house, where he also lives, in a neighborhood famous for its antiquarian booksellers. But in March 1984, his landlord of 36 years decided to sell the property.    Over the next 25 months, the 2,600-square-foot plot beneath his and two neighboring shops changed ownership four times, land records show. Sale prices weren't disclosed, but mortgages taken out on the land last year by the current owner total 5.8 billion yen ($40.8 million), nearly three times the mortgages of an interim owner in late 1984.    As the value of the property rose, so apparently did the pressure to develop it into something more profitable than a used-book business. But Japan's property laws give tenants an absolute right of residency; to get them out, occupants must be bought off.    Mr. Take says a gang of tough characters spent about eight months harassing him and his neighbors, who rejected initial cash settlements. Strangers would come at all hours to bang on his door and shout. Men who said they were employees of a real-estate company moved into a house on the lot and played loud music and chanted Buddhist sutras in the wee hours.    &quot;We couldn't sleep at night,&quot; says Mr. Take, who retreated to a daughter's home elsewhere in the city. He has banded with other area shopkeepers to resist the pests. &quot;They're still telling us to get out. It isn't over yet.&quot;    Takashi Ishii, a superintendent in the National Police Agency's organized-crime-control office, says there has been a sharp rise in incidents in which gangsters are hired to intimidate tenants. Sometimes they poke holes in the roof or resort to arson. Last April, an organized-crime figure was arrested in Tokyo for destroying a house with a power shovel while the tenant was away. Right-wingers crashed a dump truck into a dry-cleaning store in June after the tenant refused to move.    &quot;As long as the boom in land prices continues and there's money to be made, this kind of activity is going to continue,&quot; Mr. Ishii says. &quot;It all depends on the price of land.&quot;    The right-wing underworld isn't always on the side of the landowner, as the attacks on the Sumitomo companies suggest. A year ago, Sumitomo Realty received a bomb threat at its Tokyo headquarters, and Mr. Ando, the chairman, found a cardboard box burning on his doorstep. This occurred when allegations surfaced linking former Sumitomo executives with a loan scandal involving a land-shark company.    Two weeks after the three men invaded Mr. Ando's home and took his wife hostage, the leader of a Hokkaido right-wing group opened fire with a handgun in the central Tokyo branch of Sumitomo Bank, declaring support for the attack on Mr. Ando's home. No one was injured.    That same day, someone in Osaka mailed letters containing bags of cyanide to Mr. Ando and Sumitomo Corp. offices in Tokyo and Osaka. The letter to Mr. Ando, signed &quot;Scorpions and a Band of Fangs,&quot; instructed the 77-year-old chairman to return profits to &quot;victims&quot; and use the cyanide to kill himself.    Sumitomo Realty denies it engages in speculative or unethical transactions, saying it buys land only for development and doesn't sell it for quick profits.    Publicly traded Sumitomo Realty stands out among real-estate concerns reaping handsome profits from the land and development boom. Net income rose 46% in the year ended March 31, after jumping 63% a year earlier. The price rise may be peaking, though. Spokesman Fumio Kitagawa says the company recently stopped buying land. &quot;It's too expensive,&quot; he says.    Real-estate analysts say rapid turnover among small land speculators, as in the case of the Kanda bookseller's lot, accounts for much of the surge in prices, not legitimate development plans. To cool the gambling fever, parliament recently approved a 96% tax on capital gains when land is resold within two years.    Financial authorities also have scolded banks for easy lending policies where land collateral is involved. But it's debatable that the admonitions do any good.    &quot;It's very difficult to gauge the effect of our guidance,&quot; says an official of Bank of Japan, which is worried that land prices will fuel inflation. &quot;There's no way to tell where the banks are lending their money -- whether it's for speculative activity or not.&quot; Overall, real-estate-related bank loans stood at 31.7 trillion yen ($220 billion) in June, up 35% in one year.    Meanwhile, data for housing starts and office construction indicate a coming oversupply. And government policies could change the status quo that keeps city land off the market; there is a movement to remove the property-tax exemption farmers in urban areas can claim if they promise to continue farming for 10 years. A few fruit trees or a vegetable patch are enough to keep prime land off the market, though serious farming also occupies a significant amount of Tokyo land.    &quot;The reason land prices are so high isn't because there's no land. It's that it doesn't trade,&quot; says David Gerstenhaber, an economist at Morgan Stanley International Ltd. in Tokyo. &quot;But we're at the political juncture where domestic and international economic considerations demand that the power of the farm lobby is squashed. Japan is going to disenfranchise the farmer.&quot;    The Liberal Democratic Party has ruled Japan for more than 30 years with staunch backing by the farm lobby. But political analysts say the LDP is beginning to shift its power base from the farmer to the white-collar worker.    For the average white-collar worker, the cost of living space in the Tokyo area is estimated at eight to 10 times annual income, and rising. House-hunters stampede when suburban condominiums go on the market; more than 6,000 applied for one unit in a Tokyo complex last year.    Masahiko Shigemura is a 53-year-old retired bureaucrat who now is an administrator in a Tokyo sports stadium. He rented a small two-bedroom apartment while saving and sending his three children to college. Now he wants to own a home.    But he was stunned by prices when he started searching this year. He looked at a model unit at a new development in Higashi Kurume City, a commute of 1 1/2 hours from central Tokyo. An 810-square-foot, four-room apartment in the 400-unit complex is considered cheap at $260,000. Applicants, who outnumber condominiums 12 to 1, will be chosen by lot.    &quot;There's something strange going on here,&quot; says Mr. Shigemura. &quot;I'm seriously thinking about moving to Canada.&quot;    Home-hunters aren't the only ones affected. Shunichi Suzuki, Tokyo's governor, complains that it cost 500 billion yen to build a one-eighth-mile stretch of road in the center of the city. More than 99% of that cost was for the land. Gov. Suzuki has demanded that the central government put a freeze on auctioning land owned by the former Japan National Railways to prevent adding oil to the fire. </TEXT></DOC>