<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870731-0092 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:New Machine Has PossibilitiesAs a Speedy Prototype Maker---By Paul B. CarrollStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GMOFFICE EQUIPMENT (OFF)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   AS THE MACHINE goes to work, a dot of light moves jerkily across the surface of a vat of liquid in a series of patterns. After several minutes, the light disappears, and out of the liquid pops a hollow plastic ball.    The machine is just showing off. Developed by 3D Systems Inc., a small start-up company based in Sylmar, Calif., it is aimed at much more serious uses. It will let companies produce in minutes or hours prototypes of products and parts designed on a computer.    Currently, that can take weeks or months. And if a first prototype turns out to have problems, it can take weeks to make another, then more weeks for a third.    &quot;This has the potential to revolutionize the way we do business,&quot; says Al DeWitt, an advanced manufacturing engineer at the Fisher Guide Division of General Motors Corp., which will be one of the test sites for the 3D Systems machine, starting in September.    The machine makes use of a class of plastic that solidifies when ultraviolet light strikes a liquid form of it -- a process known as photopolymerization. To date, the plastics have been used for such purposes as making bathroom tiles that don't need waxing or making annual report covers glossy. But 3D Systems found it could do a sort of three-dimensional printing by using an ultraviolet laser.    ITS MACHINE USES the laser to draw on the surface of the liquid plastic the bottom-most cross section of the prototype, then it lowers that cross section a fraction of an inch into the liquid and draws the next cross section on top. By repeating the process thousands of times, the 3D Systems machine produces a solid copy, accurate to within five-thousandths of an inch, of whatever has been modeled in the computer. Small items take minutes; big ones take a few hours.    The machine still has limitations. At the moment, it can't produce objects that are bigger than one foot square. The variety of plastics that can be used needs to be expanded. And a lot of software remains to be written so the machine can be used with all the different computer-aided-design packages on the market and so it can produce more complex models.    The 3D Systems machine will cost around $250,000 and won't be generally available until early next year. Still, it seems likely to scratch a corporate itch.    Mr. DeWitt of GM says the machine has great possibilities if it's used to make sure all the pieces of a car fit together. If, as a result of the prototype, someone spots a problem with a part or a tool, &quot;it could potentially save months or even years,&quot; he says.    Ray Freed, chief executive of 3D Systems, says he hopes the machine will be used by companies making everything from telephones to turbines. He says the Pratt andamp; Whitney division of United Technologies Corp., for instance, normally takes nine to 11 months to make the prototypes for turbine blades for a jet engine. He says his machine can produce the prototypes in a week.    Clarence Borgmeyer, manager of computational methods at Pratt andamp; Whitney, says enough work remains to be done on the machine that &quot;it's a long way away from a week.&quot; But, he adds, &quot;It has that kind of potential . . . I think it has unlimited capability.&quot;    ---   Design Power for Personal Computers    Recent improvements in computer-aided design have made it possible for mechanical engineers to twist and turn and dice and slice prototypes of new products without ever leaving the comfort of their work stations. Now, that product-design capability is moving into the world of personal computers, even without relying on Intel Corp.'s muscular new 80386 chip.    Aries Technology Inc., Lowell, Mass., recently began selling a product based on the International Business Machines Corp. PC AT that makes up for the machine's lack of power with four accelerators. Two boards that attach to the AT enhance its graphics capabilities so it can handle the calculations needed for three-dimensional graphics. Two more boards help the AT do the number crunching required for stress analysis by mechanical engineers. Aries also reworked design software so it runs efficiently on a PC.    &quot;I think they've potentially got a very exciting product,&quot; says Forest Baskett, a vice president of Silicon Graphics Computer Systems, which makes a high-end work station.    The Aries machine can't match the power of such high-end work stations, and it isn't all that cheap -- the accelerators and the software cost $31,850. But it's powerful enough to let engineers eliminate many of the prototypes they now make when designing a part or product; it's relatively simple to use; and because it's based on a PC, it can run a lot of word-processing or spreadsheet or communication software that won't run on work stations.    An early Aries customer, Robert Dubensky, a computer applications specialist at Chrysler Motors Corp., says he can analyze the suitability of a part in a day with the Aries product. He says that analysis would take more than a week with more conventional methods. Mr. Dubensky also welcomes the work Aries did to make the product easier to use. Aries presents the user with a series of menus rather than making him memorize commands and lets him use a mouse to point at objects and move them around on the screen.    &quot;Within a few days,&quot; Mr. Dubensky says, &quot;it becomes an extension of your hand.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>