<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Veteran 'Lone Ranger' Strategist Packs FirepowerWith Cold-Eyed Outlook on Soviet Nuclear Policy---By John J. FialkaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   No one had ever heard of Albert Wohlstetter when he began cutting a swath through Washington's hidebound defense establishment in the early 1950s, overturning multibillion-dollar Pentagon programs with the force of his ideas.    More than 30 years later, Mr. Wohlstetter is still unknown to the public at large. Within the elite circle that plots America's nuclear strategy, however, he is a force to be reckoned with. While secretaries of defense and top military brass have come and gone, Mr. Wohlstetter -- a private defense consultant based 3,000 miles from the Pentagon -- is the intellectual father of much that is going on in the defense arena today.    He is deeply involved in the current effort to tap President Reagan's troubled Strategic Defense Initiative for weaponry that could provide near-term anti-missile protection for Western Europe. In January he was appointed co-chairman of a bipartisan Pentagon panel helping to shape long-range military strategy.    He has served as a kind of mega-critic of U.S. arms-control efforts. And his cold-eyed views of Soviet intentions -- decidedly out of fashion in the 1970s -- have come to permeate much of Washington's defense establishment.    &quot;It's not so much that he's caught the new trends,&quot; says R. James Woolsey, undersecretary of the Navy during the Carter administration. &quot;In a lot of cases, he's kind of created them.&quot;    Despite all this -- despite even the Medal of Freedom Mr. Reagan recently bestowed on him -- Mr. Wohlstetter, 73 years old, remains unknown to many power players in Washington. He says he prefers it that way, and fancies himself a kind of strategic Lone Ranger who is happiest when he is &quot;coming down at right angles to an orthodoxy.&quot;    When Wohlstetterism becomes the orthodoxy, &quot;I always begin to itch a little. Where did I go wrong?&quot;    His critics say it is in his underlying philosophy. &quot;He believes in learning how to fight with nuclear weapons,&quot; asserts Paul Warnke, the Carter administration's chief arms-control official. &quot;I've never met a general or an admiral who really agrees with that.&quot;    But Mr. Wohlstetter, who was educated as a mathematical logician and has spent most of his working life here as a private defense consultant, has made a career out of defying his critics and attacking widely held views.    In Mr. Wohlstetter's world, arms-control enthusiasts are looked upon with the same deep suspicion he reserves for generals and admirals who measure success by simply adding up megatonnage. He regards the political hoopla surrounding arms-control talks as &quot;a very dangerous game&quot; because it heightens people's hopes for easy solutions.    And he argues that agreements to limit categories of arms, such as the current effort to abolish intermediate-range ballistic missiles, suffer from the &quot;punched pillow effect,&quot; because the Soviets can simply compensate for their loss by bulging their nuclear arsenal in other areas, such as extending the range and accuracy of shorter-range missiles.    The kinds of agreements that might be enforced, he believes, are those that give each side the freedom to innovate defenses. Instead of declaring a ban on anti-satellite weapons, he would create &quot;self-defense zones&quot; in outer space, where each side would be free to attack anything that intrudes near its satellites.    Concern about bluff and surprise attack -- key elements of classic war strategies going back to ancient China -- have preoccupied Mr. Wohlstetter during most of his long career. He began his assaults on prevailing wisdom in the 1950s as a consultant for Rand Corp.    His first target was the Air Force's Strategic Air Command. While air command was touting its capabilities to deliver a nuclear &quot;Sunday punch&quot; that could destroy most of Russia, Mr. Wohlstetter was quietly briefing Pentagon officials on research showing that it was unprepared to fight a nuclear war and risked a surprise attack that could destroy much of its force.    Through dozens of small briefings with Pentagon officials -- an art form at which Mr. Wohlstetter is an acknowledged master -- he argued convincingly that the Air Force's basic nuclear attack planning was flawed. The impact of those briefings fed Mr. Wohlstetter's growing reputation as a fresh, forceful thinker on defense issues. That, in turn, led to his selection along with Paul Nitze -- now the Reagan administration's special arms-control adviser -- to rewrite the Gaither Committee Report in 1959.    The report began as a blueprint for a multibillion-dollar civil defense effort, but the rewrite transformed it into the long-term program the nation has followed since to build less vulnerable nuclear forces, including both silo-protected and submarine-based missiles.    During the mid-1960s, as the Soviet Union began to build up its own nuclear arsenal, Mr. Wohlstetter launched a campaign against the emerging doctrine known as Mutual Assured Destruction. This doctrine holds that the possession of massive nuclear arsenals makes war unthinkable for either side. To Mr. Wohlstetter, however, it is merely a variation on the &quot;Sunday punch&quot; doctrine of an earlier decade, and he uses an acid pen to attack it wherever and whenever he comes upon it.    For instance, when U.S. Roman Catholic bishops recently concluded that it was immoral to use nuclear weapons, but acceptable to possess them in order to protect allies and deter the Russians, Mr. Wohlstetter pounced.    &quot;Precisely how this volubly revealed deception is to fool allies and adversaries . . . has not itself been revealed. (Future sermons at the White House might have to be classified.),&quot; wrote Mr. Wohlstetter, arguing that such a position would undermine the deterrent effect of having the weapons. &quot;Suicidal threats are in general not a reliable means of dissuasion.&quot;    Part of Mr. Wohlstetter's continuing clout in the 1980s stems from a brief but pungent essay that he wrote in 1959, entitled &quot;The Delicate Balance of Terror.&quot; It became standard reading for graduate students bent on understanding the atomic age.    Stockpiling weapons, he argued, wouldn't deter a nuclear war unless war planners knew how to fight with them and kept pace with changes in technology. It would take many years of &quot;sustained intelligent effort,&quot; he warned, and require &quot;hard choices, responsibly made.&quot;    Among the officials who have helped shape policy in the Reagan administration are several who became disciples of Mr. Wohlstetter while they were students: Richard Perle, the recently resigned assistant defense secretary; Donald R. Fortier, an important Reagan national security aide who died last year; and Ambassador to Indonesia Paul Wolfowitz, a former assistant secretary of state.    In the 1970s, while teaching a course at the University of Chicago called &quot;Classical and Nuclear War,&quot; Mr. Wohlstetter shifted his focus to nuclear war strategies then prevalent in Western Europe, where basic North Atlantic Treaty Organization strategy assumed that intermediate and short-range nuclear weapons, including missiles, bombs and nuclear artillery, would deter a Soviet ground attack.    Anticipating Soviet advances in precision missile guidance -- some of which have since occurred -- Mr. Wohlstetter argued that the Soviets might be able to destroy a large part of NATO's nuclear arsenal along with its airfields, headquarters and communications facilities with a sudden, accurate strike of missiles fitted with conventional explosives.    Rather than the apocalyptic conflict many nuclear planners and arms controllers talk about, Mr. Wohlstetter's theory envisions a short conventional missile attack that leaves both France and Britain with the option of either capitulating or of using their relatively small forces of nuclear-tipped submarine missiles, an option Mr. Wohlstetter dismisses as being a &quot;dying sting&quot; that few leaders would carry out. This thesis has led to a number of revisions in NATO planning.    The &quot;hard choices&quot; Mr. Wohlstetter has sought have often been new programs for smaller, mobile, more accurate weapons. One idea he has pushed is that of an SDI-derived anti-ballistic missile that could blunt an enemy missile attack on Europe. Another is the quest for a small, single-warhead intercontinental ballistic missile -- a quest that has yielded the proposed Midgetman missile.    The Midgetman proposal, calling for a missile just one-sixth the size of the huge MX, emerged only after a presidential commission in 1983 hammered out elaborate political and military compromises to make it possible. Midgetman proponents, many of them a generation younger than Mr. Wohlstetter, celebrated the proposal as a great triumph and a new direction in U.S. weapons policy.    Then they found that their mentor was, as usual, thinking far down the road.    &quot;A couple of days later I had a meeting with Albert,&quot; recalls Mr. Woolsey, the former Carter administration official, who served on the presidential panel that devised the Midgetman plan. &quot;I told him we'd come up with a 30,000-pound missile. He looked at me and said, 'Why in the hell would you want something that big?'&quot; </TEXT></DOC>