<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Discontent, Anger Brewing Anew on China's Campuses---Students Chafe as Government TriesTo Impose More Ideological Purity---By Adi IgnatiusStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> BEIJING  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After China beat Japan in a televised pre-Olympics soccer match recently, more than a thousand Beijing University students went on a rampage. They stormed from the campus, waving national flags and chanting as they marched into the capital.    Though the rally wasn't overtly political, it gave the government a scare. Participants say the students had been looking for an opportunity to vent pent-up anger. &quot;The rally wasn't really about sports at all,&quot; says a junior who took part. &quot;It was about students who have been waiting for a year to take to the streets.&quot;    After 11 quiet months following a government crackdown, discontent is simmering again at China's elite universities. Students complain that little has changed since last winter's demonstrations. They criticize the Communist Party's interference in their lives and fret about their limited job opportunities.    &quot;Students are restless and they are angry,&quot; a mathematics student at Beijing University says. &quot;They are ready to hit the streets.&quot;    When students marched for democracy in Beijing, Shanghai and other cities last winter, it shook the government. In some places, workers joined the students, raising their own gripes about unemployment and inflation. China's leaders cracked down, moving the nation into more-authoritarian channels that led to the dismissal of Communist Party chief Hu Yaobang.    Today, inflation is worse and more goods are rationed. The government has reason to fear that any protests among the two million students at China's 1,100 universities could spark mass unrest. That concern was heightened this month when a thousand students from the University of International Business and Economics marched through Beijing, protesting the university's handling of the murder of a student. It was the first student demonstration since January.    To avoid a repeat of last winter's protests, party leaders have been trying to enforce party orthodoxy at the same time they pursue the more-relaxed reformist policies of senior leader Deng Xiaoping. Yet Mr. Deng's very reforms have unleashed a potentially destabilizing desire for more, and faster, changes -- particularly among the young. To counter this, the party has increased efforts to impose ideological purity on campus.    To instill proper socialist attitudes among students, it has expanded the required political coursework, including such subjects as Communist Party history, scientific socialism, the international Communist movement and Marxism. Many universities also added an overview of Western thought that highlights many of its &quot;errors.&quot; (Freud, for example, was &quot;too hung up on sex,&quot; the party's theoretical journal, Red Flag, said recently.)    Last winter's demonstrations wouldn't have happened, China's leaders reason, if the party hadn't become lax in promoting socialist ethics. &quot;There has been some confusion in our ideological work,&quot; Deng Xiaoping concluded after the unrest 11 months ago. &quot;Students have not been given strong, effective guidance.&quot;    So the state education commission -- headed by Li Peng, who has since become China's acting premier -- outlined ideological priorities. In an announcement reminiscent of the 10-year period of ultra-leftism called the Cultural Revolution, which ended in 1976, the commission said students would have to support the absolute power of the party and socialism to be eligible even to take entrance exams.    Pang Songfeng, director of foreign affairs at Nankai University in Tianjin, says baldly, &quot;Nankai can't accept a student who opposes Marxism.&quot;    In fact, plenty of students do oppose Marx and the party. But not publicly; no student would be quoted for this article because China warns students not to talk to foreign reporters.    Success depends on a university education. &quot;They force us to lie,&quot; says a Nankai student who sports a semi-punk hairstyle and and spends his spare time playing rock guitar. &quot;We pretend to love Marx when we take our entrance exams, and we pretend to love the party as students. We do love China, but some of us have very different ideas about its future. Young people and the party basically don't speak the same language.&quot;    The government also is forcing thousands of students to revive the Maoist tradition of working in fields or factories. Through manual labor, says He Dongchang, China's deputy education minister, students &quot;will inevitably come to conclusions identical with, or at least similar to, those of the Communist Party.&quot;    Also since last winter's demonstrations, more students are required to undergo military training for several weeks before beginning classes. The aim: &quot;To learn organization and discipline from the People's Liberation Army,&quot; says Wu Shanmou, deputy director of higher education in Tianjin, an industrial city 80 miles from Beijing.    At Tianjin University, adjacent to Nankai, officials have cracked down on &quot;unhealthy tendencies,&quot; including &quot;booing and hooting&quot; at mandatory political meetings. The school runs contests in basic knowledge of Marxism and held a speech competition with the theme, &quot;The motherland is in my heart.&quot;    Moreover, the party has made clear that students taking part in any demonstrations will be dealt with harshly. According to a U.S. scholar with extensive ties to party officials, Mr. Deng removed several outspoken intellectuals from the party this year as a warning to students not to underestimate the party's resolve.    While this fall's party congress heard party chief Zhao Ziyang say China must speed up political reform, the goal of which is to limit the role of the party in running the country, students are skeptical that the party would restrict its own power, polls at two schools indicate. Moreover, students vehemently oppose party control of job allocation, the area that most affects them.    The state runs most work units and assigns all but a few college graduates to work in them. If a student refuses an assignment, he can't negotiate with another unit for at least three years. In the meantime, he can work only for himself, a difficult undertaking in a country that offers few such opportunities.    The party's struggle to correct the ideological bent of China's youth recalls the era of Mao Tse-tung, who guided the party until his death in 1976. Young people, Mao believed, didn't share the revolutionary zeal of his generation. So, he launched the Cultural Revolution, urging students to abandon their studies and make revolution in the streets.    University classes were canceled and professors were harangued and beaten. Thousands died. At Nankai University, a young woman drowned herself in the large pool that serves as the university's centerpiece.    Nankai, like other universities, has come a long way since then. In 1977, entrance exams were reintroduced, and academic competence replaced ideological rectitude as the main criterion for admission. Life for the school's 11,000 students more resembles that in other countries.    Students in sweatsuits, blue jeans and miniskirts stroll the spacious campus. A young man, wearing the red-and-white uniform of Nankai's baseball team, walks by, bat and glove in hand. &quot;We lost,&quot; he tells a friend. By the pool where the woman drowned years ago, lovers hold hands in the shade of tall willows.    Outside the drab, red-brick library, students crowd around an open-air bookstall. The hottest item this day is a Chinese translation of Chrysler Corp. Chairman Lee Iacocca's autobiography. Another favorite: a biography of Sir Y.K. Pao, the billionaire Hong Kong ship-owner who fled China in the late 1940s. Stacks of newly republished collections of Mao's works go unnoticed.    At Nankai, eight students crowd onto the bottom bunks in their tiny, cluttered dorm room. A skinny liberal-arts major speaks proudly of having joined an &quot;underground movement&quot; of students that has radicalized his opposition to party policies. As several roommates nod agreement, he promises he'll join the next protest marches despite the risks.    &quot;Our anger didn't just disappear. We're looking for ways to express ourselves,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>