<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/11/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   AN INVESTOR NETWORK HELPED finance arms sales to Iran, sources said.    The intelligence sources said the private group, linked to an old friend of CIA Director Casey, also sought to profit from Tehran's weapons purchases. In closed-door testimony before congressional panels, Casey said he was led to suspect potential irregularities and possible diversion of funds from the sales during an October meeting with his friend. But two administration sources familiar with the operation said Casey knew as early as last spring that profits were being funneled to Nicaraguan rebels. Casey denied the allegation.    Reagan assured newly elected congressmen that he hadn't played a role in the diversion of funds, and the White House said it had supplied a Senate panel with &quot;all the documents they have requested which we can identify.&quot;    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that political parties have a right to insist that independent voters be allowed to participate in primary elections for Congress and state offices. The decision could prompt political fights in many of the 37 states that have primaries in which only registered members of a party may vote.    ---   At least 100,000 demonstrators marched through Paris to protest the death of a student who died in last week's riots over proposed education legislation. The government has withdrawn the bill. The 22-year-old man died of heart failure after being bludgeoned by police. Students, parents and labor unionists participated in the march.    ---   Britain's Labor Party indicated that it doesn't any longer plan to close U.S. nuclear bases within months if it comes to power. Labor leader Neil Kinnock, unveiling the party's defense program, said because of &quot;technical considerations&quot; alone it would take a year to dismantle the U.S. nuclear arsenal in Britain.    ---   Communist rebels staged marches in the Philippines to mark the start of a 60-day cease-fire in the 17-year-old insurgency. Aquino's armed forces chief ordered a halt to military operations against the rebels, but warned Filipinos to remain on guard. Violence erupted at one rally, leaving one person dead and five others injured.    ---   Anti-Israeli demonstrations spread beyond the occupied territories for the first time in a week, when schoolchildren and women staged a sit-down protest in the largely Arab town of Nazareth. Violence also erupted again in the Gaza Strip, where a 16-year-old Palestinian girl was shot and wounded by Israeli troops.    ---   Medical researchers said they have found what appears to be a genetic defect in people with heart disease. In a report in the New England Journal of Medicine, the scientists from Rockefeller University said the finding eventually may help identify people who are at risk of having a heart attack.    ---   The White House budget office dropped a proposal to double the portion of the U.S. gasoline tax that goes to mass transit. The office last week proposed that two cents of the nine-cent-a-gallon gasoline tax be earmarked for mass transit. Currently, one cent goes to mass transit and eight to the highway program.    ---   The FAA was faulted for granting medical waivers to pilots who may have been unfit to fly. During a House panel hearing, doctors for two major airlines and the pilots union criticized the federal air surgeon for recertifying dozens of pilots suffering from serious heart disease, psychiatric disorders and other problems.    ---   Tehran radio reported that a relative of Ayatollah Khomeini's designated successor confessed to murder, hoarding weapons and collaborating with the shah's secret police. The charges against Mehdi Hashemi, brother-in-law of Ayatollah Montazeri, usually result in the death penalty.    ---   U.S. officials confirmed that Honduran jets struck targets inside Nicaraguan territory during last weekend's border fighting. The administration aides, however, denied allegations by Nicaraguan President Ortega that the Hondurans conducted the raids at the request of the White House.    ---   Sotheby's said a 1632 Rembrandt painting, &quot;Portrait of a Girl Wearing a Gold-Trimmed Cloak,&quot; sold in London for $10.3 million, a record price for a painting by the Dutch master. It was the first major Rembrandt work to be auctioned in 21 years.    ---   NATO's top military officer told Congress that Reagan's nuclear arms proposal would cause problems for the western alliance because Moscow has a large advantage in nonnuclear weapons in Europe. Gen. Bernard Rogers said adoption of the proposal made in Iceland would reverse seven years of improvements in NATO forces.    ---   The West German Parliament voted to form a commission to investigate a suspected illegal sale of submarine plans by a state-owned shipyard to South Africa. Opposition lawmakers contended that Chancellor Kohl was involved. Sales of such blueprints to Pretoria would violate a U.N. arms embargo and West German law.    ---   Palestinian guerrillas evacuated some strategic positions outside Beirut that were taken from Shiite militiamen. The move was part of an Iranian-brokered truce. The Moslem fighters, who allowed ambulances and relief supplies into a Palestinian refugee camp in southern Lebanon, said the rebels returned to their positions within hours.    ---   Egypt and Israel formally established an international tribunal to resolve their longstanding dispute over control of the Red Sea resort of Taba. Both sides agreed in September to resort to arbitration to determine sovereignty over the 760-yard strip, which is held by Israel and claimed by Egypt.    ---   Pakistani police opened fire to quell a rock-throwing mob in Karachi, killing one person and injuring 40 others, witnesses said. The violence flared during a demonstration to mark ethnic riots last month in which at least 58 people were killed.    ---   Died: Rolland V. Robison, 60, chairman of Semicon Inc., Monday, in Winchester, Mass., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>