<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870619-0109 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Search for Methods to ProlongProduce Freshness Bears Fruit---By Peter WaldmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CGNECOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)CONGRESS (CNG)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG) </IN><TEXT>   RESEARCHERS in recent years have been making strides in arresting the aging process -- in produce. From extensive in vestigation into the physiology of different fruits and vegetables have come new ways of treating the commodities that greatly extend their shelf life.    The most promising area of such technology, experts say, is so-called modified-atmosphere packaging, which involves regulating the air around a product to slow or speed ripening. But geneticists are also finding ways to clone plants to bear heartier, more resilient fruit, and radiologists are refining methods to preserve freshness with small doses of radiation.    The drive to prolong shelf life is a top priority of the multibillion-dollar fresh fruit and vegetable industry. One reason is because refrigeration isn't effective in preserving cut, cleaned and packaged fresh produce, a market that is expected to explode in coming years. Also, as food travels longer and longer distances from field to kitchen, shippers need new techniques to keep it fresh. New and cheaper preservation methods, too, could be a big help in some hungry parts of the Third World.    &quot;None of the new techniques will substitute for maintaining the proper temperature,&quot; cautions Adel Kader, professor of pomology, or the study of fruit crops, at the University of California at Davis. &quot;But some can be very effective supplements.&quot;    THE MOST PUZZLING part of trying to prolong freshness is figuring out exactly how and why different types of produce age. Fruits and vegetables remain alive after harvest, and each variety continues absorbing and emitting its own combination of gases in a respiration process similar to that of living animals. To arrest this process, scientists have studied these specific gases in such common products as tomatoes and bananas. With this information, they have been able to modify the package and storeroom atmospheres for these products, preserving them, so to speak, in a state of suspended animation.    For example, Permea Inc., a St. Louis subsidiary of Monsanto Co., has developed a controlled-atmosphere storage system for apples that uses a so-called hollow-fiber membrane gas-separation technique to sharply increase the content of pure nitrogen in the air and reduce the presence of oxygen and carbon-dioxide. In a recent test of the system on Washington state apples, researchers found it maintained firmness in the fruit for longer than conventional preservation methods.    ANOTHER IMPORTANT modified-atmosphere advance has been in co-extrusion technology, or more simply put, the ability to make different kinds of multilayer plastic wraps to accomplish different ends. Such packaging giants as W.R. Grace andamp; Co.'s Cryovac division, Du Pont Co. and Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co. have been experimenting with combinations of plastic films to create wraps that allow certain gases to pass through from one side but not the other. &quot;The goal is to create a more controllable microenvironment by using the product itself as the generator of the atmosphere,&quot; says Mr. Kader of the University of California.    Natural Pak Produce Inc., Closter, N.J., packages and markets Florida tomatoes that it ships to grocers in specially sealed boxes containing a chemical pouch that helps maintain a certain air composition inside. This technique allows the company to ship tomatoes, which are actually a tropical fruit, at 65 degrees Fahrenheit, instead of the standard, refrigerated 45 degrees, making for a redder, juicier fruit. Natural Pak tomatoes sell in stores for about one-third more than conventional varieties.    Now the company is attempting to adapt its process to California avocados and Chilean vegetables, common seafaring commodities that require optimal preservation. &quot;Air-shipped Chilean asparagus sells for $2.99 a pound in New York in the winter,&quot; says Karakian Bedrosian, the company's president. &quot;With our packaging, they can ship by sea and cut the cost by more than half.&quot;    SUCH MODIFIED-ATMOSPHERE packaging techniques as Natural Pak's are expected to play a big role in the rise of higher value-added fresh fruit and vegetable products. Many of the major food companies like Pillsbury Co.'s Green Giant unit are now planning and test-marketing fresh-produce packages such as prepared salads and stir-frys. These products could offer the companies much higher margins than traditional uncut produce.    The field of biotechnology, too, is working on prolonging freshness. Calgene Inc. in Davis, Calif., has figured out how to clone processed tomatoes for soups and other canned products and is studying which genes to alter to give the fruit a higher solid-to-water ratio. Such a meatier tomato wouldn't soften so fast.    For their part, radiologists have shown that irradiating some types of produce slows ripening, especially in tropical fruits. Exposing papayas, for example, to 75 kilorads of radiation -- the maximum allowed by law is 100 kilorads -- can extend their shelf life 25%. What's more, growers of mushrooms and asparagus, two highly perishable crops, are looking at radiation.    Despite opposition from some health and consumer groups, &quot;irradiaton will come because some products need it,&quot; says Sharon Bomer, director of government relations for the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association in Alexandria, Va. Aiding the effort, Congress has allocated $10 million to the Department of Energy to establish six irradiation demonstration facilities in farming regions around the country. </TEXT></DOC>