<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Mariel Firestorm:Cuban Prisoner RiotsFollowed Seven YearsOf U.S. Ambivalence---Despite an Initial Welcoming,Many Aliens Are DetainedEven After Prison Terms---The Peruvian Embassy Fiasco---By Dianna Solis and Jose de CordobaStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The State Department's plan to send some 2,500 imprisoned Cubans back to Havana was a match thrown on seven years of accumulated tinder.    Almost predictably, the flames erupted at a detention center at Oakdale, La., a day after the deportation announcement. Two days later, the conflagration spread to the federal penitentiary in Atlanta. Learning of the deportation plan, Cuban prisoners rioted and took hostages. The eight-day siege in Louisiana ended Sunday after a settlement with federal authorities. The agreement doesn't rule out deportation, however, and the stalemate continues in Atlanta, where prisoners released four hostages but still held 90 others.    The firestorm followed years of frustration among the Cuban inmates who came with 125,000 other Cubans escaping the island nation by boat in 1980 from the port of Mariel. The suspension of due process for some 7,600 detained Mariel Cubans is unprecedented in U.S. postwar history. Even illegal immigrants and death-row inmates have more rights. Hundreds of Mariel Cubans were, in effect, handed indefinite sentences for non-violent crimes, and a few weren't even convicted, according to their families. The situation remains far from resolved after the turmoil of recent days.    In a Salvation Army tent outside the Atlanta penitentiary, Sherry Alvarez Terry fixes her binoculars on the neo-classical structure where her husband, Edel, is a prisoner. Armored military vehicles roar nearby, helicopters whirl overhead. The Revolutionary Communist Party distributes propaganda.    &quot;I think of taking my life,&quot; says the 37-year-old Mrs. Alvarez Terry. &quot;But that is not the answer. I have two children.&quot;    Four years ago, her husband, known as Eddy, was arrested after trying to shoplift a cassette tape worth $2.99. With neither a hearing nor a sentencing, she says, he bounced as No. 03138-131 like a pinball through the penal system, moving six times from prison to prison. With each transfer, she followed. In Atlanta, Mrs. Alvarez Terry has visited him the maximum of five times a week. Embracing him is against the rules.    &quot;I've gone to Florida to Arizona to Georgia and I will go from Georgia to West Hell for him,&quot; says Mrs. Alvarez Terry, a U.S. native.    A congressional panel has called the conditions of the Atlanta prisoners &quot;brutal and inhumane.&quot; Wade Henderson, associate director of the American Civil Liberties Union, says, &quot;The plight of the imprisoned Mariel Cubans is one of the greatest tragedies for the American system of justice.&quot; Long before the uprisings, suicide attempts and episodes of self-mutilation were rampant.    In a larger sense, the prison uprisings are a vivid illustration of the nation's ambivalence toward immigrants and of the ambiguities of the immigration law. The influx of the Mariel Cubans followed a declaration by President Carter that the U.S. had &quot;open heart and open arms&quot; to those fleeing Communist rule in Cuba. But once it was learned that Fidel Castro had also emptied some of his prisons and mental institutions into boats bound for America, the Mariels were shunned by many immigrant-rights groups and even by many Cuban-Americans.    The stigma remains so great that Florida case law prohibits prosecutors and defense attorneys from referring to witnesses as Mariel Cubans when questioning them, as it might be prejudicial. &quot;It poisons the mind of the jury,&quot; explains an assistant state attorney in Miami.    In some of the rare instances in which Mariel inmates have had access to the courts, however, juries have expressed sympathy for their plight. Last year a jury in Atlanta found two Cubans innocent of inciting a prison disturbance at the Atlanta penitentiary; the prison riot in question, says Mel Magidson, the jury foreman, was &quot;somewhat excusable given the circumstances they lived in.&quot;    Recalls the jury foreman, &quot;It was embarrassing for the people who served on this jury to say their country treated the Cubans as shabbily as they were treated.&quot;    When asked why the Justice Department didn't see the caldron of Mariel resentment boiling, a spokesman in Atlanta says that &quot;the inmates could have revolted at any time during the seven years&quot; since their arrival. Further, the spokesman notes, &quot;The inmates had their day in federal court and they were ruled deportable.&quot;    The 7,600 Mariel Cubans behind bars today are there for a variety of reasons. Some 200 suspected criminals and mental patients have been held since their arrival in 1980. Many others are serving sentences for crimes they committed after arriving in the U.S., ranging from murder and rape to car theft.    But about 3,800 have continued to be held after completing sentences for crimes committed in the U.S. Last month, in the move that led to the rioting, Cuba finally agreed to take back 2,500 of the Mariel Cubans at the rate of 100 a month, in effect reinstating a repatriation treaty it rescinded in 1985.    &quot;It is an injustice to hold someone who has completed his sentence,&quot; says Auxiliary Bishop Agustin Roman of Miami, whose videotaped plea on Sunday caused the Louisiana prisoners to lay down their weapons and release their hostages.    Ironically, the Immigration and Naturalization Service only a few months ago began a program to speed administrative reviews for the release of Mariel Cubans to halfway houses and to their families after serving sentences for crimes committed in the U.S. The day before the uprising in Oakdale, in fact, five Mariel detainees were released.    The Mariel story began at the Peruvian Embassy at the bottom of a hill in Havana in April 1980. Jose Antonio Rodriguez-Gallegos, a bus driver, rammed his bus through the gates of the Peruvian Embassy to gain political asylum. In the melee, a Cuban guard was killed. Fidel Castro angrily withdrew police protection from the embassy, and nearly 11,000 Cubans rushed it from all parts of the island. The demonstration of such yearning to defect was a grave embarrassment to Mr. Castro, who felt compelled to declare that anyone wishing to leave could do so from the port of Mariel. Mr. Castro even invited Cuban exiles in the U.S. to pick up their families at the harbor.    In the mad &quot;freedom flotilla&quot; that followed, the 125,000 Mariel Cubans suddenly descended on South Florida. But in his effort to discredit the refugees as escoria &quot;trash&quot; -- Mr. Castro unlocked Cuba's prisons and asylums, sending thousands of inmates to the sea and subsequently loosing a crime wave in Dade County, Fla. A study by the Dade-Miami Criminal Justice Council found that in 1983, Mariel Cubans, who then made up 5% of Dade County, were responsible for 9% of felony arrests and 23% of misdemeanor arrests.    But most Mariel Cubans rapidly assimilated into American life, obtaining jobs and scholarships. Cuban letters flourished in the emigre community with a literary journal appropriately titled &quot;Mariel.&quot; And most Mariel Cubans are in the process of upgrading their status from &quot;parolee&quot; to legal resident. Although the criminals among the Mariels represented up to 20% of the total by some reckonings, Juan Clark, a sociology professor at a Miami community college, says the undesirables made up no more than 5%.    Mariel Cubans who committed crimes in the U.S., in any case, quickly discovered that completing their jail terms was only the beginning of their sentences. Years after completing their terms, most still remained behind bars.    &quot;For anybody (else) serving a prison term, the happiest moment is when he finishes,&quot; says Alfredo Berland, one of the Cuban prisoners released hours before the Oakdale uprising. &quot;But for a Mariel prisoner,&quot; he says, &quot;that is the worst moment.&quot;    Their legal limbo was rooted, ironically, in President Carter's effort to give them a home in the U.S. In a bizarre twist of logic, they were deemed by immigration authorities never to have &quot;entered&quot; the U.S. and, thus, to be &quot;excludable aliens,&quot; with little constitutional protection. So that the &quot;excludable aliens&quot; wouldn't face detention, the U.S. government gave the Mariel Cubans a &quot;parole&quot; into the country.    But those who later committed crimes in the U.S. in effect broke parole, making them subject to deportation. Efforts to obtain constitutional protections for the Mariel refugees failed: A U.S. appeals court affirmed the immigration service position in a decision that the U.S. Supreme Court let stand in 1985.    Thus, Dalgaberto Figueroa went to the penitentiary in Atlanta on April 15 although he had just completed a sentence for killing a man who had shot his wife, Mirta, paralyzing her. &quot;My husband and I will go back to Cuba only dead,&quot; says Mrs. Figueroa, lying in a tent outside the prison. Carmelo Lopez of New Jersey completed a five-month term on a cocaine charge two years ago and has remained in prison since.    Some others are serving indefinite sentences without convictions. Fidel Millet was stopped for a traffic violation, couldn't produce his papers and has spent three years in federal prisons, according to his sister Leyla Dominguez, a Miami florist. &quot;He is not accused of anything,&quot; says his sister.    Having lost their access to the courts, Mariel Cubans find themselves unable even to straighten out bureaucratic snarls and other irregularities in their cases. David Matos of Miami shows off the file involving the case of his brother-in-law, Jorge Luis Morgan Perez, who was sentenced to a year for having an unregistered firearm, according to the legal papers. But then he shows a letter in which the immigration service informed Mr. Perez that his parole was revoked because of convictions for grand larceny and burglary. All were crimes that his brother-inlaw says he was never even charged with.    The greatest number of detainees have put in time at the Atlanta penitentiary, where overcrowding is the worst in the federal penal system, according to a 1986 report by a House subcommittee. Eight men were stuffed in cells meant for four. From 1981 to 1986, there were 158 &quot;serious&quot; suicide attempts, seven successful suicides, nine homicides and 6,000 episodes of self-mutilations -- usually involving slashing one's forearms. After disturbances rocked the prison in 1984, most Cuban prisoners were &quot;locked down,&quot; or shut in their cells for 23 hours a day.    &quot;The current living conditions for Cuban inmates at the Atlanta Federal Penitentiary are intolerable, considering even the most minimal correction standards,&quot; says the subcommittee report.    To alleviate overcrowding, inmates were moved primarily to the now-burnt-out Oakdale facility; its original purpose was housing benign immigrants whose only offense was crossing the border illegally. The $17.5 million institution, which opened only 18 months ago, is a rural, campus-like prison with well-manicured flower beds, a clothing factory and a kitchen that serves such Caribbean staples as beans and rice.    Until the uprising, the inmates and staff had as collegial a relationship as prison life permits. One corrections officer who was held hostage last week, Andre White, had begun learning Spanish from the inmates, says his wife, Nyri. &quot;He never talked bad about any of them,&quot; she says.    Nearly 300 Mariel inmates have surrendered in Atlanta and have been transferred to other federal prisons. Among them is 44-year-old Mr. Rodriguez-Gallegos, the Cuban who rammed his bus through the gates of the Peruvian Embassy in a bid for asylum. Mr. Rodriguez-Gallegos is an inmate-number on a Justice Department list circulated outside the Atlanta penitentiary last week.    In his most recent letter to his Houston attorney, Patrick Dugan, he wrote: &quot;I just keep praying to see the end of this.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>