<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0084 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Why Not Impeach?</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Now we're getting somewhere in the continuing attempt to displace the voters' choice as president. A small but widely echoed chorus has called for impeaching Ronald Wilson Reagan. Harvard Law Prof. Laurence Tribe actually utters the word in public, and columnist Anthony Lewis comes close with a column titled &quot;Richard Milhous Reagan.&quot; They deserve credit for honesty of intent and courage of conviction. On the other hand, their view of the law and the Constitution is very strange indeed.    The impeachment drive starts with the Boland amendments, which after a fashion prohibited funds to help the Contras. Even if this law doesn't cover the president personally, Mr. Tribe argues &quot;if the puppets are subject to the law and violate it, the puppet master cannot escape responsibility.&quot; Mr. Lewis wrote that Mr. Reagan &quot;was, at a minimum, part of a conspiracy to violate the law.&quot; While the Boland amendments themselves are not so pretentious as to contain criminal penalties, one news report floats the rumor that special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh might conjure up a case applying the criminal penalties of the conspiracy law.    The constitutional underpinning of this argument is Congress's power of the purse. Not only can Congress refuse to appropriate money for the Contras, the argument runs, it can specify what members of the executive branch can do on government time. After all, it appropriates their salaries. So soliciting aid for the Contras from other heads of state or encouraging private contributions by giving speeches or meeting with donors is an affront to the constitutional prerogatives of Congress, a high crime or misdemeanor. By writing limitations on the president into money bills, Rep. Dante Fascell (D., Fla.) argues, Congress &quot;can stop him from doing almost anything.&quot;    Let's see if we understand the Tribe-Lewis-Fascell thesis. The 1976 Hyde amendment bans the expenditure of federal funds for abortions. Federal funds pay the salaries of Supreme Court justices. So if they issue a ruling allowing abortion, they should be removed from office?    Or go further. Could Congress use its power of the purse to pass a judiciary appropriations act that included a prohibition on the Supreme Court invalidating as unconstitutional any law that Congress passes? Could Congress use the president's salary as a hook to deny him his veto power? After all, some part of the president's salary goes to his signing of a veto. There's also the cost of the pen.    The illogic here shows what a radical view of the Constitution is on offer. As usually understood, separation of powers means that each branch has certain rights delegated to it by the Constitution that no other branch can take away. Congress cannot unseparate the powers by passing amendments to appropriations. The power of the purse is an exceedingly blunt instrument. Congress can refuse to appropriate funds. But if instead of simply withholding appropriations, Congress tries to condition how authorized funds are spent, such conditions cannot usurp the constitutional authority of the executive branch.    This was the lesson of the 1946 Supreme Court case of U.S. v. Lovett. Congress tried to condition an omnibus appropriations act by denying salaries to three named executive-branch employees suspected of subversive activity. The justices treated this as an unconstitutional bill of attainder and a usurpation of the executive-branch authority to hire and fire its own staff.    However much it manages to confuse the law, the impeachment movement is a fantasy. The Democratic Congress is not about to impeach Mr. Reagan, make George Bush president and then try to run against him in 1988. The real world here is politics, as a month of congressional hearings has made clear. The fact that no member of Congress has urged this course suggests why there will be no impeachment. The impeachment issue is a loser politically.    No one seriously believes Mr. Reagan breached faith with the people over the Contras. While detailed records of a year-long political battle may show distortions of the truth on any side, the president's purposes have been unchanged and public. He supports the Contras and sees no alternative way of keeping the communists in Managua from consolidating their power, and is willing to use his powers as president to implement this policy. In shipping arms to Iran the president did indeed act contrary to his public postures, but this has been of little interest to Congress, except as a sparkplug for its real purposes.    The Iran-Contra hearings can be understood, at best, as part of the years-long debate over Mr. Reagan's policy in Nicaragua. At worst, they should be understood as an attempt to rough up a popular president so he won't be too much help to the Republican Party in 1988.    We have two predictions on the evidence so far. One is that there will be no impeachment. The other is that no one will come up with a better strategy for dealing with Managua than helping to arm the Contras. </TEXT></DOC>