<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Controversy Mounts Over EffortsTo Measure Quality of Health Care---By Frank E. JamesStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Expect a storm of protest late today when the federal government releases its second annual report on death rates at the nation's hospitals.    Although the Health Care Financing Administration has revised its method of computing the statistics since last year's battle with the medical community, hospitals and doctors still aren't happy that the information is being made public.    The figures -- which are based on Medicare patients -- &quot;will mislead patients who might use it in the belief that it is a source of valid information,&quot; declared a recent editorial in a newspaper published by the American Medical Association.    Such is the controversy that has been mounting around efforts to provide the public with more information about the health industry. Until lately, medical care has avoided much of the scrutiny that more mundane items like autos, refrigerators and mutual funds receive all the time from consumer groups and others.    But now, gauging the quality of health care is a hot topic. The federal government and some state agencies are looking at techniques for measuring the quality of care dispensed by doctors and hospitals. Hospitals, under pressure from consumer groups, are starting to examine what comprises quality and are using computer programs to improve the way they practice medicine.    &quot;It's possible and shortly will be easier to discriminate amongst the providers of health-care services,&quot; says William Roper, administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration. &quot;Just as the Transportation Department is now informing people about which airlines are most often late, we're going to be informing people about the outcomes of health-care services so people can make judgments for themselves.&quot;    The medical profession, however, is extremely wary of such plans. Among other things, hospitals are worried about which statistics will be published and how they will be used. Those facilities that received poor rankings by the HCFA last year, for instance, complained that the information was misleading because some institutions take on tougher cases than others. A hospital with a trauma center and an AIDS clinic would rate much worse than a suburban institution that didn't handle many serious medical problems -- regardless of the quality of its medical staff.    Defining quality also can be difficult because even patients with the same illness aren't equally sick. Chances for recovery can be influenced by factors that go far beyond the specific care provided by a doctor or hospital.    The measurement of &quot;quality is very elusive,&quot; says Alexander Williams, senior vice president of the American Hospital Association. &quot;There are so many interactions of people and technology in medical care.&quot;    Partly for that reason, the resources required to collect and evaluate medical data are far more substantial than many other consumer-protection activities. Consumers Union, for instance, says that the task of rating medical care would be beyond its capabilities. &quot;I don't know of any independent group that could do it,&quot; says Joseph R. Botta, a science editor at Consumers Union.    But consumer groups remain optimistic that some of the problems can be circumvented. For instance, the government's new statistics on mortality rates were refined by software systems that account for differences in the severity of a particular illness when a patient enters a hospital.    One system called MedisGroups, owned by MediQual Systems Inc. of Westborough, Mass., gives new patients a grade from zero to four, with four being the most sick. Rather than base the grades on doctors' subjective diagnoses, such systems use clinical findings like lab tests or electrocardiograms so that data are more comparable between patients and hospitals.    In another effort to evaluate medical care, the Joint Commission, a Chicago-based organization that accredits most of the nation's hospitals, is developing a plan that would include doctors' and hospitals' performances as a criterion in its accrediting process.    In obstetrics, for instance, the commission is trying to determine which indicators -- like blood transfusions, seizures, readmissions or birth trauma -- are the best measures of performance and what number of, say, blood transfusions in a particular case would be deemed acceptable. Once norms are set, any hospital consistently above them would have to improve or risk losing accreditation.    Some consumer groups, however, say the commission's standards may be less rigorous than hoped for because its sponsors include the American Medical Association and other medical and dental groups and its members include the very hospitals it accredits. &quot;The commission isn't a roaringly independent organization,&quot; says Charles Inlander, president of Peoples Medical Society, a consumer group based in Emmaus, Pa.    Similar projects are underway in Maryland and Pennsylvania. The work began after state health officials realized that no one -- hospital administrators, staff physicians or the state itself -- could objectively evaluate whether hospitals were giving quality care.    The Maryland Hospital Association is now collecting data from more than 40 hospitals on, among other things, the number of hospital-acquired infections, Caesarean sections, newborn and surgery-related deaths and re-admissions. The pilot study was initially opposed by the hospitals themselves, which claimed that their facilities and staffs were too dissimilar to generate meaningful comparisons.    In Pennsylvania, new laws require hospitals to collect and disseminate data about health care and health costs in order to educate the public and increase competition. Hospitals in five Pennsylvania regions, including Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, will start publishing data next year.    While they will initially examine indicators similar to Maryland's, Pennsylvania officials plan to expand the rating system to look at other, less-scientific factors, like patient satisfaction with attending physicians or whether the hospital has a chaplain or bilingual staff members.    Proponents of such studies say the programs may force hospitals to improve services that are essential to patient care. &quot;We need data-mandatory disclosure of infection, complication, hysterectomy rates and the like,&quot; says Mr. Inlander of the Peoples Medical Society. &quot;Instead we get a hospital advertising that it just put in a new concierge. What's he going to do if your husband just died because of some shoddy operation; call you up and tell you they're going to bring him home in a limo?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>