<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880516-0029 </DOCNO><HL> Weather Talk Has Soybeans Surging, But Some Say It's Early and Overblown </HL><AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PCS </IN><TEXT>   Probably the worst thing that could happen to the grain markets this week is rain on LaSalle Street, home of the Chicago Board of Trade.    With no major government crop reports expected from the Agriculture Department this week, grain futures traders are banking on dry weather to keep the heat under soybean-futures prices, some of which set new contract highs on four days last week.    Weather is dominating the soybean market earlier than usual this year because the nation's once-burdensome stockpiles are rapidly evaporating. Any hint that dry conditions could stunt this year's crop evokes memories of the 1983 drought, when soybean prices popped past $9 a bushel. It also makes traders fear water like the wicked witch in &quot;The Wizard of Oz.&quot;    &quot;If it rains three inches, we'd go down 30 cents,&quot; said Mickey Luth, a soybean analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton, Chicago.    Some market analysts and meteorologists say it is way too early to take drought talk seriously. In Illinois, for example, only about one-third of the soybean crop has been planted. Although Illinois got half its average rain for April, and has received only one-third its average for mid-May, timely showers have kept the top few inches of soil moist enough for the seeds that have been planted to take root.    &quot;Things are a little overexcited,&quot; says state of Illinois climatologist Wayne Wendland.    In Iowa, one-tenth of the soybean crop had been planted by May 8. Dry weather is only a big problem in the southeast corner of the state, where rainfall since April 1 is as much as three inches below normal in some spots.    &quot;Right now there's no critical situation,&quot; says Bernard Janssen, a U.S. Agriculture Department statistician in Des Moines. Of the weather speculation that periodically sweeps the trading pits, he jokes: &quot;Every year farmers tend to lose the crop three or four times before they harvest it.&quot;    Rainfall is critical to soybean yields when the bean pods of the plants are filling out in late July and August. Last year, a round of weather worries was squashed by rain in those weeks.    That, in the opinion of some oddsmakers, makes this year's market all the more ripe for weather speculation. &quot;After five good years . . . we are due for a drought,&quot; says James Roemer, a meteorologist at Weather Trades Inc., Des Moines.    Looking ahead to other commodities this week:   Precious Metals   Precious metals traders' attention will be focused on tomorrow's Commerce Department release of figures on the U.S. trade deficit. Vivid in their memory is last month's report, which showed a larger than expected deficit in February and caused precious metals and currencies to shoot up.    Industry observers also are looking forward to a resumption of buying of gold from the Far East, which they believe could take place soon because demand from that sector has slowed in recent weeks after being brisk earlier in the year.    Jeffrey Nichols, president of American Precious Metals Advisors Inc., cited a wire service report late last week that Taiwan had bought 186 metric tons of gold in the first four months of this year, according to an official of that country's central bank. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or about 2,204.6 pounds.    &quot;That's equivalent to six million ounces, or roughly about 10% of annual world supply of the metal,&quot; Mr. Nichols said.    Most important, he pointed out, the bank official was quoted as saying Taiwan would continue to buy gold &quot;at appropriate times.&quot;    According to Michael Mikolay, chief bullion dealer for Rhode Island Hospital Trust National Bank in Providence, there is some question about whether Far Eastern buyers are waiting for lower prices or are just reassessing their requirements before coming back into the market.    Livestock and Meat   Cattle traders will be watching a monthly Agriculture Department report slated for release today for signs that the nation's feedlots are having a tough time finding young cattle, which they fatten for slaughter.    Joseph Arata, a livestock analyst at Merrill Lynch in New York, expects the department's April seven-state cattle survey to show a 7% drop in the number of new cattle placed on feedlots compared with April 1987, when placements hit their second-highest level on record. Charles Levitt of Shearson Lehman Hutton in Chicago said the April report could signal slowing growth in the feedlot population.    The nation's cattle herd is withering. In the past two years, many farmers have been forced to sell heifers to pay debts. The breeding herd and the number of young cattle have shrunk. But these factors may do little to jack up cash prices, and thus futures prices.    Supermarket chains aren't willing to pay much for beef because they've been flooded with cheap poultry. Despite the outlook for falling beef supplies, the total supply of all meats could hit a record high this year, Mr. Levitt said. The Agriculture Department is also expected to report a 5% rise in the total number of cattle on feedlots, and that meatpackers bought roughly the same number of fattened cattle from feedlots as they did in April 1987.    Coffee   Coffee importing countries around the world can count for at least another month on not having to worry about export cutbacks by green-coffee producing countries.    As of Friday, the International Coffee Organization's 15-day average indicator price was $1.1533 a pound. If it had dropped to $1.15 or below Friday, the result would have been a cut of 1.5 million bags of coffee from producers' export quotas during the current quarter ending June 30. A bag weighs 132 pounds.    Today, the executive director of the ICO will order the release of export stamps equal to the 1.5 million bags that have been held back in designated banks in exporting countries, in case there was a cut. He will take the action because the 15-day average didn't drop to or below $1.15 by May 15. Export stamps are part of the documentation that accompanies coffee exports.    The 15-day counts will continue, however. If a sharp drop in daily prices lowers the 15-day average to $1.15 or below by June 15, the executive director has another batch of stamps equivalent to 1.5 million bags of coffee that are being held back. He can refuse to release these, in effect cutting the April-June quarter's export quota by that much. If the 15-day average drops to or below $1.15 after June 15, the cut will be made during the July-September quarter.    The possible reductions are a concern because they would exacerbate existing tight supplies of better grades of coffee, industry officials say. </TEXT></DOC>