<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0113 </DOCNO><HL> The M1 Muddle:Is Fed's Money PolicyPointing to a ReturnOf '70s-Type Inflation?---Proxmire Argues That It Is,But Volcker Will PleadData Are No Longer Valid---Targets Will Be Given Today---By Alan MurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On the multicolored computer charts spread over his desk, Sen. William Proxmire points to a nearly vertical red line. &quot;That's the one,&quot; he says. &quot;That's a pathway to sure inflation.&quot;    The line represents growth in the nation's basic money supply, which has soared at unprecedented double-digit rates for the past two years. Paul Volcker, the Federal Reserve Board chairman, has largely ignored the gauge, arguing that it no longer provides a reliable guide for Fed policy. Beryl Sprinkel, the chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers and once the administration's most determined money-watcher, also has questioned the numbers' import. Even Sen. Proxmire's own staff advises that the red line is not a cause for concern.    But the eccentric senator stubbornly disagrees. &quot;There's no question,&quot; he says. &quot;The plain logic of too much money chasing too few goods means this is going to result in an explosion of prices.&quot;    As chairman of the Banking Committee, Sen. Proxmire will preside today when Mr. Volcker goes to Capitol Hill to unveil the Fed's monetary targets for the coming year. Mr. Volcker will announce that the basic money measure remains unreliable and that the Fed will take its cues from elsewhere.    Worried about the falling dollar, the central bank may tighten its policy somewhat this year and nudge interest rates higher. But Fed officials won't try to force money growth back in line.    Sen. Proxmire's concerns nevertheless raise a prickly question for the long term: Can the Fed afford to disregard the unusual explosion of money? Or is it laying the groundwork for a resurgence of 1970s-style inflation?    The Fed chairman's annual congressional visit to report new money targets is a ritual Sen. Proxmire helped initiate nearly a decade ago. He believed the exercise would make the Fed more accountable to Congress and to the public.    But for the past two years, the reports have been something of a charade. In February 1985, Chairman Volcker told Congress the target for that year's growth in the basic money supply, known as M1, was a range of 4% to 7%. Instead, it grew 12%. Last year, Mr. Volcker widened the target boundaries to 3% and 8%, in order to allow for increased volatility. That year, the money supply grew 17%. Since October, M1, which includes private checking-account deposits and cash, has grown at an astounding 21% annual rate -- far faster than it ever grew in the 1970s, when inflation was at its peak.    The broader money measures, M2 and M3, have behaved better, staying near the top of the Fed's target ranges. But even they are running at a rate that in earlier years would have suggested higher inflation.    Whether these eye-popping statistics mean anything is unclear. Historically, as Nobel Prize-winning economist Milton Friedman has documented, growth in money has closely paralleled growth in output and in prices. Soaring money growth has usually been followed by rapid economic growth and an eventual explosion of inflation.    But recently, that link has been shattered. Despite the money explosion, economic growth was a modest 2.5% last year. And consumer prices, held back by plummeting oil prices, rose only 1.1%.    Indeed, the only evidence of the money surge, some analysts say, is found on Wall Street. The stock rally of recent months has been &quot;liquidity-driven,&quot; according to Steven Einhorn, co-chairman of the investment policy committee at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. in New York. &quot;The money that has been provided by the Fed . . . has gone into the market.&quot; Even Chairman Volcker spoke recently of &quot;inflation in the financial markets.&quot;    Most economists doubt that the rapid money growth of the past two years will result in an inflationary boom. They note that the economy is still running well below its capacity and has plenty of room for noninflationary growth. Unemployment remains at a high 6.7%, and the operating rate for most factories is low. Moreover, interest rates remain high relative to inflation, which hardly suggests that credit is too loose.    A recent survey of 50 economists by Eggert Economic Enterprises Inc. showed that forecasters expect consumer-price inflation to increase on the average by a moderate 3.3% this year and by 4.2% next year.    Nevertheless, a small but growing minority of analysts share Sen. Proxmire's fear. They believe the Fed is ignoring the lessons of history and is planting the seeds for disaster. A new survey by the National Association of Business Economists shows that 23% of its members believe the Fed is being too stimulative, up from only 15% who felt that way three months ago.    &quot;We are digging ourselves into a very deep inflationary hole,&quot; warns William Poole, a professor of economics at Brown University and a former member of President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers. &quot;We are long past the time when we should have reined in money growth. We're back to a boom-and-bust cycle.&quot;    The practice of setting targets for money growth, adopted by the central banks of most industrialized nations in the 1970s, has its roots in the work of Prof. Friedman. He argues that slow, steady growth in the money supply is essential to save the economy from alternating bouts of inflation and recession. Indeed, his recommendation has been to harness the Fed with a rule requiring money growth to be kept at an annual rate of around 3%.    The experience of the past few years, however, has created a crisis for Mr. Friedman's followers, known as &quot;monetarists.&quot; The relationship between money growth, on the one hand, and economic growth and inflation, on the other, hasn't followed historical patterns. As a result, if the Fed had tried to hold down money growth, says Lawrence Chimerine, the chairman of Chase Econometrics, &quot;we'd have been in a recession very quickly.&quot;    The bizarre behavior of money is due, in part, to changes in banking practices. Traditionally, M1 has been a measure of currency and checking-account deposits, but not savings-account deposits. The advent of interest-bearing checking accounts, however, has muddied the distinction between savings and checking deposits, and thus distorted the money measure.    That problem alone, however, doesn't explain M1's uncharacteristic behavior. Even after removal of all interest-bearing accounts, money growth has been unusually high.    Another reason for M1's vagaries, Mr. Volcker and others have argued, is the decline in interest rates. When rates were high, people were reluctant to keep their money in cash or checking accounts, knowing they could earn higher returns elsewhere. With the decline in rates, this theory suggests, people have become less reluctant to keep money in the form of currency or checking accounts.    Mr. Volcker has argued against abandoning M1, saying the figures should be evaluated &quot;in the presence -- or absence -- of confirming evidence&quot; from the broader money measures, M2 and M3. The Fed closely monitors M2, which is M1 plus most types of personal savings, including money-market funds and deposit accounts. The still broader M3 is M2 plus investments such as large certificates of deposits and money-market funds sold to institutions. Both M2 and M3 are around the top of their preliminary annual growth targets of 5.5% to 8.5% for 1987.    Other economists say recent experience is reason enough to bury Mr. Friedman's prescriptions. &quot;Mechanical monetarism is pretty dead,&quot; says James Tobin, another Nobel economist who has frequently disputed Mr. Friedman's views. &quot;I think Proxmire is out of date.&quot;    But monetarists continue to insist that in the long run, the relationship between money and inflation will prevail. Mr. Friedman, who was embarrassed by his prediction in early 1984 that inflation would rise to 9% by year's end (instead, it stayed at about 4%), has become less precise but no less dogmatic. &quot;I won't pin a date on it,&quot; he says, &quot;but sometime in the next year or so you will see a relatively rapid rise in the rate of inflation. You are playing Russian roulette by continuing to increase the money supply at this rate.&quot;    Recognizing the problems with M1, the monetarists have recently begun to argue that the Fed target something called the &quot;monetary base,&quot; which is currency plus bank reserves, and which also has been growing rapidly in recent months. But that change of focus has only added to their credibility problems, because in the past they have criticized the Fed for changing targets to suit its purposes.    The monetarists' argument is as much political as economic. They believe the Fed was able to fight inflation in 1981 because the public was worried about it; and they believe the Fed won't rein in now because the public is less worried about inflation than about a sluggish economy, trade deficits, and problems in the Farm Belt and in the oil-producing states. &quot;There was a single-minded pursuit of the stop-inflation process in 1981,&quot; says Jerry Jordan, a monetarist and a former member of President Reagan's economic council. &quot;Now I see a similar determination to help out those folks in the places George Bush and Bob Dole come from.&quot; (Vice President Bush is from Texas; Sen. Dole is from Kansas.)    Sen. Proxmire says the Fed reflects the administration's priorities. An admirer of Mr. Volcker, he argues that the Fed chairman has been forced to accept a looser policy by the Reagan administration's recent appointees to the Federal Reserve Board. &quot;If Paul Volcker was the only vote,&quot; he believes, &quot;the Federal Reserve Board would have had a far different policy.&quot;    The fundamental problem, according to Sen. Proxmire and others, is that by the time the administration and the public begin to get worried about inflation, it will be too late to stop it. The combination of an expansive money supply and a large deficit makes an eventual outbreak of inflation inevitable, they say. &quot;The only way to prevent a hangover,&quot; Mr. Jordan adds, &quot;is to not get drunk.&quot;    Sen. Proxmire acknowledges that tighter money during the past two years could have caused a recession. But in a sentiment he admits may not be shared by any of his colleagues, he says: &quot;That might have been better.&quot; By trying to avoid a recession, he contends, the Fed and the administration may be laying the groundwork for a worse cataclysm in the future. &quot;In fact, it seems to me we could be paving the way for a full-fledged depression,&quot; he warns.    Fed officials argue that the rapid growth in money is likely to reverse itself once the economy begins growing more rapidly. Higher growth will increase interest rates, they argue, and lure money out of checking accounts and into certificates of deposits and other investments.    In the meantime, while the Fed officials continue to disregard M1, they do have their eyes on other early-warning signs that are beginning to give them pause.    The recent fall in the dollar, in particular, has caused Chairman Volcker to warn that the currency markets are at a danger point and that further declines could quickly translate into increased inflation. A falling dollar increases inflation by raising import prices.    In addition, prices on basic commodities, which are watched closely by new Federal Reserve Board members such as Manuel Johnson, Wayne Angell and Robert Heller, have also been rising in recent months. And the economy itself is showing some signs of new strength.    Those indicators could lead the Fed to begin tightening its credit policy. The central bank has already allowed the key federal funds interest rate -- the rate banks charge on loans to one another -- to inch up. More overt tightening moves may follow.    But despite the protestations of Sen. Proxmire and the monetarists, the Fed isn't likely to let measures of the money supply dictate its policies any time soon. </TEXT></DOC>