<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870309-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SB MS FBCTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Several congressional staff members recently flew to New York City where they toured the New York Stock Exchange trading floor, got briefings on things such as program trading and government securities, and had a private meeting with Wall Street guru Henry Kaufman.    The trip and all its trimmings were with the compliments of Salomon Brothers Inc. The big investment banking firm wants the Capitol Hill aides to learn about the intricacies of the financial markets.    But a bigger reason behind the red-carpet treatment is that Wall Street fears Congress is about to put the brakes on its most lucrative business -- corporate mergers and acquisitions. With the insider-trading scandal resulting in the arrests of some of Wall Street's top players, lawmakers here are gearing up to pass tough new legislation aimed at the highly profitable takeover business.    &quot;The mood in Congress now is against Wall Street with a vengeance,&quot; laments Thomas Quinn, a Washington attorney who represents the Securities Industry Association, a trade group. &quot;And it will only get worse if there are more indictments.&quot;    Congress has ordered up its own investigations into insider-trading and securities arbitrage, with several congressional committees asserting jurisdiction. A spate of hearings has begun already; lobbyists are blanketing Capitol Hill with the arguments of the investment bankers and the corporate world.    Since the Securities and Exchange Commission brought charges against arbitrager Ivan Boesky and Wall Street whiz-kid Martin Siegel, the securities industry has been bracing for congressional action. And corporate America, much of which has lived in fear of hostile takeovers in recent years, senses the time is right to urge Congress to outlaw many Wall Street practices that have spurred the recent flurry of takeover activity.    &quot;Ultimately, this boils down to a contest between Main Street and Wall Street,&quot; says Senate Banking Committee Chairman William Proxmire (D., Wis.), who has promised comprehensive legislation to overhaul the corporate takeover business.    With such high stakes, it's no wonder Wall Street is doing whatever it can to impress lawmakers and their staffs. Other securities firms have arranged trips to New York City, similar to Salomon Brothers' excursions, with an end to fighting legislation that would allow banks to engage in certain securities activities, as well as fighting the anti-takeover measures. And tonight securities firms will be paying $1,000 each to attend a New York City fund-raiser for Sen. Christopher Bond (R., Mo.), a new member of the Banking Committee, which has jurisdiction over insider-trading legislation.    At the same time, Wall Street is lining up some of Washington's top consulting talent. &quot;Wall Street is sluicing millions into Washington to protect the takeover industry,&quot; says John Sherman, former aide to House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski and now a Washington consultant. He has just been retained by the Business Roundtable, which represents major corporations, though he says Wall Street firms offered him more money. &quot;Each interest is pulling together its own commando team,&quot; he remarks.    In one case, a dispute erupted over which group would use Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer andamp; Feld, the law firm headed by former Democratic Party Chairman Robert Strauss. The Capital Markets Group -- made up of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., First Boston Corp. and Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. -- first retained Mr. Strauss's firm, but in December, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. asked Akin Gump to lobby for it.    Drexel realized that in Washington there was growing sentiment against the firm after it was identified as having been subpoenaed in the SEC's insider-trading investigation and as the major source of so-called &quot;junk bond&quot; financing. Such financing with high-yield, high-risk securities has been used extensively in the takeover frenzy of recent years.    Akin Gump agreed to represent Drexel and told the Capital Markets Group about its new client. The trio of prestigious firms considered this a conflict of interest and dropped Akin Gump, insiders say. Akin Gump declined to comment.    Once the embattled Drexel had secured the representation of Akin Gump, it went on a hiring binge. It retained the law firms of Robert Royer, former legislative counsel of the Securities Industry Association, and of former Sen. Birch Bayh. It also hired former SEC Commissioner John Evans and former Reagan campaign press aide James Lake.    Despite all the lobbyists and lobbying events, Wall Street is providing little in the way of suggestions for reform in the wake of the insider-trading scandal, congressional aides say. For example, one Senate Banking Committee staff member went to New York in December to ask the Capital Markets Group for its help in crafting complicated legislation that would slow the pace of takeovers. It still hasn't responded, a member of the group concedes.    The industry trade group's position is that self-regulation has been adequate. Last month, the Securities Industry Association formed an ad hoc committee of its member firms to study insider-trading generally and how inside information relates to takeovers. The New York Stock Exchange has asked its legal advisory committee to draft a proposed definition of insider-trading.    &quot;While a number of constituencies are offering assistance, the investment banking community isn't offering solutions,&quot; says one Capitol Hill aide. &quot;They're hoping the whole thing will just blow over.&quot;    But corporate America isn't about to let that happen. Corporations also are hiring lobbyists and scurrying to take advantage of the current hostility toward Wall Street. Once reluctant to go out front in attacking securities traders and investment bankers for fear of making themselves targets, corporate executives suddenly are eager to jump into the fray. When volunteers were sought to testify at last Wednesday's Senate hearing on takeovers, 16 executives signed up.    Congress appears to agree that now is the time to move. Lawmakers have introduced a multitude of bills doing such things as banning &quot;greenmail,&quot; in which a company pays a premium to buy back its stock from an unwanted suitor, and &quot;golden parachutes,&quot; lucrative employment contracts that entitle executives to receive large payments if they're fired after a takeover. Other measures would increase the SEC's budget, require greater takeover disclosure, and expand the definition of insider trading.    Members of the committees are jockeying for a piece of the action as the likelihood of takeover legislation increases. When Rep. Edward Markey (D., Mass.) took over this year as chairman of the House subcommittee that oversees securities legislation, he was flooded with members' requests to have roles in shaping a bill.    &quot;We've got so much interest in tender-offer and insider-trading legislation, we're about to hire someone new with such expertise that we can get out of the box immediately,&quot; Rep. Markey says.    Lawmakers think they smell a scandal that will continue to grow. When the House Energy and Commerce Committee discussed its budget recently, Rep. Jim Slattery (D., Kan.), a fiscal conservative, argued for an increase in funds to uncover impropriety in the financial markets. &quot;We need significant resources to unleash our junkyard dogs on Wall Street. Congress is going to get to the bottom of this insider-trading mess,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>