<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880419-0152 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Europeans in African Court </HL><AUTHOR> Lee Lescaze </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Three years ago, a French mechanic living in Ouagadougou, the capital of Burkina Faso, picked up an African prostitute, took her back to his place and tried to make her have sex with his dog.    When she resisted, he went for his gun. The woman managed to escape and, even more surprisingly, she braved public exposure of her profession by bringing charges.    Burkina Faso's government had just introduced a form of &quot;people's court,&quot; a speedy and cheap way to try certain cases designed to coexist with the French-model judicial system installed in colonial times. When the prostitute's complaint was referred to such a tribunal, the French government was outraged.    How could a Frenchman be tried by these African rules in the absence of European notions of procedure? it asked. As the former colonial master and the present supplier of considerable aid, Paris had muscle to flex. It protested to the president and lesser officials, seeking to abort the case.    France was acting in a long, still lively tradition. Whenever possible, and during the colonial era that was pretty much all the time, Europeans have sought to avoid being judged by African standards.    As African historian Michael Crowder puts it: &quot;It was a cardinal principle of British colonial rule in Africa that black men did not try white men, whatever their offense or whatever their status. Certainly black men did not flog white men.&quot;    Mr. Crowder's &quot;The Flogging of Phinehas McIntosh: A Tale of Colonial Folly and Injustice, Bechuanaland, 1933&quot; (Yale University Press, 248 pages, $27.50) is the history of a scandal that occured in 1933 when an African ruler broke the taboo. Before the dust had settled, the British had carried out a foolish military show of force; the African leader had been humiliated, suspended and quickly reinstated; colonial officials had shown less respect for fair play than the Africans; and debate over the incident had traveled from Serowe, Bechuanaland (now Botswana), to the Houses of Parliament.    Phinehas McIntosh was a young hell-raiser. He and a handful of white companions drank vast amounts of beer and pursued (with success) large numbers of African young women.    The local ruler, Tshekedi Khama, also in his 20s, was a devout Christian, a bachelor and a teetotaller. He frequently complained to the British colonial authorities about the drinking and womanizing of the McIntosh crowd. Tshekedi, whose people were complaining that their daughters weren't safe (an interesting twist given the amount of fretting whites in Africa have done about their daughters' safety), ordered McIntosh flogged -- McIntosh had assaulted an African who had insulted McIntosh's African girlfriend. Tshekedi remarked that it gave him pain to order the flogging, &quot;but as {McIntosh} did not live the life of a white man, neither that of a native, some solution to correct his action had to be found.&quot;    For Lt. Colonel Charles Rey, resident commissioner of the Bechuanaland Protectorate, the flogging seemed an opportunity to flatten an adversary with whom he was at loggerheads over his determination to dilute the powers of African chiefs.    But it didn't turn out that way. As Mr. Crowder makes clear, Tshekedi was not to be taken lightly. He was intelligent, capable and very stubborn.    Some of Tshekedi's thinking on African development seems incredibly prescient in light of the disastrous first decades of African independence in which many nations saw their agricultural base deteriorate while they pursued chimeras of industrial development. The British wanted to open Bechuanaland to mining, but the young chief resisted. His people needed first to improve agricultural techniques, he said. For him, the priority was to improve conditions in the villages of his people, not to send his people as workers to mining camps.    Tshekedi had seen Johannesburg and come away alarmed. Mining, he thought, could come later when Africans would better handle the social changes it would bring, including more drinking and immorality.    Mr. Crowder's research has provided a wonderfully colorful re-creation of the flogging and the subsequent uproar, even though the second half of this scholarly book, which quotes at length from newspaper comments on the case and meticulously reconstructs the maneuvering that led to Tshekedi's vindication, is slower going than the opening chapters.    In addition to exposing the pomposity and racism of British colonial authorities, &quot;The Flogging of Phinehas McIntosh&quot; also contains some eerie hints of 1980s southern Africa. South Africa's defense minister longed to drop bombs on Tshekedi. He didn't get the chance in 1933, but in the 1980s, Pretoria frequently raids or bombs a neighbor. Similarly, Tshekedi's white enemies in 1933 branded him a communist without any evidence, the same treatment South Africa now gives many of its black foes.    Mr. Crowder demonstrates that in 1933 Bechuanaland there was more justice for the strong than the weak. Sadly, that also seemed the case in 1985 Burkina Faso. French pressure was rebuffed, the people's court convened and it found as follows: The mechanic was deported, the prostitute was fined for practicing a banned trade and the dog was sentenced to death.    ---   Mr. Lescaze is the Journal's deputy foreign editor. </TEXT></DOC>