<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870310-0121 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's early afternoon this gray-cold day, and the South Korean capital is thick with more than 30,000 police clad in olive-drab, Darth Vaderlike riot gear. Their job is to prevent a forbidden &quot;People's Grand Peace March to Eliminate Torture and Promote Democracy,&quot; a religious-cum-political memorial for Park Cong-Chol, the student tortured to death by police on Jan. 14.    Assembling at various points throughout the city, the marchers move in scattered clumps toward Pagoda Park, where an earlier generation of Koreans issued a declaration of independence from Japanese imperial rule. Two blocks away from this destination one group starts chanting slogans, and a reporter in their midst almost immediately hears the responding thud, thud, thud of government boots and the firing of tear gas. Thus the evening news in America features graphic footage of blinded, choking demonstrators fleeing police, just three days before a visit by Secretary of State George Shultz. A revolution waiting to happen.    Or is it? Although there is undeniable violence by some demonstrators and some police, there is more drama than danger. Over drinks, for example, the foreign press corps saves its real indignation for the dry-cleaning such gassings necessitate, and many of the bystanders regard the attempt to assemble and speak freely and the counterattempt to block the same as a spectator sport. The student demonstrators -- only 1,500 this time in a nation of 1.2 million students -- relish goading the police to look like goons for the TV cameras, and by and large the police comply. About the only ones really annoyed are passers-by -- &quot;tear gas bad today,&quot; one complains, as though talking about lousy weather -- and motorists snagged in the ensuing traffic jams.    The overemphasis on the &quot;crisis&quot; is understandable, given that South Korea today has reached its most critical juncture in its postwar history. From abroad, American policy is focusing more and more on the country's political development. At home, South Koreans have just staged a successful Asian Games that infuriated the Communist North and have moved toward constitutional reform. In the next year or so they also hope to stage a successful 1988 Olympics, see the first peaceful transfer of power in their republic's history and decide on a political system. Though nervous at facing so many momentous events in such a short time, Koreans of all stripes say they are optimistic about the long run.    Even the opposition's de facto leader, Kim Dae-Jung, sounds a cheery note amid his criticisms of &quot;U.S. support for military dictatorship.&quot;    &quot;I don't believe the military will crack down to preserve Chun Doo Hwan's power,&quot; says Mr. Kim, &quot;and that's a new development. In 10 years' time I do believe our people will enjoy democratic government.&quot;    That's a big leap for a man who has twice barely escaped death from prior Korean governments. Moreover, his optimism is echoed not only by his co-chairman on the Council for the Promotion of Democracy, the soon-to-be president of the New Korea Democratic Party, Kim Young-Sam, but also by officials of the ruling Democratic Justice Party and Koreans at large.    All these disparate groups are surprisingly of one voice in attributing this improvement on Korea's political landscape to &quot;education,&quot; pointing to a 98% literacy rate. No one cites the market's role in creating in less than a generation that element that since Aristotle has been deemed the bedrock of a free and prosperous polity: a middle class. Pace the New York Times's former executive editor, A.M. Rosenthal, who earlier this year predicted a revolution in two years, there's already been one. A Korean middle class on the rise has moved the debate from whether to reform to how.    As distasteful as it is for those who want America to adopt a Carteresque policy centering on publicly insulting President Chun, if the man is (quite rightly) going to be held accountable for everything wrong with Korea he also ought to get some credit for what goes right. Even last month's State Department report censuring his government for press restrictions and a &quot;pervasive and ingrained problem&quot; of police brutality nonetheless acknowledged the &quot;considerable personal freedom, including economic and religious freedom and broad rights to pursue private interests.&quot; The point is not that President Chun is a liberal. The point is that he is liberalizing.    The economy is the most obvious area. Amid a jumble of picturesque dwellings, each with its little &quot;ji-boong,&quot; or roof, smiling upward at the corners in traditional Korean style, the glassy corporate headquarters of Hyundai stretches up into the sky. The numbers tell the same story: Under President Chun, Korea has continued its record economic growth, moving from a developing to a newly industrialized nation; with 12% growth in 1986, Korea today ranks 20th in the world in terms of gross national product and 12th in terms of trade. As the opposition's Kim Dae-Jung and Kim Young-Sam correctly stress in interviews, the government has largely done this by favoring and protecting big business groups such as Hyundai, and that has caused problems at home and abroad. But this is an argument for more, not less, liberalization.    Translated into political terms, this new prosperity means that Koreans have much to lose by upheaval. This is one of the many differences between Korea and a Philippines impoverished under Marcos rule. It helps explain why Koreans have been reluctant to join the students or even rush to the opposition: Though the government wouldn't win any popularity contests, so long as it moves in the right direction Koreans are not going to take to the streets. Indeed, most Koreans view the opposition-government clash less as a matter of reform than of who will emerge top dog, especially given the lack of real policy differences. Younger opposition figures champ at the autocratic bit of &quot;the two Kims,&quot; as their leaders are commonly called. The public at large worries that intransigence on both sides will mean a vicious circle of ever-hardening positions.    The wild card everyone wants to play is America. Thus far, this U.S. administration has wisely tried to avoid endorsing any particular solution. For example, though Secretary Shultz met only with President Chun, a deputy assistant secretary of state arrived two days earlier and met with opposition figures. Naturally enough, the opposition complains publicly about the Shultz visit and the government privately about his aide's visit. That is just politics.    The U.S. position on Korea, stated by Assistant Secretary of State Gaston Sigur in February and endorsed here by Mr. Shultz Friday, favors &quot;constitutional and legislative reform,&quot; a permanent &quot;`civilianizing' {of} their politics,&quot; but leaves it to Koreans &quot;to decide what institutions and mechanisms best fit their country's needs.&quot; Continued Korean political progress depends partly on whether America resists the temptation of a more activist role that might jeopardize the whole arrangement and leave the U.S. holding the bag. That is diplomacy.    Right now the focus is on getting both sides to compromise, which would be the ideal but unlikely outcome. The more practical approach would be to set in motion changes that would foster competing institutions that help make compromise less subject to individual whim.    In this 200th anniversary year of the U.S. Constitution, it would be wise to remember James Madison's great insight that only power blocks power. In the case of Korea, the power that needs strengthening is a rising middle class that yearns politically for the same freedoms it has tasted economically. Even the big businessmen so favored by the government chafe under government control. Oddly enough, the upshot is that those most reluctant to express their dissatisfaction are ruling-party members themselves, equally fearful of the foreign press and their own bureaucracy. So the government controls the rate of progress but the opposition sets the agenda.    All in all, that tension is not a bad thing. Absent an unprecedented compromise between the opposition and the government, the important thing is to couple President Chun's promised retirement next year with measures to give more backbone to nongovernment institutions: greater local rule, say, along with more press freedom. Expansion of economic opportunity at the expense of the government's corporatist approach to economics -- reducing tariffs, government control of credit, etc. -- would give a tremendous and popular push to democratization, not to mention smoothing some distortions in world trade.    Today those extolling the links between the market and democracy are mostly on the right, and they have especially influenced the current U.S. administration. But these links were most elegantly set down more than a century ago when a German thinker named Karl Marx chronicled the revolutionary role of a merchant class in gradually pulling down the old feudal order by creating a countersource of political power, namely economic wealth. Willingly or not, knowingly or otherwise, out of self-preservation or concern for his country, in loosening the government's grip over people's economic lives, President Chun has sown the same seeds of destruction for the very Korean order that put him on top. If ultimately successful, this would prove an ironic but welcome legacy.    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>