<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Africa:Eritrea Struggles -- as West Yawns---By Charles Petrie</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC FREST </IN><DATELINE> OROTA, Ethiopia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After 25 years of struggle, the Eritrean conflict in Ethiopia has become one of the longest-running guerrilla wars in the world. The Eritrean Peoples' Liberation Front has resisted eight successive offensives and now controls 85% of the contested land. The group, however, looks in vain to Europe and America for recognition of its struggle and help in getting Ethiopia to the negotiating table.    Eritrea, the northern province of Ethiopia, is the homeland of some three and a half million people. In many Western minds, the province's lengthy independence fight has long been dismissed in favor of a wider recognition of the nation of Ethiopia. But this region has emerged as one of the principal defenders of freedom in Soviet-oppressed Ethiopia. Eritreans are united behind the Eritrean Peoples' Liberation Front, an organization unfairly categorized as Marxist-Leninist because of now-distant ideological roots. Failing to understand the Eritreans' struggle today means failing to understand the true nature of the problem in Ethiopia.    Eritrea, through the EPLF, fights a giant with two heads. The first is Ethiopia's army, 10 times the size of Eritrea's regular army, and equipped and backed by the Soviet Union. The second is the international community's refusal to see the conflict as anything other than an internal Ethiopian problem. One result of this ignorance is that a movement with strong national support, one that has produced some of the most efficient structures in Africa, has had to develop without exterior aid. Another result is mass-scale suffering: first during the 1984-86 famine, and now emerging in the form of agricultural devastation due to locust attacks.    The famine in Ethiopia, like the famine in Mozambique, is the bitter product of civil war. Eritrea, an area four times the size of Belgium, is situated along the Red Sea coast, between Sudan and Djibouti. The region, about a tenth the land mass of Ethiopia, is divided more or less in half by a front. To the west lies the Liberated Zone, a mountainous area totally under the control of the EPLF. Here rest the administrative, military, economic and political bases of the movement. Because of minimal anti-aircraft defenses the area is continuously subjected to raids by Ethiopian MiG bombers. All structures visible from the air have been reduced to rubble by the raids and shelling. So the different departments of the EPLF are hidden underground along the various valleys. To the east lie semi-liberated zones, frequently controlled by EPLF guerrillas.    More than any other African independence movement, the EPLF has already mapped out concrete postwar plans. Current Eritrean economic proposals envisage a mixed economy. In the medical field experiments have citizens participating in the cost of their health coverage, a traditionally heavy burden for Third World government budgets. The backbone of the nascent economy comprises a number of production units aimed at decreasing Eritrean dependence on now-essential imports. The pharmaceutical department produces more than 54 drugs, including three types of antibiotic.    Other new industries include the shoe-production unit, which makes the black sandals that are the trademark of the EPLF fighter; the electronics department, which produces radios and amplifiers; and the various repair shops that service watches and captured Soviet and Ethiopian equipment.    Much is being done to prepare for the period after hostilities. Education programs are run behind the front lines. It is not uncommon to come upon a group of fighters some 200 yards from the front having a math lesson or taking exams. Skilled expatriate Eritreans -- many of whom are now scattered in North America and West Europe -- are invited to participate in training, as teachers or consultants to the various technical services. Unskilled expatriates, mostly to be found in the camps of Sudan, are invited to come for a month to help build roads, work on agricultural programs and join the education courses.    Cultural and educational groups travel to all the countries where the Eritrean communities reside to help maintain national feeling. Given the different origins of these Eritreans, the EPLF is discussing the possibility of a multiparty political environment. The objective is to enable Eritreans to come back to Eritrea once peace and stability have been won.    But such promising plans are blocked by strong Soviet-backed Ethiopian offensives. &quot;At present there is great pessimism in Eritrea as to the possibilities of peace,&quot; says Isseyas Aferworki, leader of the EPLF. The Derg, as the military regime in Addis Ababa is known, has not defined new positions for negotiating peace since 1976. The consensus is that blame for this belongs with the Soviet Union, which is said to maintain the Ethiopian regime's martial arrogance through its substantial military support.    The role of the Soviet Union in this conflict has shifted. The Soviets supported the Eritreans when Haile Selassie was in power, but then dropped them when Mr. Selassie was deposed in hope of gaining greater influence in their area. &quot;The only solution is intervention of a third party to bring pressure on the Ethiopian government to force it to the negotiating table,&quot; says the EPLF's Mr. Aferworki.    Unfortunately, in this goal the EPLF is not helped by the U.S. government, which, perhaps finding the conflict of limited regional potential, has preferred to attempt to regain influence over Addis Ababa through famine aid. Nor do Eritreans find support from the other leaders in the international community, who have also ignored the EPLF to the benefit of their desire to maintain standing with the Ethiopian regime. Unlike similar African movements such as Jonas Savimbi's UNITA in Angola, the EPLF stands alone.    This problem found its cruel expression in the absence of direct governmental aid from Europe during the 1984-86 famine. Eritreans in zones controlled by the EPLF had to depend exclusively on their own resources and aid from nongovernmental organizations for help during the catastrophe. The cost was heavy: 500,000 people stranded within Eritrea and nearly one million forced to flee to Sudan.    Another tragedy is under way. Locusts have been breeding freely in Eritrea. Having ravaged the Eritrean hills, they are progressing into the lower lands of Ethiopia and Sudan. A famine on a large scale is not impossible. Some 120,000 people within Eritrea are still entirely in need of aid for survival.    ---   Mr. Petrie recently traveled for a month in Eritrea. </TEXT></DOC>