<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861219-0121 </DOCNO><HL> If Congress Halts Contra Funding---By Ronald Radosh</HL><DD> 12/19/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   One of the casualties of the Iran-contra arms scandal may well be further congressional funding of the Nicaraguan contras. Longtime opponents of such funding are now arguing that the secrecy, opportunism and corruption of this episode reflect the true morality of the contra venture. This leaves Congress and the administration with the need to come to terms with their lack of a realistic U.S. policy on Nicaragua and fashion one that will meet both the security needs of the region and current U.S. political realities.    Even before the erosion of congressional support for the contras, their plight was serious. Costa Rica has taken severe steps to isolate the southern-front rebels. The Hondurans insist that the contra forces abandon their Honduran camps and move as quickly as possible into Nicaragua proper, something that seems militarily impossible.    The contras also have failed to score a dramatic military success, such as the seizure of a town. In a recent Commentary article, Penn Kemble and Arturo Cruz Jr. argue that the contras should not be put to such a severe test; that they have gained more than the Sandinistas did in a comparable period of activity against Somoza, and that the totalitarian structure of Nicaragua makes the kind of active support the Sandinistas obtained impossible to achieve. Rather than seeking dramatic results, they plead, Congress should look at their ability to sustain a long-term military presence that will produce growing instability within Nicaragua.    Such a course is hardly likely to be adopted. Expecting quick results, Congress seems in little frame of mind to finance the kind of enduring, indecisive guerrilla warfare that Messrs. Kemble and Cruz make the case for. With the new scandal, the chances are even slimmer. The need for pressure against the regime is, however, more necessary than ever.    Today, clearly, the extent and depth of repression has increased, as the Sandinistas move to consolidate their power and finalize the growing Bolshevization of the once broad-based original revolution of 1979. Indeed, one is struck about how little political space now exists. In contrast, since the demise of severe death-squad activity in El Salvador, even the guerrilla-linked mass organizations have revived, and left-led unions and action groups openly demonstrate and parade in Jose Napoleon Duarte's El Salvador. A breakaway faction from Guillermo Ungo's guerrilla-aligned socialist party has decided to enter politics and run candidates opposed to the ruling Christian Democrats.    In Nicaragua, by contrast, a broken and token opposition serves only to cement the fig-leaf of pluralism needed to gather Western support for the Sandinistas.    Democratic opponents of the contras have argued for months that their opposition is to the contra war, and that they are not defending the Sandinistas. Yet, they have failed to offer any meaningful alternatives that would provide U.S. protection to the democratic resistance. Their actions make it appear that they would remain content to sign a regional treaty with Nicargua that would mean the abandonment of the opposition.    The new crisis, however, provides an opportunity. Except for the die-hards of the Democratic Party's left wing, who probably in reality favor the Sandinistas, a bipartisan consensus can be achieved that recognizes the threat posed by a Soviet-aligned government to U.S. security, and seeks to exert pressure of a strong character that can force the comandantes to back down. These include:    --Massive financing of democratic opponents of the Sandinistas. Recently, the remaining Nicaraguan opposition groups, from Social Christians to the communists, have pledged to run joint unity candidates for coming local elections -- they think they can win the mayorality race in Masaya as well as Managua (where, despite the government's tight organizational hold, economic decline is most evident). Such an event would thoroughly embarrass the Sandinistas and reveal their lack of genuine popular support.    Friends of the Nicaraguan people should express as much solidarity with the Sandinistas' opponents as their supporters show for the comandantes. (Last year, some of America's greatest legal minds met at New York University to help the Sandinistas begin writing a new &quot;democratic&quot; constitution. When the work is finished, the Sandinistas will reveal how American democrats wrote their document, proving once again how committed their government is to pluralism.) To achieve this end, the disorganized, weak and demolished opposition groups desperately need funding. Now is the time for Congress to allocate sufficient funds, through the already existing National Endowment for Democracy, to finance an effective campaign by the opposition forces. Such above-board support of a nonmilitary campaign should prove hard for even the Democratic Party's left to oppose.    The Nicaraguan government should be told that internal peace depends upon their willingness to negotiate with all interested parties, including the contra rebels, who will no doubt have enough resources to keep fighting even if Congress cuts off the aid pipeline. The Sandinistas should be pressured to do no less than the Duarte government did in El Salvador.    If the Sandinistas demonstrated a willingness to negotiate with the rebels and then allow free elections, Ronald Reagan could in turn apply pressure on the contras to reduce their military activity against the government in step with the restoration of basic freedoms in Nicaragua. The same kind of pressure persuaded many conservative El Salvadorans to give qualified support to Mr. Duarte in 1982 and 1983.    --Pressure to reopen La Prensa. The Sandinistas used the contra war as an excuse to close down La Prensa, which they claimed was subversive. Without the contra war, they argued, La Prensa could have been allowed to function. The current situation gives the lie to their arguments. The rebels have suffered setbacks, but the government has not moved to reopen the only free news source in the country. The real reason is clear. La Prensa allowed the opposition to give people the truth, and the government couldn't allow the paper to function. NED funding of the paper could also be renewed by Congress.    --Should other steps fail, the U.S. should consider a formal break in diplomatic relations. In an earlier era, President Woodrow Wilson gave support to the policy recommendation of his last secretary of state, Bainbridge Colby, who issued the Colby Note on Relations with Russia in August 1920. Written for the secretary by the American socialist John Spargo, the Note proclaimed it was the intention of the U.S. not to have diplomatic relations with the Soviets, and that it urged other powers to follow suit. The Note also opposed those who wanted direct U.S. military intervention against the Bolsheviks.    Such a statement, if presented today, would do much to reassure Nicaraguans who fear a U.S. military invasion, but who have no use for the Sandinistas. The U.S. could sign a formal agreement that it would respect any government freely elected by the Nicaraguan people, even a revolutionary one, as long as all elements of the population had full access to a truly free electoral campaign. In the language of the original Colby Note, the U.S. should reject relations with &quot;a government which is determined and bound to conspire against our institutions,&quot; of a regime based &quot;upon the negation of every principle of honor and good faith.&quot;    In another troubled time, Herbert Hoover pursued the policy of nonrecognition of Japanese-occupied Manchuria; a policy meant to pressure and isolate Japan, and, in historian Richard Current's words, to be a &quot;final and sufficient measure, a substitute for economic pressure or military force, a formula looking toward conciliation and peace and relying on the moral force of public opinion for its effect.&quot;    Liberal opponents of the Reagan administration have rightly objected to the hypocrisy involved in aiding rebel forces seeking to overturn a government the U.S. recognizes. They are correct. The first step in meeting this objection is to break diplomatic relations.    Contra supporters will object that such mechanisms have little chance of success; that military muscle is the best single method of restraining the Sandinistas.    It remains to be seen just how the current crisis will affect the chances that remain for support of the contras. I formerly was a strong opponent of any assistance, humanitarian or military, to the contras. I am still ambivalent about the wisdom of the U.S. providing such aid. However, everyone who genuinely cares about the condition of freedom in Nicaragua, whatever his views on the contras, has a responsibility to come up with serious alternatives that will put effective pressure on the Sandinistas -- diplomatically, politically and economically. Failure to do so casts adrift the entire Nicaraguan people, not just the contras. Whether such pressure will be enough to make a difference, only time will tell. But it would be a start, and would offer hope that sometime in the future the generation of 1979 that overthrew Somoza will again see a free Nicaragua.    ---   Mr. Radosh, a historian who teaches at the City University of New York, writes frequently on Central America. </TEXT></DOC>