<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Outlawed Weapons -- A Scourge Returns --- Fighting Dirty: Western Industry Sells Third World the Means To Produce Poison Gas --- Germans in Particular Supply The New 'Pesticide Plants' In Volatile Mideast Region --- Nabbing a Cargo at Kennedy </HL><AUTHOR> John J. Fialka (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST EUROP GOVMT FREST FORGN </CO><IN> CHM ARO MON </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>      {Second of a Series}   In the spring of 1984, it began to dawn on the specialty-chemicals sales staff at Phillips Petroleum Co. in Bartlesville, Okla., that somebody had made a terrible mistake.    News accounts told of thousands of Iranian soldiers at the Iraqi front suffering severe burns and damaged lungs from mustard gas, a poison that killed or maimed over a million people in World War I. Just a year earlier, a Belgian unit of Phillips had sold an Iraqi pesticide company 500 tons of a complex chemical called thiodiglycol. When combined with hydrochloric acid, thiodiglycol produces mustard gas.    The deal was a record sale of this obscure chemical, and had been regarded as a coup at the time. Now the reaction at Phillips was anguish.    Poison gas is pushing its way into the world's attention these days, with Iraq accused of turning the savage weapon on its own Kurdish minority, only months after the latest chemical exchanges in the Iran-Iraq war. But where does a country like Iraq or Iran get chemical weapons? Alarmed officials of Western governments set out four years ago to track this lethal trade and try to curb it.    They have had made some progress, along with some unsettling discoveries. What they found was a maze of shadowy deals reaching from Third World countries through European trading companies and brokers to large chemical-supply concerns such as Phillips, and, especially, several West German companies.    The first shock for the Western officials was to learn that Iraq, the main suspect, didn't have to import fully manufactured chemical weapons. Much of the simpler poison-gas technology, the means to make World War I vintage compounds such as mustard gas, was already in place and operating within Iraq itself.    Even more disturbing, they learned that an Iraqi entity called the State Establishment for Pesticide Production (SEPP), which was the agency that bought the thiodiglycol from Phillips, was acquiring hardware and ingredients to make deadly nerve gas. Nerve gases can be up to 100 times more toxic than mustard gas, capable of killing almost instantly in tiny amounts. Though U.S. intelligence says there is no conclusive evidence, United Nations investigating teams that made five trips to the war front suspect Iraq of using nerve gas there.    The Western defense and intelligence officials were set on the track of the chemical supplies after Iran sent to British hospitals patients who obviously had been victims of gas attacks. Also in 1984, Iran presented to an international assemblage in Geneva videotapes and other evidence of Iraqi use of chemical weapons. The Western officials began meeting privately at the Australian Embassy in Paris, where they drafted proposed new export regulations for members to take back to their home countries and impose.    But they quickly learned that the global chemical trade isn't one that is easy to put a leash on. Many of the chemicals that needed to be curbed to prevent poison-gas manufacture also have legitimate uses in commercial products like pesticides, lubricants, paints and fertilizers. The same is true of some of the laboratory equipment. And the chemicals trade is a highly competitive business, which puts a premium on confidentiality.    &quot;Part of the problem here is that you're dealing with an industry where no eyebrows are ever raised against anything,&quot; complains one member of the so-called Australian group, which now includes representatives from 19 nations and the Common Market.    Apparently no eyebrows were lifted in 1983 at Phillips, which received the order for the thiodiglycol from KBS Holland B.V., a Dutch trading company handling the order from Iraq's SEPP pesticide organization. In July 1983, when the trucks arrived in Tessenderloo, Belgium, to pick up the thiodiglycol, Phillips learned that &quot;it was going to a big agricultural user in Iraq,&quot; says Raymond Verding, a vice president of the Phillips's specialty-chemicals division in charge of the sale. Referring to mustard gas, he says, &quot;Nobody had any idea some people would be looking at a gas of that sort.&quot;    The sales executive contends the deal didn't seem unusual, because pesticide manufacturers often buy thiodiglycol in &quot;orders of hundreds of tons.&quot; But pesticide experts disagree. They say thiodiglycol normally is sold in quantities of a few tens of tons at a time, for uses in the printing, textile and automotive industries. &quot;I'm not aware of this particular chemical being used in agriculture&quot; at all, says Stanford Fertig, head of pesticide research at the U.S. Department of Agriculture's research center.    By early 1984, when Phillips received a second order for 500 tons of thiodiglycol from SEPP, company officials had grown suspicious. They rejected the order. The alarm was spreading too within the Belgian government. It revoked Phillips's license to make thiodiglycol and put the chemical on a list subject to export controls. Many other industrial nations, spurred by the Australian group, have since done the same.    Phillips's U.S. parent subsequently decided to sell it only to known domestic customers. &quot;We lose business,&quot; says specialty-chemicals manager Robert Emerson, &quot;but it's not worth the risk.&quot;    Around this same time, in February 1984, a customs inspector at New York's Kennedy Airport stopped a shipment from being sent to Iraq's SEPP by a Nashville, Tenn., company called Al-Haddad Enterprises Inc. It was 74 barrels of potassium fluoride -- a chemical used in making Sarin nerve gas. Sahib al-Haddad, a naturalized American citizen born in Iraq, won't comment on the shipment, which wasn't illegal because U.S. controls hadn't yet come into effect. He says his company mainly exports food to Iraq.    Finding the shipment was &quot;a fluke&quot; at the busy airport, says the agent in charge of Customs Service operations at Kennedy, Art Stiffle. Some 120 cargo-carrying flights leave Kennedy for overseas each day. New regulations or no, &quot;unless we have specific information saying, yes, it can be used for chemical weapons, we have to let it go,&quot; Mr. Stiffle says.    But U.S. officials did detect several years ago a sudden surge in Middle Eastern demand for pesticide technology. They also noticed that West German chemical companies were heavily involved in meeting it. &quot;The Germans were showing up all over the place,&quot; says a U.S. official who spoke on condition he not be named. A State Department-CIA task force visited the Bonn government to ask it to rein in the companies.    The delegation came armed with satellite photos of heavily fortified underground sites in Iraq, where it suspected the Iraqis were working on poison gas. One site, near the Iraqi city of Samarra, included a $2.6 million pesticide factory that had been sold to SEPP by Pilot Plant, a unit of a West German laboratory-equipment supplier called Karl Kolb. The plant contained special corrosion-resistant parts that could be used to make Sarin, the most lethal of the nerve gases developed by the Nazis.    Kolb denies that the plant was designed to produce poison gas. Such a facility, says managing director Helmut Maier, &quot;would need special precautions, special pumps that can't break down or leak.&quot; When the West German government responded to the U.S. plea with export controls on certain lab equipment and chemicals, Kolb sued, forcing Bonn to admit that two government chemists sent to inspect the plant had found it appeared to be a normal pesticide plant.    But Mr. Maier concedes the Pilot Plant unit had been set up to meet &quot;a tremendous demand&quot; among developing countries for plants to conduct large-scale experiments in exotic chemical processes. And Kolb quietly folded the unit after Bonn began requiring exporters to guarantee that a plant will be used for a specific process. &quot;This is something that no scientist will tell you, so we decided to liquidate this company,&quot; Mr. Maier says.    Not all West German companies, however, may have been so ready to give up the exotic-chemicals business in the Third World. Last November, German prosecutors seized over a ton of documents relating to dealings by Kolb and 12 other companies with the Middle East. Thomas Marx, the lawyer for one of them, expects a major trial involving 25 defendants among the 13 companies being investigated.    The company Mr. Marx represents, W.E.T. G.m.b.H. of Hamburg, sold Iraq's SEPP $10 million worth of equipment, including heavy-duty pumps and chemicals that could be used to make nerve gas. W.E.T. was told it was for a water-treatment plant. But Mr. Marx says the gear was taken by truck through Turkey to Iraq, and the West German companies dealing with SEPP weren't allowed to follow into the heavily guarded restricted area where the plant was being built.    &quot;The whole scheme may be for the Holy Ghost or someone who can put all these things together,&quot; Mr. Marx says.    The Iraqis take a cynical view of the West's actions, says the lawyer, who recently returned from Baghdad after negotiating damage claims made after W.E.T. stopped delivering. &quot;They said there were many of the same {European} companies just over the border {in Iran}, and they're building the same technology.&quot;    Iran, in fact, retained West Germany's Lurgi G.m.b.H. last October to advise it on construction of a large, modern pesticide complex. Lurgi says that it has taken no role in engineering or building the plant, which, it adds, will make only commercial pesticides under licenses from West German, East German, Swiss and Indian companies.    Syria, another nation that Western-government experts say has chemical weapons, aroused U.S. concern about five years ago over another West German deal. A company called Schott Glasswerke sold a Damascus research institute corrosion-resistant glass pipes, glass vessels and other lab equipment that U.S. officials suspect is used to handle the ingredients of Sarin nerve gas. Schott doesn't know what the equipment was used for, says a spokesman, Deiter Kappler. &quot;In nearly all cases, we do not know what our customers are producing because they don't tell us,&quot; he says. Syria has denied that it is making chemical weapons.    Since Western nations imposed the new chemical export controls inspired by the Australian group, apparently just one firm, a Dutch trading company called Melchemie Holland B.V., has been convicted of violations. The Netherlands government fined it $30,000 for selling Iraq's SEPP a number of restricted chemicals without a license, including phosphorus oxychloride, a possible component of nerve gas. Melchemie officials didn't return calls seeking comment.    Though the Australian group believes it has made progress in curbing chemicalweapons supplies, concern that further controls are needed grew last March after fighting near Halabja in northern Iraq. Television coverage of the aftermath of the battle, in which Iran claimed that 3,000 people were killed, showed entire families of indigenous Kurds frozen in death, their unmarked bodies giving little evidence of what had killed them.    Manuel Dominguez, a doctor sent by the United Nations to investigate, examined 66 survivors. He concluded that 62 had been injured by mustard gas, while four others showed symptoms of nerve-gas poisoning. Dr. Dominguez reported that he suspected Tabun, the original nerve gas developed by Nazi Germany in the 1930s.    Graham Pearson, director of Britain's Chemical Defense Establishment, which designs equipment to detect nerve gas, is among experts who say there isn't sufficient evidence to say that nerve gas has been used in the Iran-Iraq war. Victims of it either recover rapidly or die, in which case the chemicals quickly break down, he explains. But he doesn't have any doubt that mustard gas was used on the Iranians sent to British hospitals.    Analysts in the State Department-CIA task force believe that Halabja may have been a case in which Iran retaliated against a mustard-gas attack by using hydrogen cyanide. Cyanide can kill almost instantly, and it may be what devastated the Kurdish families shown in television coverage.    Iraq says most of the SEPP pesticide plant has been &quot;privatized&quot; and produces only nonmilitary products like paints and fertilizers. Asked in July about poison gas in the Iran-Iraq war, Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz told a news conference in Bonn: &quot;I am a frank man, and I say that such weapons were used in this conflict. The Iranians started the use.&quot; The Iraqi Embassy in Washington insists the foreign minister was misunderstood, but yesterday Defense Minister Adnan Kheirullah said in Iraq that &quot;the general rule is that these weapons should not be used, and this is a rule which we believe in. But I would like to say that if this is the rule, then for every rule there is an exception.&quot;    Iran denies it has used chemical weapons. U.N. investigators, however, say both combatants in the long and bloody Iran-Iraq war have done so repeatedly. And it is clear that many other Third World nations are stockpiling them.    One expert working on the problem for the Australian group says countries like Iraq get around new export controls by buying subcomponents of prohibited ingredients, many of which are still commercially available. Nations with less chemical technology try to build stockpiles by using front companies and other elaborate deceptions, or by searching for suppliers in countries like India and Brazil, which haven't yet imposed export controls.    &quot;We can slow it down, but we haven't stopped it,&quot; he says. &quot;At this point, we can claim only a modest success.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>