<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880311-0163 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: The Economic and Political Awakening of Argentina's Peronists </HL><AUTHOR> Jorge Chediek </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   The Peronists, Argentina's principal opposition force, are on the verge of completing a significant ideological and organizational transformation. Gone are the days of Juan Domingo Peron exhorting the masses from the balcony of the Presidential Palace, of the shrill voice of his wife Evita decrying the takeover of Argentina by foreign multinationals, and of union bosses dominating the party's political machinery. Shedding their traditional cloak of authoritarianism and unbridled populism, the Peronists have embarked on a process of political and economic democratization that has added a degree of stability and hope to the country's historically chaotic political process.    The turning point for the Peronists came in the 1983 presidential elections when the rival Radical Party's nominee, Raul Alfonsin, won -- and shattered the myth of Peronist electoral invincibility. Also made evident was the electorate's unwillingness to return to the violence and anarchy with which the Peronists had come to be associated. Sensing the need for reform, Carlos Grosso, Jose Manzano, Jose de la Sota and other younger party activists united with older politicians such as Antonio Cafiero and Carlos Menem and called for the election of the party's leaders and candidates, the dismantling of the Peronist political machine, and a rethinking of the party's economic platform.    The efforts of the Renovadores (the Reformers) are important because they represent the first serious attempt to convert Peronism into an authentic democratic political party and to question the party's traditional support for protectionism and economic nationalism. They become even more significant when examined in the historical context in which the movement developed and in light of the party's strong anti-democratic heritage.    When Peronism emerged in the mid-1940s as Argentina's leading political force, it was little more than a movement centered around the charismatic figure of Juan Peron, fueled by his unique ideological blend of populism, authoritarianism and anti-Americanism. Argentina's all-powerful trade unions formed the movement's base of popular support, the military was drawn toward Peronism's violent ambiance and the industrialists were persuaded by the lure of protectionism.    On the economic front, Peron called for Argentina's &quot;economic independence.&quot; He nationalized the railroads, the telephone companies, the electric utilities and other public-service industries. Deficit spending and huge public-works projects became the pillars of Peronist economic policy. A constitutional amendment and a series of laws restricting foreign investment were approved. In an attempt to isolate domestic production from foreign competition, quantitative restrictions on imports, as well as other protectionist measures, were implemented with the support of the country's economic oligarchy. The theory of industrial development through import substitution was embraced by nearly all.    This combination of personality cult, authoritarian extremism, union domination and economic protectionism was maintained by the Peronists into the 1980s and has been the principal target of attack by the Reformers. The reform movement's leadership has been taken from the union bosses and placed in the hands of politicians chosen through internal elections. The Peronists now are widely perceived as responsible and stable participants in the political process.    By distancing itself from its legacy of violence and chaos, the party has been able to expand its support among the middle class and widen its electoral appeal. This increased popularity was perhaps most clearly manifested in the September 1987 congressional and gubernatorial elections in which Peronist governors were elected in 17 of 22 provinces and Mr. Alfonsin's Radical Party was deprived of its majority in the lower house of Congress.    Traditional Peronist support for strong protectionist policies was in many ways an inevitable byproduct of the party's authoritarian political orientation. With Argentina's return to democracy, however, many in the movement have come to appreciate the extent to which political freedom and economic liberty are linked and have called for greater moderation in the party's economic platform.    The Reformers do favor a tougher stance toward the IMF and Argentina's international creditors on the issue of the external debt than do the Radicals. However, their position is based on what they perceive to be the technical impossibility of repayment rather than a conscious desire to break with Western financial institutions. They also have softened their previous opposition to the privatization of public-sector industries and the opening of the internal market to foreign investment. While criticized by some legislators for not going far enough, a draft bill has been prepared by Peronist legislators calling for increased privatization of state-owned enterprises.    The party's leadership also has recognized the need to cut the federal budget deficit, and has supported President Alfonsin's call for greater economic integration with Brazil and Uruguay. In addition, Peronist control of most of the provincial governments has led the party to take up the old conservative banner of federalism and to call for the decentralization of the economic decision-making process.    The reforms within the Peronist movement are in large measure a reflection of the swing to the center that is occurring in the political thinking of Argentine society. During the 1987 congressional elections, the coalition of conservative parties (called &quot;liberals&quot; in Argentina) had strong showings in the nation's capital and the urban areas of other provinces. At the University of Buenos Aires, a traditional bastion of leftist thinking and support, the free-market-oriented Union Para la Apertura Universitaria (UPAU) now is the second-leading student group in the university's Federation of Students, with significantly more support than the Peronists and other leftist organizations. It is this change in public opinion that made the Reformers realize that future political survival depends on the moderation of Peronist economic dogma.    Despite the Peronists' reforms, there still exists a great deal of distrust and animosity between the liberals and the Peronists. A number of liberal leaders already have indicated that if thrust into the role of broker in a deadlocked electoral college, they would favor reaching an agreement with the Radicals in the 1989 presidential elections. The chances for a Peronist/liberal alliance will become even more remote if, as expected, Eduardo Angeloz, the moderate governor of Cordoba, emerges as the Radical's presidential candidate.    The democratization of the Peronist Justice Party and the moderation of its economic platform may not ensure the continuity of the country's fragile democracy, but it clearly is a step in the right direction.    ---   Mr. Hewko, an attorney practicing with a Washington, D.C., firm, recently returned from two years in Argentina and Brazil. Mr. Chediek, a senior political analyst at the Argentine Parliamentary Information Bureau, is currently on leave as a graduate student at Georgetown's School of Foreign Service. </TEXT></DOC>