<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870205-0025 </DOCNO><HL> Companies Wrestle With ThreatsTo Workers' Reproductive Health---By Barry MeierStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR GOVMTELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   In 1983, pregnant women working at a Digital Equipment Corp. semiconductor plant in Hudson, Mass., experienced an unusual number of miscarriages.    To learn why, the company commissioned a study by the University of Massachusetts School of Public Health, the unpublished results of which it shared last month with other semiconductor makers. Without uncovering the specific cause of the problem, the study found, among other things, that the miscarriage rate for a group of 67 women at the Hudson plant working in so-called clean rooms -- where computer chips are etched with acids and gases -- was 39%, nearly twice the national average.    Responses to the report have differed sharply. American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. has removed all pregnant women from several computer-chip production jobs. Digital says it is &quot;strongly urging&quot; pregnant women to leave such posts. Intel Corp., National Semiconductor Corp. and others have expressed no opinion on the report and say they are leaving any decisions about transferring to the employees themselves.    These disparate reactions highlight the dilemmas that companies face when grappling with one of today's most sensitive business-safety issues: potential hazards in the workplace that may affect workers' ability to reproduce. Although recent evidence suggests that a variety of chemicals and even video-display terminals may pose such health risks, there is still little consensus on what action to take. Policies designed to address the problem, usually by banning pregnant or fertile women from certain jobs, have often touched off controversy and even lawsuits alleging discrimination.    &quot;Companies aren't dealing with eliminating toxics,&quot; says David LeGrand, a union health official with the Communications Workers of America. &quot;They are simply displacing women.&quot;    Only 15 of the 500 largest U.S. companies have comprehensive policies covering reproductive hazards, according to a recent report by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment. One problem in establishing such policies is a lack of conclusive data. Few industrial compounds have been tested for their potential reproductive hazards to men, women or unborn children. And the federal government regulates only four threats to reproductive health: ionizing radiation, lead, the sterilant ethylene oxide and the pesticide dibromochloropropane, or DBCP.    Industry and government scientists agree that many more substances pose similar risks. A recent study by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, or NIOSH, found that male workers exposed to glycol ethers, a class of solvents widely used in the paint and electronics industries, had sperm counts sharply below the national average. Other tests suggest that exposure to arsenic, mercury, anesthetic gases, some solvents and certain drugs and pesticides may also cause male infertility, spontaneous abortions, miscarriages or birth defects.    Corporate reactions to such threats have often stirred resentment among employees. The United Auto Workers, for example, is currently suing Johnson Controls Inc., a Milwaukee-based company, over its policy of excluding women from battery-making jobs involving exposure to lead. &quot;The problem with all these plans is the assumption that these substances only affect women&quot; says Joan E. Bertin, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberities Union, which has filed several discrimination suits over so-called fetal-protection policies.    But Johnson Controls maintains that its plan is designed solely to protect unborn children and doesn't discriminate against women. In some cases, the company says, a fetus appears more vulnerable to workplace hazards than adults. Jean Beaudoin, a top safety official at Johnson Controls, says that while some battery producers bar only pregnant women from the workplace, Johnson's policy includes all fertile women because of fears that women often don't immediately know when they are pregnant.    In limited legal tests, courts have ruled that fetal-protection policies are discriminatory -- unless a company makes a strong scientific showing that workplace hazards pose a particular risk to unborn children. Edward Calabrese, a University of Massachusetts toxicologist who worked on the Digital study, says both Digital and ATandamp;T may have overreacted to the report, which doesn't link the Hudson plant problem with any particular chemical. &quot;In a public-health sense, they both have gone further than the data,&quot; he says.    Spokesmen for both companies describe their policies as precautionary. But Mr. LeGrand -- the union health official whose Communications Workers of America represents workers at one ATandamp;T semiconductor plant -- suggests that if a problem exists, simply removing pregnant workers won't preclude future high miscarriage rates.    Along with the glycol ethers, another substance that may be further scrutinized is arsine gas, some scientists suggest. The compound is widely used by the electronics industry to produce computer chips.    Although studies of the gas's reproductive threat don't exist, tests indicate that animals convert arsine into arsenate, a potent reproductive toxin, says John Branford, president of Occupational Health Systems Inc. a Nashville, Tenn.-based company that compiles data on workplace hazards. Such studies also suggest that arsenate can cross the womb's protective barrier, causing fetal death or birth defects, he adds. Some companies, however, note that arsine is used in a vacuum chamber, which minimizes worker exposure.    Getting companies to agree on how to identify such reproductive hazards also creates problems. In 1983, for example, NIOSH began studying the risks posed by video display terminals, or VDTs, following sporadic reports of high miscarriage rates among some VDT users in several industries. VDTs emit certain wavelengths of ionizing radiation.    BellSouth Corp., an Atlanta-based regional telephone company, is letting NIOSH study the reproductive health of its female workers. But the company won't let researchers ask workers about their fertility history or their perception of occupational stress, a potential cause of miscarriages. A BellSouth spokesman says the company believes such questions are &quot;outside&quot; the study's scope.    When NIOSH scientists insisted on the questions' validity, BellSouth sought the help of the White House Office of Management and Budget, which then threatened to block funding for the study unless the questions were dropped. The institute has since relented on the issue, but many researchers at NIOSH and elsewhere believe that without such key questions, the scientific import of the $450,000 publicly funded study is severly impaired.    In a recent memo, James Melius, a senior official at NIOSH, said, &quot;The changes requested by OMB will eliminate information . . . which would help to confirm or explain any differences found between the VDT group&quot; and women who don't use VDTs. </TEXT></DOC>