<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0148 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Tower Report</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Yesterday morning, John Tower, Edmund Muskie and Brent Scowcroft sat in the Old Executive Office Building and answered reporters' questions for the better part of an hour about Ronald Reagan's sale of arms to Iran. That news conference may be the beginning of wisdom on this affair. (CSPAN says it will rebroadcast the Tower Commission news conference on Sunday, March 1 at 11:05 a.m. EST.)    We have had four months of nonstop political fireworks over Irangate with very little coherent explanation of the point of it all. At last, Messrs. Tower, Muskie and Scowcroft have provided a context.    In their answers, the three former public officials insistently deflected irrelevancies (&quot;Were any Fortune 500 companies involved in raising funds for the contras?&quot;) and directly addressed most of the fundamental issues. Those issues are:    Why did the Iran initiative go wrong? What is the role of the presidency in conducting the foreign policy of the United States? What is Congress's role? Did the Iran-contra connection break the law?    The report itself says that the initiative's errors were the result of a management breakdown, and that John Poindexter and Don Regan didn't sufficiently monitor Oliver North's activities. Given Ronald Reagan's style of management, it was their job to see that he was apprised of the content and course of the initiative. Sen. Tower added that Mr. Reagan's focus on concepts rather than details had on the whole produced a successful foreign-policy record, but had failed in this one instance.    The commission concluded that the National Security Council as an institution isn't irreparably damaged, that the NSC chief shouldn't be subject to congressional confirmation, and that the NSC is a necessary instrument of presidential policy.    The commission's view of the president's foreign-policy responsibility addresses the central issue in the Iran-contra affair. The three agreed that the president has primary authority for the conduct of foreign policy, just as the civics books say.    The core of this country's difficulties in foreign policy is that many members of the Washington community have adopted the quite radical position that Congress not only has powers to debate and fund foreign policy but is entitled to engage itself directly in policy execution. That is a prescription for paralysis. The Founding Fathers had been appalled at the extremely poor quality of this country's foreign policy under the shared-power provisions of the Articles of Confederation. They therefore vested primary responsibility for foreign affairs in the president. The Tower Commission usefully suggests placing the congressional oversight of covert activities in a single joint committee with restricted staff.    What the Tower Commission describes as a serious management breakdown is no accident, nor did the process start with this administration. It is the direct result of successive congressional legislative strategies, originating mainly within the political left. The strategy has had two goals: first, to constrict the executive's ability to act; second, to effectively absolve Members of direct responsibility for any failures.    The Boland Amendment, a now-expired law the White House has been accused of breaking, sits at the center of this argument. Yesterday Gen. Scowcroft was asked if the White House had violated the Boland Amendment. Gen. Scowcroft answered that the Boland Amendment is a large, complex law that has been subject to varying interpretations. This answer may surprise much of the public, which has been led to believe that the Boland prohibitions on contra spending had the clarity of a red traffic light. In fact, they were mush, which helps explain how they got through Congress. Legal experts still argue over their meaning. Yet they managed to limit the administration's options in dealing with a Soviet threat in Central America. A crisis was probably inevitable.    Our reading is that the public is indeed disappointed with the White House's handling of this affair but that it had also become increasingly impatient with the cloud of accusatory smoke belching out of Washington. This administration is hardly above criticism. But surely at some point the opposition should be required to lay its cards on the table and make a specific case for the war it is waging against the presidency. It will not get much support from the good, common sense expressed by the members of the Tower Commission yesterday. Maybe that means the case against the presidency isn't a very good one. </TEXT></DOC>