<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Latest Effort to Settle Texaco Case RaisesParties to New Level of Brinkmanship---By Allanna Sullivan and Thomas Petzinger Jr.Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX PZL TWABANKRUPTCIES (BCY)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   Texaco Inc. and Pennzoil Co. are confronting new risks and complexities as they square off in their latest effort to settle their landmark $10.3 billion legal dispute.    On the surface, an out-of-court solution appeared more attainable than ever, thanks to an imaginative settlement scenario that the major players agreed to pursue as part of Texaco's bankruptcy-law proceedings. But the latest settlement has taken the parties to a new level of brinksmanship and uncertainty, with Texaco in the decidedly weaker position.    It was clear yesterday that Pennzoil would seek to settle the case through two channels simultaneously: on the one hand, directly with Texaco, with whom it remains far apart; and on the other hand, with Texaco's creditors, with whom it is closer to an agreement. Pennzoil's pursuit of a two-track settlement strategy follows a decision Wednesday by a bankruptcy judge to give Texaco 40 days to settle with Pennzoil -- and Texaco's creditors the freedom to pursue their own settlement plan with Pennzoil.    The decision put Texaco in a race with its creditors to come to terms with Pennzoil within the 40-day limit, after which Texaco will lose its exclusive right to propose a plan. In fact, the judge indicated he might terminate the period in which Texaco alone can propose a plan if, in the meantime, Pennzoil and the creditors reach their own accord.    &quot;It dramatically changes things,&quot; said Kenneth Klee, a bankruptcy lawyer representing Pennzoil, of Wednesday's decision by the judge.    &quot;We share a more common point of view with Texaco's creditors than with Texaco's management,&quot; added another source close to Houston-based Pennzoil. &quot;The judge has taken away Texaco management's veto power.&quot;    The settlement plan being pushed by creditors is likely to draw fierce resistance from White Plains, N.Y.-based Texaco on several fronts. It was understood, for instance, that as part of their pending reorganization proposal, Texaco's creditors would seek to limit Texaco's ability to take on new debt and would restrict other management freedoms even after the company had settled the Pennzoil case and been discharged from bankruptcy-law proceedings. This could happen through financial covenants that would continue clinging to the company as part of the bankruptcy reorganization plan.    Meanwhile, Pennzoil disclosed that it had been in contact with corporate raider Carl Icahn, who controls 12% of Texaco's common, suggesting that the New York investor was anxious to bring the legal dispute to a rapid conclusion. A source close to the bankruptcy case said Mr. Icahn had spoken directly with J. Hugh Liedtke, the chairman of Pennzoil.    James Shaddix, Pennzoil's assistant general counsel, told analysts in New York that Pennzoil believed Mr. Icahn &quot;can be an extremely constructive force&quot; in settling the case. Mr. Shaddix added that he expects &quot;an intensive effort involving all parties&quot; to settle, and for &quot;the process to begin rapidly.&quot;    An individual familiar with Mr. Icahn's strategy added, &quot;I expect him to exert his power as the largest stockholder. He'll coax, persuade, badger Texaco's management.&quot;    &quot;Everybody is talking to everybody,&quot; said a source close to Texaco. Bankruptcy lawyers for all the parties yesterday huddled over a draft of the crucial order that will spell out the bankruptcy court's rulings of Wednesday. And while meetings weren't yet scheduled between Mr. Liedtke of Pennzoil and James Kinnear, the chief executive officer of Texaco, a source close to the bankruptcy case said Mr. Kinnear had asked Charles Luce, chairman of the creditors' committee, to &quot;get Liedtke to a table.&quot;    The latest settlement effort is at least the eighth since Pennzoil won its mammoth judgment in late 1985, when it convinced a jury that Texaco's acquisition of Getty Oil Co. had interfered with a contract for Pennzoil to acquire an interest in Getty Oil -- a court judgment that ultimately threw Texaco into Chapter 11 proceedings.    But the latest settlement effort is structured far differently than the unsuccessful ones of the past. As previously reported, under the latest proposals, Texaco would pay money to Pennzoil -- up front and nonrefundable -- in exchange for a cap on any judgment affirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court. &quot;It's an insurance policy,&quot; said Calvert Crary, litigation analyst at Bear, Stearns andamp; Co., New York. &quot;The upfront payment is the premium. The back end is the deductible.&quot;    He and several other lawyers applauded the parties' agreement to pursue such a settlement, which would ensure Pennzoil of some monetary recovery and ensure Texaco of not losing the entire $10.3 billion. &quot;It makes eminently good business sense for both parties to reduce the unwieldy risks they are facing in the U.S. Supreme Court,&quot; said Frank Morgan, a Houston lawyer who considered the same &quot;straddle&quot; approach in trying to settle the multibillion-dollar uranium antitrust litigation of the 1970s.    But some specialists said the strategy presents heavy potential risks to either party. &quot;It could be dangerous,&quot; said Philip Corboy, a Chicago attorney who has secured several huge settlements for victims of airline crashes and others. For one, Pennzoil's decision to cap the award could arouse shareholder lawsuits if the U.S. Supreme Court rebuffed Texaco's appeal. Conversely, Texaco's &quot;up-front&quot; payment to Pennzoil could give shareholders a measure of damages to seek if the high court reversed the judgment.    In addition, Mr. Corboy said, a decision to cap the ultimate award could make the high court less disposed to hear the case because the threat to Texaco's survival would have been eliminated. Although in principle the court accepts appeals on matters of law, not dollar amounts, &quot;if there's an agreement to cap, the Supreme Court might say, 'Get out of here,'&quot; he said. Other lawyers, however, questioned that speculation.    But all that assumes that agreement can be reached on a straddle settlement -- either between Pennzoil and the creditors or directly between the warring litigants. And for all its appealing aspects, certain elements of a straddle settlement are inherently difficult to agree upon.    Such a settlement would involve agreement on two sets of figures rather than one. For creditors, the more meaningful figure is the amount of the cap, which in their view must be low enough to keep Texaco whole to pay its debts. Publicly, creditor representatives have proposed a cap of $3.5 billion and have been authorized to increase the figure to $4 billion. Texaco's figure is $3 billion. Pennzoil's is $5 billion -- not $4.5 billion, as one non-Pennzoil lawyer suggested during Wednesday's bankruptcy-court hearing, according to Mr. Shaddix, the Pennzoil lawyer.    &quot;Pennzoil has gone as low as it can go on settlement numbers,&quot; Mr. Shaddix said. Another source close to Pennzoil added that the company's board would review the matter next week.    For Texaco, the more important figure is the smaller one -- the &quot;up-front&quot; payment -- a source close to Texaco said. From the beginning of the case, Texaco has argued that with the benefit of every doubt, Pennzoil is entitled to damages of only $500 million -- the highest figure that Texaco now offers to guarantee Pennzoil, but only one-half the payment suggested by creditors and one-third the amount demanded by Pennzoil.    Texaco has a remaining source of leverage: timing. The bankruptcy judge Wednesday indicated that if Pennzoil and the creditors reach their own plan, two-thirds of Texaco's shareholders would have to approve it. The source close to Texaco yesterday estimated that a shareholder vote would take six weeks to schedule -- after the weeks that such a settlement would likely take to achieve. By that time, the U.S. Supreme Court might well have ruled to accept Texaco's appeal, giving shareholders every reason to vote down a settlement unfavorable to Texaco.    In addition, the source said, the reorganization-cum-settlement plan being pushed by the creditors places onerous restrictions on Texaco's management, including a restriction on its ability to restructure the company after its discharge from Chapter 11. Top Texaco officials have privately indicated their intent to launch a restructuring to enhance shareholder value at the first opportunity.    &quot;If Pennzoil gets greedy, and if the creditors don't put a brake on that greediness, you'll wind up with a plan that the equity holders will never approve,&quot; said the individual. &quot;And then you've blown it for everybody.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>