<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0040 </DOCNO><HL> Tory Paradox: In Thatcher's Britain, Freer Enterprise Leads To More State Control --- Despite Conservative Gospel, She Is Centralizing Power Over Taxation, Schools --- Roughing Up an Errant BBC </HL><AUTHOR> Barbara Toman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher took office with a mission: to get government off people's backs. &quot;We've got to restore the balance,&quot; she said in 1979, &quot;in favor of the individual against the state.&quot;    But nearly a decade later, the Nanny State is thriving and Mrs. Thatcher is assuming a degree of power startling in modern democracies. &quot;Thatcherism&quot; is the name for her free-market, tough-leadership gospel, but its paradoxical byproduct is stronger central control. Local government, education and even information increasingly are managed directly from 10 Downing St., giving Mrs. Thatcher's so-called Enterprise Culture a Big Brother.    &quot;Americans would be appalled at the prospect that's coming here: a very powerful central state facing individual citizens, without a constitution, without a Bill of Rights,&quot; says George W. Jones, professor of government at the London School of Economics and a critic of both Mrs. Thatcher and the opposition Labor Party. &quot;It's very alarming.&quot;    Mrs. Thatcher is on everybody's back these days. She lectures the Anglican Church, exhorting clergymen to provide clearer leadership on moral issues. She scolds Europeans who seek the elimination of national barriers, dismissing as &quot;airy fairy&quot; any notions of integration that diminish British sovereignty. Her government slaps injunctions and warnings on newspapers and broadcasters who offend her definition of national security.    &quot;The funny thing about Margaret Thatcher is she should represent the reduction of state power and the emphasis on the individual,&quot; says Des Wilson, chairman of the Campaign for Freedom of Information, a group advocating less government censorship. &quot;But she is the classic example of paternalism.&quot; Mr. Wilson is former president of Britain's Liberal Party.    Mrs. Thatcher also, it seems, is unstoppable. With her political opponents sinking further into obscurity each year, Vernon Bogdanor, a politics fellow at Oxford University, believes she can stay in office virtually until she decides to leave -- which isn't likely to be soon. Sixteen months into her third term, she vows to go for a fourth and doesn't dismiss a fifth.    &quot;It's almost, Apres moi, le deluge,&quot; says Peter Hennessy, who is a director of the Institute of Contemporary British History and doesn't belong to any of Britain's political parties. He says the prime minister's attitude is &quot;'I have the vision. I'm the one who has turned this country round. I'm going to do it my way.' That's very bad and very unusual for our tradition.&quot;    A titanic political figure, Mrs. Thatcher will stand out in any history of 20th-century Britain. Her achievements are well-documented. Personal wealth has grown. More than a million former tenants of public housing now own their own homes, and 20% of British adults own stock, up from roughly 6% in 1979. Income-tax rates have plunged from their stratospheric, pre-Thatcher level. London, freed from foreign-exchange controls in 1979, has become a world financial center, pumping more than twice as much money into the country now as North Sea oil. Inflation has cooled from 10.3%, and productivity is up.    Mrs. Thatcher &quot;has reversed the decline of Britain -- I don't think that is an exaggeration,&quot; says Leon Brittan, Mrs. Thatcher's former trade and industry secretary who next year will become a European Community commissioner. Bill Martin, chief U.K. economist at Phillips andamp; Drew, a London brokerage firm, says, &quot;Her willingness to grind the economy into the dust in 1980 to get inflation down was an act of political courage.&quot;    But Britain's prosperity in the Thatcher era bears deeper examination. Assuming future annual economic growth of 3.5% in Britain and 2.5% in West Germany, Britain still would need nearly 11 years to catch up with West Germany's prosperity, as measured by per-capita gross domestic product.    Wynne Godley, a Cambridge University economics professor and a longtime critic of the prime minister's policies, calls the Thatcher economic miracle &quot;a gigantic con trick.&quot; Many major economic indicators, including output and industrial investment, have performed poorly during the Thatcher era, Prof. Godley argues.    Far fewer workers are producing only slightly more goods in the Thatcher era, he says. He blames an &quot;unprecedented&quot; fall in personal savings for the current consumer boom, which is merely sucking in imports. Mrs. Thatcher, Prof. Godley says, has &quot;completely failed to tackle the underlying strategic predicament caused by industry's failure to compete successfully in world markets, including our own.&quot;    For now, short-term management of the economy is Mrs. Thatcher's big problem. Though most Britons live better than ever, economic overheating threatens that prosperity. The country's ballooning trade gap could signal a balance-of-payments crisis and a major bout of inflation. Already, inflation has surged to 5.7% from 3.3% in January; some economists expect it to reach 7% next year.    Mrs. Thatcher's main weapon against inflation has been higher interest rates. Eight successive increases since early summer have pushed the bank base rate, similar to the prime rate in the U.S., to 12% from 7.5%. Mortgage rates, up by almost a third, to 12.75%, are squeezing young Britons who followed Mrs. Thatcher's advice and joined her &quot;property-owning democracy.&quot;    Unemployment is 8%, nearly double the level when she took office. And despite Mrs. Thatcher's crushing defeat of the 1984 miners' rebellion and her success at bringing Britain's obstreperous unions to heel, an old British hobgoblin -- the strike -- may be returning. Last spring, ferry workers virtually sealed off English Channel ports for two weeks and, last month, a walkout by government postal workers eliminated all mail service for 10 days.    Even Mrs. Thatcher's most celebrated reduction in state power, the sale of $29.7 billion of state-owned assets, produced ironic side effects. The sale of national telephone and gas utilities virtually intact made private monopolies out of public ones; the new entities face little pressure or competition to improve service. Electrical and water utilities now are headed for the auction block.    With its sales of non-utilities, the government has tossed in a gift that violates free-market principles: protection against takeover. In the case of British Airways, for example, the government limits any single shareholding to 15% until 1992. Defense contractor Rolls-Royce PLC has a similar shield, combined with strict limits on foreign ownership. And this week, the government, again fearful of foreign influence, ordered Kuwait to cut its stake in British Petroleum Co. by more than half, to 9.9%.    Another irony of Mrs. Thatcher's reign is that, contrary to President Reagan's New Federalism effort of shifting power to state governments from Washington, she has emasculated local government here. To cripple the left-wing socialists who run some city councils, she pushed through two new, centrally controlled taxes that will hit every municipality where it hurts the most: the purse.    Beginning in 1990, local councils no longer will be allowed to set their own business property-tax rates. Instead, bureaucrats in Whitehall will set a single national rate and distribute the proceeds to local areas. Personal-property taxes, meanwhile, will be scrapped in favor of a regressive head tax.    The upshot: Local councils once managed about 50% of their revenue. Under the new system, they will control 25% at most. That is &quot;an amazing degree of centralization,&quot; Prof. Jones says. &quot;I don't think President Reagan would think it {proper} to decide the local tax rates in San Francisco or Chicago.&quot;    Mrs. Thatcher also wants tighter control over the country's 31,000 primary and secondary schools; she feels local school boards haven't adequately educated the country's youth. Beginning with the 1989 fall school term, British children will follow a new, national curriculum, spending about 70% of their time studying 10 Whitehall-chosen subjects.    Some even will go to schools essentially run by central government instead of local school boards. One of Mrs. Thatcher's most radical ideas is to allow elementary and high schools to secede from their local school boards. She sees these &quot;independent state schools&quot; as a way to break left-wing school boards' hold on education, and give power to principals and parents. The schools will be financed by Whitehall.    Just as the Thatcher education changes give more power to Whitehall, so could her proposed overhaul of Britain's Draconian Official Secrets Act provide stricter control over the market of ideas. Passed hurriedly in 1911 amid pre-World War I spy hysteria, the law makes receiving or communicating any information from a government agency without permission a crime. But the law is so vague -- under it, even divulging whether tea was drunk during a meeting could be illegal -- that juries are reluctant to convict people.    The prime minister wants to redraft the law, narrowing the scope to limit the likelihood of ridiculous prosecutions. But she doesn't want to change the law's intent -- prohibiting the flow of any information not specifically released by the government. &quot;This is a bill about the control of information, not the release of information,&quot; Mr. Wilson says. Mrs. Thatcher is &quot;more and more obsessed with secrecy, partly because nearly all her humiliations have been concerned with secrecy,&quot; he says.    In Mrs. Thatcher's reign, two major prosecutions have occurred under the law. In one, a senior civil servant at the defense ministry who leaked embarrassing material about Britain's conduct of the Falklands War was acquitted because the jury felt the leak was in the public interest. In the other, a Foreign Office clerk who tipped off a newspaper about controversial nuclear missiles arriving at U.S. bases in Britain served four months in prison.    The secrets act, however, is used mostly to intimidate. In early 1987, the British Broadcasting Corp. canceled a program about Britain's spy satellites after the government warned that it might violate the law and threaten national security. In scenes more resembling South Africa than Scotland, police spent 28 hours searching the BBC's office in Glasgow, confiscating five vanloads of material. When the New Statesman magazine published a version of the same story, police spent five days searching the offices of that left-wing publication.    In July, the program was found not to be threatening to national security after all. The BBC recently broadcast it and a segment about the controversy. &quot;The outstanding feature of Thatcherism is not only can't you criticize, you can't question,&quot; says Mr. Wilson of the free-information campaign.    The obsession with controlling information led to Mrs. Thatcher's silliest hour yet: her ultimately futile effort to prevent publication of &quot;Spycatcher,&quot; the memoirs of former British agent Peter Wright. She sent Britain's top civil servant all the way to Australia, where Mr. Wright retired and wrote his book, to ask courts there to bar publication. Meanwhile, her government slapped injunctions on three British newspapers that had printed excerpts of the book, which also has been published in the U.S. Though thousands of copies of the book have made their way to Britain, the case against the newspapers continues here.    Yet Mrs. Thatcher is convinced she has freed Britons from an overbearing state, and uses that as her main argument against aspects of the European Community's plans for a unified internal market in 1992. &quot;We haven't successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain,&quot; she said in a recent speech, &quot;only to see them reimposed at a European level.&quot;    By ridiculing proposals for an economically and politically united Europe, she wins points in the U.K. for painting a more realistic picture of the Common Market's prospects. But for many Britons, her vision of a Europe adhering to common manufacturing standards doesn't go far enough.    Economists and politicians on both sides of the English Channel argue that the free internal market in finance planned for the European Community after 1992 will require greater currency stability. That, in turn, calls for Britain's participation in the exchange-rate mechanism of the European Monetary System. But Mrs. Thatcher, apparently wishing to keep full control over Britain's monetary policy, refuses to join &quot;until the time is right.&quot; Even her two most senior cabinet colleagues -- Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson and Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe -- have sent strong signals, however cautious, that the time is now.    Here at home, her shiniest vision is of a Britain blessed with hard-working capitalists. Her own prescription for social well-being, delivered to Scottish clergymen last spring, is hard work and self-reliance. The Bible, Mrs. Thatcher informed the pastors, says &quot;we must work and use our talents to create wealth.&quot; She went on to cite approvingly St. Paul's dictum that &quot;if a man will not work, he shall not eat.&quot;    That speech provoked an uproar from clergymen and opposition politicians. So, too, did another last month in which one of her junior health ministers advised Britain's elderly to &quot;knit gloves and get your grandchildren to give you a woolly nightcap&quot; to keep warm this winter.    But the uproar had little effect: Britain's split opposition is in disarray and is generally ineffective, making the country a virtual single-party state.    Together, the three opposition parties -- Labor, Social Democrats and the new Social and Liberal Democrats -- win 53% support in opinion polls, more than the government's 44%. But that isn't any threat. After years of factional sniping, a single anti-Thatcher opposition isn't in the cards. Labor is torn by dissent between left-wingers and moderates, and the popularity of the party's leader, Neil Kinnock, has faded rapidly. The centrist opposition, split between the Social Democrats and the new Social and Liberal Democrats, lies in even greater confusion.    &quot;She's the luckiest prime minister this century,&quot; says historian Hennessy. &quot;She's only had the chance to practice her conviction politics because the other side has been pouring paraffin over themselves and putting matches to it in front of the television cameras at routine intervals.&quot;    The biggest factor tempering Mrs. Thatcher's reform agenda, in fact, is her own sharp political instinct. Soon after winning her third term, she signaled a readiness to take on the National Health Service, the sacred cow of the Welfare State. Last year, she launched a review widely expected to sound the beginning of the end of the principle of free health care for all.    But the resulting furor suggests the National Health Service, Britain's biggest employer, is too hot even for Mrs. Thatcher to handle. The government won't announce its plans until later this month, but Mrs. Thatcher appears to have backed off. In July, she appointed a new health minister who isn't considered a radical proponent of the free market.    &quot;Her inconsistencies arise from her shrewed political sense,&quot; Prof. Jones says. &quot;She wants to win the next election.&quot;    The health issue is a measure of this country's continued devotion to the public sector and the welfare-state consensus. Many doubt those ties will ever dissolve, and wonder how lasting the Thatcher Revolution will prove.    &quot;Britain is very odd, you see; the superficialities can change, but the bedrock {is} very difficult to change,&quot; Mr. Hennessy says. &quot;We may have declined, relatively speaking, quite dramatically and appallingly. But we don't want to be like the West Germans or Japanese or even Americans very much. Old England has a remarkable capacity to reassert itself.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>