<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870824-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Boeing DelaysIts DevelopmentOf 7J-7 Airplane---Firm Cites Lack of OrdersFor Fuel-Efficient Craft;Delivery Date Is Now '93---By Eileen WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BA MLP MD GE LABOR CANDAAEROSPACE (ARO)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Boeing Co. has postponed the start of development of its 7J-7 &quot;propfan&quot; jetliner because airlines aren't yet ready to order the plane.    The Seattle-based aerospace giant had been scheduled to launch the plane's development this year so that it would be ready for delivery in 1992. But the company has changed the delivery date to 1993, a Boeing official confirmed in an interview.    &quot;This takes a little of the pressure off to have an early launch,&quot; said Richard R. Albrecht, executive vice president of Boeing Commercial Airplane Co., a unit. &quot;We will launch when we have customers.&quot;    The design of the twin-aisle plane incorporates next-generation electronic components, lightweight structural materials and a fuel-efficient engine that combines characteristics of both the jet and the propeller.    But in the fiercely competitive atmosphere of the airline industry today, carriers are said to be more interested in economy than in new technology. Airlines haven't placed any pre-launch orders for the 7J-7, orders that Boeing has said it needs to begin work on the plane.    The move isn't related to T. Boone Pickens's recent interest in the company, Mr. Albrecht said. Last month, the investor received federal government permission to buy as much as 15% of Boeing's 155.4 million shares outstanding.    Mr. Pickens hasn't disclosed his intentions or the size of his current Boeing stake, held through his Amarillo, Texas-based Mesa Limited Partnership.    Still, a delay in Boeing's cash investment for development of the plane is likely to make Boeing a more attractive investment because it could boost earnings next year, aerospace industry analysts say. Analysts have said that any delay could free up as much as $500 million that otherwise would have been spent on research and development for the plane next year. Mr. Albrecht declined to comment on analysts' speculation. Boeing officials also wouldn't say whether it would use the money to fight off Mr. Pickens, such as with a one-time dividend or a restructuring. So far, Boeing's only defense against Mr. Pickens has been adoption of a poison pill anti-takeover provision.    In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange Friday, Boeing closed at $51.875 a share, down 12.5 cents.    Boeing apparently has been considering the delay for several weeks. In a recent interview, Phillip Condit, also an executive vice president of Boeing's commercial jetliner unit, said Boeing wouldn't go ahead with the plane until &quot;major airlines put their heart and soul into it.&quot; Mr. Condit, reviewing past Boeing history, also said, &quot;The kickoffs of our airplanes never occurred when we said they would.&quot;    Company executives displayed a cross-section of the 7J-7 fuselage at the Paris Air Show in June and commenced an intense sales campaign in July. Two carriers, American Airlines and Scandinavian Airlines, expressed an interest. But the two had wanted different sized aircraft, with American looking for a plane with at least 165 seats and Scandinavian, one with about 140 seats. The 7J-7 is designed ideally to hold 150 seats.    At one sales presentation, &quot;everybody was saying ooh and aah about the technology, but nobody was ready to sign up,&quot; says Steven Udvar-Hazy, president of International Lease Finance Corp., a Beverly Hills, Calif.-based owner and lessor of jet aircraft.    One reason is the availability of current-technology planes, comparable in size to the 7J-7, at attractive prices. Competition between the Boeing 737-400, McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s MD-80 and Airbus Industrie's A-320 has brought down the price of all three planes and stimulated a buying spree by airlines.    Another factor is low oil prices, which have discouraged carriers from replacing their aging fleets of Boeing 727s, the oldest of which have been in service since 1963. Boeing designed the 7J-7 to replace the 1,831 existing 727s, but airlines haven't been in any hurry to retire the older planes. &quot;If fuel prices go up, the price differential (between the 7J-7 and a cheaper, less-fuel-efficient plane) goes down,&quot; said one airline executive.    Boeing's delay of the 7J-7 until 1993 could put it at a competitive disadvantage to McDonnell Douglas, which plans to have its MD-92 on the market by 1991. The MD-92 is a stretched version of its existing MD-80 that incorporates the propfan engine. The St. Louis-based aerospace company is also planning to develop a version of the propfan engine that could be retrofitted on its existing planes. Either way, the McDonnell Douglas concept is based on the premise that carriers won't want to pay a premium to buy an entirely new airplane in order to get the fuel-efficient engine.    But by delaying its version of the propfan, Boeing is gambling that airlines eventually will be ready to buy the next generation in aircraft design, incorporating the latest in electronics and structural materials as well as the engine.    &quot;The 7J-7 serves as a carrot for those airlines who wish the latest in technology, a step above whatever is available today,&quot; says Paul Nisbet, an aerospace analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities in New York.    On the other hand, airlines that aren't so interested in thinking that far ahead have filled up the order book of Airbus Industrie, the aircraft consortium supported by four European governments. Toulouse, France-based Airbus has taken 287 firm orders for its new A-320 aircraft before the plane has even come off the assembly line. The 150-seat planes, which are due to be in service next spring, are powered by conventional engines.    Meanwhile, Boeing's delay of the 7J-7 also will affect two major participants in the program. A spokesman for Fairfield, Conn.-based General Electric Co., which is developing the engines for both Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, said GE wasn't inconvenienced by the postponement. &quot;The (propfan) program is going ahead and is timed to the programs of each of the manufacturers,&quot; the spokesman said.    Boeing also has agreements with four Japanese companies to jointly take a 25% equity share in the 7J-7 development. The companies are Japan Aircraft Development Corp., Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd., Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. and Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd. Spokesmen for the companies couldn't be immediately reached.    Boeing's Mr. Albrecht said the Japanese partners are &quot;aboard on the rescheduling decision, and I don't think they have any fundamental quarrel with it.&quot;    Japanese participation in the 7J-7 program was revived last year after a disagreement early in 1985, following Boeing's first delay in the delivery date of the plane, to 1992 from 1988. Boeing also angered the Japanese when it decided to power the aircraft with the fuel-saving propfan in lieu of the more conventional V2500 engine under development by Japan and several Western partners.    The existing agreement between Boeing and the Japanese includes some restraints on the Japanese companies against working on competitive aircraft projects. The Japanese have been subcontractors on Boeing commercial jetliners for decades.    ---   Talks in Canada to Resume   TORONTO -- The Canadian Auto Workers union said negotiations with Boeing Co. will resume today.    Since June 23, about 4,100 workers have been on strike at Boeing's de Havilland Aircraft of Canada Ltd. facility here.    Talks between the union and the company broke off July 23. The two sides have been unable to settle differences over work rules at the plant. </TEXT></DOC>