<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871026-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Companies' Education Investment Pays High Dividends---By Marcy Kaptur</HL><DD> 10/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   While the workers in my district clearly recognize the danger of the recent stock-market dives, we can't restrain a bit of bemusement. For years we've been hearing that the service sector -- led by the financial-service wizards of New York and L.A. -- was the main, if not the only, driving force in the economy. Our manufacturing sector was relegated to insignificance.    Well, thank God that wasn't true. Otherwise last week's stock crash might well have led to national economic collapse.    Certainly, foreign competition and a changing world economy have exacted a heavy toll on our nation's manufacturing industries. However, many of these industries have survived and are now as tough and lean as they've ever been. The managers of these companies have learned through hard experience about exactly which investments pay off.    One of the best productive investments these managers have made over time has been to offer advanced training and educational opportunities to their most productive employees. Capital spent on people has paid off as much as or more than capital spent on equipment.    Metal Forming andamp; Coining of Maumee, Ohio, is a producer of small, cold-form metal parts for the auto industry. The firm operates out of a 100,000-square-foot manufacturing complex, has yearly sales of about $12 million, employs 70 people and is a union shop. It is just the type of firm the manufacturing-doomsayers would expect to find on the financial ropes.    In reality, however, Metal Forming is thriving. Chairman and president Mike Czerniak has made a concentrated effort to invest in education for his employees and has seen it improve the bottom line. Both hourly and salaried employees are eligible for educational benefits, with the company footing the bill for tuition, books and enrollment fees. And journeymen toolmakers may take company-paid courses in skilled trades. Mr. Czerniak himself has benefited from the firm's tradition of encouraging employees' educational growth; he began with the firm he now heads as a journeyman toolmaker 25 years ago.    Jackie Davenport has been with Metal Forming for nearly 20 years. She began as a press operator and has been steadily promoted to her current position as a quality-control inspector. The Statistical Process Control courses she took have played an integral role in her career advancement. Ms. Davenport's skills are critical to the quality improvements necessary for U.S. auto firms to compete successfully with foreign companies, which have stressed quality control.    What about the bottom line? Mr. Czerniak estimates that over the past seven years, this investment in education is responsible for half of the company's sales increase. &quot;The increased abilities and skills of our workforce in the critical areas of robotics, engineering, accounting and others,&quot; he says, &quot;have had a direct and significant impact on the strong growth of the firm over the past decade.&quot;    Mr. Czerniak is not alone among northwest Ohio employers who have instituted education programs and seen them yield dividends. Ruston Simon, president of Progressive Industries Inc., in Northwood, believes the education program he started is responsible in part for the firm's low turnover and strong growth pattern.    Progressive makes metal stampings, dies, prototypes and assemblies primarily for the auto industry, averaging yearly sales of $3 million (expected to reach $4 million in 1988). Also, this year it will be one of seven new domestic stamping suppliers to Honda's Marysville, Ohio, operations.    Each of Progressive's 40 employees is eligible to participate in an education program, which covers the costs of tuition, books and other expenses. Over the past 12 months, 29 of 33 hourly employees took 55 different quarter courses in subjects directly related to improving job skills. Seven salaried employees participated in seminars geared to improve management skills. The estimated cost to the company is $12,000-$14,000 over the past year.    Mr. Simon is convinced that the improvements generated by the company's education initiatives are directly related to its being chosen as a supplier to Honda. According to Mr. Simon: &quot;As a growing company, we have to force decision-making down to the floor. . . . This is part of what Honda was looking for.&quot; He adds, &quot;We want skills and decision-making ability throughout the organization. Otherwise, we have to add to our overhead costs by hiring additional management.&quot;    And it's not just the small- and medium-size companies that have caught on. This fall, for the first time, Chrysler's Machining Plant in Perrysburg, Ohio, is offering college courses on site. Employees choose from electronics, algebra and financial planning. Classes are available for all three shifts before and after scheduled work hours and are funded through the UAW-Chrysler Tuition Assistance Program. More than $300,000 in education and training funds has been allocated.    This development follows the Perrysburg facility's in-plant computer-training program inaugurated this past spring. To date, more than 400 local Chrysler employees -- one-third of the work force -- have been awarded college credits from the University of Toledo for completing computer classes. Advanced classes are currently being offered in Lotus, CAD, robotics and word processing. Program administrators are confident that by the end of this year half of all plant personnel will be computer literate. Similar initiatives at General Motors and Ford manufacturing facilities in Toledo also have met with success.    The attitude of these major companies and of business leaders such as Mike Czerniak is not only refreshing, but illustrative of a comeback spirit I see in manufacturers throughout the Midwest. World competition is tough. But the companies are adjusting and investing in the future through their work forces, and through modernization and streamlining of their production processes. After last week, maybe investors will be more willing to bank on the renewed manufacturing sector than a shaky service industry.    ---   Rep. Kaptur represents the 9th district of Ohio. </TEXT></DOC>