<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN IS EXPECTED to be central to the Iran-Contra hearings in Congress.    The president isn't scheduled to testify when the Senate and House investigating committees begin two months of televised hearings Tuesday. But leaders of the investigating panels predict that by the time the hearings end, Reagan will emerge as a commander in chief who inspired and applauded his aides' activities. The White House said Reagan had no part in activities of Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell, who pleaded guilty to conspiring to defraud the government by funneling $2.1 million in tax-exempt donations to arm the Contras.    The IRS revoked the tax-exempt status of the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty, the fund-raising organization Channell headed.    ---   FBI documents show fired White House aide North twice tried to delay a criminal probe involving a publicist who since was implicated in illegal fund-raising efforts for Nicaraguan rebels. The Senate Intelligence panel, which heard testimony by FBI chief and CIA Director-designate Webster, released the data.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett called for mandatory AIDS testing of certain people, including hospital patients, immigrants, marriage-license applicants and prisoners. In the strongest statement yet by a U.S. official on testing, he also said it should be state and local policy, despite arguments on violation of privacy.    ---   Weinberger is expected next week to approve construction of prototypes for a fleet of high-technology helicopters, Army and industry officials said. The ruling would authorize a competition for the $60 billion program.    ---   Final regulations were issued by the Immigration and Naturalization Service, giving employers an extra three months -- until Sept. 1 -- to verify the legality of workers hired between Nov. 1 and June 1. The rules carry out the landmark immigration bill passed last year, providing amnesty for illegal aliens.    ---   The Pentagon is preparing tight new security rules to curtail easy access to the Defense Department by East bloc diplomats and journalists, officials said. Separately, a third Marine probably will be charged with espionage in the sex-and-spy scandal at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, an official said.    ---   Delegates from 31 nations agreed in principle to curb production of chemicals that damage the ozone layer, which shields against cancer-causing ultraviolet rays. The U.N.-sponsored Geneva meeting was the third bid since December for an international protocol. The accord is to be adopted at a September meeting in Montreal.    ---   The disarmament conference recessed the first half of its 1987 session after receiving a report of &quot;important&quot; gains in the 19-year effort to ban chemical weapons. But the 40-nation conference in Geneva, to resume June 9, didn't mark any breakthroughs on chemical weapons or nuclear testing, the two major issues at the talks.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir rejected the plan by Foreign Minister Peres, the Labor leader, for an international Mideast peace conference, warning it could force the government's breakup. Shamir's Likud bloc favors direct Arab-Israeli talks. Israel appears headed for early general elections over the issue, political sources said.    ---   South African police tear-gassed students in widespread protests, amid mounting political tensions ahead of Wednesday's whites-only parliamentary elections. Authorities banned black trade unions from holding rallies today to mark International Labor Day. A bomb damaged a rail line near Soweto in new black unrest, disrupting service.    ---   Austrian Chancellor Vranitzky will visit the U.S. as planned May 17-24, despite Washington's barring President Waldheim for his World War II military activities. Though Austria said this has hurt bilateral relations, Vranitzky said longstanding friendly ties should be maintained.    ---   John Paul II condemned Hitler's &quot;death machinery&quot; and defended German bishops and the Vatican during the Nazi era, when the Roman Catholic Church was accused of being lax. As the pope began a five-day visit to West Germany, he sought to ease Catholic-Jewish tensions over beatifying two Nazi victims, including a Jewish-born nun.    ---   Gunmen in Lebanon have seized an Iranian Embassy employee and want to swap him for missing Anglican Church hostage negotiator Terry Waite, a weekly magazine in Beirut said. The embassy said it hadn't any record of the alleged kidnap victim. Waite disappeared in Beirut Jan. 20 after leaving to meet captors of U.S. hostages.    ---   Poland detained more than a dozen opposition activists across the country for planning anti-government demonstrations to disrupt official May Day ceremonies, Warsaw said. If the detainees are fined by courts, it would be the first time activists were punished just for planning illegal protests.    ---   India warned that the U.S. decision to lease Awacs surveillance planes to Pakistan poses a security problem. The defense chief told Parliament that India won't hesitate to act &quot;to meet the threat.&quot; The Pentagon has agreed in principle to lease the planes to help Pakistan defend against air attacks by Afghanistan's Soviet-backed military.    ---   Prime Minister Turgut Ozal said Turkey launched a large military operation against Kurdish separatists who ambushed an army patrol in the east this week, killing 13. </TEXT></DOC>