<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Cash Bonanza:Federal and State TillsGet Surprise BonusesIn Capital-Gains Taxes---Asset Sales Last Year to BeatRise in Tax Rate ProvideBulge, at Least for Now---A $10 Billion Dent in Deficit---By Alan MurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   In Vermont, state budget officials are euphoric.    After tallying up April's income-tax returns, they found that the state's top 60 taxpayers paid a grand total of $7 million in taxes for 1986, up from less than half a million a year earlier. As a result, the state treasury is bulging.    &quot;We've never seen anything like this,&quot; says John Dooley, Vermont's secretary of administration.    In Iowa, the story is similar. After a decade of budget doldrums, officials this year have seen their tax take soar twice as fast as projected. &quot;It's quite a surprise,&quot; says Patrick Cavanaugh, the director of the state department of management.    For many other states as well, 1987 is turning out to be a tax collector's dream. Unexpected revenue is filling state treasuries to the brim. And in Washington, the surprise surge in tax receipts during April was so large that it could cut the federal budget deficit by $10 billion to $15 billion this year.    The reason? Americans held a nationwide yard sale late last year, selling long-held assets to beat the scheduled increase in the top capital-gains tax rate to 28% from 20%. This year they have paid taxes on those gains, and the result is a bonanza for state and federal treasuries.    &quot;The capital-gains tax has gone bonkers,&quot; says James Roscoe, a senior budget economist for the Connecticut general assembly. Taxpayers &quot;took a decade's worth of capital gains in just a few months,&quot; agrees David Hale, the chief economist for Kemper Financial Services Inc.    While a boon for state budget makers, the surprise surge in revenue is also creating a serious problem for the lawmakers. Most are eager to spend their new-found money. Many states want to put it in new education programs or use it to finance tax cuts. But tax experts warn that higher capital-gains revenues this year could be followed by sharply lower capital-gains revenues in subsequent years.    &quot;I'm afraid this revenue bulge may produce a false sense of euphoria,&quot; says Steven Gold, the director of fiscal studies for the National Conference of State Legislators. &quot;To the extent it is due to capital gains, it may just be borrowing from the future.&quot;    The April surprise is also adding new fuel to the debate over capital-gains taxation, which continues to simmer in Washington and in many state capitals. Supporters of the new tax law, which for the first time in five decades treats capital gains like any other income, argue that the change makes the tax system fairer and also raises needed revenue.    But a powerful coalition of businessmen, investors, academics and politicians continues to insist that the increased gains rate will cost the Treasury money over the long run and will hurt the economy by discouraging investment and entrepreneurship. Those low-tax forces are already laying the groundwork for a new assault on Congress.    &quot;Sooner or later, Congress is going to decrease the capital-gains tax,&quot; says Mark Bloomfield, who heads a group called the American Council for Capital Formation and who helped spearhead the 1978 and 1981 drives for lower taxes on capital gains. &quot;Hopefully, it will be sooner rather than later.&quot;    Already, a group of Republican congressmen is pushing a proposal to cut the top capital-gains rate back to 15%, although that idea is unlikely to go far this year. Meanwhile, some Democrats are pushing a plan to make the capital-gains tax even tougher by eliminating the exemption now allowed for inherited property.    The 1986 tax law lowers the top tax rate on ordinary income to 38.5% this year and 28% (33% for some upper-income taxpayers) in the following years, from its previous 50% level. For capital gains, however, the bill raises the top tax rate to 28% this year from 20%. In subsequent years, capital gains will be taxed like ordinary income, eliminating both the preferential rate and the six-month holding period that used to distinguish capital gains from ordinary income.    Most tax experts expected that change to raise capital-gains revenues this year, as people paid taxes on the assets they rushed to sell last year before the new law took effect. But few expected the sell-off to be so large. The Treasury Department, for instance, had estimated its revenue collected in April would be $5 billion to $10 billion lower than it actually was.    The April revenue shower was surprisingly widespread:    --Connecticut's revenue from the state tax on capital gains, interest and dividends is expected to be $460 million this year, nearly double last year's $250 million.    --New York announced an unexpected $850 million surge in revenue for 1986. Gov. Mario Cuomo said the &quot;dramatic&quot; rise was due to year-end sales of stock and other assets.    --California's finance commission last month surprised the state by projecting a $1.5 billion surplus for this year, double the original projection. &quot;A significant portion&quot; of the increase is due to capital gains, says Johan Klehs, the chairman of the state Assembly's revenue and taxation committee.    While the surge in capital-gains revenue from the 1986 tax year grows increasingly clear, however, the outlook for 1987 becomes ever more cloudy. Predictions of the money to be raised from the 1987 capital-gains tax vary by tens of billions of dollars.    Lawrence Lindsey, a professor of economics at Harvard University, calculates that revenue will fall sharply as taxpayers &quot;lock in&quot; their assets to avoid paying the higher 28% rate. Treasury and congressional tax estimators also assume a drop-off in revenue, although not as steep as that predicted by Mr. Lindsey.    But Jeffrey Schaefer, a senior vice president at the Securities Industry Association, says that strong activity in the stock market so far this year suggests capital gains in 1987 could be even larger than in 1986. That is a minority view, to be sure; but if it is right, capital-gains revenue could contribute $30 billion or more toward reducing the federal budget deficit next year.    At the state level, estimates are equally uncertain. Most states are following the federal government's lead and taxing capital gains the same as ordinary income, according to Mr. Gold. But they are finding it increasingly difficult to determine whether that means their revenue from capital gains will rise or fall.    In Connecticut, for instance, officials believe that the take from the capital-gains tax will drop to $350 million next year from $460 million this year. But James Roscoe, a senior economist for the Connecticut General Assembly's office of fiscal analysis, admits that the &quot;margin of error on that projection is about 100%.&quot;    In New York, the estimates have become the subject of an intense political struggle. Republicans in the state Senate have accused Gov. Cuomo of intentionally underestimating capital-gains revenue in order to head off larger tax cuts. &quot;We believe he's politicized the estimates,&quot; says Abraham Lackman, the director of fiscal studies for the New York Senate Finance Committee. Like Mr. Schaefer of the Securities Industry Association, Mr. Lackman argues that the capital-gains take will continue to be strong and that, therefore, New York can afford a big cut in taxes.    Estimating revenues from capital-gains taxes is a devilishly tricky business, and it is the source of fierce and endless controversy among the small band of academics and tax experts who make such estimates.    The problem arises because taxpayers are free to choose when they sell stocks or other assets, and therefore free to choose when they pay capital-gains taxes. Under a longstanding loophole in the tax code, they can even escape the tax altogether by holding on to assets until they die. While ordinary taxes may be inevitable, and therefore predictable, capital-gains taxes definitely are not.    Mr. Lindsey and others argue that the increased tax rate on capital gains under the new law will lead people to hold on to their assets rather than sell them. As a result, revenues will fall, despite the higher rate.    Mr. Schaefer's numbers, however, call into question such pessimistic forecasts. He calculates that sales of common stock by individuals were 45% higher in the first three months of 1987 than in all of 1986. To him, that suggests that stockholders haven't been deterred by the higher gains rate from selling their stock.    Hugh Weedon, a Vermont investor and one of the state's largest taxpayers, illustrates the point. He sold a large portion of his stock portfolio late last year to take advantage of the low tax rate. But now, he says, he is continuing to take gains this year as well, rather than &quot;locking in&quot; his new assets.    &quot;The volume of activity on my account has increased substantially this year,&quot; Mr. Weedon says. Because the new law reduces the tax distinction between rates on capital gains and ordinary income this year and eliminates it and the six-month holding period next year, &quot;I'm taking profits more frequently because there is no reason to take them long term.&quot;    Mr. Lindsey acknowledges that a booming stock market could cause some taxpayers to continue to take gains, despite the higher rate. But he notes that common-stock sales account for less than a third of all capital gains. Sales of real estate or other assets may be more influenced by the higher gains rate.    Whether revenues from capital-gains taxes rise or fall in the coming years will have a critical effect on the future of capital-gains taxation. Washington lobbyists are keeping a close eye on the work of Mr. Lindsey and others, hoping they can convince Congress that lowering the gains rate will raise money.    &quot;That's a fascinating line of inquiry,&quot; says Kenneth Hagerty, vice president of the American Electronics Association and an advocate of lower capital-gains taxes. &quot;If there are responsible, credible academic findings that lowering the capital-gains tax could generate more revenue, that would be a fascinating new wild card.&quot; Tax experts still are debating whether a 1978 cut in capital-gains tax rates produced higher revenues by encouraging more frequent sales.    For now, however, there is little sympathy in Congress for such a change. &quot;I've heard almost no complaints&quot; about the higher capital-gains rate, says Sen. Bob Packwood of Oregon, who shepherded last year's tax bill through the Senate. &quot;There seems to be general public acceptance of the change, and there is a great feeling in Congress about the need for some stability in the tax system.&quot;    Nevertheless, seasoned Washington observers, including administration officials who promoted tax reform, believe a major effort to reduce the capital-gains tax in the next few years is all but inevitable.    As former Senate Finance aide Roderick DeArment once put it: &quot;Capital gains is magic. You raise money when you lower the rate, and you raise money when you raise the rate. The only thing you can't do is leave it alone.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>