<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0021 </DOCNO><HL> Same Old 'Boiler-Room' Sales TalkStill Fools Many Eager Investors---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION (CFT)FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION (FTC) </IN><TEXT>   Precious metals . . . foreign-currency futures . . . oil and gas leases . . . rare coins. . . .    The investments are ever-changing, but the so-called boiler-room approach remains the same: a hard sell by telephone, a promise of extraordinary return, and a sense of urgency that the opportunity won't be there tomorrow.    And many people still fall for it. In California alone, boiler-room operations (so named because the phone rooms used to be in out-of-the-way basements) make more than $500 million a year from victims nationwide, says Terree Bowers, an assistant U.S. attorney in Los Angeles.    &quot;Why people continue to spend so much on the phone is beyond me,&quot; says Herschel T. Elkins, California's senior assistant attorney general. He tells of a Florida woman who lost more than $50,000 in three separate scams, then &quot;wrote to us saying she was beginning to get discouraged with these California companies.&quot;    With the potential profit so great, even stepped up law-enforcement efforts sometimes seem to do little more than push the problem around. During the past two years, while authorities in Florida cracked down on boiler-room operations with tougher laws and enforcement, many telephone-fraud artists left the state -- a lot of them for California.    Now, California is cracking down, with the help of two federal task forces. Arrests are up, and some alleged boiler-room operators have left for other climes.    &quot;We often see these guys go from one scheme to the next,&quot; says Kent Neal, chief of the economic crime unit for the Broward State Attorney's Office in Fort Lauderdale. &quot;They sell whatever's hot at the moment.&quot;    Todd Evans Fisch, along with his parents, Joel and Joan, faces federal charges in Los Angeles of running a precious-metals boiler room in El Toro, Calif., that defrauded investors of $8.5 million. When the Fisches were arrested in Florida in October on mail- and wire-fraud charges stemming from the California operation, Todd Fisch was working at a foreign-currency firm; in an administrative complaint, the Florida Comptroller's office alleges that the firm was a boiler-room operation. At a pre-trial detention hearing in Miami, an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified that, between the California and Florida activities, Todd Fisch had been involved in boiler-room type operations in British Columbia and Washington state.    The Fisches have pleaded innocent to the federal charges, and their attorneys say they intend to defend them vigorously. An attorney for Todd Fisch says his client hasn't contested a cease-and-desist order issued by the Florida Comptroller's office, primarily because he is being held without bail on the federal charges; but the attorney denies that Mr. Fisch was involved in illegal boiler-room activities anywhere, and he says the charges will be addressed at the appropriate time.    Often even intelligent investors are taken in by schemes linked to current developments that gives them an air of legitimacy.    When a federal lottery was set up in 1984 to award rights to build cellular telephone systems, for example, some were quick to exploit it. Los Angeles-based American National Cellular Inc. used phone solicitations to sell license-application-preparation services. But according to a complaint filed in federal court in Los Angeles by the Federal Trade Commission, the company exaggerated the chances and profitability of winning a license or, at least, an interest in a license.    American National Cellular, which the FTC said had sales of $22.9 million in about a year, is now in receivership. Without admitting or denying the charges, the company and two principals last month signed a consent agreement with the FTC that the agency says should bring about $1 million in customer refunds. They also relinquished claims to some $4 million to $5 million in customer promissory notes.    Another way boiler-room operations try to seem legitimate is by using solid-sounding credentials or lying about affiliations with well-known concerns.    Executive Gold Card Travel Club in Los Angeles sought entree by saying it was affiliated with Visa and MasterCard, then promised free trips to Hawaii if the people it called would provide credit-card information. Takers never got the trips, but unauthorized charges appeared on their cards, according to a federal indictment against the company's manager, Lawrence David Berry, and its owner, Roy William Castner, on fraud and other charges. The two men have pleaded innocent to the charges, which were handed up last June in Los Angeles, and are scheduled for trial next month.    As telephone con men seek the path of least resistance, they've also tended to move into less regulated investments. In August 1985, the general counsel to the Commodities Futures Trading Commission decided that a bank-financing program for buying precious metals isn't within the agency's jurisdiction. Since then, such unregulated plans have flourished.    Usually, a customer purchases the metals, paying 20% or more as a downpayment. The bank lends the remainder and holds the metal in its vault as collateral. Dennis O'Keefe, the CFTC's assistant director of enforcement, says such investments typically involve big commissions and fees, and &quot;often the way they are set up, you have to have very good performance just to break even.&quot;    Some salesmen use bait-and-switch tactics, luring customers with a bank-financed plan, then switching them to in-house financing. Many outfits, so-called &quot;bucket shops&quot; or &quot;naked&quot; operations, don't buy bullion at all, Mr. O'Keefe says.    The con man's penchant for unregulated investments has also bolstered allegedly fraudulent sales of coins. In September, the FTC charged in a civil complaint filed in federal court in Boston that Rare Coin Galleries of America Inc., a Boston firm, and Rare Coin Galleries of Florida Inc., a related firm in Fort Lauderdale, had systematically misrepresented the grade and investment value of coins, thus defrauding customers of an estimated $28 million.    (While the Florida firm used phone solicitations, the one in Boston marketed coins through insurance agents and financial advisers, who an FTC attorney says apparently had no knowledge of the alleged fraud.)    Andrew P. Hier, an attorney for the coin companies, says his clients haven't done anything wrong and that the complaint turns on a dispute over subjective grading of coins. He says the FTC's estimate of losses is excessive.    Some boiler rooms are avoiding investment schemes entirely. Instead, they're selling such products as copy-machine supplies.    One offender, Los Angeles-based Park Distributing Inc., defrauded customers by tricking them into believing it was the regular source of supplies for their copy machines, then overcharging, sending unrequested reorders, and short-shipping, according to federal charges filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles.    The charges, which have resulted in 24 convictions and the forfeiture of $2.5 million, say that the company also tacked on a &quot;CDA&quot; charge. The charge, says Larry B. Johnson, a U.S. postal inspector, was variously described to customers as a &quot;Canadian Duty Act tax,&quot; an &quot;excise tax,&quot; or a &quot;case distribution adjustment.&quot; But internally, he says, company salesmen jokingly referred to it as the &quot;cost of doing business in America.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>