<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Still-Steep Barriers to Black Republicanism </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph Perkins </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><G> EXE JUS </G><TEXT>   Exit polls indicate that George Bush captured only 12% of the black vote last Tuesday. While this is a slight improvement on Ronald Reagan's 9% in 1984, it nonetheless represents yet another rebuke of the Republican Party by blacks.    The estrangement is somewhat recent. The research of political scientist Pearl Robinson details how from 1865 to 1932 Republican presidential candidates won most black votes. (A far smaller percentage of blacks could and did vote in much of that period, of course.)    This was to be expected. The 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments, banishing involuntary servitude and seeking to guarantee voting rights to all, were the work of a Republican Congress. During Reconstruction the party acted to strike down restrictive Black Codes passed by Southern state legislatures; promote free public school systems open to white and black children alike; and to establish the Freedmen's Bureau, which, among other things, ran schools for former slaves and defended the rights of black workers.    Mr. Bush and the GOP will have to act if they are to begin to reclaim this heritage and swing black voters back by 1992. Indeed, the reason blacks began to shift their allegiance from the Republicans in the late 1930s and firmly realigned with the Democratic Party in the 1960s is that they were bettered by the way three Democratic presidents used their powers.    Though Franklin Roosevelt failed to win a majority of the black vote in his first run for the presidency, his New Deal initiatives improved the economic status of blacks, providing jobs for many and government relief payments to those without work. By his second term, he had won over most blacks (although the majority still identified themselves as Republicans).    Harry Truman further endeared his party to blacks by integrating the armed forces in 1948, and by running on a civil-rights platform against Dixiecrat segregationist Strom Thurmond. Whereas black party identification was evenly split between Democrats and Republicans in 1944, in 1948 the Democrats moved to a 56% to 25% advantage.    Nonetheless, the black vote was not monopolized by Democrats until Lyndon Johnson's election in 1964. His push for historic civil-rights legislation -- over the objection of fellow Southern Democrats -- and creation of federal anti-poverty programs have paid electoral dividends among blacks ever since, though they have helped cost Democrats much of the South in presidential races.    George Bush cannot be expected to launch a New Deal or Great Society, but to woo blacks he will have to pursue a more positive, activist agenda than has his predecessor. Most black political figures -- Democrats and Republicans alike -- think the major failing of the Reagan administration was inactivity on many fronts and opposition to blacks where it was active.    In a book published recently by the Urban Institute, Norman Amaker, a law professor at Loyola University in Chicago, identifies these Reagan policies as most egregious: the aborted reversal of an Internal Revenue Service policy of denying tax exemptions and charitable deductions to racially exclusionary schools; persuasion of the Supreme Court in the Grove City case to narrow coverage of federal laws intended to prevent inequality, and the president's veto of legislation to reinstate broader coverage (later overridden by Congress); removal of affirmative-action requirements pertaining to the Housing and Community Development Act; and opposition to tougher provisions of the 1982 extension of the Voting Rights Act.    The first thing Mr. Bush must understand is that civil rights -- which most in the U.S. take for granted -- are always the most vital interest of black Americans. The issue cuts across age, gender, income, even party identification. Or to put it in another context, civil rights are a univeral concern of blacks in the same way that Israel is of Jews.    Most blacks believe the Reagan administration to have been on the wrong side of this issue consistently. Not only that, some of its top officials are perceived to have sought, under a &quot;color-blind&quot; doctrine, to rescind the civil-rights gains achieved by blacks two decades ago.    At a dinner last March with some 500 largely black supporters, Mr. Bush said: &quot;I guarantee you, I will get personally involved in protecting the civil rights of every American. This effort will be at the top of the agenda of my attorney general, and he or she will be directly accountable to me for results.&quot;    The implication of this is that Mr. Bush will not appoint an attorney general like Edwin Meese, who, for all his virtues, hardly pursued a positive civil-rights agenda. Nor is Mr. Bush likely to appoint a figure like the late Clarence Pendleton to head the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights or William Bradford Reynolds to head the Justice Department's civil-rights division. These gentlemen spent much of their tenures seeking to limit the reach of civil-rights law, actions that hardly ingratiated them, their president, or their party to most black Americans.    If Mr. Bush passes the civil-rights test, wooing blacks would become infinitely easier. As it is, he has several factors working in his favor. The most important may be the economy. In a survey published two years ago by the Joint Center for Political Studies, a Washington-based black political think tank, two-thirds of blacks said they had kept pace economically or moved ahead during the Reagan years. These perceptions are backed up by various government statistics.    More blacks are working today at higher wages than ever before. The black middle class has grown by nearly a third since 1980, and is now, for the first time ever, the dominant income group in black America. Black family incomes are at an all-time high, having increased by roughly 6% in real terms over the past eight years. The number of black professionals has increased an amazing 63% since 1980. Black managers and officers in corporate America increased in number by 30% over the same span.    Such extraordinary gains during the 1980s should have produced support for Mr. Reagan and the Republican Party. But, again, because of the administration's civil-rights record, and because its most prominent ambassadors to the black community were Messrs. Meese, Reynolds and Pendleton, the administration received little credit from blacks. In contrast, blacks were quite charitable to Jimmy Carter (even though they lost economic ground during his presidency) because he was perceived as supportive of basic civil rights.    That points out a peculiarity in black America. Unlike most Americans, blacks do not yet vote along class lines. If Mr. Bush could defuse civil rights as an issue that delineates Republicans from Democrats, he would make it easier for middle- and upper-middle-income blacks -- logically the core of a black GOP constituency -- to join the party. As it is, those blacks who support the GOP have made a conscious decision to subordinate a vital racial interest in favor of their economic interests.    Mr. Bush needs to stake out a positive role in the economic arena as well as in civil rights. A few days before the election, outgoing Rep. Jack Kemp (R., N.Y.) sent a letter to Bush campaign chairman James Baker suggesting that during Mr. Bush's first 100 days, the president unveil an &quot;anti-poverty agenda for economic empowerment.&quot; It includes community-based youth corps, involving black youngsters in the provision of services to their communities; free-enterprise zones in areas of high unemployment, to spur job creation; tenant management of public housing, leading to the prospect of home ownership; more magnet schools, to offer better choices for inner-city children; tax adjustments, to provide earned income credits according to family size, to offset the heavy tax burden on low-income workers.    Mr. Kemp is on to something, because a trait that distinguishes blacks from most ethnic groups in the U.S. is their own tendency to define the overall status of their population not by the average black individual or family, but by the very worst off. So even though the majority of blacks have made considerable progress in the 1980s, most blacks are focused on the fortunes of the black poor. If civil rights is the number one interest of black Americans, the plight of the black poor is number two.    Number three would probably be upward mobility. Most blacks who enjoy middle- and upper-middle-class status today are only one or two generations removed from poverty. Rightly or wrongly, they feel they owe their current status to opportunities created by the federal government. Many well-educated blacks used federal and state grants and loans to finance their schooling, for instance. And many got good jobs because of employer affirmative-action programs. When such programs are threatened or have aspersions cast on them, blacks naturally feel affronted. And so long as one-third of the black population is mired in poverty, blacks will not hear of dismantling programs that enabled so many within their ranks to escape poverty in the first place.    If Mr. Bush and the GOP put blacks at ease on these three vital interests, then they can trumpet other themes: toughness on crime and drugs, welfare reform, family values, self-help, etc. Such themes should play well with the natural conservatism of most blacks. This conservatism hasn't translated into Republican votes because the three big concerns outweigh all the others in the minds of blacks.    President Bush must bear all of this in mind if he is to transform the party of Lincoln into the majority party once more in the U.S. It is a formidable undertaking, but hardly impossible. Mr. Bush personally begins with a clean slate so far as most blacks are concerned. If he is ardent in his support for the principle of civil rights, if he pursues an anti-poverty agenda, and if he lets stand policies aimed at upward professional mobility for blacks, he is certain to have better relations with this constituency than Mr. Reagan has. Moreover, he could take a place alongside revered Democrats as a president who broadened the base of his party.    ---   Mr. Perkins is a Journal editorial-page writer. </TEXT></DOC>