<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880722-0042 </DOCNO><HL> Gulf Breakthrough: Peace Plan Is a Boon For Most of Mideast And for West as Well --- It Could Turn Iran Inward, Easing Risk of Terrorism And Moslem Uprisings --- But for Israel, New Pressures </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The long Persian Gulf nightmare may finally be ending.    Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's decision to end the bloody war with Iraq is the first real opportunity in a decade for stability in the gulf -- a region that, as the West's oil lifeline and the likeliest site of any superpower confrontation, has economic and political import unsurpassed in the world.    For the West it has been a decade, beginning with the first weakening of the shah almost exactly 10 years ago, of terrorism, hostage-taking and humiliation. For Iran's gulf neighbors it has been a time of constant danger from the Khomeini threat to export Islamic radicalism. And for the combatants it has meant unremitting bloodshed -- even including death from chemical weapons.    If Iran's pledge now to stop shooting is accepted by Iraq -- and that seems likely -- the whole world can expect some immediate benefits: less tension, less terrorism and more-reliable oil supplies. Iran seems genuinely to fear for the survival of its Islamic revolution, and the prospect that it now may focus its energies at home is good news for all regimes, from Saudi Arabia to the Soviet Union, that have large Moslem populations. For America, Iran's decision offers not only a chance to scale down a costly naval operation in the Persian Gulf but also the possibility of restoring some normality to relations with Iran, seen as the strategic prize in the area.    The major losers may be Israel and Iraq's President Saddam Hussein. Iraq can expect more distance in its relations with the U.S. as Washington quietly seeks to improve ties with Tehran. And President Hussein, who invaded Iran nearly eight years ago, may have a lot of explaining to do to justify the suffering and destruction he brought on his nation without any gain of territory.    For Israel, which has cited the war to argue to Washington that it is the only stable nation in a tumultuous region, the end to the war could mark an unwelcome shift of U.S. attention from the gulf back to the Arab-Israeli issue. Attention often brings with it new pressure on Israel for concessions.    Many experts expect that with the end of the war, both combatants will seek to increase their oil production to generate badly needed revenue for rebuilding. Each nation now pumps about 2.4 million barrels a day, and it would take months before either could get back to prewar production levels, which were about four million barrels a day for Iran and 3.5 million for Iraq. Higher output would put further downward pressure on oil prices -- unless the end of the war enabled quarrelsome members of the producers' cartel to agree on deep production cuts, which seems unlikely.    By no means does the sudden prospect of peace promise an end to all tensions in the Persian Gulf. Ancient Arab-Persian bitterness abounds, and inter-Arab rivalries now are likely to revive. Nor does it portend an end to the deep distrust of America in Iran. The road to peace remains strewn with hazards, primarily of Iraqi making.    Iraq, which in recent months has managed to reclaim most of the territory it lost earlier in the war, seems determined to seek further humiliation of Iran and some concrete concessions that would help Saddam Hussein justify an estimated 200,000 dead in a population of only 13 million and a war debt approaching $100 billion.    Regardless, an end to the shooting seems very likely. Iraq's debt, owed mostly to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Western Europe, gives those governments great leverage to press for acceptance of Iran's overture in accepting a United Nations truce proposal. The Iraqis, in fact, agreed a year ago to accept the plan -- before hesitating when Iran accepted it this week. Now the U.N. secretary-general is sending a team to Tehran and Baghdad to try to cement a cease-fire and thus make it much harder for hostilities to resume.    For America this turn of events is a major foreign-policy victory. Its dispatch one year ago of a naval armada -- later joined by warships from several Western European nations -- to protect Kuwaiti tankers from Iranian attack marked a sharp psychological shift in the war. Iraq turned more aggressive, and frightened Arab states like Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iraq finally felt secure enough to stand up forcefully to Iran. Tehran increasingly found itself in a shooting war with a superpower. The mistaken U.S. downing three weeks ago of Iran Air flight 655, tragic as it was, seems to have been the final straw that broke Iran's crumbling morale.    &quot;The U.S. comes out of this looking pretty good,&quot; says Geoffrey Kemp, a former Reagan adviser on Mideast affairs. &quot;A policy that certainly had its downsides appears, on balance, to have been redeemed by events.&quot;    Even more significant than an end to the war is the seeming change inside Iran. House Speaker Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani appears to be moving deliberately and rapidly to obtain Ayatollah Khomeini's blessing for a number of foreign-policy changes -- an end to the war and an end to Iran's international isolation -- before the ailing ayatollah dies.    Tehran radio yesterday quoted Mr. Rafsanjani as saying he cried as he listened to the ayatollah's &quot;historic, stunning and great&quot; message calling for an end to the war, in which the ayatollah, or Imam, said the decision was for him &quot;more deadly than taking poison.&quot; Mr. Rafsanjani said that &quot;after Imam's courageous and wise decision, now it is up to us not to bring anxiety, turmoil and disruption to the society by raising the whys and wherefores.&quot;    The speaker, widely viewed as a passionate Persian nationalist but not a fundamentalist fanatic, is eager to restore diplomatic relations with Western nations, including America. He established contact with the Reagan administration in 1985, but disclosure of those contacts the following year forced their end.    Mr. Rafsanjani seeks to restore Iran's relations with the world in an effort to obtain Western credit for Iran, which suffers severe economic deprivation because its oil exports are insufficient to finance both the war and economic development. Iran earlier this week agreed to resume diplomatic relations with Canada, and American officials say ties with Great Britain were in the offing until Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher strongly supported the U.S. right to defend itself against what it mistakenly thought was an attacking Iranian warplane.    For its part, the U.S. says the next step in better American-Iranian relations is the designation by Tehran of an official to begin dialogue with Washington. Administration officials maintain that, despite recurring rumors, there haven't been any secret contacts with Iran recently. Burned badly by the disclosure of earlier back-channel negotiations with Iran, the U.S. in recent months has rejected several offers by private Iranians -- including one from an emissary who claimed he was the ayatollah's personal physician -- to open a dialogue.    So far, Iran has been reluctant to meet the U.S. demand. One reason, perhaps, is that the U.S. has told Iran, through Swiss intermediaries, that while Washington is willing to hold unannounced sessions with an Iranian representative, news of any meeting is likely to leak.    The powerful Iranian speaker faces strong internal opposition in Interior Minister Ali Akbar Mohtashemi-Pur, who is dominating internal Iranian affairs just as Mr. Rafsanjani is dominating external relations. So, whether Mr. Rafsanjani can firmly establish new policies that will withstand the internal struggle expected to follow Ayatollah Khomeini's death is an open question.    For its part, Moscow is eager to avoid Iran's return to any alliance with America. Even Iranian neutrality is a setback for the Soviets, who have welcomed Iranian enmity for the U.S. However, most analysts believe Moscow would genuinely welcome an end to Iran's effort to triumph over Iraq and thus spread its brand of Islamic fundamentalism. The Soviet Union, with 50 million Moslems living in Central Asia along a border with Iran and Afghanistan, is the world's fifth-largest Moslem nation. And with ethnic troubles flaring in the Baltic States and in Armenia, the last thing the Kremlin wants is trouble with its rapidly reproducing Moslems.    Not surprisingly, Israel and Iraqi President Hussein, the two parties that face the greatest risk from the advent of Persian Gulf peace, are adopting a cautious stance. Recriminations already are beginning to fly in Israel as Foreign Minister Shimon Peres, who hopes to be Israel's next prime minister, attacks the present one for lost opportunities to make peace while Iraq was distracted. Tensions between Iraq and Syria (which supported Iran) have kept Israel's two enemies -- and the Mideast's most powerful Arab armies -- from any unified acts against Israel.    In Iraq, the leadership is calling for more time to test Iran's sincerity and is seeking Iranian concessions that could justify to the Iraqi people nearly eight years of bloodshed. But it may be hard to delay, so eager are Iraqis for peace.    A Baghdad office worker this week received a phone call from his son at the front seeking news of Iraq's response to the Iranian truce offer. The father was cautiously hopeful, telling his son he might be home soon after four years on the battlefield. Hanging up, the office worker turned on the radio to hear that Iraq was again bombing Iran. &quot;This is crazy,&quot; he said. &quot;Iran is not a country to toy with. If we don't accept peace now, maybe the chance will slip away. For that, no Iraqi will be forgiving.&quot;    Among ordinary Iraqis, the air of relief is palpable, many people at last planning for a future of something other than unending war. Jalal Tomma has been at or near the front since 1982, when he finished college. &quot;I wanted to be an engineer and have been a soldier instead,&quot; he says. &quot;Now maybe I can start my life again, find a job and see my friends who are held in Iran.&quot;    Despite this yearning, some in both Israel and Iraq worry that President Hussein, in his drive to justify the war as well as to assume a leadership role in the Arab world, may see his battle-hardened army as the only route to the recognition he craves. Diplomats in Baghdad doubt he would risk further military attacks on anyone. Instead, they expect him to seek to influence his Arab neighbors through the personal ruthlessness that has long marked his rule of Iraq and his dealings with other Arabs.    Regardless, these diplomats believe Iraq's clout will be diminished by an end to the war. Some even predict that Iraq's wartime supporters, such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, may be quick to try to mend fences with Iran and even offer financial aid to Tehran.    &quot;The Iraqis aren't loved in this region,&quot; says one Western ambassador. &quot;Once they are no longer defending Arabs from Persians, people won't mind their getting a bloody nose or two.&quot;    ---   Tony Horwitz in Baghdad contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>