<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Where a Soldier's Loyalty Lies---By John E. Shephard Jr.</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Military officers fill about one-third of the 50 professional staff positions on the National Security Council. Few would disagree that military expertise is a necessary complement to civilian advice on the staff. But the allegations against Lt. Col. Oliver North in the Iran-contra affair raise a fundamental question about the role of active-duty military officers in political-policy assignments. Where do the loyalties of these officers lie: with the president as commander in chief, the laws of the U.S. passed by Congress, or their own conceptions of the public good?    The question is important, because it's likely that Col. North ultimately will defend his actions on the basis of one of two arguments: either he was carrying out the president's policies (in letter or in spirit) -- and thereby was merely obeying his commander in chief -- or he was serving a &quot;higher loyalty&quot; to the national-security interests of the country. The latter argument suggests that loyalty ought to be placed in the officer's own conception of the public good.    Neither of these arguments rests on an acceptable basis for military loyalty in a democracy. The idea that military officers owe loyalty toward the president alone has not been widely accepted since World War II. Hadn't we rebuked the German generals at Nuremberg for hiding behind the pretext of apolitical military professionalism? American military officers have long been trained in the axiom that dutiful adherence to the &quot;chain of command&quot; is no excuse for acting outside the law.    Neither can we buy the &quot;public-good&quot; argument. This one has challenged us before. Gen. Douglas MacArthur, shortly after his recall from Korea in 1951, defended his insubordination to President Truman by damning what he viewed as the &quot;dangerous concept that the members of our armed forces owe primary allegiance and loyalty to those who temporarily exercise the authority of the executive branch of government rather than to the country and its Constitution, which they are sworn to defend.&quot; As the great soldier had dramatically confessed to Congress several weeks earlier, he had simply &quot;tried to do his duty as God gave him the light to see that duty.&quot;    The problem, evidently, was that God and President Truman did not see eye to eye, placing the general in the awkward position of having to choose between a higher authority and one higher still. In actuality, Gen. MacArthur was defending his pursuit of his own foreign policy as military commander in Korea, and a democratic government cannot condone the substitution of a military officer's own conception of correct foreign policy for the policies of elected officials. That is why Gen. MacArthur was wrong, and why a public-good rationale would not exonerate Col. North.    The public-good argument is vulnerable to the arrogance of personal convictions. It has always been so. Indeed, Dr. Johnson wryly warned 18th-century England that &quot;patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel.&quot; History records many wrongs committed by zealots who were firm believers in their own vain presumptions of the national interest.    However, there is a higher authority to which our democratic society demands all military officers adhere. Their commissions of office dictate that they &quot;observe and follow such orders and directions . . . as may be given by the president . . . or other superior officers, acting in accordance with the laws of the United States.&quot; This stipulation places a direct and personal obligation on the military officer to act within existing laws and carry out only lawful orders. When this conflicts with his duty to the president, his only recourse may be to resign or request reassignment. If an officer interprets law beyond its letter, even when he believes he is carrying out the intentions of his commander in chief, he must accept personal responsibility for his actions. When he pursues policies that he knows to be inconsistent with national law, he deserves both professional and legal condemnation.    It is probably harder for the midcareer military officer on the NSC staff to deal with the problems of divided loyalty than it is for the Joint Chiefs of Staff because, since 1958, the military chiefs have been legally obligated to speak freely and frankly with Congress. The NSC staff, on the other hand, has become more &quot;political&quot; through the years, with a personalized loyalty tied to the individual president.    Nevertheless, those in uniform must avoid such personalized loyalties if the credibility and political neutrality of the military profession are not to be undercut. Of course, this prescription is subject to abuse if officers actively challenge lawful presidential policies or clandestinely supply ammunition to the president's political opponents. There is no easy escape from this predicament. The officer who accepts an assignment to a presidential staff carries an immense burden as to the propriety of his professional behavior. So also must the president and Congress recognize that burden and repress temptations to involve military officers in their political disputes.    ---   Capt. Shephard is an assistant professor of political science at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point. </TEXT></DOC>