<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0029 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ARMENIAN LEADERS ENDORSED annexation of a neighboring region.    Defying authorities in Moscow, the legislature in Armenia voted to transfer control of the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh enclave to Armenia from Azerbaijan. The decision, which is expected to be opposed by Azerbaijan, has turned the ethnic dispute into a constitutional issue for the Kremlin to resolve. It also is considered a blow to Gorbachev's efforts to unify the Communist Party before a national conference June 28. The Soviet leader has pledged to discuss the country's ethnic strife.    Unrest over the disputed territory began in February, with demonstrations in both republics. Moscow already has rejected such annexation demands.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that the CIA and other national security agencies can be sued by employees who claim they were dismissed in violation of their constitutional rights. The 6-2 ruling involved a lawsuit by a former CIA technician who was fired as a security risk in 1982 after disclosing that he was homosexual.    ---   Jackson said he held a &quot;meaningful preliminary discussion&quot; with a top Dukakis aide who is interviewing potential Democratic vice presidential candidates, but the civil-rights leader said he hasn't decided if he wants the No. 2 spot. Jackson also met with the congressional Black Caucus, and members urged him to seek the post.    ---   Reagan called for the appointment of an independent prosecutor to investigate conflict-of-interest allegations against House Speaker Wright. The House ethics committee has decided to investigate certain of the Texas Democrat's financial dealings. The president suggested that a special prosecutor's inquiry would be &quot;more proper.&quot;    ---   Dr. Jonas Salk presented preliminary test results of an AIDS vaccine using the whole, inactivated virus to inoculate people already infected. The polio-vaccine pioneer's approach, described at an international AIDS conference in Stockholm, was met with skepticism. Other researchers have been experimenting with virus fragments.    AIDS researchers released data on dextran sulfate, a drug already used by some AIDS patients in self-treatment. Used as an anticoagulant and anti-cholesterol drug in Japan but barred in the U.S., the medication appeared to produce modest but encouraging test results.    ---   The Justice Department launched a criminal investigation into $7,750,000 in foreign payments and other financial dealings by Northrop Corp. in connection with attempts to sell F-20 jet fighters to South Korea's government. The Los Angeles-based defense contractor wouldn't comment about the inquiry.    ---   The White House is weighing whether to seek new military aid for the Nicaraguan rebels following last week's failure of Sandinista-Contra peace talks. Meanwhile, a truck convoy carrying aid to Nicaragua was turned away at the Mexican border by U.S. Customs officials. Members of the group later blockaded Rio Grande bridge.    ---   Rebel Archbishop Lefebvre threatened the first split in the Roman Catholic church in 118 years, announcing that he would consecrate four bishops June 30 without papal authority. Such a breach of discipline would formalize a schism. The Swiss-based prelate, barred from saying Mass since 1976, said he can &quot;no longer trust Rome.&quot;    ---   The Dalai Lama recognized China's right to handle Tibet's foreign affairs and maintain troops on Tibetan soil. The move signaled a change in policy. During a visit to the European Parliament in Strasbourg, France, Tibet's exiled leader urged Beijing to grant limited independence to his homeland, which was invaded by China in 1949.    ---   A bomb exploded in the Northern Ireland garrison town of Lisburn, killing five British soldiers, police said. About 10 other people were injured. Separately, a senior member of an outlawed Protestant paramilitary group was killed in Belfast. The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility.    ---   The European Space Agency launched the first of a new generation of Western Europe's Ariane rockets from a space center in French Guiana. The launcher later placed three satellites into orbit. The agency hopes the new rocket will provide a competitive edge in the race to commercialize space.    ---   Haiti's president halted the transfer or retirement of military officials, saying the action was needed to &quot;avoid a major crisis&quot; in the country. One officer, Jean-Claude Paul, has been indicted in Miami on drug-trafficking charges. Others have been blamed for violence that prompted the cancellation of last November's elections. </TEXT></DOC>