<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Fighting Back: Chemical Firms Press Campaigns to Dispel Their 'Bad Guy' Image --- Fears of Regulation, Lawsuits Lead Firms to Clean Up And Court Public Backing --- Mishaps Undermine Efforts </HL><AUTHOR> Laurie Hays (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> ROH HPC DD DOW </CO><IN> ENV CHM </IN><TEXT>   The chemical industry is running scared.    Regulators are relentless. Citizens are angry. Disasters like Bhopal, Love Canal and Times Beach are still haunting memories. So after years of trying to tough it out, big chemical makers are trying a new tactic: An all-out effort to persuade the public that the industry is mending its ways. The goal is to calm apprehensions before even stricter laws and constraints are imposed.    Consider these recent examples:   --Du Pont Co. has vowed to stop making chlorofluorocarbons by the end of the 1990s. The chemicals, widely used in refrigerants and styrofoam, are suspected of eating away the Earth's protective ozone layer.    --Monsanto Co. has promised to reduce all its hazardous air emissions by 90% by 1992 though they currently meet federal guidelines.    --Dow Chemical Co. and the Sierra Club have endorsed jointly a proposed federal law that would sharply reduce hazardous-waste production. Dow itself has adopted an aggressive waste-reduction program.    --The Chemical Manufacturers Association has proposed for the first time to set operating and safety standards that its 170 members would have to meet to retain membership.    Industry officials acknowledge that the campaign is born of desperation. Environmental activism is on the rise, carrying the threat of more government regulation, more lawsuits brought by citizens' groups against polluters, and heightened pressure to clean up contaminated sites, typically a very costly undertaking.    Chemical companies also fear a strong backlash as more and more information on pollution becomes known to the public. Under a recently enacted federal right-to-know law, for instance, chemical companies are required to notify the Environmental Protection Agency of all emissions of toxic chemicals.    Monsanto decided to reduce air emissions because officials are concerned about such reaction. &quot;The demand for a cleaner environment hasn't peaked yet,&quot; says Harold J. Corbett, senior vice president. Cutting pollution voluntarily, he says, &quot;is better than sitting back and waiting for more regulation to come along.&quot;    &quot;Firms realize they have to deal with environmental issues on a self-interested basis,&quot; says Daniel Dudek, a senior economist for the Environmental Defense Fund, a not-for-profit advocacy group based in New York. &quot;Otherwise, somebody else will make a decision for them that they will have to live with.&quot;    Officials who fear such consequences include Robert D. Kennedy, chairman of Union Carbide Corp., which owns a majority of the Indian subsidiary that leaked poison gas and killed more than 2,000 near a plant in Bhopal in 1984. &quot;An aroused public,&quot; he says, &quot;can put us out of business, just like it put the nuclear industry out of business&quot; after the incident at Three Mile Island. &quot;The industry can and should improve its performance,&quot; he says.    Many companies are pressing a public-relations program designed to portray themselves as sensitive to the environment. To advertise its newfound awareness, Hercules Inc. hoists flags at its plants with symbols representing the Earth, air, water and fire. Its environmental-awareness program is dubbed &quot;We Care.&quot; Hercules also rewards employees for adhering to federal, state and local anti-pollution guidelines.    The Chemical Manufacturers Association has gone so far as to publish a manual for plant managers with advice on how to win public support. It urges them, for example, not to &quot;stonewall&quot; when asked questions. They are also told to avoid such seemingly arrogant responses as &quot;The risk of emissions from the plant is lower than the risk of driving to the meeting or smoking during breaks.&quot;    Across the country, managers are adopting friendlier, more open postures. In community advisory meetings, companies are trying harder to address concerns. Residents, environmental activists and local officials are invited to join the committees and set the agendas.    But the industry's efforts to portray itself as a sensitive corporate citizen still have a long way to go. Some skeptics dismiss the campaign as just so much public-relations fluff. &quot;Coffee and doughnuts and a few sirens really don't take care of the problem,&quot; says Fred Millar, a director of the Environmental Policy Institute, a nonprofit environmental-advocacy group in Washington.    Others say the campaign doesn't begin to address problems caused by hazardous chemicals in the environment. Says Barry Commoner, a founder of the environmental movement and director of the Center for Biology of Natural Systems at Queens College in New York: &quot;The cutting edge of the unsolved environmental crisis lies with the chemical industry. When (a chemical company) says they're doing their best, my first response is 'How come you didn't do this 30 years ago?'&quot;    In addition, the industry's reassurances that safety is a top priority seem to ring hollow in light of frequent mishaps and accidents. Just last month, a chemical leak from a Monsanto plant in Sauget, Ill., sent 120 residents to the hospital with burning eyes, nausea and headaches. Four days later, in Nashua, N.H., 1,700 residents were evacuated from their homes after a leak from a W.R. Grace Co. plant that makes chemicals and pesticides created a vapor cloud.    But many companies say they have learned the consequences of enraging the public. Ciba-Geigy Corp. is one of those. In 1984, hazardous waste from its chemical plant in Toms River, N.J., was found to have seeped into the groundwater of a neighboring residential area. A year later, in an unrelated incident, Ciba and four of its officials were indicted on charges of disposing of waste improperly at another site. (The case is pending; the company and the officials pleaded innocent.)    A public furor erupted, and it hasn't subsided yet. The incidents led residents to take a closer look at the plant's operations, and some didn't like what they saw. On several occasions, Toms River residents picketed the company's complex. Now, environmental groups are demanding that the company halt the discharge of treated waste into the ocean -- a move that the company says would be very costly.    The mishaps have hurt in other respects, too. Several years ago, the company sought approval from local officials to build a $90 million pharmaceutical plant in Toms River. But its application to get zoning approval has become snarled in red tape, largely because of local resentment and increased scrutiny.    &quot;Ciba's reputation is at an all-time low,&quot; says William Skowronski, a school official and a member of a local environmental group.    Now, Ciba is trying to make amends. It invited residents to join a committee to air their gripes against the company and discuss solutions. The company also donated $50,000 to a local environmental group to hire specialists to evaluate the company's plans to clean up contaminated sites. The consultants noticed an omission in the plans that neither the company nor federal regulators had spotted. Ciba agreed to remedy the oversight.    Ciba officials say they believe the efforts are helping mend relations with the community. And some local activists give the company credit for trying. &quot;For the first time, citizens are being allowed to participate in the regulatory process,&quot; says Kathleen Terry, an attorney and president of the local environmental group.    The legacy of Bhopal also has been a powerful motivator for some chemical makers, among them Rohm andamp; Haas Co.    The company operates a chemical plant in Philadelphia's Bridesburg section, an industrial zone that also is home to a coffee factory, a smelter and a city sewage-treatment plant. Foul odors often permeate the air here. Leaks and accidental chemical spills aren't unusual.    While many residents staunchly supported their industrial neighbors for the jobs they provide, Rohm andamp; Haas has had its share of problems. The most infamous involved the deaths from lung cancer of 60 Rohm andamp; Haas workers who had been exposed to a toxic chemical process between 1948 and 1971 in the plant's Building 6.    The company changed the process to make it safer, and two years ago, settled cases stemming from the workers' exposure for $25 million. But, alarmed by the incident at Bhopal, officials decided to take a harder look at all the plant's hazardous-chemical operations.    Today, Rohm andamp; Haas has under way a program to upgrade safety procedures and reassure local residents that it intends to be a more responsible corporate citizen. To foster better relations with the residents of Bridesburg, plant officials meet with community leaders every month to discuss their concerns about plant operations.    The company also says it spent $5 million to analyze its handling of the most dangerous chemicals used at the plant. It has reduced inventories of those chemicals, and it monitors more closely the processes in which the chemicals are used.    For some companies, the battle with environmentalists has come down to bottomline financial concerns. They hope, for example, to gain competitive advantages by anticipating future regulations. Du Pont is regarded as leading the phase-out of ozone-damaging chlorofluorocarbons. The EPA and an international group of producers had advocated only a reduction of the compounds, not their elimination. But now just about everyone supports the phase-out idea, and Du Pont appears closest to going commercial with alternatives.    But Du Pont says making chlorofluorocarbons was no longer very good business for the company anyway. Intense price competition squeezed profits, and overproduction forced it to write off some new manufacturing facilities before they were used. Elwood P. Blanchard, a Du Pont executive vice president, dubbed the business a &quot;cash trap&quot; for Du Pont.    In other cases, environmental liabilities have become so financially burdensome that companies have found they can save money by preventing pollution before it starts. Dow Chemical Co. saw in the mid-1970s that hazardous-waste landfills were increasingly costly burdens because of cleanups and lawsuits. Similarly, pollution-control devices are expensive. So the company began researching ways to produce less hazardous waste.    The result was a program started in 1986 that environmentalists now cite as a model for other companies. Its premise is production efficiency. Each financial quarter, Dow tracks an index that shows the process wastes as a percentage of production. So far, it says, air wastes have been reduced by 30%, water wastes by 20% and solid wastes by 15% -- all before they even reach the pollution-control devices that filter them further. Dow's goal is to reduce waste an additional 10% to 15% next year.    Already, Dow is saving money. For example, by reprogramming a computer at a Louisiana plant where vinyl chloride is made, 10.5 million pounds of air wastes were eliminated. The value of the unreacted raw materials that would have become waste: $800,000 a year.    Says Ryan Delcambre, Dow's manager for waste reduction, &quot;We saw opportunities.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>