<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880714-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Beijing Boom: China's Birthrate Rises Again Despite a Policy Of One-Child Families --- Officials, Fearing a Setback To Modernization Drive, Adopt Harsher Penalties --- Why Boys Are So Desirable </HL><AUTHOR> Adi Ignatius (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> KETOU VILLAGE, China  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Rao Changqin is recalling her determination -- despite the wishes of the state -- to bear a son.    After first giving birth to a girl, Ms. Rao defied China's one-child limit and had a second child, another girl. Then the 35-year-old farm worker in this tiny village outside Beijing bore a third child, this time the long-sought son. For the two unauthorized births she and her husband were fined a total of $1,348. That is more than they earn in a year, so the couple went deeply into debt.    &quot;I had to keep trying until I had a boy,&quot; Ms. Rao says calmly, perched on a sofa in a Ketou government office and surrounded by the Communist Party officials who failed to persuade her to submit to an abortion.    Ms. Rao's defiance, and the defiance of others like her, spells new trouble for China. This country's birthrate is once again on the rise, despite draconian birth-control measures in recent years that included &quot;voluntary&quot; mass sterilization and a one-child policy that led thousands of peasants to murder their new-born girls. Already one in three pregnancies ends in abortion and yet some 22 million babies were born last year. That is one every 1.4 seconds. Ironically, China's economic reforms are partly responsible for the rise. They have increased the incomes of the country's mostly rural population and thus enabled peasants to pay fines and produce children in spite of government wishes.    As a result, the rate of growth in China's population is rising after the nation had virtually halved the alarming 2% annual increase of two decades ago. Last year, the country's population grew 1.44%, up from a rate of 1.41% in 1986 and 1.1% in 1985. (By comparison, the annual rate in the U.S. is about 0.9%, in India about 2%.) If this continues, China's 1.08 billion population will swell to 1.5 billion by 2010, straining anew the country's efforts to modernize.    &quot;China's population {growth} is almost out of control again,&quot; warns a recent editorial in the official Guangming Daily.    So the government is intensifying its birth-control efforts. It is doubling fines (a second child in Ketou now brings a penalty of about $1,000) and instead of simply penalizing offending families, the government also is basing the pay and promotion of certain officials on their success at limiting births. As a result, some of the officials are adopting new &quot;persuasion tactics,&quot; such as cutting off water and electricity to families who refuse to practice birth control.    For instance, here in Ketou, the task of controlling births falls to Jia Dianlai, a 48-year-old bureaucrat in a crisp Mao suit who has served as the village's top party official for 20 years. If births exceed state quotas, he stands to lose up to 10% of his handsome $500 annual salary -- and maybe even his job. If he does well, he could earn several hundred dollars in bonuses.    Mr. Jia has his work cut out for him. At 3%, Ketou's annual population growth rate is more than double the national average. Nearly two-thirds of the village's 270 families have had two or more babies. Mr. Jia himself has four children -- all born, he hastens to explain, before the single-child policy took effect in 1979.    &quot;I'm under a lot of pressure,&quot; he says, noting that rural people cling to &quot;feudal ideas.&quot; Chief among those ideas is the belief that more children -- particularly boys -- equals more happiness. Boys not only are more effective beasts of burden on the farm but are a source of security for Chinese couples. After a male in the countryside marries, he and his wife move in with his parents, and support them in their old age.    Mr. Jia was among several officials who tried to persuade Ms. Rao to have an abortion. He pleaded with her to consider society's overall needs, not just her desires. But she prevailed and paid the fines. After she gave birth to her son, Mr. Jia and others kept up the pressure. Finally, after months of tense &quot;persuasion meetings,&quot; and facing an additional $800 in fines, Ms. Rao agreed to be sterilized.    In the future, officials might not be so patient. The battle to limit population growth is being fought with renewed vigor in every city and village. Posters and billboards exhort people to marry late and have only one child.    In urban areas, where inflation is squeezing family incomes, crippling penalties for those who have second children have essentially ended the practice. But in the countryside, where officials have frequently granted exceptions to the single-child rule, the fight is just beginning.    In pursuit of birth control, Chinese officials intrude into the most intimate aspects of couples' lives in ways Americans would find intolerable. For instance, Ketou officials maintain a detailed dossier on each of the village's 210 women of child-bearing age. Two thick notebooks list the result of each pregnancy, the birth-control method used and any fines imposed. (In some villages, such files chart women's menstrual cycles.) The records show that two-thirds of the women in Ketou have had more than one child. About a quarter have had three or more.    Ketou has 31 officials involved in enforcing birth-policy guidelines. They frequently visit local households, providing free birth-control devices and urging mothers to have abortions and undergo sterilization. Female officials even conduct spot checks in the home to make sure intrauterine devices are still in place.    But Ketou women dodge the officials. &quot;If a woman knows that we are coming, she frequently runs away,&quot; says Liu Guofang, the village director. &quot;As a result, a lot of my visits take place after hours. Even then, sometimes they run away.&quot;    Few rural women agree to have abortions, and many who do first put up a strong fight. Chen Yuping, a 32-year-old Ketou chemical worker and the mother of one child, recently became pregnant. Mr. Jia recruited her husband's employer, a branch of the People's Construction Bank of China, to help press her to have an abortion. A bank official told her that if she had the baby, her husband's salary would be halved, to $6.75 a month.    &quot;They also laid my husband off for 15 days so he could persuade me not to have the baby,&quot; she recalls, rocking nervously in her chair. Finally, she succumbed. The baby is gone but the resentment remains. &quot;I felt it was unfair,&quot; she says, staring blankly at a wall across the room.    To show a visitor not all women resist, Mr. Jia goes to the microphone in his office and calls over the loudspeakers scattered across the flat countryside, &quot;Liu Lianping. Liu Lianping. Please come to the party office.&quot;    Within minutes a shy 24-year-old appears. She is dressed in a pink silk jacket. She enters a room filled with officials and takes a seat on a thick sofa against the wall. The officials begin telling her story for her.    Ms. Liu had her first child, a boy, two years ago. She was urged not to have another. &quot;She was easy to deal with,&quot; the party secretary boasts.    But other officials sitting in the room tell a different tale. In fact, they say, it took weeks of visits, including one from the party secretary himself, before Ms. Liu agreed to have an IUD inserted. They recall her mother-in-law vehemently telling officials to mind their own business.    As the story proceeds, Ms. Liu suddenly interrupts. &quot;I finally decided, why not give in,&quot; she says. &quot;I already had a child.&quot;    Sending Ms. Liu back to work at the village chicken farm with a wave of his hand, Mr. Jia says, &quot;In this generation, we have to make some sacrifices. Otherwise, things will be very difficult in the future.&quot;    In stark contrast to Ketou, the 12th Street neighborhood in Shenyang, an industrial city in northeast China, has one of the best records in the country. Since 1980, not a single child has been born outside state quotas for 12th Street, where about 40,000 people live. This achievement underscores the fact that birth control is much easier to carry out in cities, where most workers are still employed by the state and are therefore vulnerable to pay cuts. In the countryside, on the other hand, farmers have access to a free market, and their direct reliance on the state is waning.    At 12th Street, there are no exceptions to the one-child policy. For couples who have a second child, both husband and wife lose 10% of their salaries for 14 years. And they lose preferential treatment in getting access to apartments, schools and free education. In some cases, employers -- who also bear responsibility for population control -- have dismissed workers who have additional children.    &quot;Anyone can make the calculation,&quot; says Jian Hong, a bespectacled 38-year-old teacher and mother who lives in the 12th Street area. &quot;Who in their right mind would have a second child?&quot;    This sentiment is echoed in cities across China. Sun Wei, for example, lives in a tiny, 200-square-foot apartment in Beijing with her husband and six-year-old daughter. Their family income is about $50 a month, too little, she believes, to support another child. She willingly had an abortion after becoming pregnant in January. &quot;You couldn't pay me to have a second child,&quot; she says.    Because 12th Street did well last year, the three senior neighborhood officials divided a bonus from the city government of $135. Smaller bonuses went to lower-level birth-control officials. But the incentives can cut both ways: If the neighborhood does badly, these bureaucrats face penalties equal to at least 4% of their income.    A consensus hasn't always existed among China's leaders that population must be controlled. Chairman Mao Tsetung used to argue that &quot;the more people, the greater China's strength,&quot; and he ignored experts' calls for curtailing growth. (China now has 22% of the world's population but only 7% of its arable land.)    When the chairman's broader economic policies led to mass starvation in the early 1960s, the government launched programs to limit births. But family-planning efforts soon broke down, and birth-rates soared during the 1960s and 1970s until the end of China's chaotic Cultural Revolution in 1976. In 1963, the peak year, 30 million babies were born, pushing the population growth rate to 3.3%.    Today, babies from that era have reached child-bearing age themselves, contributing to the new surge in births. The current cycle isn't likely to peak before 1995, and some international demographers warn that the country may see similar booms every 20 years or so. That worries Chinese officials bent on modernization.    Already, food production isn't keeping up with population expansion. China had to import about 15 million tons of grain last year at a cost of more than $1 billion in scarce foreign exchange. Peasants currently tend cramped farms averaging only about one-quarter of an acre each, while, in the cities, workers have just a few square feet of living space apiece. The government has hoped to double current per-capita income to more than $800 by the year 2000, but that too is threatened by China's chronic, if cyclical, population explosions, officials warn.    China has lost control of population growth, says Mr. Jia, the Ketou official. &quot;So we have to work harder. If we fail to limit population, China's living standard will never improve.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>