<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871214-0062 </DOCNO><HL> Congress Dulls Pain of Deficit-CuttingBy Injecting Giveaways and Gimmicks---By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and John E. YangStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXES LABOR LATAM MDEST FREST LUVECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)AIRLINES (AIR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congress sweetened the bitter medicine of deficit-reduction with a helping of the type of giveaways and gimmicks that are the traditional fare of spending and tax legislation.    The Senate, in the pre-dawn hours of Saturday, approved a $606 billion omnibus spending bill that would pay for the continuing operation of federal agencies and provide a 2% salary increase for most federal workers. But the measure, approved 72-21, wasn't completed until the lawmakers had adopted a dollop of special breaks for favored interests.    The bill would reduce projected military spending for the current fiscal year by $5 billion and trim estimated nonmilitary spending by $2.6 billion. As a result, military spending would grow only about 1% before inflation, and discretionary nonmilitary spending would grow about 4%.    The spending bill is the second of two measures designed to reduce the federal budget deficit. Earlier, the House and Senate passed different versions of another bill that supposedly would trim $22.6 billion from this year's projected deficit by increasing taxes and changing laws that dictate spending. Both that deficit-reduction bill and the spending measure are expected to be reconciled in House-Senate conference committees this week, and to win final approval before Christmas.    The two-part deficit-reduction package would merely slow spending growth rather than reduce federal outlays. Overall spending would increase from last fiscal year by about $47 billion, and red ink in the current fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30, is likely to exceed the last fiscal year's $148 billion budget deficit.    Moreover, some lawmakers contend the package contains a number of deficit-trimming measures of dubious potency.    Lawmakers defend the deficit-widening provisions in the spending bill passed Saturday as necessary to garner enough votes to win passage of the thorny legislation. What's more, many insist that there are fewer such provisions than usual in this year's bill, and they say that even those are in jeopardy.    In the course of considering 77 amendments over almost 17 straight hours Friday and Saturday, lawmakers voted to:    --Give $9 million in nonmilitary aid to the Nicaraguan Contra rebels. The measure also would provide an estimated $6 million allowance to transport the food, clothing, shelter and medicine, and also to deliver to the rebels the previously authorized military goods valued at $500,000. House Democrats oppose any money for the Contras, however, and the spending bill that passed that chamber earlier this month doesn't contain any.    --Allow the administration to provide Stinger anti-aircraft missiles valued at $7 million to Bahrain, which would have to return any unfired missiles after 18 months. The House-passed bill would ban the transfer of the sophisticated weapons for fear that terrorists could acquire them.    --Allow the administration to resume aid to Pakistan despite that nation's failure to agree that it won't build nuclear weapons. The House bill has a similar provision. The aid was cut off at the end of September, when a similar legislative provision expired.    --Postpone until Aug. 31 a deadline for cities to be in compliance with the Clean Air Act. After the deadline, which is Dec. 31 under current law, the Environmental Protection Agency could impose economic sanctions against cities with the worst air-pollution problems. The House approved a similar measure.    The Senate bill also contains an allotment of federal largesse, including amendments that would:    --Enable Southwest Airlines to provide service between Dallas's Love Field and Wichita, Kan., by exempting such flights from federal noise-abatement laws. The provision was sponsored by Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.).    --Direct the federal government to consider suburban Sullivan, Mo., to be part of the St. Louis metropolitan area, thus allowing Sullivan's hospital to receive higher Medicare payments than it currently does. The provision was sponsored by Sen. John Danforth (R., Mo.).    --Allow college football coaches to establish tax-deferred pension plans that they can carry with them from school to school as they change jobs. Current law prohibits nonprofit organizations from having such so-called 401(k) plans. The amendment, sponsored by Sen. James Sasser (D., Tenn.), was suggested by Johnny Majors, the popular football coach at the University of Tennessee.    --Permit Hoboken, N.J., to defer until 1990 its reclassification under federal law to &quot;metropolitan city&quot; from &quot;urban county,&quot; so that it may continue to be eligible to receive community-development grants. That amendment was offered by Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D., N.J.).    --Spend $350,000 to spruce up the Mount Rushmore National Memorial in South Dakota for its 50th anniversary in 1991, an item sponsored by Sen. Larry Pressler (R., S.D.).    The omnibus spending bill approved by the House earlier this month also contains its share of booty, including:    --$8.5 million for the Loma Linda University Medical Center's proton-beam cancer treatment center, an item sponsored by Rep. Jerry Lewis (R., Calif.).    --$1 million to help pay for the recent celebration of the Constitution's bicentenntial in Philadelphia, sponsored by Rep. John Murtha (D., Pa.).    --$500,000 for a highway bypass in Petoskey, Mich., pushed by Rep. Bob Carr (D., Mich.).    --$90,000 for a right-hand turn lane on Tierrasanta Boulevard in San Diego to allow easier access into Murphy Canyon Housing Complex, courtesy of Rep. Bill Lowery (R., Calif.).    Rep. Lawrence Coughlin (R., Pa.), who derided the bill as a &quot;hog's breakfast,&quot; sponsored a provision in the bill urging the Department of Housing and Urban Development to spend $13.5 million to deal with a ground-collapse problem in the Philadelphia area.    The other Senate deficit-reduction bill purports to increase revenue $2 billion by providing $400 million to expand audits by the Internal Revenue Service. Budget experts roll their eyes in disbelief at that claim.    In addition, the measure would put into effect a new subsidy program for soybeans, cottonseed and sunflowers that critics charge could cost millions of dollars in the fiscal year beginning next Oct. 1; increase block grants to localities for social service programs by $50 million in the current fiscal year; and broaden Medicare coverage for psychiatric services and Medicaid coverage for children and pregnant women.    And it would authorize the sale of government-held financial assets and allow borrowers to prepay high-interest government loans. That would raise $7.85 billion but probably would result in a long-term loss to the federal government. Also part of the measure is a provision that would allow Israel, Egypt and other countries to prepay billions of dollars in high-interest-rate loans. That could cost the U.S. about $1 billion in forgone interest payments over the term of the loans. </TEXT></DOC>