<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881109-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Politics andamp; Policy: Democrats Hold On to Decisive Control of Congress And Add to Their Strength in Nation's Statehouses </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers and David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Democrats retained decisive control of Congress and added to their strength at the nation's statehouses, as ticket-splitting voters gave the party an edge even where Vice President George Bush won handily.    George Bush's lack of coattails was shown by the fact that, as of early this morning, it appeared the Democrats probably gained one or two Senate seats and governorships and at least held their own in the House.    Connecticut Republican Sen. Lowell Weicker, whose career in Congress spans two decades, was defeated by the state's Democratic attorney general, Joseph Lieberman, while in New Jersey, Ohio, and North Dakota, Democratic Sens. Frank Lautenberg, Howard Metzenbaum and Quentin Burdick turned back once threatening GOP challenges. In West Virginia and Indiana, Democrats Gaston Caperton and Evan Bayh, the son of former Sen. Birch Bayh, took governorships held by the GOP.    Republicans weren't without victories, but the election generally was marked more by the emergence of new personalities than a national shift in power, according to projections by NBC News. Trent Lott, the House Republican whip, won a historic Mississippi seat long held by retiring Democratic Sen. John Stennis. But even as he won, two former Democratic governors and Vietnam combat veterans, Bob Kerrey and Chuck Robb, were taking back Senate seats held by Republicans in Nebraska and Virginia.    A third Democratic victor, Rep. Buddy MacKay, won a closely fought Senate race in Florida, defeating conservative Rep. Connie Mack, who ran an ideological campaign tailored to take advantage of the vice president's popularity in the state, according to ABC News. Mr. MacKay will take the Senate seat being relinquished by retiring Democratic Budget Committee Chairman Lawton Chiles, and his victory is seen as a triumph for Democratic moderates in the South in the face of Republican dominance at the presidential level.    According to ABC News projections, the sole Democratic incumbent to lose in the Senate was John Melcher, the two-term Montanan who was a thorn in the side of the Reagan administration in the debate over farm issues. He will be replaced by former farm broadcaster Conrad Burns, a Republican who appeared to benefit from attacks on Mr. Melcher and his irascible personal style.    The most notable Republican House victory was the defeat of powerful Banking Committee Chairman Fernand St Germain of Rhode Island by attorney and businessman Ronald Machtley, according to the state's three major television stations. Mr. St Germain survived a similar challenge two years ago, but he was weakened by a primary fight this year and continued controversy over his close ties with the savings and loan industry. Mr. Machtley benefited most recently by reports that the Justice Department concluded there was strong evidence of misconduct in Mr. St Germain's being entertained by lobbyists with a stake in legislation before his committee.    Democrats came into the election with a 54-46 Senate majority and having enjoyed a 257-178 House majority through most of the 100th Congress. Mr. Lott, who gave up a powerful House leadership post to run for the Senate, reflects GOP resignation to the Democratic influence there. Another young Republican, Rep. Judd Gregg, left the House to take over the New Hampshire governor's office that John Sununu is relinquishing.    Gov. Michael Dukakis's running mate, Sen. Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, reflected the pattern in yesterday's elections. He won his fourth term as senator even as the Democratic presidential ticket lost in his state. As the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Sen. Bentsen symbolizes a system of almost two governments in Washington -- a Republican executive and Democratic legislature.    Other prominent Democratic senators who prevailed, not surprisingly, included Robert Byrd of West Virginia, who is stepping down from his Senate leadership post; and Edward Kennedy, who, though only 56 years old, will rank fifth in seniority in the entire Senate. Also re-elected were Democratic Tennessee Sen. James Sasser, who will be the new chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, and Sen. George Mitchell of Maine, who wants to succeed Mr. Byrd as leader and whose smooth television manner may be attractive to fellow Democrats looking for a national spokesman after losing the White House.    In the race to fill the seat of retiring Sen. William Proxmire of Wisconsin, Democratic businessman Herb Kohl survived a late-campaign surge by GOP state Sen. Susan Engeleiter. Mr. Kohl spent $4 million of his own money to replace Mr. Proxmire, who spent only $145.10 to win re-election six years ago.    Among Republicans, Vermont Rep. James Jeffords was elected to succeed retiring Sen. Robert Stafford, a major voice in environmental legislation. Missouri Sen. John Danforth, whose campaign advertised his role in trade legislation initially opposed by the Reagan administration, easily won re-election, as did Sen. John Chafee of Rhode Island. A third GOP incumbent, Minnesota Sen. David Durenberger, defeated state Attorney General Hubert Humphrey III, the son of the late vice president and longtime champion of liberal Democrats.    In California, early this morning, ABC News projected that incumbent Republican Sen. Pete Wilson narrowly survived a challenge by Lt. Gov. Leo McCarthy. In Wyoming, GOP Sen. Malcolm Wallop was the projected victor.    As with Rep. St Germain, ethics is one issue that can still cut through the power accumulated by incumbents. Republican Georgia Rep. Patrick Swindall, who is under federal indictment for perjury charges, lost to Democratic challenger Ben Jones, and Maryland Democrat Rep. Roy Dyson, who has been embroiled in controversy involving his office staff and ties to Pentagon contractors, narrowly led a poorly financed challenge by a Vietnam veteran Republican Wayne Gilchrest with more than 90% of the vote reported.    Ethics issues were a factor as well in the Rhode Island gubernatorial campaign, where Republican Gov. Edward DiPrete, who has been embroiled in a controversy surrounding the real-estate dealings of a company controlled by his family, narrowly defeated Democratic attorney and businessman Bruce Sundlun.    One Republican House incumbent who lost was Rep. Joseph DioGuardi of Westchester County, N.Y. He was defeated by Democrat Nita Lowey, a former assistant secretary of state, according to the Democratic and Republican congressional campaign committees. </TEXT></DOC>