<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: 'Special Events' Yield No Joy for Bond Raters </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BON </IN><TEXT>   Harold H. Goldberg is chairman of the Corporate Rating Committee at Moody's Investors Service, a role that gives his opinions dollars-and-cents importance to some 3,000 corporations world-wide. A good bond rating is a many-splendored thing, and nothing can make a chief executive officer or chief financial officer happier than to be elevated to the triple-A Valhalla that Moody's reserves for only the most credit-worthy companies. Conversely, few things are more dispiriting than to be demoted from the As down to the Bs or, saddest of all fates, from the Bs to the Cs.    Moody's debt ratings not only raise or lower corporate borrowing costs, but are one measure of corporate health. So it is a matter of some interest that Mr. Goldberg's recently issued &quot;Global Outlook&quot; for 1988 predicts that, for the third consecutive year, more corporate credit ratings will be downgraded than upgraded.    Mr. Goldberg doesn't think the ratio of downgrades to upgrades will be quite as high as the 1.7 of 1986 and 1987. But still there is something interesting about a pattern of declining credit quality after five years of steady economic growth in the U.S., accompanied by economic improvement in other free-market industrial nations. Standard andamp; Poor's goes so far as to predict that its downgrade ratio will rise this year from an estimated 1.5 in 1987.    Bond raters, Mr. Goldberg explains, attempt to look five to 10 years ahead. Bond buyers are investing for the long term. But even when a rater is looking beyond the next business cycle, business cycles cannot be ignored. Both Moody's and Sandamp;P see the possibility of a recession sometime this year, a view that figures into their downgrades. Special factors in certain industries, such as the write-downs by moneycenter banks of some sovereign-risk loans, help expand the number of downgrades.    Other economists might quarrel with the bond raters' recession forecasts, citing, for example, the likely added boost this year from the 1986 tax reform. But few people have better insights than bond raters into the income statements and balance sheets of corporations.    &quot;We see more difficult times for a host of industries domestically,&quot; says Mr. Goldberg, citing both his recession fears and strong competitive pressures in many markets. &quot;At the same time what we see is the decapitalization of businesses through what we call special events. There was a pause in takeovers, huge stock buy-backs and restructurings right after Black Monday, but they're coming back with a vengeance. Last year, about one-quarter of all the downgrades were a result of these special events. It's our belief that they will continue.&quot;    &quot;Special events&quot; are happenings outside the normal course of business, including not only takeovers and recapitalizations but also such things as the huge damage award that knocked down Texaco's debt rating. Corporate officers sometimes issue large amounts of debt to ward off hostile takeovers by making it difficult to later mortgage the corporation's assets to finance the takeover. Stock buy-backs by companies also are sometimes an anti-takeover strategy in that they force the price of the stock upward and consume the honey pots of cash that attract raiders.    To be sure, shareholders often benefit from higher stock prices brought about by these capital restructurings. But the end result is usually a higher debt-to-equity ratio, and hence reduced credit quality.    It is argued by some respected economists that it is a good thing to return value to shareholders on the grounds that shareholders, by and large, will make better investments with the money than corporate managers normally make. Nonetheless, special events reflect a dramatic change in the direction of greater corporate debt and, hence, lower credit ratings and higher costs for future borrowing.    &quot;U.S. firms, as a rule, have always had stronger capital footings than most multinational competitors world-wide,&quot; says Mr. Goldberg. &quot;Some analysts felt that many if anything during the '60s and '70s were overcapitalized and missed out on some business opportunities for not being as aggressive as they should have been. What has happened with the advent of hostile takeovers, particularly directed to those firms whose stock prices were underperformers, has really caused a deep correction in their capital structure. More companies today are trying to use a large amount of leverage to protect their independence and at the same time provide a better return to their equity holders. The days of well-heeled companies limping along in terms of rewarding their stockholders is probably over.&quot;    Mr. Goldberg says that he is &quot;disappointed&quot; with what five years of economic growth has done for balance sheets. &quot;You would think that capital positions would be enhanced, liquidity would be improved and creditor protection would be more comfortable. But what we're seeing is this other concept of concerns about losing control, short-term profitability and the growing concern that research and development is being underinvested. What you think of as a rater is that cash and liquidity is a reserve a company should have for difficult times. But if anything after restructurings debt protection measures are weaker rather than stronger.&quot;    But it is necessary to put Mr. Goldberg's views into some historical context. In some very important ways, corporations are far healthier today than a decade ago. &quot;We had a very difficult time in the 1970s with the inflation environment. It was culminated in 1981 and 1982 with the recession. As a result of the difficult times, many of our major companies in a host of industries got out of antiquated facilities, they restructured in a manner to reduce employment and attain meaningful levels of productivity improvements. Those gains are not over. More companies today in a whole series of industries are tougher and they've tightened their belts. They are paying attention to the things they should have in the expansionary years, mainly productivity and processing technology. All the paper companies, all the chemical companies and many of the assembly and fabricating industries in this country are stronger today than they have ever been. Those companies on a selected basis are improving their credit-worthiness.&quot;    Mr. Goldberg believes that profit margins are the best guide to a company's future. They reveal how competitive a company is in its industry, the quality of its management, its ability to make use of technology. After sharp gains in 1983 and 1984 -- years in which credit ratings were on balance upgraded-corporate profits gained more slowly in 1985 and more slowly still in 1986. Last year, according to a preliminary estimate by Salomon Brothers in its &quot;Global Equity Market Review and Outlook&quot; it appears that pre-tax &quot;economic profits&quot; rose 5.6% from the year before, a slight improvement over 1986 after allowing for a higher rate of inflation.    But Mr. Goldberg wishes corporations were doing better. &quot;Raters have emotions, too. It's much nicer to put out a rating change for a CFO and say, by the way, we raised your rating. I much prefer to communicate that kind of message rather than we have lowered your rating.&quot; CEOs and CFOs no doubt also would prefer to hear such news. </TEXT></DOC>