<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880616-0049 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters: Offshore Boiler-Room Scams Proliferate --- Swindles Are Easy to Start, Hard to Crack </HL><AUTHOR> Charles McCoy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM CANDA </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><TEXT>   The calls from Costa Rica always came in crackling and fuzzy, but they sounded great to Jeff Wilson. The jojoba beans were going strong, the callers reported. The sulphur mine was looking good. Invest now and make a fortune.    &quot;Their presentations were impressive. . . . They'd gone through a lot of trouble and expense,&quot; says Mr. Wilson, an oil-refining consultant in Lutherville, Md. So over several months beginning in late 1986, he rounded up $140,000 and bought into one of the latest and most troublesome trends in financial crime, an offshore boiler-room scam.    For years, telephone con artists operating in foreign countries rarely reached out to touch American investors at home. But now, state and federal fraud investigators say, boiler rooms are popping up all over Central America, the Caribbean and other distant climes. They are capitalizing on advances in telephone technology and declines in international phone rates to blanket the U.S. with calls. And they're almost impossible for regulators to shut down.    &quot;A foreign boiler room comes close to the perfect crime,&quot; says Edward Pankau, a private investigator in Houston who specializes in financial crimes. &quot;It's easy. It's lucrative. A lot of times, the law can't touch them. It's a beautiful racket.&quot;    Nobody knows how many offshore boiler rooms are now in operation. Clearly, they don't yet rival their U.S.-based counterparts, which annually fleece Americans of an estimated $10 billion. But state and federal securities regulators fear that could change as scam artists spread the word about their many advantages -- things like lax local regulations, fuzzy international fraud laws, secrecy statutes that cloud the money trail and jurisdictional problems that often block any effort at prosecution.    &quot;It's a problem we know is only going to get bigger,&quot; says Barry Gladden, a fraud investigator with the Florida Comptroller's Office.    Investigators have received complaints about boiler rooms operating in the Bahamas, Bermuda and the Turks and Caicos Islands, among other exotic locales. But Costa Rica seems to be emerging as a favorite site -- specifically, the Centro Colon building in downtown San Jose. Kenneth Armitage, an urbane Englishman, opened a boiler room there in 1984, in a posh office across the hall from the British Embassy. According to Costa Rican authorities, he lured an estimated $7 million -- mostly from Americans -- into his Invest and Prosper Fund, which promised annual returns of 21%.    But the only one who prospered was Mr. Armitage. The scheme fizzled in 1986, when he returned to England to face fraud charges in an unrelated matter. Investors, meanwhile, never got the promised returns and haven't been able to trace their funds. Mr. Armitage won't be much use in the hunt; he died recently of a heart attack.    Just months after Mr. Armitage left for England, International Swiss Investments Corp. moved into his old office and began a similar operation, according to a lawsuit filed in Seattle by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Wilson, the Maryland consultant, and hundreds of other U.S. investors were duped into investing in International Swiss after hearing its telephone pitch for sulphur mines and jojoba beans, the complaint alleges. (Jojoba, the boiler-room salesmen explained, is a hot commodity because it can be substituted for politically-sensitive sperm whale blubber in perfumes.)    The SEC alleges that International Swiss has deceived investors about the size of its stakes in jojoba beans and sulphur. Salesmen's assertions that the company planned to go public in London were also untrue, the SEC says. Federal investigators privately estimate that International Swiss may have hit American investors for as much as $40 million so far.    In April, a federal judge in Seattle issued a cease-and-desist order and preliminary injunction against International Swiss. At least six states have hit the outfit with similar orders in recent months.    But all that doesn't amount to a hill of beans in San Jose. As in most Latin and Caribbean nations, it's no crime in Costa Rica for a local boiler room to fleece foreigners, according to securities attorneys in both the U.S. and Costa Rica. Furthermore, U.S. courts and state regulatory agencies have no jurisdiction there. About all they can do is hope for extradition.    Pressure from angry investors eventually flushed International Swiss out of Costa Rica, but it is still operating from offices in Panama City and Cancun, Mexico. Salesmen in those two places are calling investors already bilked by the Costa Rican operation and offering them new investments -- investments that federal investigators believe are bogus. Meanwhile, International Swiss's president, Leonard Zrnic, who has been charged with stock manipulation in an unrelated case in Spokane, Wash., is living in a posh condominium in Cancun. His lawyer says Mr. Zrnic refuses to comment unless this newspaper agrees in advance to print Mr. Zrnic's remarks in their entirety -- a request that was denied.    Federal investigators say at least three other Costa Rican boiler rooms have sprung up in recent weeks, calling International Swiss investors with offers to recover their lost investment for a fee or to make them a fortune in mining stocks. According to investors, these boiler rooms are using some of the same salesmen employed by International Swiss. The SEC is unsure whether they have any connection with Mr. Zrnic.    &quot;We're trying to do something about them,&quot; laments one investigator. &quot;It's damn hard.&quot;    Investigators say offshore boiler-room specialists are adept at spotting opportunities presented by new technology. The tiny Caribbean island of St. Kitts got a new high-tech satellite phone system last year. Within weeks, it also got a boiler room, set up by a cast of veteran Canadian and South Florida operators. One of the group's leaders, Martin Resnick, has at least 14 convictions in Canada for fraud and other crimes.    Investigators with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police say the outfit planned to suck in $25 million by hawking high-risk stock in a bank founded on the island by Mr. Resnick's associates. According to these investigators, the bank had virtually no assets. And it listed directors who say they have never heard of the bank.    The operation was typical of offshore boiler rooms in all respects but one -- it seems to have nicked relatively few investors. That's because it folded just a couple of months after it opened. Not that the operators were caught doing anything illegal; like Costa Rica, St. Kitts has loose securities laws. But Canadian newspapers got wind of the boiler room, and the resulting publicity prompted the operators to shut it down.    At least temporarily. Mr. Resnick, who defends the operation and says he broke no laws in St. Kitts, vows that it will rise again. &quot;They may close things down for a week or two, or a month, but it will go on,&quot; he says.    According to investigators, most offshore boiler-room scams aren't discovered until long after they move into high gear. And then it can take years to do anything about them. In one of the earliest known cases, a Canadian named Murray Libman set up phone rooms in Canada and Costa Rica in the mid-1970s, pitching worthless shares in two phony Costa Rican gold mining operations. The swindle ran undetected for five years, and it took another five before authorities could figure out who was behind the operation and close it down. The take: an estimated $20 million from 15,000 U.S. investors, almost none of which has been recovered.    Mr. Libman surrounded his scam with an almost impenetrable corporate shell of at least five Panamanian companies, taking advantage of secrecy laws that made it impossible for investigators to determine its backers. He further covered his tracks with elaborate phone hookups. The lines from his Toronto boiler room, for example, ran directly into a legitimate U.S.-based telemarketing firm, which in turn unwittingly routed them throughout the U.S. The ploy made it nearly impossible to trace the calls back to the Canadian salesmen.    Authorities in Canada finally broke up the scam with the help of a disaffected accomplice. But other problems arose to complicate prosecution. Mr. Libman's lawyers argued that Canadian courts had no jurisdiction, since the victims were Americans. They tied up the case for four years, until late 1986, when Mr. Libman, about 70 years old, was finally convicted of fraud. He received no jail time and paid a fine of only 60,000 Canadian dollars (about US$49,260 at current exchange rates).    Prosecutors run into numerous other problems that never come up in domestic boiler-room investigations. Consider the case of Gerald Rogers, who faces fraud charges in federal court in Denver, Colo. In the early 1980s, he allegedly ran a Panamanian-based operation that peddled taxshelter investments in a phony French Guyana gold mine and conned investors out of about $100 million.    It took more than a year of haggling between U.S. prosecutors and the State Department and the Panamanian foreign ministry to get permission to take a deposition from one of Mr. Rogers's alleged Panamanian accomplices. But when prosecutors finally arrived in Panama, the accomplice was long gone. Mr. Rogers himself has been on the lam since 1986. Not a penny of the $100 million he is accused of scamming has been recovered.    Faced with such daunting obstacles, some investigators concede that going after foreign boiler-room scams often isn't worth the effort. Larry Lambert, an investigator with the Orange County District Attorney's office in Santa Ana, Calif., recently received a series of complaints about a boiler room near Ensenada, Mexico. The operation extolled the virtues of investing in precious metals. Downside risks -- that the outfit had no precious metals and no intention of delivering on orders -- weren't mentioned.    &quot;It was obviously a scam,&quot; Mr. Lambert says. &quot;Chances are it's still going on. But I've got 200 boiler rooms in my own backyard to worry about. Besides, who is going to dump 10 grand on my plane tickets and expenses to chase something like that down, when chances are you can't do anything about it anyway?&quot; After making some initial inquiries, Mr. Lambert's office dropped the investigation.    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Martin Resnick&quot; -- June 17, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>