<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871209-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Inquiry of Fatal PSA Crash Said to FocusOn Possibility of Gunshots Fired Aboard---By Roy J. Harris Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> U CHVAIRLINES (AIR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><TEXT>   Federal investigators studying Monday's fatal Pacific Southwest Airlines crash reportedly were concentrating on the possibility that gunshots were fired on board by a recently terminated employee of USAir Group Inc., which acquired PSA in May.    The crash killed 43 passengers and crew members, including Chevron U.S.A. President James R. Sylla, who was returning to the Chevron Corp. unit's San Francisco headquarters with three other company employees from an annual Chevron Christmas luncheon in Los Angeles.    Flight 1771, an 80-passenger PSA British Aerospace BAe-146 aircraft, crashed in the hilly ranchland northwest of Morro Bay about 45 minutes after its 3:30 p.m. takeoff from Los Angeles International Airport.    The Federal Bureau of Investigation would say only that &quot;a criminal act&quot; appeared to have precipitated the fiery crash, according to wire service reports. But Washington-based USAir confirmed other reports that among the passengers were David Burke, fired last month for allegedly misappropriating funds while a USAir customer-service agent, and the USAir supervisor who had fired him.    A USAir spokeswoman, asked to comment on news reports that Mr. Burke had used an airline ID badge to evade security procedures and board the aircraft with a .44-caliber Magnum pistol, would say only that Mr. Burke's ID card had been returned to the company and destroyed after the 35-year-old employee was fired Nov. 19.    A Federal Aviation Administration spokesman in Washington said the agency likely would examine procedures that allow airline employees to bypass metal detectors, if those procedures enabled an armed man to board an aircraft undetected. &quot;Our first priority is going to be to determine what happened,&quot; the spokesman said.    The agency has been testing airport security this year, and reportedly found Los Angeles International among the lower-ranking facilities in detecting mock weapons carried by FAA personnel.    Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board, which reports on accidents to FAA, were on the crash scene in central California but hadn't made a statement by late yesterday about the possible cause of the crash.    In a statement to employees, PSA President Russell Ray said: &quot;We have no basis to believe that the accident was caused by a mechanical reason or a crew error.&quot;    Speculation among aircraft experts was that gunfire wouldn't necessarily pose a major threat to a jetliner, unless it disabled flight crew members or caused a major penetration of the fuselage.    In San Francisco, Chevron Chairman George M. Keller held a news conference over the death of the 53-year-old Mr. Sylla and the three other employees, Owen F. Murphy, Jocelyn G. Kempe and Allen F. Swanson. He said company officials first became concerned about the four when they missed a Monday-evening planning conference on world-wide public affairs management.    Mr. Sylla, a 30-year Chevron veteran who in previous jobs had been responsible for industrial relations and environmental affairs, had been a corporate vice president since 1979 and Chevron U.S.A. president since June 1984. He was elected to Chevron's executive committee last year. A spokesman for the energy concern said Mr. Sylla had done much of the &quot;pick and shovel work&quot; in the $13 billion merger of Chevron and Gulf Corp. in 1984.    Among other prominent passengers reported to have died in the crash were Wolfgang Studemann, a West German space scientist who was going to the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, and Dr. Neil Webb, president of Dominican College, a liberal arts school in San Rafael, Calif., who was traveling with his wife.    ABC News yesterday reported that investigators had found a suicide note from Mr. Burke saying he intended to kill his former supervisor, Ray F. Thompson. The network reported that the former USAir employee bought a one-way ticket and smuggled on board the gun and six rounds of ammunition.    USAir said Mr. Thompson, the customer-service manager at Los Angeles International, was aboard Flight 1771 Monday. No one survived the crash, according to authorities, and bits of wreckage were reported scattered over 20 acres.    Immediately after the crash, pilots and others who had monitored transmissions from the PSA jet plane's cockpit said the pilot had reported an emergency involving gunfire in the cabin before the plane went down.    The disaster was the first fatal accident for PSA since the 1978 collision of an airliner with a small plane over its headquarters city of San Diego killed 144. Its popular Los Angeles-San Francisco commuter service is the airline's largest single route, serving the nation's most heavily traveled air corridor.    The 40-year-old airline, acquired in a wave of mergers the past few years, is scheduled to disappear next year as USAir completes a combination of service and the repainting of the pink, red and white PSA planes, which bear a black &quot;smile&quot; marking under the nose. </TEXT></DOC>