<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870804-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Medical Move:A Psychiatrist's WorkLeads to a U.S. StudyOf Alzheimer's Drug---But Dr. Summers Shuns Test,Seeks to Widen His Own;Is Memory Really Aided?---The Fee-for-Research Furor---By Michael WaldholzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WLAPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   For medical science, the drug industry and its regulators, it is an unprecedented pharmaceutical experiment. For millions of victims of Alzheimer's disease and their families, it is a matter of life or living death.    The National Institute of Aging plans to announce Thursday that, beginning this month, it will spend $2 million a year for three years to study an experimental drug called THA. A California psychiatrist claims it is the first drug ever to reverse memory loss due to Alzheimer's, the incurable mind-destroying disease that kills 100,000 Americans a year.    But skeptics, some angry and chagrined, abound. And the urgent testing of the drug follows a bizarre chain of events stretching from the Californian's research office to a prestigious medical journal, a wealthy New York auto dealer, the halls of Congress and the White House.    Until last November, THA wasn't even considered a strong candidate for fighting Alzheimer's. Then the psychiatrist, William K. Summers, published a study in the New England Journal of Medicine showing that the drug significantly improved memory and physical performance for 16 of 17 impaired Alzheimer's patients.    The finding uniformly surprised longtime researchers in the field. &quot;There is a scientific rationale behind THA,&quot; says Dr. Leon Thal, a researcher at San Diego Veterans Administration Hospital. &quot;But the results were overwhelming, and when you get results like that out of the blue, the first reaction is to be skeptical.&quot;    Even if the institute of aging replicates Dr. Summers's findings (he isn't taking part in the institute's study), THA has limitations. It isn't a cure because it doesn't affect the disease's underlying degenerative process. Instead, researchers hope it will enhance memory and other functioning in the years before the disease eventually destroys a victim's mental capacity. Also, THA appears to produce some changes in liver chemistry, causing some researchers to worry about long-term side effects.    Dr. Summers, who is 43 years old, has been tinkering with THA, which stands for tetrahydroaminocridine, for 11 years. As a resident at Barnes Hospital in St. Louis in 1976 he had used a similar-acting drug, physostigmine, to treat a patient with delirium tremens. The patient's hallucinations subsided, but the drug caused vomiting and diarrhea and &quot;he looked like hell,&quot; says Dr. Summers. Searching the medical literature for something less toxic, the young doctor found Australian studies referring to THA, which was synthesized in Australia decades ago.    If it hadn't been for a breakthrough in Alzheimer's research at about the same time, Dr. Summers might have left THA alone. But scientists in Great Britain reported discovering that the brains of Alzheimer's victims contained abnormally low amounts of acetylcholine, a chemical that carries messages between nerve cells involved in memory. And according to the Australian studies, THA increased acetylcholine levels.    &quot;I don't think anyone else made the connection simply because THA wasn't available outside Australia,&quot; Dr. Summers recalls.    Over the next few years, he tried to obtain research grants but was turned down. The rebuffs reflected, in part, the inconclusive results obtained by other scientists pursuing the same theory with physostigmine, which also promotes acetylcholine.    Even without grants, Dr. Summers had some early -- but fleeting -- success with THA. In 1981, he published in an esoteric scientific journal, Biological Psychiatry, a study of 12 patients showing that, given intravenously, the drug improved memory when used for an Alzheimer's-like dementia. A year later, however, scientists at the National Institutes of Health weren't able to fully reproduce his results.    Nonetheless, based on Dr. Summers's 1981 finding, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration granted him approval to test THA in pill form in about 40 patients. Working mostly out of his small private office in Arcadia, a Los Angeles suburb, Dr. Summers and a colleague, Kenneth Tachiki, developed a technique to tailor drug doses to the individual patient, doses that maintained constantly high blood levels of acetylcholine.    Kenneth Davis, a respected Alzheimer's researcher at Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, says that this tailoring is &quot;a key contributor&quot; to the results Dr. Summers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine on the first 17 patients to complete a round of treatment in his 40-patient experiment. In an editorial accompanying the study, Dr. Davis called the findings a &quot;triumph for the scientific method.&quot;    The study's publication as the lead article in the widely respected Journal generated news stories world-wide, causing thousands to clamor for THA. Dr. Summers's small staff fielded 300 calls a day for more than a week afterward. The staff at the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association in Chicago also was inundated. &quot;The desperation was very sad; we felt terrible,&quot; says Jerome Stone, chairman of the ADRDA.    The likelihood that anyone would get the drug was dim. That's because it typically costs a drug company millions of dollars to test a drug for safety and effectiveness. But THA's patent had long ago expired. Without patent protection, companies backing THA research would have no guarantee of recouping their investment. Dr. Summers says that before the study's release last year, he contacted several companies and they all &quot;pretty much said 'thank you, but no thank you.'&quot;    Unable to attract financing for his research, Dr. Summers created a private company, called Solo Research Inc. He started charging patients in his study $12,000 for the first year and $4,800 a year thereafter, to cover the cost of producing the drug plus medical expenses.    After his study was released, Dr. Summers sent about 600 copies of a brochure describing his &quot;fee for research&quot; enterprise to people who called his office inquiring about the drug. He also advised callers that the Food and Drug Administration hadn't approved his request to expand his study to about 200 patients, so &quot;I told them if they wanted to be in the study they ought to call their congressman and put some pressure on the government.&quot;    Instead, FDA officials were outraged when they discovered that Dr. Summers was still charging test subjects a fee, something they had told him in the spring he couldn't do. So they ordered him to stop &quot;in effect advertising and selling the drug,&quot; says Dr. Paul Leber, the head of the FDA division handling THA.    &quot;Imagine our concern,&quot; says one FDA staffer. &quot;Here was this phenomenal result, and then we find out the researcher has a financial interest in the drug.&quot;    Dr. Summers had also filed an application with the U.S. Patent Office for a limited type of patent based on discovery of a new use for an old compound. Although the FDA says it was aware of that filing, the editors at the New England Journal of Medicine say that they were not and that they didn't know about his fees.    &quot;I was shocked when I found out he had established a for-profit company,&quot; says Dr. Arnold Relman, the Journal's editor. &quot;I called him and told him it was an absolutely inappropriate way to fund research.&quot;    Dr. Summers says that at first he didn't know he needed FDA approval to charge subjects. When he kept charging after being told he couldn't, he says, he was billing for other medical expenses, not for the drug itself. He says that he didn't notify the Journal's editors about it because he began charging only after he had submitted his study for publication, and that the &quot;fee for research&quot; venture was merely a way to support continued research. He says he has now reorganized the venture into a nonprofit operation that, if he is allowed to again charge fees, would pay him a $100,000-a-year salary to compensate him for the time he spends treating patients.    Moreover, Dr. Summers says he filed for a patent only to attract backing from some drug company, not for personal aggrandizement. But he acknowledges that in seeking such backing, he has asked for a $1 million &quot;bonus,&quot; plus royalties, in exchange for assigning his still-awaited patent rights. He says he is &quot;primarily interested in support to continue my research,&quot; but also feels that &quot;I deserve something for my efforts.&quot; So far, despite these efforts and despite the highly publicized study, he hasn't lined up corporate backing.    What the study did attract was immediate alarm among top Alzheimer's researchers and physicians. Lissy Jarvik, a professor of psychiatry at the University of California at Los Angeles, called the FDA a day before the study was released to complain that it would promote &quot;unreasonable expectations.&quot; She and others worried that people would seek out illicitly produced versions of the drug. &quot;We had to do a confirming test right away,&quot; she says.    Among the many who called Dr. Summers's office the day of publication was Victor Potamkin, a wealthy auto dealer in the New York area and a member of the ADRDA board. His wife, Luba, an Alzheimer's victim, hadn't spoken in over a year. He persuaded Dr. Summers to include Mrs. Potamkin in the THA test and flew her and her physician to California from her home in Miami Beach. A garrulous salesman who appears in television commercials pitching his cars, Mr. Potamkin then called Mr. Stone, the ADRDA chairman, demanding that his association &quot;figure out how to make the drug available,&quot; Mr. Stone relates.    Mr. Stone, the founding chairman of Stone Container Corp. of Chicago, had already telephoned Andrew Monjan, a top official at the National Institute of Aging. Coincidentally, Mr. Monjan was presiding at an NIA-sponsored meeting of academic researchers, who, like Dr. Jarvik and Mr. Stone, urged that a large test be undertaken quickly. &quot;The feeling was that we had better prove or disprove his findings as fast as possible,&quot; Dr. Monjan says.    But the NIA's budget lacked the funds for a full-scale study. It didn't even have money for a meeting of researchers to plan such a study. &quot;I called back Victor and said we needed about $300,000 to support a meeting at NIA,&quot; says Mr. Stone. &quot;Victor said he'd put up one-third if the rest of the board would match it. Within days we did.&quot;    Mr. Potamkin also pressed the case for a study with Ronald Reagan. In late November, he and Princess Yasmin Khan, the daughter of the late actress Rita Hayworth, a victim of the disease, met with the president briefly during a previously planned session to publicize Alzheimer's Disease Month. &quot;I told him we had to have a meeting {of government scientists} to organize the study,&quot; Mr. Potamkin says. Soon, in January, an NIA-organized meeting of scientists was held, but it isn't clear what role the White House played in this development.    Soon after Luba Potamkin received the drug, she &quot;showed the first improvement in years,&quot; says Larry Eisner, her Miami physician. &quot;When Mr. Potamkin's son visited her, she called him 'Robert,' her first word in a long time.&quot;    Dr. Summers, meanwhile, was hearing a crescendo of criticism. &quot;The study has some problems, nothing that appears to be fatal,&quot; says Richard Wurtman, a researcher at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. &quot;But there was also a lot of envy. Here comes this nobody from nowhere and he publishes an enviable study in the most enviable of places. What do you expect?&quot;    The sharpest criticism was to come from the FDA, which forced Dr. Summers to return money he had charged research subjects and still refuses to let him expand his study. In a review of his research records following the study's publication, an FDA investigator found 15 areas in which his documentation was inadequate or lacking. &quot;The guy is a poor record-keeper,&quot; says a top agency official who nevertheless makes no judgment about Dr. Summers's findings.    Dr. Summers says that the agency is nit-picking and that it has refused to &quot;communicate&quot; what it wants. Officials' refusal to let him charge the test subjects fees, he says, &quot;has made it impossible for me to hire staffers to help answer their questions.&quot;    In January, the idea of an NIA study won approval from the scientists at the NIA meeting. They decided they needed to enlist a major drug company to produce the drug, conduct animal testing and perform all the statistical analyses required for FDA approval of a drug. They first contacted Warner-Lambert Co. of Morris Plains, N.J., which has been developing drugs for use against dementia, and gave the company several days to respond. The company was at first reluctant, largely because of the patent problem.    But after being lobbied by some of the academic researchers, it agreed to participate. &quot;These were the guys we will need to work with when one of our compounds is ready for testing,&quot; says Jerry Weisbach, the head of the company's drug research operations. &quot;We felt if this was the most important thing going on in Alzheimer's research, we wanted to be a part of it. Also, we didn't want them turning to someone else.&quot;    As an added incentive, Warner-Lambert was guaranteed by the FDA, under a law passed several years ago, exclusive marketing for five years if the test proved successful.    In the months following the January meeting, the ADRDA induced several congressmen and senators to introduce legislation for supplemental NIA budgeting to finance the study. Twelve days ago, a Senate committee approved the additional budgeting and sent it on to the full Senate as part of a larger bill on aging.    Meanwhile, Dr. Summers, who buys his THA from a small chemicals manufacturer in Milwaukee, continues his search for a backer and has declined to participate in the NIA study. He says he is worried that an agreement he would have to sign with Warner-Lambert would restrict his ability to work with the drug himself.    These days Dr. Summers, still seeking FDA approval for an expanded study, spends his early mornings and evenings wrestling with paper work for the FDA and trying not to think about the impending NIA study. NIA officials say that while their study is designed to last three years, they may have tentative results by early next year. &quot;My nightmare,&quot; Dr. Summers says, &quot;is that they don't see what I saw.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>