<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0085 </DOCNO><HL> REAL ESTATE:Red-Light Districts UprootedBy Inner-City Redevelopment---By William CelisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   SO-CALLED ADULT-ENTERTAINMENT zones are gradually being uprooted by inner-city development. The districts were created in some cities several years ago through zoning laws and placed in neighborhoods considered less than prime. Over time, however, the land has become more valuable, and cities and developers from Boston to Baltimore to Washington are now squeezing out businesses that specialize in adult entertainment.    Many cities have yet to confront the issue, and this spring the American Planning Association sponsored a seminar on strategies to uproot pornographic districts. But in cities where the process has begun, particularly in the East, redevelopment has spawned protests, lawsuits and even death threats.    In Washington's 14th Street red-light district, for example, tenants in new office buildings were being harassed by barkers and prostitutes. With the help of undercover agents and local police, the Franklin Square Association, a neighborhood business group, spearheaded efforts that resulted in the closing of 16 of 22 sex-oriented businesses; some of them lacked proper licensing while others were charged with operating as fronts for prostitution or drugs. &quot;It wasn't easy,&quot; says Arthur J. Schultz III, the group's president. He and a developer received a series of anonymous death threats because of the group's efforts.    Baltimore's attempts to redevelop its adult zone have been equally messy. Two lawsuits have been filed against the city over promises involving relocation and compensation. At least one city official is sympathetic to the plight of businesses in &quot;The Block,&quot; as the area is known. Says Councilman Anthony J. Ambridge: &quot;It's our responsibility to keep our word to a business person, whether it's an adult-entertainment business or a computer concern.&quot;    ---   Pension Write-Down Hurts Key Index   When RREEF Fund, a San Francisco pension manager, took a $100 million write-down a few weeks ago, it was a case of yet another giant pension manager taking it on the chin in the beleaguered Southwest. Bedeviled by deteriorating values on real estate of all types, write-downs in the region have been reported by several big pension managers, including Boston Co. Real Estate Counsel Inc. and Equitable Real Estate Investment Management Inc. RREEF, one of the more respected managers, took its write-down on nine office buildings in Denver, Houston and Dallas.    The size of RREEF's write-down resulted partly from the pension manager's own procedure: Its property is appraised annually. Much of the industry prefers to appraise its portfolio quarterly and, thus, lessen the blow of any write-downs. As a result, says Maurice W. Coulon, president of the National Council of Real Estate Fiduciaries: &quot;I don't see any more major surprises. There's not going to be an avalanche of people reporting $100 million write-downs.&quot;    But Mr. Coulon, who is also senior vice president of Boston Co. Real Estate Counsel, asserts that RREEF's write-down wiped out what probably would have been a gain in the Frank Russell Co. Index, a widely used barometer that measures real estate performance. He declined to elaborate, but said specific data will be available when the index is published in three weeks.    ---   CRYSTAL BALLS AND TEXAS: Kenneth Leventhol andamp; Co. recently delivered news that people in Texas most likely already know: It's going to take a long time before Houston, Dallas and Austin recover from the effects of low oil prices and too many buildings.    Unlike many studies on the future of Texas real estate, the Los Angeles-based accounting firm projects the years in which it believes the Texas cities will recover. Houston office occupancy will improve gradually and surpass 90% in 1994; Dallas office occupancy will hit bottom this year and then increase to 90% by 1992. Austin, believed by some real estate experts to be the most overbuilt city in the U.S., won't see improvement until 1995, when the firm predicts the city's occupancy rate will top 90%.    The firm based its prognosis on expected increases in population, employment and retail sales. But the study didn't take into account any significant increases in oil prices or drilling activity.    ---   FAIR HOUSING BILL AMENDMENTS: Physically and mentally handicapped people would be protected from housing discrimination under Fair Housing Act amendments proposed by Democratic Sen. Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Republican Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania. Under the proposal, developers who build apartments would be required to make all public areas accessible to physically handicapped tenants. The Fair Housing Act was approved in 1965 by Congress; it prohibits discrimination of racial minorities who want to buy or rent.    ---   CONVENTION CIRCUIT: Affordable Housing is the the topic of two conventions in Atlanta, Sept. 10-13, sponsored by the Institute for Community Economics, Greenfield, Mass., and in Kansas City, Mo., Sept. 10-11, presented by the American Institute of Certified Planners, Chicago, and the National Association of Housing and Development Officials, Washington . . . . Packaging deals for foreign investors is the theme of two seminars in Newport Beach, Calif., Sept. 16-17, and in Washington, Sept. 28-29. The seminars are sponsored by Crittenden Research Inc., Novato, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>