<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880321-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Forget Wheat, Export Lawyers </HL><AUTHOR> Michael J. O'Neill </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Ever since Black Monday our financial experts have been in a frenzy, shredding old predictions, making up new ones, blaming President Reagan, going into bankruptcy, laying off brokers, that sort of thing. They now have no time for the nation. We have been left shivering alone, without their great foresight and wisdom to guide us.    In the emergency, all of us amateurs must step in to fill the gap. We've got to take the initiative to solve America's economic problems, even if we think the M1 is a rifle. It would be irresponsible, even dangerous, to allow the president and Congress to act on their own.    As my personal contribution to the cause, I have developed a &quot;People Export Plan,&quot; or PEP for short. In one grand sweep it could increase the efficiency of the economy, undermine foreign competitors and eventually wipe out our huge trade deficit.    Like Einstein's famous equation about mass and energy, PEP is elegance itself. The core principle is that a society can increase its competitive power many times over simply by exporting its own economic defects to a rival. Subtracting defects from one side and adding them to another results in a massive transfer of inefficiency -- from the U.S., for example, to Japan.    Human exports can play a decisive role in this process because the most serious defects in our economy are people. Not the workers who improve the country by making and doing, or even the drones who accomplish nothing at all, like congressmen who can't even pass a budget, but the hot-tickets in our society. The yuppies -- the lawyers, MBAs, management consultants and corporate raiders -- everybody who makes millions tying knots in the coils of progress.    As a group, these professionals have had a devastating effect on our competitive position. Studies show that with every explosive increase in their numbers, all our economic indicators have plunged -- productivity, value of the dollar, you name it. The reason is that these people don't produce anything themselves but they make life difficult for those who do. And then, to compound the felony, they take billions away from the rest of us to support their cushy life styles.    Illustrating the point are lawyers who breed faster than flies in August. Some 650,000 are now making spaghetti out of our affairs and -- appalling thought! -- the American Bar Foundation predicts there will be more than a million by the mid-1990s. One out of every 35 people in Washington already is a lawyer, which helps explain the mess we're in. And non-government law is a $52 billion industry, specializing mainly in red tape, obfuscation and conflict.    The Japanese meanwhile keep their country humming with only 14,000 practicing lawyers, or a total of perhaps 100,000 if you count businessmen with legal training. This gives them a huge competitive advantage. Fortunately, however, it is one that PEP can overcome; all that needs to be done is to export thousands of American lawyers to Tokyo. By that one action we could clog Japan's economic arteries and clear many of our own.    This isn't just pie-in-the-sky thinking. It so happens that after years of U.S. pressure the Japanese finally have lowered their guard. They have passed a little-noticed law allowing foreign lawyers limited rights to do legal work in their country. It is a hole in the dike that the U.S. can exploit immediately with an aggressive lawyer-export program. Every attorney shipped to the Far East would be one less to gum up the works here at home.    The same policy can be followed with considerable benefit in the case of corporate paper-pushers and management consultants. Most of them can't tell an 80386 microchip from a potato chip, but they run around loose in executive suites making so many flip charts and five-year plans that the line executives who do know their jobs can't get anything done.    Japan apparently has even fewer MBAs than lawyers and rarely uses outside consultants at all, on the unfashionable ground that bosses shouldn't be bosses if they have to ask somebody else how to run their business. Which argues all the more for a vigorous PEP campaign. By exporting at least some of our 70,000 MBAs, we could inject American &quot;paper entrepreneurialism&quot; into Japanese corporate culture. This would have a wondrously negative effect on them and a salubrious effect on us.    PEP strategy would be extended beyond Japan, of course -- to Germany, France, the rest of the world. Exports of people rather than goods must now be considered the weapon of choice in the attack on our trade deficit. Although other countries already market people -- Irish nurses or Turkish laborers, for examples -- the effects are entirely different; in these cases, the receiving country benefits and the exporter often loses. The genius of the People Export Plan is that it provides a double payoff. It targets for shipment only those people whose departure would simultaneously strengthen the U.S. and weaken a competitor.    Which triggers another thought. What about those brokers and financial analysts who have been laid off? Wonder what it would do for the economy if we shipped a couple of boatloads to Japan? Hmmmmmm.    ---   Mr. O'Neill is former editor of the New York News. </TEXT></DOC>