<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880309-0080 </DOCNO><HL> French Survivor: After 7 Years in Office, Mitterrand Apparently Is Set for Re-Election --- As Sort of Philosopher-King In Guise of a de Gaulle, He Keeps the Right at Bay --- Everybody's Favorite Uncle </HL><AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> DUNKIRK, France  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It is a display of power politics that the late Chicago Mayor Richard Daley would have loved.    Seated beneath an allegorical painting of &quot;Righteousness Confronting Adversity&quot; in city hall, Francois Mitterrand politely listens to Mayor Claude Prouvoyeur thanking him for two years ago appointing Jacques Chirac, a conservative and the president's archrival, as prime minister. &quot;Things have gotten much better since then,&quot; adds the mayor, a member of Mr. Chirac's political party, eyes a-twinkle.    The Socialist president, who appointed Mr. Chirac solely out of political necessity, smiles enigmatically. Then, rising to the lectern, he launches into a 25-minute denunciation of this obscure mayor and his conservative allies for, he alleges, having let the French steel industry wither from lack of investment, for pitting class against class, for failing to adopt modern ideas to meet international competition. The mayor studies his shoes.    &quot;My role is as the guarantor of national unity and national institutions,&quot; Mr. Mitterrand concludes at a near shout, leaving his audience of local officials gasping and the mayor still staring at his shoes.    The performance is vintage Mitterrand, master combatant, politician and survivor. After more than 40 years in politics -- he was elected to the National Assembly in 1946, the same year Richard Nixon was elected to Congress -- Mr. Mitterrand shows no signs of retiring. At age 71, he seems almost certain to seek a second seven-year term as president of France. He has taken on the mantle of a latter-day Charles de Gaulle, who, more than anyone else, shaped modern France.    &quot;Francois Mitterrand sincerely wants to be the incarnation of France like de Gaulle was,&quot; says Roland Dumas, a friend and former foreign minister. &quot;He is creating a presidential majority in his own name, just like de Gaulle did.&quot;    If, as expected, Mr. Mitterrand announces this month for the presidency and if, as expected, he wins the May election and serves out his term, he will have been a force in French politics longer than any other modern politician, including de Gaulle.    Already, he has changed the French political landscape in a way that may be more long-lasting than the Reagan Revolution in the U.S. Building the Socialist Party from scratch in 1971, Mr. Mitterrand went on to prove that a leftist could get elected without France's flying apart. Equally important, his Socialist government absorbed and then, in effect, destroyed the French Communist Party.    Finally, Francois Mitterrand turned his own party toward the center. Now, French politicians of all stripes share surprising unanimity on most issues, stressing economic liberalization at home and hawkish independence abroad. &quot;Mitterrand brought the left into the national consensus on defense -- which no conservative could have done,&quot; an aide to Mr. Chirac says.    Still, detailing Mr. Mitterrand's legacy and divining what he would do with a second term are as difficult as pinning down the true personality of a complicated, many-faceted, intensely private man. Says Nobel Peace Prize winner Elie Wiesel, a Jewish writer and philosopher with whom the Catholic president frequently discusses everything but politics: &quot;There are many hidden rooms in his being.&quot;    Perhaps more than any other current political leader, Mr. Mitterrand prides himself on being an intellectual as well as a politician. A voracious reader, he has written a dozen stylish books of political comment and reminiscences. He has been known to wander around Venice by moonlight, keeping reporters waiting for hours while he gathers his thoughts.    This year, he and Mr. Wiesel summoned 75 Nobel laureates to the Elysee Palace to discuss the 21st century. Standing beneath eight glittering chandeliers in the Elysee's Salle des Fetes, Mr. Mitterrand told his distinguished guests: &quot;Politicians should be humble before sages.&quot;    He went on to give the Nobel laureates, including Henry Kissinger and Willy Brandt, a speech that was unmistakably Mitterrand. &quot;Strange century, ours,&quot; he said. &quot;Terrible enigma. We experience life and death at the same time, as if two times were contained in one: one for hope, the other for despair.&quot;    All this has led some French commentators to suggest that Mr. Mitterrand is really running for philosopher-king.    Mr. Mitterrand's kingly aloofness may be helping restore his popularity and thus his presidential prospects. In four years, he has gone from being the most unpopular of French presidents to everyone's favorite uncle. For the past two years, since his party lost its parliamentary majority and he was forced to name a conservative prime minister, he has presided above it all and left the messy, often-unpopular work of day-to-day domestic governance to Prime Minister Chirac, who, as a presidential candidate, has fallen into the odd position of running against the man who appointed him.    Mr. Chirac is one of two announced major challengers; the other is former conservative Prime Minister Raymond Barre. Mr. Mitterrand -- or another Socialist if he unexpectedly declines to run -- will challenge them in a two-stage election. The first vote will be on April 24; the two candidates with the most votes will then oppose each other in a final vote May 8.    Opinion polls show Mr. Mitterrand winning 35% to 40% of the votes in the first round, with the two conservatives getting about 20% each. In May, according to the polls, Mr. Mitterrand will pick up enough votes from the center to beat either surviving conservative.    One conservative campaign strategy is to brand Mr. Mitterrand as inconsistent. A Chirac aide snidely accuses the president of &quot;changing his politics like he changes his shirts.&quot; There is some truth to this charge: In many ways, France has changed Francois Mitterrand more than he has changed France.    For two years after his 1981 election, he put into effect the Socialist program of fast reflation and wholesale nationalization. As inflation soared and the franc nose-dived, his approval rating plunged. Then, he changed course completely. His 1983 austerity program was applauded by even his right-wing opponents. After naming four Communists to his original cabinet, he broke with the Communists in 1984 and destroyed them as a political force.    All of this took the extraordinary patience and determination of a man who escaped from a German prison camp on his third try and was elected president, also on his third try, after 23 years in opposition. Although the right faults his inconstancy, it largely applauds the fruits of his switch.    He decentralized parts of France's bloated bureaucracy, a reform that isn't likely to be reversed. He also began to reduce the government's role in the economy before Mr. Chirac speeded up the process. On foreign policy, he has remained a staunch anti-Communist. His 1983 speech to the West German parliament is widely seen as fortifying German resolve and paving the way for deployment of U.S. Pershing II missiles there. Now, he is trying hard to improve Franco-German defense cooperation as he sees the U.S., distracted by deficits and elections, reducing its focus on Europe.    Mr. Mitterrand deflects rather than denies charges that he has changed. An aide calls him &quot;responsibly pragmatic&quot; and says he has changed as the wishes of the country have changed. Mr. Mitterrand, asked recently whether he or France had changed more during the past seven years, responded characteristically: &quot;Neither and both. Oh, I haven't changed much. Maybe I've gotten a little more friendly.&quot;    His biggest challenge in a second term would be to transfer his personal popularity back to the Socialist Party to enable it to win a fresh parliamentary mandate. In France, the majority party or coalition in the assembly forms the government, which runs the day-to-day business. The president's role is vaguer.    Mr. Dumas, the president's friend, predicts a Mitterrand victory will lead to a historic realignment. &quot;Call it a move towards social democracy, union of the center, whatever you want,&quot; he says. &quot;Mitterrand will do it.&quot;    What he would do with it remains unclear, and that uncertainty is precisely what he wants. Unlike the polarized left-vs.-right 1981 election that brought him to the presidency and later swept the Socialists to control of the National Assembly, the 1988 election is revolving around personalities, not ideology. In 1981, the Socialist slogan was &quot;Change Your Life,&quot; and the party's joint platform with the Communists offered 110 specific pledges.    Today, Mr. Mitterrand talks only of softening capitalism's harsh face, and the slogan is the inscrutable &quot;Mitterrand Generation,&quot; with posters showing a baby girl holding on to the hand of a man in a business suit. The Socialist platform is so muted as to be acceptable to virtually any U.S. presidential candidate. The Communists, who now get only 10% of the vote in opinion polls, accuse Mr. Mitterrand of treason against the left.    In any event, Mr. Mitterrand seems to have both created and caught a national mood. &quot;France doesn't want platforms or ideology or bottom-line accounts of the past,&quot; an aide says. &quot;Francois Mitterrand is a president for all seasons.&quot;    Mr. Mitterrand certainly tries to be. Though liking a good political scrap, he also likes to show he can rise above it. After hearing some radio talks about the Bible by Elie Wiesel in 1981, Mr. Mitterrand, who had been raised a strict Catholic in rural France, began meeting with him.    &quot;We talk about life, death, childhood, authority, but never politics,&quot; the writer says. These dialogues, which may soon be published in book form, seem to be a release for the president. Mr. Wiesel recalls visiting once at the height of some political affair that was gripping Paris. &quot;For three hours, he didn't say a word about it. When he finally showed me to the Elysee door and turned to go back to his office, he cried, 'Quelle affaire!'&quot;    Then, it's back to politics. On a campaign swing in the tiny town of St. Omer, a mayor who supports Mr. Chirac has declined to pipe Mr. Mitterrand's speech in city hall out to the 2,000 people shivering in the town square and carrying banners saying, &quot;Uncle, don't leave us&quot; and &quot;The Mitterrand Generation is us.&quot; The mayor escorts the president down the steps toward his car. The president slips the mayor's armlock, dives into the eager crowd and presses the flesh.    Later, in friendly territory at a luncheon in Socialist-controlled Bethune, he is in fine form. &quot;The Socialists have no program, no ideas?&quot; he scoffs at a current conservative charge. &quot;What bigger idea is there than building France, of building Europe? What a bet! What stakes!&quot; He is just warming up.    &quot;By the end of the century, Europe will be one immense construction site. Everything will be revised, everything will be possible.&quot; His voice is rising. &quot;I am impassioned by this enterprise.&quot;    His voice suddenly drops. &quot;You've got to seek, and sometimes you find what you seek.&quot; He is nearly whispering. &quot;And if you never find it, at least the act of seeking justifies your existence.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>