<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0002 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congress last year approved aid to Nicaragua's Contras by a whisker, and that was before the Iran-Contra arms scandal.    Now, Congress probably will cut off military aid -- a move that many think will doom the rebels' seven-year effort to oust Nicaragua's Sandinista government. And observers throughout Central America worry that Washington still isn't focusing on the vital question: What happens then?    &quot;If the Contras lose the war, as seems likely, there definitely won't be peace in Central America,&quot; says Guillermo Lacayo Guevara, the Christian Democratic president of El Salvador's legislative assembly.    Refugees would be a big problem. Honduran officials have been seeking a U.S. pledge to give haven to the estimated 15,000 Nicaraguan guerrillas and their families in the event of a Sandinista victory. Otherwise, it is feared, the Contras would seek permanent sanctuary in Honduras, then destabilize Tegucigalpa's shaky democracy. One concern is that the rebels are mostly illiterate peasants who wouldn't fit neatly in U.S. society, either.    Unless a verifiable, regional settlement can be negotiated before Washington loses its Contra card, many see an outright Sandinista victory as a harbinger of greater instability in Central America, with guerrilla movements in El Salvador and Guatemala gaining new momentum. It is commonly believed that Contra pressure has reduced Sandinista supply shipments to the Salvadoran revolutionaries since 1981.    Some people see a need for an expensive, long-term U.S. containment policy intended to control Marxist advances in the area. Such a program might entail billions of dollars in new economic assistance as well as deepening military involvement, perhaps even a permanent U.S. base in Honduras.    &quot;If Americans are chafing now at having to spend $100 million a year to support the Contras,&quot; argues Susan Kaufman Purcell, an expert on Latin America at the Council on Foreign Relations, &quot;wait till they see what they'll have to spend to contain the Sandinistas after the Contras are disbanded.&quot;    The Contras seem likely to survive 1987, but they may then be in serious trouble. Washington Rep. Don Bonker, a Democratic member of the Western Hemisphere subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, says: &quot;Any additional funds, particularly military aid to the Contras have no better than a 30% chance of passing the House, with odds just a little bit better than that in the Senate.&quot; Those odds could grow longer, depending on the revelations of the current congressional hearings on the Iran-Contra scandal. Contra leaders themselves say they need the aid if they are to persist.    The Contra dependence on Washington for money and on former Nicaraguan National Guard officers for leadership don't bode well for their future. But while the Contras can't defeat the Sandinistas militarily, their eventual disappearance might nevertheless jar the regional balance of power.    &quot;My guess is the Sandinistas would not return to their old ways immediately,&quot; comments a ranking U.S. diplomat serving in Central America. &quot;They would continue to fear a direct U.S. invasion from the Reagan administration, which Congress cannot control.&quot; The diplomat, however, suggests that the Sandinistas &quot;might test the new administration&quot; in 1989. &quot;It's difficult to assume they're just going to sit in Managua.&quot;    No one knows the future of Nicaragua. The image of a triumphant, militaristic, Marxist-Leninist Nicaragua torments antiCommunists. Others think the Sandinistas will broaden civil and economic liberties once the Contra pressure is released. Some observers speculate that Managua will face serious internal political pressures from the Nicaraguan public and from within the Sandinista party itself once the war fades and domestic crackdowns are no longer justifiable. The Sandinistas' future may be profoundly affected by whatever commitment the Soviet Union makes in Nicaragua, and by the moves Washington makes.    &quot;We don't have a wall to stop Sandinista ideology or subversives,&quot; complains William Hall Rivera, the Honduran president's chief of staff. &quot;It won't be a fight over land, but over minds.&quot; He adds: &quot;We'll need a Marshall Plan.&quot;    In the early 1960s, President Kennedy faced an arguably comparable situation. Fidel Castro quickly consolidated his revolution in Cuba, defeated a U.S.-organized counterrevolutionary force and attempted to export his ideology to the Dominican Republic, Colombia, Venezuela and Bolivia. His adventurism failed, partly because Washington pushed Alliance for Progress social programs and military training in Latin America, but mostly because of indigenous anti-communism in the hemisphere.    Things could be worse. Left-wing movements in Central America have lost strength over the past few years, and revolution doesn't seem to be brewing in the region. Still, Nicaragua's neighbors aren't fully prepared to face a consolidated Sandinista government and the ideological and military forays that such a regime, unchallenged, might make.    Costa Rica has no army to protect the jungle frontier it shares with Nicaragua. Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala are impoverished countries with shaky democracies. And civilian leaders in those nations predict that long-term regional tensions will give their militaries excuses to remain fully mobilized and to exert political power. All of Managua's neighbors share similar fears: that cities will swell with refugees, that foreign investors will shy away from the region and that the Sandinistas will infiltrate their countries with Marxist-trained student, union and peasant leaders promoting Nicaragua's &quot;revolution without frontiers.&quot;    Costa Ricans don't expect to see Sandinista tank columns rolling into San Jose. Their concern is that Nicaragua won't be able to stem the migration of dissidents. Refugees would increase Costa Rica's already serious housing and employment shortages. &quot;Social pressures will build,&quot; warns German Serrano Pinto, a leading Costa Rican opposition politician.    To avert such a situation, Costa Rican President Oscar Arias is pushing his fellow Central American presidents to sign a peace plan, calling for cease-fires and amnesties, an end to aid to guerrilla forces and free elections across Central America, before the U.S. Congress votes on Contra aid again. He says his plan has a greater chance to be accepted by the Sandinistas now because &quot;afterwards, there won't be the pressure&quot; on Managua to seek a settlement.    Nevertheless, President Arias says the existence of the Contras may make a bad situation in Central America even worse. Since every dictator needs a scapegoat, he says, the Sandinistas might miss the Contras once the rebels withered away. &quot;Managua uses the Contras,&quot; claims the Costa Rican president, &quot;as an excuse to take away individual liberties, as an excuse to justify the catastrophe of their Marxist-planned economy and as an excuse to justify to the world having a hungry people.&quot;    The view from Managua is as varied as the ideologies that manage to survive under the revolution. Enrique Bolanos, the leader of Nicaragua's besieged business community, says he expects the Sandinistas to crack down harder on the private sector and political opposition if the Contras are defeated. Carlos Huembes, a dissident labor leader, believes that &quot;without the Contras, the Sandinistas will have to invent other pretexts to explain their repression. There will be more instability in Central America, including Nicaragua. . . . It's historical that Marxists in power eliminate each other.&quot;    Alejandro Bendana, the secretary general of Nicaragua's foreign ministry, says a relaxation of U.S. pressure would bring about broader political freedoms, including the reopening of opposition newspaper La Prensa and Radio Catolica. The Nicaraguan diplomat said negotiations with the U.S. and Nicaragua's neighbors could even eliminate Nicaragua's need for Soviet bloc military advisers. But he, like others on the Central American left, sees a cut in Contra funding as a possible precursor of more unrest.    &quot;The closer we come to a final defeat of the Contras,&quot; warns Mr. Bendana, &quot;the greater the possibility of a direct American intervention. Ronald Reagan won't want to go riding off into the sunset without a Sandinista feather in his 10-gallon hat.&quot;    Another leftist, Salvadoran rebel leader, Ruben Zamora, thinks an end to the Contras would help his revolution. &quot;The U.S. would be abandoning its child,&quot; he claims. &quot;If Washington cuts aid to the Contras, what assurance will there be that Washington won't also eventually cut aid one day to {President Jose Napoleon} Duarte? Duarte will feel insecure.&quot;    The stakes are highest for Honduras, to which thousands of Contras would escape a Sandinista romp. Honduran-Contra relations have been testy for years, with Tegucigalpa sometimes blocking U.S. aid shipments to Contra camps. Following reports that Contras were getting drunk and beating and raping Honduran peasants along the border in 1985, the Honduran commander-in-chief at the time, Gen. Walter Lopez, ordered the Contras to concentrate their forces in one frontier region where they could be better controlled. Gen. Lopez, speaking through an intermediary in Honduran army intelligence, told Contra leaders that he would deploy the air force and three battalions of the 110th Brigade to enforce his decision. The Contras moved.    Last November, in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal, Honduran President Jose Azcona and the top military brass asked the U.S. for assurances that the Contras would be out of Honduras and doing their fighting within Nicaragua by midyear. Washington agreed. Honduran and U.S. sources say the agreement has been largely implemented, with all but about 3,000 Contras now out of Honduras and with Contra logistical resources gradually being transferred from the Honduran mainland to Swan Island in the Caribbean.    But most Honduran analysts believe that it is just a matter of time before the Contras return. &quot;It's much better if the Contras win and we get a democracy in Nicaragua,&quot; says Honduran Vice President Jaime Rosenthal, &quot;but in Honduras, there's a sense of opposition to the Contras. We have to think about our democracy.&quot;    And what do the Contras say about a future without their own presence? Carlos Ulvert, the Contras' former foreign secretary, says rebel forces have been a key element in the Reagan administration's successful containment of the Sandinistas over the past seven years. Without congressional aid to the Contras, he predicts, pressure would build in Central America for the U.S. to open its doors to thousands of unemployed Nicaraguans whose only training is in the handling of assault rifles. &quot;South Miami Beach,&quot; he adds, &quot;would become the South Bronx.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>