<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870731-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Shareholders Don't Need 'Protection'---By Harold C. Simmons</HL><DD> 07/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   I have been involved for the past 12 years in the business of identifying and investing in companies that I perceive as undervalued by the marketplace. In some instances, I have simply remained a passive investor, while in others I have gone on to acquire control. I am sometimes called a &quot;corporate raider.&quot;    In the U.S. today, nearly all large public corporations have no significant concentration of stock ownership. As a result, they are controlled by management with little or no input from stockholders. Management is self-perpetuating and usually owns very little stock in the corporation.    In the past several years, a challenge to that system has arisen: the buyer who has the resources to buy enough stock to claim control for himself and his fellow stockholders. This buyer is called a &quot;raider&quot; and this effort to control the corporation is called a &quot;takeover&quot; -- both misnomers, because no force is used. The buyer offers to pay more for the stock than anyone else, and the seller wants to sell at this higher price. The stockholder is &quot;reclaiming&quot; his lawful control of the corporation.    That's where the battle starts. Incumbent management doesn't want to lose control of the corporation. Both sides perceive their self-interest to be aligned with the best interests of the public. There is a genuine conflict of interest between management and stockholders that should be resolved in the stockholders' favor.    Management should be barred from using corporate assets to interfere with the free-market transfer of stock ownership. Allowing management to enter the arena on shareholders' behalf, and with the shareholders' money, rests on the fallacy that shareholders somehow need a protector. But protect the shareholders from what? From voluntarily selling their own shares at a higher price?    In the name of protecting shareholders, corporate management has been allowed to misuse corporate assets by paying huge investment-banking fees, legal fees, golden parachutes and greenmail, and attempting other devices such as poison pills. This vitiates one of the most significant rights of stock ownership -- the ability to sell that stock when an offer is received at a price one chooses to accept.    The greatest problem posed by current regulations and some of the proposed legislation is that they enable, and in some instances facilitate, incumbent management's use of corporate funds -- the shareholders' funds -- to thwart an acquisition of control when management should not be able to interfere with the operation of the free market by interposing itself between buyer and seller, ostensibly for the seller's benefit. Also, government should not try to and cannot protect shareholders from making their own investment decisions. In a free market we all have the right to make an investment decision, good or bad, when we choose.    Based on these principles, let me address a number of specific areas:    --All companies traded on U.S. exchanges should be required to have a one-share, one-vote rule. Any legal devices designed to create dual capitalization merely give existing management or an existing control group the ability to retain control without sufficient stock ownership.    --Greenmail should be outlawed. No company's management should be permitted to pay greenmail, regardless of how long a shareholder has owned its shares or how few shares a shareholder owns. Again, management should not be entitled to misuse corporate funds in an effort to maintain control.    --Legislation allowing non-management shareholders access to the corporate proxy machinery and providing for secret proxy voting are big steps forward for management accountability to shareholders.    --&quot;Shareholder rights plans&quot; and &quot;poison pills&quot; should be banned. Management should not be entitled to set up roadblocks of this type at shareholders' expense. The SEC has recently recognized and supported the principle of nondiscrimination by the well-advised adoption of rules prohibiting discrimination among shareholders in tender offers.    Many of the other proposals now before Congress would only exacerbate the problem of incumbent management hindering stockholders from selling their shares to a bidder. In particular, proposals that would arbitrarily limit open-market purchases to a stated percentage of the shares outstanding outside of a tender offer absolutely cripple the free-market system. Many times a large buyer wants to purchase from a willing seller at the market price a large block of stock that would trigger this prohibitive rule. It is impractical to make a tender offer because of the huge expense and untimely delay for each purchase over 10%. This would make many large blocks of stock illiquid. It would, of course, be a great defense for entrenched management.    Other proposals that would delay the consummation of tender offers beyond 20 business days, or prohibit open-market purchases during certain periods, are uncalled for in light of our market system, which reacts to developments in a very short period of time.    There are two additional areas that warrant specific mention. The Hart-Scott-Rodino Act's reporting requirements are an early-warning device that requires public reporting of stock-ownership levels well below those levels called for under the securities laws.    The purpose of the act should be to deal with antitrust issues, and it should be tailored to legitimate antitrust problems. At a minimum, no filings under Hart-Scott-Rodino should be required until actual control of the target company is an issue. Anyone seriously concerned that an acquisition of control of a company would trigger antitrust problems will have the foresight to consider and resolve those problems prior to any acquisition.    Finally, Congress must address the question of federal pre-emption of state takeover laws. A uniform rule should apply here: No state should be allowed to structure takeover laws, either for its own corporations or corporations with business activities within that state, if such laws interfere with the free transferability of share ownership in a company. The recent Supreme Court decision in CTS Corp. v. Dynamics Corp., which upheld an Indiana anti-takeover law, should be critically reviewed by Congress. The Supreme Court failed to deal with the most onerous aspect of the Indiana law, a provision that takes away the voting rights of any investor who acquires 20% of a company unless the shareholders vote to reinstate them.    A proliferation of state anti-takeover laws would create a patchwork of overlapping and inconsistent regulation that could severely cripple U.S. securities markets. Congress must focus on this potential threat.    The advocates of tighter acquisition regulations should consider the assumptions that are implicit in their positions. We should not be embarking on a pathway of increased regulation that serves simply to further entrench existing managements. It is the shareholder who has made the decision to invest in a company's stock; that same investor should be free to decide when to sell that stock.    ---   Mr. Simmons is a Dallas investor. This is based on his testimony last month before a House subcommittee regarding the Tender Offer Reform Act of 1987. </TEXT></DOC>