<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880321-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Chaotic Congress: Lawmakers' Inability To Clear Up Gridlock Is a Rising Frustration --- More and More Work Yields Less and Less Legislation; 'Every Man for Himself' --- The Legacy of James Madison </HL><AUTHOR> John E. Yang (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   WASHINGTON -- One day late last year, the House spent 3 1/2 hours trying to go home.    In the Senate last month, lawmakers bickered for 53 straight hours (over a bill that eventually was shelved) in a bitter debate that featured a Republican lawmaker being carried feet-first onto the Senate floor by Capitol police.    Tomorrow, lawmakers are expected to override a presidential veto of legislation closing a loophole and broadening the reach of civil-rights laws to cover workers in private businesses and state and local governments -- all the while continuing to deny those same basic protections to their own staffs.    Meanwhile, lawmakers rail about the burgeoning federal budget deficit but continue to tuck pet projects into spending bills and special breaks into tax measures. Not since 1977 has Congress been able to finance the federal government before the beginning of the fiscal year, its most basic task.    Congress just doesn't seem to work these days. The making of legislation was never intended to be a tidy business; James Madison purposely built inefficiencies into the system to protect against rash decisions. But in the view of many scholars and lawmakers themselves, the problem today isn't simply inefficiency; it is an inability to deal with the nation's problems.    &quot;There's a sense that the whole system is breaking down,&quot; says Sen. Daniel Evans, a one-term Washington Republican whose frustrations led him to retire this year.    The late House Speaker Sam Rayburn's oft-quoted adage that lawmakers should &quot;go along to get along&quot; has been replaced by &quot;every man for himself.&quot; Lawmakers find it far more advantageous to champion a narrow cause, even at the expense of the larger interest. &quot;Congress has greater difficulty in legislating,&quot; says Richard Fenno, a University of Rochester political scientist whose specialty is Congress. &quot;There's more gridlock, more frequent intransigencies.&quot;    The reasons reflect changes both in the institution and in American politics itself. &quot;It's a totally different creature than it was when I arrived in 1961,&quot; says Rep. Morris Udall, an Arizona Democrat. Lawmakers' increasing reliance on special-interest money to finance their campaigns encourages them to pursue narrow, self-interested goals. As the congressional reforms of the 1970s stripped party leaders of much of their power, the great growth in congressional staffs gave even junior lawmakers the resources to stake out individual positions on issues.    Even for those in positions of great influence, serving in Congress no longer has the appeal it once did. &quot;I just wasn't looking forward to another six years in the Senate,&quot; says Florida Democrat Lawton Chiles, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, who has decided to call it quits after 18 years.    Congress is still occasionally able to come together to enact such sweeping legislation as the 1986 measure revamping the nation's tax code. &quot;The fact is that Congress is the most powerful and the most effective legislative body in the world,&quot; says Nelson Polsby, a political scientist at the University of California at Berkeley. &quot;If you don't think it's efficient, it's because democracy isn't efficient.&quot;    But these days, such meaningful action is far and away the exception rather than the rule. While the number of hours the House and the Senate are in session has increased since the 1950s, the number of bills passed and laws enacted has declined. More and more work is producing less and less.    Tensions between the two parties in the House are extraordinarily high. With a solid ideological majority, the Democrats needn't reach out to compromise with the Republicans. Frustrated and bitter, GOP lawmakers -- none of whom have ever served in the majority -- wage a low-intensity, guerrilla war against the ruling Democrats, sparking acrimonious exchanges on the floor that strain the limits of congressional courtesy. The strife has become increasingly nasty and personal as combative GOP lawmakers such as Georgia Rep. Newt Gingrich take to the floor to assail House Speaker James Wright as &quot;corrupt.&quot;    In the Senate, routine legislation gets bogged down by irrelevant amendments on such divisive issues as abortion and AIDS, often proposed by lawmakers seeking to set up campaign issues. Often, a single senator blocks the consideration of a bill. &quot;There's been a breakdown of comity, civility and self-restraint on the Senate floor,&quot; Mr. Fenno of the University of Rochester says.    When Congress does wield power effectively, it is often only to benefit itself. Lawmakers have exempted themselves from virtually every regulatory law: They needn't comply with the Civil Rights Act or the Equal Pay Act, and when they leave Congress, they don't have to bother with the Ethics in Government Act.    Former White House political adviser Lyn Nofziger, for instance, was convicted last month for violating the ethics law by lobbying the Reagan administration within a year of leaving its employ. By contrast, former California Rep. Jerry Patterson, a Democratic member of the House Banking Committee who was defeated for re-election in 1984, registered as a congressional lobbyist for a big California savings and loan institution just three months after he left office. As a past member of Congress, he retains the right to roam the Senate and House floors.    Last year, lawmakers defeated attempts to revise the special-prosecutor law to include themselves. Measures to extend the ethics law to cover lawmakers are pending in both the House and the Senate, but they aren't likely to pass.    &quot;Institutional hypocrisy,&quot; declares Republican Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois. &quot;We demand a punctilious observance of the laws by lesser mortals, but we sure do give ourselves all the latitude in the world.&quot; The only thing preventing lawmakers from seeking an exemption from the law of gravity, he says, is the fact that they would &quot;have to violate the separation of church and state to pray for it.&quot;    Congress also gets mired by the redundancy of its committees. No fewer than 10 committees and subcommittees have held hearings on changes in the securities laws in the wake of last October's stock-market crash; with so many different jurisdictions involved, no legislative action is expected this year.    In addition, because panels' jurisdictions are vaguely defined, many ambitious chairmen -- and ambitious staffs -- are eager to expand their purview. For instance, Michigan Rep. John Dingell, chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, has recently been involved in issues ranging from banking deregulation to Pentagon procurement.    &quot;I swear, John has members of his staff who do nothing but look for other committees' turf to grab,&quot; complains Rep. Udall, the chairman of the House Interior Committee, which often finds itself sharing jurisdiction over issues with Mr. Dingell's panel.    Replies Mr. Dingell, &quot;We simply do the things assigned to us under the rules of the House, and we ask others to do the same and leave us alone.&quot;    The tremendous growth in lawmakers' staffs has also contributed to wheel spinning. Congress is the most heavily staffed legislature in the world, with more than 31,000 employees. By contrast, the 650 members of the British House of Commons get by with about 1,000 employees.    &quot;You've got a lot of motion that inevitably is at loggerheads,&quot; says Mark Bisnow, a congressional aide for nine years who is now in private industry.    With an army of aides to write speeches and press releases, research issues and draft amendments, almost any lawmaker can try to affect legislation on almost any issue. As a result, members are less likely to defer to their colleagues as &quot;experts&quot; on specific issues than before. The Senate &quot;has become close to a pure democracy, which some people say is pure chaos,&quot; says Charles Ferris, a Washington attorney who was the top lieutenant to Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield in the 1960s and 1970s.    Elected to set the nation's laws, members of the House and the Senate quickly become distracted by hundreds of competing claims for their attentions. Lawmakers' appointment books are jammed with delegations of businessmen from their hometowns who, organized by their various national trade groups, want to stop by and press their cases. Trays of incoming mail are laden with cards and letters, some of them handwritten but worded identically with messages generated by special-interest groups.    This turns issues such as the long stalemated matter of reforming the nation's financial services into a turf fight between the bankers and the stockbrokers and insurance and real-estate agents back home. Facing the prospect of choosing between these constituent groups, lawmakers choose to do little.    It also encourages lawmakers to be advocates rather than statesmen. The Senate has gone from being &quot;a community-minded institution to one that's rather individualistic,&quot; says Mr. Fenno, the political scientist.    The problem is exacerbated by the rules of the chamber, which allow a determined minority to block a majority. The threat of a filibuster, a tactic once reserved for such momentous issues as slavery, war and civil rights, has now become &quot;part of the day-to-day bag of tricks of senator after senator,&quot; says Steven Smith, a University of Minnesota political scientist. Last year, GOP senators used a filibuster to tie up a routine defense authorizations bill.    So far, the current Senate has voted on limiting debate 26 times -- more such votes than were held between 1919, when the rules were changed to allow filibusters to be curtailed, and 1960.    The frequent stalemate in the Senate has strained relations with House members, who complain that they pass legislation only to have it languish on the other side of the Capitol. &quot;One hundred prima donnas,&quot; Rep. Udall says of his colleagues in the Senate. &quot;They can't do what they want to do in an orderly way, so they do it in a disorderly way.&quot;    Even many senators would agree. Sen. Evans of Washington, a former governor and college president, calls his service in the Senate &quot;a remarkable privilege&quot; but looks forward to leaving nonetheless. &quot;Never have I served in a body where the members are so exceptional,&quot; he says, &quot;and the body itself so flawed.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>