<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0062 </DOCNO><HL> Ford-UAW Job Security Clause Contains$500 Million Cap on Payouts to Workers---By Jacob M. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> F GM LABORAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The job security plan negotiated between Ford Motor Co. and the United Auto Workers union appears less revolutionary than originally thought, an analysis of documents released over the weekend shows.    Contrary to the initial popular impression, the program doesn't fully protect from layoff Ford's entire 104,000-member hourly work force. Ford imposed a $500 million financial cap over the three-year life of the contract, which could limit the number of workers protected. And the union, for its part, pragmatically accepted that it can never negotiate away the uncertainty of a cyclical industry.    But the contract, signed last week and awaiting membership ratification by Sept. 30, is stronger -- financially and structurally -- than previous job-security promises made in the auto industry and perhaps any other U.S. industry.    The pact's improvements over earlier contracts are more a matter of logistics than of principle. The job security issue under the old contract was a bureaucratic nightmare, UAW officials say, because it forced the union to prove why each job disappeared and why each worker should be protected. The new program is simpler, and shifts the burden to the company to prove why a worker should be laid off.    The program also will be a difficult one for General Motors Corp. to accept when negotiations kick into gear there today because GM uses more workers per car than Ford does.    Separately, Chrysler Corp., whose U.S. contract doesn't expire until next year, said members of the Canadian Auto Workers union accepted a new three-year contract with its Canadian unit, ending a six-day strike.    The program will, according to a UAW summary of the contract, &quot;maintain current job levels at all units in all locations and will prevent layoff for virtually any reason except carefully defined volume reductions linked to market conditions.&quot; The union likes to say the program takes a &quot;snapshot&quot; of current employment levels and tries to preserve it.    Under the program, if a worker's job disappears, he would receive his same wages and benefits but they would be paid out of a special job-security fund. The worker would then do odd jobs around the plant, receive training, or possibly do &quot;non-traditional&quot; work, such as helping charities in the community. When another worker leaves, the &quot;protected&quot; worker would then take his place in a traditional plant job.    The $500 million financial cap Ford placed on the fund represents an improvement over the $280 million, six-year job security fund under the old contract. But the average annual labor cost of an auto worker is between roughly $50,000 and $60,000, so the package could theoretically cover as few as about 3,000 of Ford's 104,000 total hourly workers. However, the numbers covered probably would be much higher than that because of likely employee turnover.    In theory, the guaranteed employment program isn't that different from existing programs. There are four basic reasons why an auto worker might get laid off -- new technology, productivity improvements, a sales downturn or the &quot;outsourcing&quot; of work, that is, the transfer of work to other companies. In 1984, Ford and GM agreed to protect workers from all of those factors except a sales downturn. The 1987 program essentially does the same thing.    But, &quot;by focusing on the jobs that must be protected rather than putting the focus on certain events that could cause job loss, the (general employment number) program has a broader reach,&quot; the UAW summary explains. &quot;It's as simple as saying that the union has the job slots nailed down from the start, rather than having to justify creating them through a joint determination process.&quot;    The plan also more clearly isolates the effects of the market. While Ford can lay off people if car sales drop, it has to hire them back after sales pick back up -- rather than simply increasing overtime as it did after the last recession.    The program also tries to wipe out the effects of sales declines stemming from Ford decisions to use non-U.S. labor. If U.S.-built Escort sales drop because of a recession, then Ford can lay off workers. But if sales drop because consumers prefer the Korean-built Ford Festiva, the company can't lay off U.S. workers. And if there is a sales drop for the Tempo -- which is built in both the U.S. and Canada -- the union will argue that the company must lay off an equivalent number of workers in both countries.    But for most sales declines, whether from poor design or an industrywide slump, Ford workers will still end up on the street. As UAW President Owen Bieber Friday told representatives from Ford local unions around the country, that problem has to be addressed by pushing for tougher trade restrictions in Washington.    The guaranteed employment program narrows but doesn't close other loopholes that have allowed Ford to reduce its employment base. In the past, job guarantee programs cost Ford very little, because steady attrition allowed the company to take workers quickly out of the &quot;protected pool,&quot; and put them back into the plant.    But the new contract forces the company to replace one of every two workers who leave -- essentially slowing the attrition rate. That makes it more expensive to cut out jobs, because it prolongs the period of time the company must pay workers who are doing nothing to help build cars.    The new contract also expands the definition of outsourcing, which means that the company has to foot the bill for more workers affected by shifting work from its current location. Under the old pact, workers were protected when Ford transferred work to a non-Ford plant. The new contract protects workers if jobs are shifted to any non-UAW facility. That means Ford would have to pay for work shifted to its Canadian operations, where labor is cheaper, and is represented by the independent Canadian Auto Workers union. If the same principle were applied to GM, the company would have to pay for work transferred to GM-owned plants in the U.S. represented by the International Union of Electronic Workers.    While making a greater commitment to job security, Ford likely won't change much because of the contract. Ford did promise to save 4,200 jobs that &quot;have been at risk,&quot; and said it would consider investments that would create 4,700 new jobs. Still, Ford has already slimmed down from 190,000 workers a decade ago, and it won't likely lay off many more workers unless sales drop. In that case the guaranteed employment program wouldn't prevent the layoffs.    But it could make a big difference for GM, which employs about 350,000 workers. To be sure, the program isn't as tough as some company officials had feared. Most workers currently on layoff from GM are the victims of the struggling auto maker's plunging market share -- and therefore wouldn't win any new protections from the program.    But it could affect GM's future plans in many ways. First, GM's operations aren't as efficient as Ford's. If GM sales do pick up, the company probably would want to hire back fewer workers than it used before. The guaranteed employment plan may prevent that.    Second, the plan makes it harder for GM to trim its parts operations. GM reportedly makes as much as 70% of its parts in-house, compared with as little as 40% at Ford. Many of those parts can be bought cheaper on the market, and GM says its high degree of vertical integration puts it at a competitive disadvantage.    To cut its parts operations, GM has three basic options. It can outsource work, it can sell parts plants, or it can close parts plants.    But the job security program negotiated at Ford makes outsourcing more costly. It makes it harder to sell a plant because it requires a buyer to maintain the same labor contract. And it bans plant closings.    (The plant-closing ban isn't as stringent as it sounds. The UAW exempted two plants Ford had previously planned to close, although it did improve benefits for those workers. GM presumably would demand that the dozen-plus plants it has announced plans to close would also be exempt. It isn't clear whether it could win an exception for unannounced plant closings.)    If the UAW is sincere in its intent to impose the Ford contract on GM, it will be harder for the No. 1 auto maker to shed inefficient operations. GM may then demand that the UAW help make parts plants more competitive. The solution may lie in changing work rules, something the Ford contract encourages but doesn't require.    Another out would be for GM to impose a financial cap on any job security program proportionate to Ford's.    &quot;If you were to take it literally, and place that contract on us with no changes,&quot; said a GM official, &quot;that would be of grave concern. . . . If GM goes out of business, what happens to the UAW? Do you think the 104,000 jobs at Ford would save them?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>