<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880413-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A HIJACKED JET LANDED in Algeria following the release of 12 hostages.    The Kuwaiti Boeing 747 touched down in Algiers after hijackers traded the hostages for fuel at Larnaca airport in Cyprus. A Cypriot official said negotiators in the nine-day-old hijacking were assured that the remaining hostages would be freed in Algeria, but an Algerian official said it wasn't certain they would be released. It was unclear how many hostages remained aboard, but the plane's flight plan listed 40 people, of whom eight were believed to be hijackers. The hijackers said they weren't backing down on their demand for release of 17 pro-Iranian terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait.    The freed hostages, who are from Kuwait, Jordan and Egypt, said they weren't mistreated and were unaware that two passengers had been killed.    ---   The U.S. called for a massive U.N.-sponsored effort to resettle eight million Afghan refugees as Soviet troops withdraw. A Soviet spokesman reportedly told Italian lawmakers that 50,000 of Moscow's 100,000 troops would be out by Aug. 15. Meanwhile, Western diplomats said Moscow has boosted arms supplies to the Kabul regime.    ---   Israeli troops wounded more than 40 Palestinians as protests erupted in the Gaza Strip after the expulsion to Lebanon of eight Palestinians, who said they would stage a sit-in at a Red Cross office until they were allowed to return home. The U.S. ambassador accused Israel of using excessive force against Palestinian protesters.    ---   The Mideast dominated a debate by Democratic presidential candidates in New York, underscoring the importance of the large Jewish vote in the state's primary next week. Gore attacked Dukakis for refusing to take a position on the creation of a Palestinian state, which he opposes and Jackson supports.    ---   Sen. Byrd said he won't seek another term as Senate Democratic leader, but that he would seek the Appropriations panel chairmanship if he wins election to a sixth term in November. Candidates to succeed Byrd, who has held the leadership post since 1977, are Sens. Inouye, Johnston and Mitchell.    ---   The U.S. Patent Office granted a patent for a genetically engineered mouse and said it is considering granting 21 similar patents. The patent, granted to Harvard but with Du Pont holding exclusive rights to the technology, ushers in an era in which private concerns can profit from and control artificially developed animals.    ---   A U.S. Marine sentry was killed in Panama when fellow American guards opened fire near the edge of Howard Air Force Base. The Pentagon said that the sentries were searching for intruders, believed to be members of the Panamanian military who had infiltrated a fuel-storage area on the base, but that no one was apprehended.    ---   Contra leaders agreed to a Sandinista offer to resume talks today on details of a Nicaraguan cease-fire and said they would take part in high-level peace talks set for Friday only if the technical talks are successful. Those negotiations broke down last week in a dispute over U.S. aid to the rebels.    ---   West German officials said Mohammed Hamadi, charged with air piracy and murder, will be tried in juvenile court for the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet to Beirut. The move means he faces a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison, rather than life.    ---   Iran said its troops pushed across the northeastern border with Iraq and claimed Iraqis used chemical weapons in an effort to repulse them. Iraq said that it repulsed the offensive in the Kurdistan region and that it fired four missiles into Tehran and Tabriz.    ---   Massachusetts lawmakers are expected to send to the governor, possibly today, a health-care bill widely considered a major precedent for future attempts to address growing problems with the nation's medical-care system.    ---   The Arizona Supreme Court ordered the cancellation of a May 17 recall election because former Gov. Mecham has already been removed from office through impeachment. The state's attorney general had argued for the election to give voters the right to decide who should be governor.    ---   A chartered DC-3 crashed 155 miles southwest of Johannesburg, killing all 23 aboard, South African officials said. The plane was taking jockeys and trainers home from a race in the Orange Free State.    ---   Manila said it will require all foreigners to obtain certificates showing they are free of the AIDS virus before they can stay in the Philippines. Merchant sailors must have the certificates no matter how long they stay, but other foreigners must have them only if they plan to stay longer than six months.    ---   Bangladesh's President Ershad lifted a state of emergency he imposed in November at the height of a campaign to topple him. The opposition called the move cosmetic and vowed to continue efforts to oust him.    ---   A federal judge ruled that former President Nixon's papers are not shielded by executive privilege. The ruling voids a Justice Department opinion directing the National Archives to honor all Nixon privilege claims, affecting about 3,100 documents.    ---   Died: Alan Paton, 85, South African writer, near Durban, of throat cancer. </TEXT></DOC>