<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88's Silent Majority </HL><AUTHOR> Wade Clark Roof </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Since the Iowa caucus, there has been a great deal of concern expressed about the role of religion in politics. Pat Robertson's strong showing in the caucus, as well as his expected resurgence in South Carolina and on Super Tuesday from his poor finish in New Hampshire, raises questions not only about religion but about a preacher running for president.    This year we have not one but two preachers: Jesse Jackson and Pat Robertson, both speaking in the rhythmic cadences of the pulpit, who offer themselves as champions of Judeo-Christian values, and as alternatives to politics as usual. According to a Times Mirror survey conducted by the Gallup Organization between Jan. 8 and Jan. 17, 41% of Americans when asked about a minister as president said that it &quot;makes no difference,&quot; 39% said it's a &quot;bad thing,&quot; and only 16% said it's a &quot;good thing.&quot;    With so much attention paid the preachers, we ought not lose sight of the 80% of Americans who either are indifferent to or turned off by ministers-cum-presidents. The really big story is that amid the clamor of invisible armies and righteous empires, there is a noticeable silence in the way most Americans bring their values and beliefs to bear upon the democratic process.    Compared with previous election years, one is struck by how remarkably little -- not how much -- religious posturing is going on among the candidates. Unlike in 1984 when President Reagan openly courted the evangelical vote, the candidates this time around, so far at least, have not publicly done so. Also at that time Geraldine Ferraro's vice presidential candidacy prompted discussion about the duties of Catholic public officials to uphold the teachings of ecclesiastical authority, a level of reflection about religious and civic responsibilities that has no counterpart at present. Pat Robertson himself has resigned his ministry and is now playing down his evangelical connections, as he tries to put himself forward as a mainstream candidate.    Even campaign talk about Americans as good and decent, God-fearing people is pretty scarce thus far -- surprisingly so, considering how these themes have played in recent elections. Jimmy Carter appealed to the people in these terms in 1976, declaring himself a born-again Christian candidate; and four years later all three major candidates for the nation's highest office so declared themselves. But not this year. Given the current climate, most candidates need not identify themselves religiously. For sure, everybody knows that Pat Robertson and Jesse Jackson are Southern Baptists. Many voters probably know Paul Simon is Lutheran and Michael Dukakis is Greek Orthodox. What about the other candidates? Can you name any of their religious affiliations? No one seems to care.    It's not that religion is unimportant, but that the mix of religion and politics this year is quite different. In this respect presidential politics currently mirror the new religious context very well. Undisputed is the diminished influence of the old Protestant establishment in American life. Those churches that historically have been the most committed to what Benjamin Franklin called &quot;publick religion&quot; -- that is, concern for an inclusive vision of public order and societal well-being -- are today in disarray.    Since the 1960s the more liberal, mainline Protestant churches have been in a downward spiral, suffering from a loss of confidence and institutional vitality. Once capable of sustaining a religiously based commitment to liberal democratic faith, these institutions today seem to lack force and vision in public life. The WASP colonial big three -- the Episcopalians, Congregationalists and Presbyterians -- still have disproportionate representation in Congress and among CEOs in Fortune 500 companies, yet they are no longer the custodians of the culture, and religiously are unable to forge a compelling and influential synthesis of faith and civic virtue, of loyalty to God and to country.    The public role of religion generally in American life has undergone considerable shifts. Will Herberg, a Jewish commentator of the 1950s, could write in those years that &quot;not to be a Protestant, a Catholic, or a Jew was somehow not to be an American.&quot; A unifying faith in the American Way of Life then cut across all three major religious traditions, creating strong ties between the mainline faiths and the culture. But this fails to ring true in 1988.    The boundaries of religious and secular pluralism have expanded, so much so that to be a &quot;Protestant,&quot; a &quot;Catholic,&quot; or a &quot;Jew&quot; no longer conveys quite the same sense of belonging. Religious identities themselves have changed. After President Kennedy, being a &quot;Catholic&quot; in American politics would never be quite the same. After President Carter, what mattered was not that one was &quot;Protestant&quot; but &quot;born-again.&quot; And after President Reagan, neither &quot;Protestant&quot; nor &quot;born-again&quot; seems to matter very much.    During this time, the social basis of American religion has drastically changed. We get some clues by the questions that are not being asked in this election year.    No one asks, for example, about the &quot;Catholic vote.&quot; As Roman Catholics have moved into the mainstream socially, culturally and politically, they have become virtually indistinguishable from other Americans of comparable social standing: They hold child-rearing values, belong to political parties, and vote much like others. Eighty-five percent of Catholics would support a woman presidential candidate, compared with 81% of all Americans; 32% favor abortion for whatever reason, compared with 37% of all Americans.    Similarly, this year few are inquiring into the &quot;Jewish vote.&quot; Jews remain more liberal on many issues than either Catholics or Protestants: 94% of Jews would vote for a woman president; 76% favor an open stance on abortion. At the same time, the Jewish outlook has grown more conservative in other respects, such as in attitudes toward intermarriage and concern for ethnic and cultural survival. Jewish political and religious alliances have also become blurred, making them less partisanly predictable now.    With all the changes, it is difficult to describe a religious mainline anymore. An emerging mainline would include moderate-minded white Protestants -- Methodists, Lutherans, Disciples, and others who resonate more to the center than the extreme, religiously and politically. These Protestants fail to attract as much attention as evangelicals, fundamentalists and charismatics do, largely because they are more politically diverse and less predictable. The mainstream would also include many Catholics, some Jews, and some middle-class blacks, all of whom are drawn toward the center.    These constituencies largely occupy the middle ground of American life -- politically and culturally. They are people whose sympathies lie not wholly with either the Moral Majority or the Immoral Minority, but who are accustomed to hard choices as a way of life. Together they make up at least one-half of the voting public.    In the emerging religious context of American life, there is much that these groups share. Neither rampant secularity nor fanatic fundamentalism seems the way for them to go.    Moderation, civility, public demeanor -- all are values important to many members of these mainline groups. Ninety-five percent of these mainliners believe in God; three-quarters believe in life after death; more than half think of themselves as very religious; one-half attend church or synagogue regularly. They are religious but not inclined to wearing their religion on their sleeves; they are generally open-minded and tolerant, yet stubbornly individualistic when it comes to deciding for themselves how their faiths influence their political choices. They too are voting this year, somewhat unpredictably -- they are religion's silent voters in 1988.    ---   Mr. Roof is a professor of sociology at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. He is the co-author of &quot;American Mainline Religion: Its Changing Shape and Future&quot; (Rutgers, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>