<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871112-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan, Calling for 'Bipartisan' Effort,Picks Judge Kennedy for Supreme Court---By Stephen Wermiel and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WNEWSEXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan, sounding conciliatory rather than confrontational, selected Anthony M. Kennedy, a federal appeals court judge from Sacramento, Calif., in his third attempt to fill a vacant seat on the Supreme Court.    In an appearance in the White House press room, President Reagan called for &quot;a bipartisan effort&quot; to confirm the 51-year-old Judge Kennedy and urged &quot;prompt hearings&quot; by the Senate Judiciary Committee.    Judge Kennedy is a traditional conservative, friends and associates say, who respects legal precedents and believes in a limited role for the courts, but who has no strong ideological agenda or record of involvement with conservative causes such as abortion or school prayer. A graduate of Harvard Law School, he has been a federal appeals court judge for 12 years and, since 1965, a highly popular, part-time teacher of constitutional law at McGeorge School of Law in Sacramento.    Unlike President Reagan's attempts to fill the Supreme Court seat with Judges Robert Bork and Douglas Ginsburg, the announcement yesterday -- which was expected -- evoked no sharp criticism from liberal Democratic senators and expressions of moderate concern, rather than alarm, from civil rights groups.    Senators and civil rights leaders said they want to study Judge Kennedy's extensive judicial record -- he has written more than 400 appeals court opinions -- and listen to his answers in confirmation hearings.    There was no immediate decision about when the Senate Judiciary Committee will hold hearings, but some senators doubt they will begin before January.    Committee Chairman Joseph Biden (D., Del.) said, &quot;We will . . . move as rapidly as is prudent.&quot; Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.), who blasted the last two nominees, said the judge &quot;has written a large number of opinions that the . . . committee will want to examine to determine his judicial philosophy and his commitment to the principles of the Constitution.&quot;    In an attempt to sound a harmonious tone, President Reagan stressed that Judge Kennedy is &quot;popular&quot; with colleagues and with senators &quot;of varying political persuasions.&quot; Judge Kennedy, in brief remarks, added that he is &quot;looking forward to the scrutiny that the Senate should give any nominee . . . .&quot;    Threatened opposition from some conservatives, who fear that Judge Kennedy is too moderate, has been &quot;muted,&quot; according to White House officials. Two weeks ago those threats led President Reagan to select Judge Ginsburg over Judge Kennedy. Yesterday, however, one conservative, Sen. Orrin Hatch (R., Utah), said, &quot;I doubt that any conservatives are going to oppose him . . . He does appear to be a conservative judge.&quot;    White House officials said Sen. Jesse Helms (R., N.C.), leader of the anti-Kennedy effort two weeks ago, is &quot;reserving judgment&quot; until he has a chance to meet the nominee and discuss his record.    The big question for the White House, now that it has made its choice, isn't conservative reaction. Officials expect conservative groups to support the nomination, although without real enthusiasm.    Unknown, however, are the attitudes of the coalition that helped to defeat Judge Bork. Initial concern in civil rights groups, said Ralph Neas, director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, focuses on &quot;problems in . . . fair housing, voting rights, wage discrimination and school desegregation cases&quot; in which Judge Kennedy wrote opinions.    But the wait-and-see attitude by liberal senators and civil rights leaders suggests that those who successfully opposed Judge Bork are attaching considerable importance to the confirmation hearings for Judge Kennedy. &quot;It's very important that people take their time to study the whole record,&quot; said Washington civil rights lawyer William Taylor. &quot;I don't see how there can be well-prepared hearings before January.&quot;    Some opponents of Judge Bork had positive initial reactions. &quot;Those opinions I've read, even those I disagree with,&quot; said Harvard Law School Professor Laurence Tribe, a constitutional expert, &quot;show (Judge Kennedy) to be a thoughtful, moderate conservative, not a zealous ideologue, but someone who is respectful of constitutional principles.&quot; He, too, said it is &quot;premature to draw any final conclusions.&quot;    A Sacramento native, Judge Kennedy received a degree from Stanford University and studied at the London School of Economics before graduating from Harvard Law School with honors in 1961.    After a brief stint with a San Francisco law firm, he returned to Sacramento in 1963 to pick up the law practice of his father, who died that year. The practice, later merged with those of two other lawyers, involved a range of legal advice and litigation for a variety of clients and included some lobbying for corporations, including Capitol Records Inc., now a unit of Thorn EMI PLC, and Schenley Industries Inc., now a unit of Rapid-American Corp.    White House officials say that they and the Federal Bureau of Investigation have looked extensively at Judge Kennedy's record as a lobbyist and have turned up nothing controversial.    Mr. Kennedy first came to the attention of then-Gov. Reagan when he helped draft a constitutional amendment limiting California state taxes and spending. Voters rejected the plan in 1973, but two years later Gov. Reagan urged President Ford to appoint Mr. Kennedy to the federal appeals court based in San Francisco.    Friends say Judge Kennedy is an intense, soft-spoken man with a wry sense of humor who is dedicated to his family. He and his wife, Mary, a third-grade teacher, have a son Justin, 23, a Stanford graduate now working in real estate; a son Gregory, 22, and daughter Kristin, 19, both Stanford students. His friends say he is a practicing Catholic, an avid reader, and a sometime golfer and tennis player. Judge Kennedy dresses conservatively, is trim and stands more than six feet tall.    Despite a serious manner in the courtroom, he is best known at McGeorge Law School for occasional theatrical flourishes at his Monday night classes. To celebrate the Constitution's bicentennial, he arrived a few weeks ago in powdered wig, ruffled shirt and Colonial coat to portray James Madison and lecture on the problems of drafting the Constitution. In other years, he has received ovations from standing-room only classes for his portrayal of President Franklin Roosevelt urging support for packing the Supreme Court. Students say he has a limitless memory for constitutional law and rarely uses notes or a textbook in class.    When he was passed over by President Reagan in favor of Judge Ginsburg, Judge Kennedy's students planned last Monday to hang a banner in the classroom saying, &quot;You'll always be supreme to us.&quot; But they never got to display the message; Judge Kennedy was called to Washington again.    On the bench, Judge Kennedy &quot;adheres to precedents; he's not a judicial activist,&quot; says a former partner, state court Judge Hugh Evans. Also, in his reluctance to expand the rights of criminal defendants and suspects, he fits the definition of what President Reagan wants -- a Supreme Court nominee committed to law and order.    Some of his more important decisions may become a focus of controversy. In 1985, he rejected women's claims that Washington state must give male and female workers equal pay for jobs that are different but have &quot;comparable worth.&quot; He wrote a 1983 dissent, which the Supreme Court followed to a degree, urging relaxation of the constitutional rule that illegally obtained evidence must be excluded from criminal trials. In 1979, he wrote that the Pasadena, Calif., school system had satisfied a desegregation order and wasn't required to continue efforts to keep racial balance.    In a 1980 case with which the Supreme Court agreed, he struck down the &quot;legislative veto&quot; by which either house of Congress could disapprove by a simple majority an action by the executive branch. And conservatives want to ask Judge Kennedy about a 1980 ruling that, although it upheld the Navy's discharge of homosexuals, suggested that some homosexual conduct is entitled to constitutional protection. </TEXT></DOC>