<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:A Banker Seeks Creditor Unity on LDC Debt---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM SPCBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Richard J. Flamson III has one word to describe what the LDC debt problem will look like in two to three years if current methods for dealing with it aren't changed. The word is &quot;dreadful.&quot; As chief executive of Security Pacific Corp., a bank with a nearly $1.2 billion stake in Brazil and Mexico, he wants a new approach. He has some thoughts on what it should be.    The Flamson case for change is persuasive. Banks are getting increasingly restless over the beating their shares and shareholders are taking each time they are asked to send good money after bad. European and Japanese banks are heading for the exits. The less-developed countries themselves are becoming more fractious, as evidenced by Brazil's suspension last month of interest payments on $67 billion of its $108 billion external debt.    Mr. Flamson wants to stay in the LDC business. &quot;Security Pacific, with its headquarters in California -- where almost every city has a Mexican name -- would sound stupid if we said we didn't want to be part of ongoing financial dealings with Mexico.&quot; But he wants better coordination among lenders, a goal that only can be achieved, he thinks, by giving the many banks that want to shed their LDC debt less ruinous ways of doing so.    As things stand now, debtor countries deal with diverse lenders: governments; the International Monetary Fund; the World Bank and other development banks; other multilateral agencies, such as Europe's Bank for International Settlements, and, finally, private banks around the world. Private banks have the biggest stake in troubled debt, about 73% of the $342 billion owed by Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Venezuela, the Philippines and Chile, for example. But their role in debt negotiations is relatively weak.    Governments and multilaterals set loan terms and conditions and the banks &quot;piggyback,&quot; Mr. Flamson says. He wants &quot;pari passu&quot; treatment, an agreement that governments and multilaterals will not go charging ahead of the banks in loan restructuring deals.    &quot;A lot of guys in important positions in banking have lived in a lot of these countries. They are very capable of evaluating a particular set of circumstances. They add a dimension of common sense that might not otherwise be there. I never thought bureaucrats and economists could solve the world's problems.&quot;    Yet he concedes that banks need the muscle of government and multilateral creditors. &quot;Conditionality&quot; is a sensitive issue. Traditionally, the IMF, with U.S. support, has set the conditions for bailouts. But national leaders often make political capital by flouting conditions.    The Baker Plan, outlined by Treasury Secretary James Baker at an IMF meeting in Seoul two years ago, envisioned more positive conditions designed to produce economic growth. It at least won philosophical support from the LDCs. Mexico, for example, has promised to sell off state enterprises to reduce their drain on government finances and generate more competition. But such enterprises are part of national political machines, which means they don't go quietly.    &quot;When you are talking about negotiating conditionality with Mexico or Brazil or any big borrowers, what you are talking about is changes in their political and economic systems,&quot; says Mr. Flamson. &quot;Those are by definition geopolitical issues beyond the power of bankers around the world to deal with. Banks don't have that kind of leverage and only through closer cooperation with governments and government agencies and multilateral agencies and development banks can we take advantage of whatever leverage we collectively have with the borrower. As long as we speak with different agreements and all with our own little pile of conditionality, or try to piggyback off of someone else's conditionality whose whole purpose of existence might be different from ours, we run into this kind of mishmash we've been working our way through the past several years. The geopolitical issues are major.&quot;    Brazil's self-destructive &quot;Cruzado Plan&quot; last year was a case in point. This was simply the old game of gunning the money supply under price controls, a gambit the Nixon administration used in the U.S. in the early 1970s with inflationary consequences that had a lot to do with creating today's international debt problem. Brazil's governing party won last fall's parliamentary elections, but at a high cost. &quot;They won the election, but they lost the economy,&quot; observes Mr. Flamson.    Getting the banks more involved in conditionality, in Mr. Flamson's view, will require that only those banks with a long-term interest in debtor countries stay in the game. Better means must be found for the others to get out. Some banks already are getting out, but with &quot;haircuts&quot; of up to 50% of loan principal. There's also an anomaly. Banks can carry doubtful paper on their books at par, but if they sell it or trade it at a discount, accountants and regulators require them to book their loss. So the same paper is on some books at full value and on others at 50% of full value. The sales and swaps do nothing to reduce the debtor's obligation, of course.    Some help could be given by allowing larger tax-free bad debt reserves, as European governments do, and by permitting accounting changes that allow amortization of losses on debt write-downs. But Mr. Flamson also would like the IMF, the World Bank or a new entity to provide a secondary market so that LDC debt could be marketed &quot;without such a terrible haircut.&quot; This would encourage large numbers of exits and simplify debt negotiations. If it enabled loans to be stretched out to longer maturities, it would also ease the burden on debtors.    &quot;If you talk to some other people in our business, they'll tell you that's dangerous because they'll just go out and create a new black hole. I don't believe that. I don't think the market is going to make the same mistake twice, not in so many years at any rate.&quot;    Yet any public policy that heads in the direction of taking either the banks or the debtors off the hook should be approached with caution. The principles espoused by Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey, who has suggested such things as a 3%-a-year write-down of principal, are too inclined toward the easy way out for the debtors. Someone would have to pay, bank shareholders or taxpayers or both.    But the bottom line of Mr. Flamson's argument is appealing. The goal of policy must be to make the debt of LDCs marketable once more. New lending, restructurings and stretchouts have scant justification if they merely put the debtor nations deeper in the hole. No one really thinks that Brazil, Mexico or other big countries will walk away from their debts, but if it continues to be distressed paper, nothing will have been accomplished either. Banks that stay in business with those countries will continue to flounder.    Mr. Flamson's proposed new mechanisms, which he concedes are only rough ideas, might help. But he would be the first to assert that the only permanent solution will be more enlightened policies in the debtor nations to create an environment for genuine economic growth. It seems logical that bankers who want to stay in the game should have a more active role in fostering that enlightenment. Indeed, events seem to be increasingly demanding nothing less. </TEXT></DOC>