<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Political Scions: Lawmakers' Children Who Serve in Congress Find It Has Changed --- Impasses Are Frequent Now And Power More Diffuse; But Job Is Still Attractive --- Has Sen. Dodd Proved Point? </HL><AUTHOR> Jeffrey H. Birnbaum (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When John Rhodes Jr. was sworn in as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Arizona in 1953, his son stood proudly by his side. And when it was John Rhodes III's turn to take the oath of office in 1987, he had his own four sons with him.    But when asked whether his children will serve in Congress, the younger Mr. Rhodes pauses for a long time before answering. &quot;It's definitely not for everybody,&quot; he finally says. &quot;It's really kind of hard to say I would recommend to anybody that they ought to do this.&quot;    Congress is like a small town where some names recur generation after generation. There have been four congressional Kennedys, five Frelinghuysens and six Muhlenbergs. Currently 13 sons and two daughters of former federal lawmakers serve in the 535-member Congress.    But these men and women have inherited a vastly different world from that of their parents. All have obviously been greatly influenced by their fathers' experiences, yet the similarities with their parents may be less telling than the differences -- in how they view the issues of the day, how they view themselves and how they view their roles as lawmakers.    Membership in Congress remains attractive for many sons and daughters. Service there provides a rare opportunity to do good and wield power. And having a forebear in the public eye is an asset for any aspiring politician. &quot;I wouldn't be here if I hadn't been very, very careful in the choice of my father,&quot; says Michigan Rep. John Dingell, who succeeded his father, also named John, when he died in 1955.    Minidynasties have been part of the fabric of Congress almost from the beginning. &quot;There have been political families who have sent several generations to Congress,&quot; says Raymond Smock, the House historian, &quot;and every Congress has had a handful or more.&quot;    The names can be confusing -- Republican Rep. Hamilton Fish Jr. of upstate New York is the fourth of his name to serve since the 1840s -- and the philosophies can change: Rep. Fish's father was a vigorous opponent of Franklin Roosevelt; he himself is a fiscal conservative who voted to recommend impeachment of President Nixon; and now his son Hamilton III -- former publisher of the Nation, the liberal magazine -- is running as a Democrat in another district. Former Sen. Russell Long of Louisiana was preceded in the Senate by both his father, Huey Long, and his mother, Rose McConnell Long. Rep. William Jennings Bryan, the famous Nebraska isolationist, was followed in the House by his daughter, Ruth Bryan Owen, an outspoken internationalist.    What follows is a look at some of the changes that Congress has undergone as seen through the eyes of three men for whom Congress is the family business. Democratic Rep. Dingell, one of Congress's most influential committee chairmen, is the son of a man who wielded a great deal of power in his day even though he never headed a major committee. Mr. Rhodes already is seen as an echo of his diligent father, the former Republican leader. And Sen. Christopher Dodd of Connecticut could hardly be more different from his father. The dovish Democrat is the son of Thomas Dodd, who was one of the Senate's biggest hawks.    John Dingell   At a husky 6-feet-3, &quot;Big John&quot; Dingell is one of Congress's most imposing figures. But he is still in awe of the diminutive gentleman with a booming voice who preceded him as congressman from Detroit. During times of indecision, Mr. Dingell, now 62, sometimes turns to a faded photograph of his father and asks, &quot;Pop, what would you do in this?&quot; He adds, &quot;It's a pretty good yardstick.&quot;    Mr. Dingell learned Congress from the bottom up. For four years he worked as a House page. He also was his father's chauffeur and de facto campaign manager, which helped ensure election to his father's seat despite his tender age of 29.    Today Mr. Dingell is the chairman of the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee, but he is a little wistful when he talks about the enormous clout his father was able to wield. As the second-ranking Democrat on the Ways and Means Committee, which in those days made appointments to other committees and was an arm of the then-potent House leadership, he orchestrated enough committee-assignment switches to push through the St. Lawrence Seaway project, which was important to his state.    These days, Rep. Dingell says, congressional power is much more diffuse. No single member -- not even a veteran chairman like himself -- can act with the impunity of the barons of old. &quot;The ordinary members have achieved much more power throughout the institution,&quot; he says. &quot;Today the chairmen are net losers.&quot;    Rep. Dingell himself spends a great deal of time rounding up votes from his panel's junior members and fighting off his own subcommittee chairmen, particularly the liberal Henry Waxman, Democrat of California. In his father's day, such insubordination rarely was tolerated. Punishment for defying the leadership could be demotion to a lesser assignment such as &quot;the select committee for the disposal of wastepaper,&quot; Rep. Dingell says.    &quot;The House was an institution that in his day did follow its leadership,&quot; he says. &quot;The House is not an institution that follows its leadership well today.&quot;    Now a new generation of Dingells is moving into politics. Christopher Dingell, 31, was elected to the Michigan state Senate in 1986. At first, Rep. Dingell advised his son, who would have to take a pay cut from his job as a Ford Motor Co. engineer, to spurn public office. And Rep. Dingell continues to warn about the pressures of the job, his son says. &quot;You can get elected to this business because of your father,&quot; Rep. Dingell says in an interview. &quot;You can't stay here because of your father. You stay here because of what you do on your own.&quot;    John Rhodes III   After he was elected to a regional office several years ago, neophyte politician John Rhodes III telephoned his famous father, then the House GOP leader. &quot;Congratulations, Dad,&quot; the younger Mr. Rhodes recalls saying, &quot;you've won another election.&quot;    Jay Rhodes, now 44, was only partly joking. The respected name of John Rhodes goes a long way in Arizona. Right now, in fact, his father, at the age of 71, has emerged from retirement to run for governor at the urging of party leaders, to heal the wounds created by the impeachment and conviction of Gov. Evan Mecham.    When Jay Rhodes was growing up, members of his family used to tease one another that they would collaborate someday on a book entitled &quot;Politics Is a Family Affair.&quot; Back then, the congressman recalls, the family's closest friends were the families of other lawmakers. For the elder Mr. Rhodes, those affiliations spilled over into legislation: He was known for his bipartisanship, a trait that was aided by his off-hours associations. Though Jay Rhodes has made a few stabs at working with Democrats, particularly those in the Arizona delegation, most of his affiliations have been with Republicans.    In his first term in office, he is disappointed to discover that Congress isn't a family place anymore. The specter of elections every two years and the advent of jet travel compel many House members to scamper back to their districts almost every weekend. Some even leave their families there. Rep. Rhodes isn't immune to this re-election fever and, unlike his father, he has already missed some important family occasions, including a school play.    &quot;A good part of the reason that Congress isn't able to operate as effectively as it should is that the members haven't had the opportunity to develop relationships among themselves,&quot; Rep. Rhodes says. &quot;We are so busy during the week that literally the only time you see members who aren't on your committees is on the floor&quot; during brief votes.    Though his father's political roots are in a less harried generation, he understands what his son is going through all too well. After Jay Rhodes went through an exhausting day of campaigning in 1986, the elder Mr. Rhodes cautioned him: &quot;This is just a fair example of what you're going to be facing from now on. If you really want to do this, you've got to be a little bit crazy.&quot;    Christopher Dodd   Before his 1981 Senate swearing-in, Christopher Dodd's siblings presented him with their father's pocket watch and chain, and the chair that he sat in when he was a U.S. senator. The young Sen. Dodd wore the watch with pride during the ceremony, and still uses the chair in his Senate office.    Sen. Thomas Dodd lost his re-election after his colleagues voted in 1967 to censure him for diverting campaign funds to his personal use. Christopher Dodd says he didn't consciously run for the Senate to avenge the humiliation. But one of Thomas Dodd's staunchest defenders, former Sen. Long of Louisiana, says the son &quot;wanted to prove a point, which I think he has proved; he is a very dedicated public servant.&quot;    Father and son are a study in contrasts. Thomas Dodd, though a New Deal Democrat, was an acerbic anti-communist and a hawk on the Vietnam War. Christopher Dodd is a leading Senate liberal who champions the cause of ending military assistance to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua. When Thomas Dodd was censured, Christopher Dodd was a Peace Corps volunteer in the Dominican Republic.    The Congresses that the two men have served also are starkly dissimilar. In Thomas Dodd's day, the legislative week and year were short and orderly, tightly controlled by the leaders. The amount of time lawmakers spent working on bills and waiting for them to pass was a fraction of what it is today. By comparison, far longer hours were spent traveling through the home state politicking. &quot;The Washington life was less demanding,&quot; Christopher Dodd recalls. &quot;Politics was more demanding.&quot;    Now, that formula has been turned on its head, at least in the Senate. Senators don't worry about touching home base as often as House members because their terms are six years long rather than two. So for them, at least, constituents are often a television interview, rather than a plane ride, away. Senators also usually represent larger geographical areas that are reached more efficiently through radio or TV.    In the Senate as in the House, sessions never seem to end, and the issues never get resolved. The annual impasse on the federal budget and on other controversies, including aid to the Contras, keeps lawmakers in town almost all year long, often doing little more than spinning their wheels. &quot;You spend a lot of days working your head off,&quot; Sen. Dodd says, &quot;and you begin to wonder if you're showing anything for the effort.&quot;    For all that, though, the senator doesn't deny the allure of his work. His feelings, he says, mirror those of his father, who was asked shortly before his death whether he would serve in the Congress if he had it to do over again. Tom Dodd -- publicly disgraced, his health broken -- replied: &quot;In a second.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>