<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0140 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Re the Bork nomination: There is a misunderstanding of the concept of &quot;original intent.&quot; Judge Bork has said that without adherence to the original intent of the Framers of the Constitution, there is no legitimacy for judicial decisions. This view, until recently, was the guiding principle of constitutional law, and rightly so in a country that was the first to set down on paper a constitution to do what its name implies: constitute us as a people and provide a government to secure our rights. If there is to be no adherence to these constituting principles and if that which constitutes us is elastic and subject to interpretation based on current fashion, then why have a constitution at all?    There can be no legitimacy for judicial decisions if there is no standard against which their legitimacy may be measured. It is thus non-adherence to original intent that most threatens the institution of judicial review. Conversely, those jurists who follow Judge Bork's reasoning ensure the survival of judicial review by adhering to a constituting authority that makes possible its existence. Judge Bork is hardly a detractor of judicial review; by his own philosophy he must be its greatest advocate.    There are those who take issue with Judge Bork's basic philosophy that original intent ought to guide the rendering of constitutional decisions, saying that we cannot today be bound by the mores of our forebears, that our understanding of rights and humanity today is somehow more profound than that of the Framers. The Constitution was the culmination of 150 years of debate over the rights of man engendered by centuries of religious and civil war in Europe. Moreover, this debate was not merely the province of philosophers and statesmen, of Hobbes and Locke, Jefferson and Madison, but of the commonest of men, as shown by the records of town meetings of that time throughout America. Simple farmers, merchants and craftsmen were well-versed in the problems of majority vs. minority rights, representation, taxation, assembly, free speech and religious persecution. The Federalist was not some ivory-tower dialectic but was popular and widely read. In a sense, that whole generation was &quot;Founding,&quot; and when constituting a government it provided a system capable of amendment, both constitutionally and statutorily. Hence when we outgrow the Constitution, when new issues unforeseen by the Founders arise, when new attitudes take shape, we may amend our Constitution, make new laws, change things democratically, while preserving the Framers' original guidance in that which we leave unchanged. What we may not do is leave change up to a council of revision (an idea proposed and rejected by the Framers themselves) that decides issues solely on the basis of popular or contemporary sentiment.    It sounds extreme to speak fearfully of the potential loss of liberty in America today, but it is not extreme. By degrees, as we turn to the Supreme Court to solve our most contentious social and political issues, instead of having the courage to confront them in the legislature, we forfeit our liberty and belie the notion that free men can govern themselves. Apathy and complacency present the greatest threat to the American political system, manifested in the growing desire among legislators and citizens at large to let others (i.e. the Supreme Court) decide. When Judge Bork speaks of remaining faithful to original intent, he issues a clarion call for courage to resolve issues through participatory democracy and not by judicial fiat.    James C. Dunlop   Arlington, Va.</TEXT></DOC>