<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0021 </DOCNO><HL> OPEC Is Approaching Midyear Parley---Oil Prices Firm, but IraqKeeps Tough Stance---By Youssef M. IbrahimStaff reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is approaching its midyear conference with firm oil prices, hopes of still higher revenues and a big headache with the tenacious regime of President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.    Almost a year after substantially throttling back oil production to boost prices, all 13 members of OPEC are impatient to reap the fruits of a year's discipline that successfully reversed the spectacular price collapse of 1986.    Some members are already calling for a price increase at OPEC's June 25 meeting in Vienna, while others prefer to stick to the present fixed price of $18 a barrel in return for being allowed to pump more oil.    But expectations of harmony in the oil markets and rising producer revenues could founder on Iraq's campaign to expand its oil output. Last August, Iraq rejected OPEC's quota system as unfair. Now it is preparing plans for a 25% boost by this summer's end in its current production of about two million barrels a day.    Drained by its nearly seven-year-long war with Iran, the regime of Iraqi President Hussein has repeatedly served notice in recent months that it will try to raise revenue in the easiest way it knows, by pumping its huge reserves. Landlocked by an Iranian blockade, it has prevailed on Saudi Arabia and Turkey to carry its oil to market via pipelines across their territories.    A nearly completed pipeline to the Mediterranean Sea through Turkey would add 500,000 barrels a day to Iraq's export capacity by September. Another planned pipeline through Saudi Arabia could start sending a further 1.6 million barrels a day to the Red Sea port of Yanbu in 18 months.    In the context of OPEC politics, Iraq's projected production increase appears an unshakeable resolve forged in the agony of the long war with Iran rather than a negotiating ploy. Iraq insists that its production quota must equal Iran's. Current OPEC rules, which Iraq ignores, would allow Iran to produce 2.4 million barrels a day while limiting Iraq to 1.5 million barrels a day for the third quarter.    'Our position has been and will remain (that) Iraq's quota should not be a single barrel less than the quota allotted to Iran as long as the war is going on,' Iraq's new oil minister, Issam al-Chalabi, said in an interview published in the current issue of the Middle East Economic Survey, an authoritative trade newsletter. &quot;This will continue to be our position at the next OPEC meeting if the issue is raised again.&quot;    Beyond this confrontation, there appears to be little else to spoil OPEC's largely bright outlook and pride in having calmed world oil markets.    Among other things, Saudi Arabia -- OPEC's largest oil exporter -- appears to have convinced a skeptical world community of oil traders and oil-industry executives who had questioned its ability to play the role of OPEC's &quot;swing producer,&quot; adjusting Saudi output according to world demand in order to stabilize prices. In that role it has allowed oil output to fall much lower and further than others to keep the price steady at around $18 a barrel, up from a low of under $10 a barrel last year. Friday, the spot price of West Texas Intermediate-the U.S. benchmark crude-rose 25 cents, to $19.80 a barrel.    In April, the Saudi oil minister, Hisham Nazer successfully extracted a promise from the U.S. to stop its &quot;OPEC bashing,&quot; in the words of a senior U.S. administration official, a move that constitutes a major, but quiet, reversal in Reagan administration policies.    Furthermore, Mr. Nazer has taken advantage of the pain inflicted on all oil producers by last year's price collapse to further Saudi oil diplomacy. In effect, he has persuaded major non-OPEC oil exporters, such as the Soviet Union, Norway, Egypt, and a large segment of the U.S. and international oil industry to join OPEC's drive for slow, steady price improvement. This goal for years eluded Mr. Nazer's predecessor, the former Saudi Oil Minister Ahmed Zaki Yamani, who was fired by King Fahd last year.    &quot;There is a lot of optimism in the business, which is largely generated by the higher (oil) prices, that OPEC will maintain the price structure and roll over its present agreement&quot; to pump no more that 15.8 million barrels a day collectively, says John Lichtblau, executive director of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation.    That echoes a widespread feeling inside OPEC. &quot;I say, 'Why fool around with success?'&quot; asserts a senior OPEC oil minister who asked not to be identified. &quot;We shouldn't change anything.&quot;    OPEC sources say they will simply overlook the chronic tendency of the United Arab Emirates to surpass its quota of 900,000 barrels a day by some 150,000 barrels a day. They make light of the periodic threats by the UAE oil minister, Manei Saeed Al Otaiba, to break with OPEC, reasoning that he always backs down. In addition, sources say they already overlook Qatar's recent quietly instituted discount of 40 cents a barrel on its oil, as it is one of OPEC's smallest producers. Above all, OPEC in the end is almost certain to turn a blind eye to Iraq's outright refusal to join the majority.    Sources say the group appears intent on doing all this not only for the sake of internal harmony and market stability, but also because, as the senior OPEC minister noted, &quot;It's the best of all alternatives. I just don't see another way.&quot;    The substantial fall of the dollar, in which oil is traded, hasn't upset this general mood, analysts say. That's because many OPEC countries import goods priced either in dollars from the U.S., or in currencies tied to the dollar from non-European countries. In addition, many barter oil directly for goods. Thus, the fall in the dollar isn't the factor prompting whatever calls for higher prices may be coming from OPEC.    John Calverley, senior economist of the London-based American Express Bank Ltd., says the slide in the dollar's value has trimmed OPEC's revenue gains, but not across the board. While the dollar price of OPEC oil has risen 30% from last year's average price, the fall of the dollar has shaved 20 percentage points off this increase to non-U.S. purchasers. In turn, this has damped what could have been the inflationary impact of higher oil prices, which affects OPEC countries as most of them import much of what they eat, wear, fight with and otherwise use from those very same Western economies.    &quot;The price rise may be bad news for the U.S. from an inflationary standpoint but for much of Western Europe and Japan who can buy cheaper dollars to pay for their oil, it's not that bad,&quot; noted Mr. Calverley.    Many analysts and some U.S. officials, however, maintain that even for the U.S., whose oil-producing states like Texas and Oklahoma are in the throws of depression because of the price collapse last year, the revival of oil prices is welcome. &quot;We don't want to see $9 dollar (a barrel) oil again,&quot; said U.S. Energy Secretary John Herrington in an interview last week. </TEXT></DOC>