<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880405-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan and the Courts: Some Reagan Judicial Appointees Fail to Follow Conservative Path Expected by Administration </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> JUS EXE CNG </G><TEXT>      {Fourth of a Series}   BECKLEY, W.Va. -- Behind Judge Elizabeth Hallanan's desk, in a small federal courthouse here in coal country, are photographs of President Reagan and former Attorney General William French Smith.    The two men, who in 1983 selected her to be a federal judge, were looking for a solid conservative. Judge Hallanan, now 63 years old, seemed a good bet: She was a lifelong Republican, and her father was state GOP chairman for 34 years and presided at the 1952 Republican National Convention.    But Judge Hallanan has had a few surprises for President Reagan and other conservatives.    In 1985, she ruled that a West Virginia constitutional amendment authorizing a moment of silence in public schools was unconstitutional, a decision that directly contradicted the Reagan administration's position in a similar case. In 1984, she ruled in favor of a group of women coal miners who faulted their employer, Pittston Co., for sexual harassment. In 1986, she found that a police officer's freedom of speech was violated when he was suspended for refusing to obey an illegal law-enforcement policy.    &quot;She would probably declare herself to be a conservative,&quot; Beckley lawyer Lee Adler says, &quot;but she doesn't act that way.&quot; Judge Hallanan doesn't disagree. &quot;You just can't stereotype me,&quot; she said in a recent interview.    Despite President Reagan's selection of unprecedented numbers of federal judges, not all those he has appointed have turned out to be consistent conservatives. Some, like Judge Hallanan, have shown themselves to be independent and beyond easy labeling.    Predicting the performance of federal judges has always been an imprecise art, and new judges quickly discover the high degree of independence the Constitution guarantees by giving them life tenure. But this unpredictability is only one factor that limits President Reagan's success at appointing conservative judges committed to a limited role for the courts and to narrow interpretation of the law.    Another factor is the selection process itself. Throughout the Reagan administration, appeals court judges have been chosen directly by the Justice Department and White House with an eye toward strong conservative thinkers who will be able to influence their colleagues and shape the law. Their success has been widely reported.    But district court appointments still originate primarily with Republican senators or, where the senators are Democrats, with GOP governors, House members or state party officials. Often these officials are more moderate than Reagan administration officials are. In some states, senators have appointed commissions to recommend nominees to them; senators then choose a name and send it to the Justice Department.    Judge Patricia Fawsett in Orlando, Fla., was nominated in 1986 at the behest of then-Sen. Paula Hawkins. But, although conservatives criticize the number and length of appeals in death penalty cases, and lawyers for death row inmates say it is tough to get federal judges to listen to them, Judge Fawsett ruled in favor of one death row inmate last year and temporarily delayed executions for two others.    &quot;The administration's hands are tied . . . in district court appointments,&quot; says James McClellan, director of the conservative Center for Judicial Studies. &quot;They have done the best they could, but because of senatorial courtesy, they don't have a free hand.&quot;    So far, President Reagan has appointed 47% of the sitting federal appeals court judges -- 79 of 168 -- and 46% of all district court judges -- 265 of 575. With Democrats controlling the Senate and with the president in the final months of his term, the pace of appointments is slowing, and Mr. Reagan's chances of naming 50% of the total are fading. But the impact of the Reagan judiciary will be felt into the 21st century.    Senatorial courtesy hasn't stopped the Reagan administration from trying to reshape the district courts, and political battles have ensued over candidates the administration deemed too moderate.    Pennsylvania's Republican senators, Arlen Specter and John Heinz, rely on a nominating commission to supply them with judicial candidates. But for three district court vacancies, the two moderate senators and the Reagan administration had a prolonged standoff.    One seat on the bench was vacant for nearly two years. For another, the senators' choice was nominated recently after a two-year wait. A third seat was vacant almost three years, and when the administration finally agreed to consider the senators' candidate, the would-be judge had waited so long he had turned 60, prompting the American Bar Association to question his nomination. (He withdrew.)    William Dwyer, a liberal Seattle lawyer, was nominated only after Sen. Daniel Evans (R., Wash.) threatened last year to hold up Senate confirmation of all federal judges in Western states.    And the Reagan administration has on occasion refused to honor an agreement between New York's senators, Republican Alfonse d'Amato and Democrat Daniel Moynihan, under which the senator whose party isn't in the White House recommends every fourth judicial nominee. Last year, Sen. Moynihan's choice, Peter Strauss, a Columbia University Law School professor, withdrew after the administration refused to nominate him.    For Judge Hallanan, the nomination process was smooth, but some of her decisions have shown independence and unpredictability.    &quot;You have a lot of Reagan appointees around the country who, in every case in which they have discretion, rule on the side of government or business,&quot; says James Lees, a lawyer in Charleston, W.Va. &quot;Judge Hallanan is an obvious exception to that. She is not a person in the Reagan mold.&quot; Other lawyers say she often favors business over labor but agree that she is independent.    The moment-of-silence ruling is a case in point. As the Reagan administration was urging the Supreme Court to uphold a similar Alabama law, Judge Hallanan ruled that the West Virginia law violated church-state separation. She didn't wait for the high court. &quot;I bit the bullet,&quot; Judge Hallanan says. &quot;I felt the law was so abundantly clear that the decision was easy.&quot;    Public reaction surprised her. She was vilified in letters and phone calls. &quot;I was warned of the reaction,&quot; she says, &quot;but it went beyond my wildest imagination. It was vicious and personal.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>