<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870623-0026 </DOCNO><HL> High Court Lets Lower Ruling Stand,Allows Banks to Sell Commercial Paper---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BT TAXES DEPS GT LABORBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)SUPREME COURT (SUP)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court left intact a federal appeals court ruling that Bankers Trust Co. may sell commercial paper for its clients.    The high court's refusal to hear an appeal by the Securities Industry Association is a boost for the Federal Reserve Board's policy of allowing the legal line between commercial banking and securities to blur.    But the significance of the case, involving the placement of commercial paper by banks, has been eclipsed by the Fed's approval in recent months for subsidiaries of bank holding companies to underwrite, rather than merely handle, commercial paper. A legal challenge to the Fed's approval for underwriting is pending in a federal appeals court in New York, and a trip to the Supreme Court is almost certain.    Yesterday's Supreme Court appeal goes back to 1979 when the SIA, a trade group, first challenged Bankers Trust's effort to sell commercial paper. Federal law says commercial banks can't underwrite notes or securities. Commercial paper is unsecured promissory notes issued by corporations to provide short-term financing.    The case went to the Supreme Court in 1984 on the Fed's ruling that commercial paper wasn't a &quot;note.&quot; The high court ruled that commercial paper is a security, contrary to the Fed's view, and told the Fed to decide whether Bankers Trust was selling, underwriting or distributing commercial paper.    Bankers Trust, a unit of Bankers Trust New York Corp., acts as an adviser and agent to issuers of commercial paper, but because it doesn't underwrite the sales, it has no independent financial stake in the placements and sales.    The Fed said that Bankers Trust's handling of commercial paper didn't constitute any of the prohibited activities. A federal district court struck down the Fed's approval in February 1986. But the appeals court for the District of Columbia last December reinstated Bankers Trust's approval.    Since last December's appeals court action, the Fed has given Bankers Trust New York approval to sell commercial paper through another subsidiary, BT Commercial Corp., and has given Bankers Trust New York, Citicorp, J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. and Chase Manhattan Corp. permission to underwrite a variety of securities through subsidiaries.    The final word on the expansion of commercial banks into the investment field may come from Congress, which is considering a moratorium on new authority for banks as well as limits on this expansion.    Securities Surrender   The justices ruled 8-1 that a shareholder's surrender of stock to a corporation in order to improve its financial status can't be treated as an immediately deductible loss for federal tax purposes.    The high court reversed the ruling of a federal appeals court in Cincinnati that permitted the principal shareholders in Travco Corp., a motor-home manufacturer in Michigan, to take a loss on their federal income tax returns for surrendering shares to the company.    The shares were surrendered in 1976 to improve the financial position of the company and to make it more attractive to lenders. In its appeal to the Supreme Court, the Internal Revenue Service argued that the surrender was a contribution to the corporation's capital, without compensation, rather than a loss.    In an opinion written by Justice Lewis Powell, the Supreme Court ruled that a shareholder who surrenders stock but retains control of the company doesn't sustain an immediate loss for income tax purposes. &quot;The shareholder's loss, if any, will be recognized when he disposes of his remaining shares,&quot; Justice Powell said.    Justice John Stevens dissented, saying the court's decision and the view of the IRS marked a change in the law that should be approved by Congress, not by the executive or judicial branches.    Bank Branches   The high court refused to hear an appeal by Mississippi bank regulators challenging the Comptroller of the Currency's approval for Deposit Guaranty National Bank to open an additional branch.    The case involved the question of how to interpret a federal law that permits national banks to branch out in a state only to the extent that state-chartered banks are permitted by state law.    Mississippi law permits a state-chartered commercial bank to have branches only within 100 miles of its main office. Deposit Guaranty, in Jackson, the principal unit of Deposit Guaranty Corp., had applied to open a branch in Gulfport, which was more than 100 miles away.    A federal court, in a suit by state officials, blocked Deposit Guaranty's branch. But Deposit Guaranty argued, and the Comptroller agreed, that Mississippi savings and loan institutions compete with national banks and aren't subject to the 100-mile limit. A federal appeals court in New Orleans ruled in February that the Comptroller's ruling was reasonable.    Nuclear Safety   The justices agreed to decide whether companies that manage federal nuclear-production facilities must comply with state occupational health and safety rules. The court agreed to hear an appeal by Goodyear Atomic Corp., a unit of Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co.    Goodyear manages a federal uranium-enrichment facility near Piketon, Ohio. The legal dispute arose in 1980 when a maintenance worker fell and fractured his ankle. Under an Ohio worker compensation law, the employee received some $9,000. The worker applied for an additional award, alleging that the plant didn't comply with state standards.    Although the worker's lawyers say the additional award would total at most about $4,400, Goodyear fought to the high court on the theory that the federal Atomic Energy Act pre-empts any state health and safety requirements at federal facilities. Goodyear appealed after the Ohio courts ruled that companies managing federal facilities still must comply with state law.    The Justice Department, although unhappy with the decision of the Ohio Supreme Court last August, said the state worker compensation law has been amended and urged the high court to pass up the appeal.    Racketeering Cases   The high court ruled 8-1 that civil lawsuits for damages filed under the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act must be filed within four years of the event prompting the lawsuit.    The court, in an opinion written by Justice Sandra O'Connor, said Congress failed to specify a limit on the amount of time for filing such suits. The court borrowed the four-year limit from a federal antitrust law that also permits civil suits for damages. Justice Antonin Scalia disagreed with the court's action.    Private Mail System   The justices agreed to decide whether the University of California must open up its internal mail system to union materials sent in an effort to organize custodial employees. The university argued that federal law prohibits such free, private delivery, but the California courts ruled that state law requires free delivery of union letters within the university system.    Defendant's Testimony   The justices ruled 5-4 that states can't prohibit defendants from testifying in their own behalf simply because their memory has been aided by hypnosis. Such a prohibition, Justice Harry Blackmun wrote for the majority, violates a defendant's constitutional right to testify. Chief Justice William Rehnquist dissented, joined by Justices O'Connor, Scalia and Byron White. </TEXT></DOC>