<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Soviet Media's Harder Line on GermanMay Signal Conservative Counterthrust---By Mark D'AnastasioStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROP </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   An intensifying Soviet propaganda campaign to paint daredevil pilot Mathias Rust as a possible spy rather than a youthful prankster could mark a political setback for Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev.    Almost overnight, the Soviet media have eased off blaming the military for letting the maverick West German fly his plane unchallenged through Soviet air space and land in Red Square. Instead, the press is now implying he may have had official support in the West for his action. The turnabout could signal that Mr. Gorbachev has lost political control over the affair. Some Western sources speculate that the controversy over the 19-year-old Mr. Rust's stunt may be providing a rallying point for the Soviet leader's numerous opponents in the military, the KGB security police and the party elite.    At first, Mr. Gorbachev moved adroitly to turn the incident to his advantage, creating an impression of decisiveness by firing both his defense minister and air-defense chief. But now his detractors appear to be encouraging a backlash to the idea of blaming Soviet defenses by switching the onus to foreign enemies.    &quot;The affair won't sink Gorbachev, but his opponents are going to turn around and do exactly what he's trying to do: use it for all they can,&quot; one Western official says.    A loss of political authority couldn't come at a worse time for the Soviet leader. He is preparing to push through a package of far-reaching economic initiatives at a meeting this month of the party's powerful Central Committee. Yet as many as half its 307 members are believed to be hesitating to support them.    Also at the meeting, Mr. Gorbachev is expected to try to promote two of his closest political allies, Alexander Yakovlev, his chief propagandist, and Moscow party boss Boris Eltsin, to voting members of the ruling Politburo from candidate members. He may also be looking for a replacement for Geidar Aliev, one of 11 full voting members of the Politburo, who is believed to be close to death.    Western sources speculate the abrupt change in the press toward a conspiracy-theory approach was engineered by conservative forces in the military and the KGB, which bear joint responsiblity for letting Mr. Rust get away with his escapade.    According to this line of thinking, their aim would be to halt Mr. Gorbachev from further exploiting the event as a means to purge military officials who oppose his liberalization policies, and especially his effort to curb the growth in military spending. They might also want to head off any attempt by Mr. Gorbachev to use the security breach as an excuse to discipline the KGB, elements of which are believed to be bridling at his drive to relax Stalinist-era controls over the arts and the economy.    Soon after Mr. Rust was taken into KGB custody, an authoritative Soviet spokesman, Novosti News Agency Chairman Valentin Falin, said the youth would probably be set free soon with thanks for having exposed &quot;gaps&quot; in Soviet air defenses. He made no mention of any possible concerns in the Kremlin that the West German flier might be a spy or a dupe of Western espionage services.    Instead, Mr. Gorbachev's low-key approach -- what the Tass press agency calls &quot;a humane attitude in foreign policy&quot; -- initially won out over the traditional Russian impulse to cry conspiracy. That he was able to bring under control a propaganda machine that tried to blame the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency for the spread of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome was seen as a show of his political strength.    But within 24 hours the Kremlin's soft line hardened as Soviet officials began saying the affair was &quot;more complicated&quot; than originally thought. Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennadi Gerasimov declared on American television that Mr. Rust might have been taking part in a test of Soviet air defenses. The implication was that a foreign government was involved in some sort of plot.    Next, in a lead story in the newspaper Moscow News, chief editor Yegor Yakovlev wrote that before departing, Mr. Rust had studied a variety of itineraries for crossing the Soviet border and that his Cessna aircraft had been stripped down to install additional fuel tanks. Making clear that the young man would stand trial and could face up to 10 years in a prison camp, Mr. Yakovlev added, &quot;The public will learn later that the coming flight had been worked out with maps and mock-ups back in Hamburg,&quot; West Germany.    &quot;Just think if the event took place in Washington and not Moscow,&quot; he wrote. &quot;What would happen if a light sport plane with Soviet identification marks landed on a lawn in front of the White House?&quot;    Western sources say the arguments advanced by Mr. Yakovlev are weak. &quot;If he means Western military or intelligence agencies put Rust up to this, they have a lot of proving to do,&quot; one source said.    Rather than providing any hard evidence, the Soviet media are relying on the foreign press to make their point. Tass has begun quoting speculation in West German publications about Mr. Rust's motives; it says there is growing concern that he was a &quot;gullible victim of a far-reaching plan.&quot;    In Mr. Yakovlev's comments, Western analysts see hints a show trial could be under preparation for the West German pilot. At the least, they say, a press conference might be held along the lines of the September 1983 briefing by Soviet military officials. On that occasion, they used colorful maps and other visual aids to back up the Kremlin's claim that a South Korean airliner downed by Soviet jets was on a spy mission. Analysts point out that they managed to convince a significant segment of foreign opinion that their version was true.    Mr. Gorbachev's supporters continue to minimize the Rust affair. Even Mr. Gerasimov of the Foreign Ministry, who probably would preside over any such press conference, said a lot of other motives than spying -- such as the hope of financial gain or just the desire to prove himself -- could explain the West German pilot's actions.    Whether the Soviet leader's backers succeed in making their interpretation prevail and in avoiding a media extravaganza could be a test of Mr. Gorbachev's grip on power. </TEXT></DOC>