<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0032 </DOCNO><HL> REGIONS </HL><AUTHOR> Eugene Carlson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR BSE </CO><IN> PUB UTI </IN><TEXT>      Map Charts the Path   Of Fatal Heart Attacks   FATAL HEART attacks occurred pretty much uniformly across the U.S. as recently as the 1950s. But not any more. A line running from New England to the Mississippi Delta now forms a sort of Heart Attack Alley where the rate of fatal heart attacks is much higher than the national average.    A state-by-state study of premature deaths by the Centers for Disease Control shows that New York in 1985 had 254 heart-attack deaths for every 100,000 males age 35 to 64, the highest of any state. Other states along the heart-attack axis -- Rhode Island, New Jersey, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi and Louisiana -- are clustered just below New York in the grim standings. North Carolina and South Carolina are also near the top.    The healthiest hearts, meanwhile, appear to be out West. New Mexico has the lowest fatality rate for middle-aged males: 108 deaths per 100,000. Other states at the low end are Utah, Hawaii, Montana, Alaska, Washington and California. The figures are age adjusted to account for states with younger populations; male statistics are cited because men are at a higher risk for heart attacks than women.    &quot;Explaining the geographic differences is very difficult,&quot; says CDC epidemiologist Patrick Remington. In the 1960s, California was the first state to show a dip in heart-attack rates. Now declines are occurring in every state. Smoking, excess weight, and a diet high in saturated fats are strongly linked to heart disease, so states where these factors are on the wane should rank lower on the heart-attack scale.    Is this an argument for the tofu-and-yogurt California life style? &quot;That's a good hypothesis,&quot; Dr. Remington says.    Counterculture Media   Explore New Territory   ALTERNATIVE news weeklies are now reaching beyond their home turfs.    Several counterculture newspapers are expanding to other cities, building on the profitable niche they've found in left-of-center news coverage, comprehensive entertainment listings, and ads aimed at college students and middle-age consumers.    The Boston Phoenix in the next few weeks expects to complete its purchase of the New Paper in Providence, R.I. The Seattle Weekly is exploring an alternative -- newspaper joint venture in Vancouver, British Columbia. Phoenix, Ariz.'s 18-year-old New Times, which bought Denver's Westword in 1983, began a similar publication in Miami in December. The Chicago Reader has expanded to Washington, Los Angeles and Berkeley, Calif.    Jim Larkin, New Times Inc. publisher, says growth of the politically feisty papers isn't surprising. &quot;Dailies increasingly want to look like USA Today, and that provides a tremendous niche for shrewd editors,&quot; he says.    Mainstream publishers also are getting interested. Landmark Communications Inc. of Norfolk, Va. -- which owns eight dailies in the Sun Belt as well as other publications -- now runs alternative weeklies in Virginia, North Carolina, Florida and Louisiana. And two former Des Moines Register executives are exploring a statewide alternative paper in Iowa.    Big Boston Power Users   Team Up to Save Energy   WHEN BOSTON'S temperature hit the mid-90s last month, Boston Edison Co. flashed a message to 10 of its biggest customers: Cut back your power use.    The Prudential Center turned off the lights in a well-lit lobby and switched a cooling system from electricity to steam. Massachusetts General Hospital shifted the power in one entire building to an emergency diesel generator.    It was the start-up of the Northeast Energy Cooperative, a voluntary pact designed to cut energy use during peak demand. The plan lets Boston Edison ask co-op members to trim power usage by a combined maximum of 10 megawatts -- enough to serve 5,000 homes on an average summer night -- as many as 20 times a year and up to eight hours at a time.    The customers, which also include Digital Equipment Corp., the Christian Science Center and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, get paid by the utility for the electricity they give up. A computer network allows members to coordinate their power cutbacks.    The Northeast co-op is an offshoot of energy-saving plans pioneered in California.    Why Fewer Teens Hold   Jobs in West Virginia   TEEN-AGERS JOIN the labor force in sharply different numbers, depending on where they live.    In Minnesota, nearly three-fourths of all youths 16 to 19 years old were employed or actively looking for work in 1987, says the Bureau of Labor Statistics in its annual state and regional job profile. In West Virginia, at the other end of the teen-labor spectrum, less than 40% were doing so.    West Virginia's chronically depressed economy holds teen-age job-seekers down. But the bottomtier labor rate also reflects the fact that women don't easily enter the job market in West Virginia. &quot;It's kind of ingrained in this culture. The man goes out and makes the money, and the woman stays at home,&quot; says David Griffith, a labor-market analyst in the state's employment security department. West Virginia has the lowest female labor-participation rate of any state.    Minnesota's healthy urban economy, coupled with its big farm population, puts a high percentage of teens to work. In tracking labor, the Bureau of Labor Statistics includes people who work on family farms.    The bureau compiles its labor profile from Census Bureau monthly household-survey numbers, which can be volatile in small states due to sample size. </TEXT></DOC>