<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880328-0044 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: If You Sue Your Boss, You May Not Have Another </HL><AUTHOR> James E. Challenger </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><TEXT>   The firing and lawsuit season is upon us.    Newspapers are filled with announcements of layoffs in financial services, automotive, advertising and many other fields.    Age discrimination is often the basis for legal action by an employee against his former company. When a major national retailer went through a cost-cutting period, a number of older executives were discharged at the same time as the consolidation of departments. These executives banded together and instituted a class-action suit against the former employer. A very similar case occurred with another national retailer that sought to reduce its overhead and operating expenses. Another large class-action suit also based on the charge of age discrimination is pending against a leading Midwestern bank.    Municipal workers are joining the growing trend in lawsuits. In Chicago, a discharged typist in the city clerk's office sued the city to get her job back, claiming that she had been forced to work 70 hours a week despite an ulcer.    In the South, a judge refused to dismiss suits against the Jefferson Parish, La., Clerk of Courts, brought by three parish employees who claimed they were reassigned and then fired.    Employers can't be guaranteed the suits will stop even if the employee is reinstated. Two state workers in the Southwest were discharged and later reinstated. They later filed a suit against the county for unspecified damages.    A Texas mayor was the target of a suit by a city worker who claimed that she, the worker, was demoted for criticizing her supervisor. A $25,000 judgment against the mayor was dismissed.    Employers occasionally lose lawsuits, that is true. But the employee doesn't win even when victorious. He or she is forever branded as a litigious person, and who is willing to hire such a person?    Discharged persons who sue forget about their future. Their prospects of returning to the work force after litigation, whether or not they are successful, are slim to nil. Who wants to hire a person who sued the last employer and who might eventually sue a new one?    A television news editor in a large Midwestern market had spent the greater part of his career, more than 20 years, with one employer. When the news operation was in an expansion mode, he was promoted and placed in charge of a newly opened bureau to concentrate on suburban coverage outside of the primary metropolitan area. However, shortly after that, the station was taken over by new management and retrenchments were made in all areas. The news editor became a victim of the ensuing fallout and was discharged. Incensed by what he considered a completely unjustified discharge, he sued the the TV station on the basis of age discrimination.    A settlement was made out of court. Even though the case never came to trial, it was widely reported in the media. The individual was unable to get another job in that market, and to date has not found employment in any other market. It is likely that his reputation for being litigious is making employers shun him.    Before discharged workers sue and put themselves into the position of becoming a non-person in the job market, they should give serious thought to the consequences of such action by asking themselves: How would they react if they were an employer with two or three qualified candidates and one of them turns out to have sued a former employer?    Let's say that the person applying for the job is the best qualified and that person will really benefit the company. Now what? Does the person doing the screening recommend such a person and also tell the employer that the person sued a former employer?    A personnel officer with a major corporation was placed in just such a quandary when a sales and marketing manager renowned for an innovative style that boosted sales and profits applied for a job. The applicant was well known in the industry for his professional abilities, but a further check of his background revealed that he had sued a former employer over the loss of a job. The personnel officer reluctantly decided not to recommend him to the employer because of the lawsuit against the former employer.    In another case, a production manager who applied for a job at a manufacturing company figured that having a lawsuit against a former employer in his background would be a drawback, and he tried to overcome it. He took the initiative himself in the employment interview to explain the circumstances surrounding the suit and conceded that he had made a mistake. He said he would not do anything of that sort again. Here was an individual with demonstrated talents and an excellent work record. The employer appreciated his openness and honesty, but decided against hiring him. The employer felt the individual might sue again if something went wrong and the worker blamed the employer again.    Common sense dictates that the person screening for corporate decision makers understands the views of management clearly and risk taking with employment today is not a luxury any company can afford. Further, there are no guarantees that the person will not sue again.    Of course, the other candidates will be given greater consideration because they are &quot;safe&quot; and they do not bring negative baggage to the position.    Consider your future and then don't sue. If you do sue, you may never get an equal or better job again.    ---   Mr. Challenger, a lawyer, is president of Challenger, Gray andamp; Christmas, a Chicago international outplacement firm. </TEXT></DOC>