<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870406-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Farm Trade Tangle -- Amber Wave:World's Grain OutputSurges as Nations SeekFood Self-Sufficiency---Glut and Dwindling NumberOf Buyers Put PressureOn Exporters Like U.S.---High-Yield Rice in Indonesia---By Wendy L. WallStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC EUROP FREST FORGNCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT (AGD) </IN><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   Drought-ravaged Sudan appealed to the world in 1984 for grain to feed its starving people. Today, it is again looking abroad for help.    But Sudan's problem now is glut. Despite sales agreements with five Arab nations, the Sudan, after two record harvests, has more grain than it can handle. It is one of nine African nations that want help in exporting their crops.    Such is the state of the $25 billion-a-year global trade in grain, perhaps the most basic of foods. Countries around the world are racing toward grain self-sufficiency, impelled by the food-price shocks of the 1970s, the recent African famine and debt burdens that make imports unaffordable. They are irrigating deserts, plowing pasture and seeding tundra. Many are restricting purchases from abroad while giving their farmers incentives to grow more.    Just 15 years after world leaders warned of a threat of global famine, Saudi Arabia is giving away wheat it can't store. Heavily populated Bangladesh has slashed grain imports, Chinese corn floods the Pacific Rim, and tiny Malawi is trucking maize to its central African neighbors. In frozen Finland, farmers are turning surplus wheat into vodka, mink fodder and glue.    All this has sent the global grain trade into a tailspin. Volume is down 16% so far in the 1980s. That is a radical change from the 1970s, when a near-doubling in international grain purchases touched off explosive growth in U.S. agriculture, leaving American farmers dependent on foreign markets for one-third of grain sales.    To some extent, the grain glut is due to recent good growing conditions in many lands, and drought or other weather problems could turn some marginal exporters back into importers. And part of the new production could be phased out voluntarily should the surplus lower prices too steeply; some farmers in Argentina and Australia have already started to switch crop land back to cattle.    The surplus also hasn't prevented millions from going hungry. Even in nations that are no longer importing grain, diets often leave much to be desired. Economists believe that many Third World countries may eventually step up imports again if their economies and debt problems improve. China and India, for example, may one day import more corn in order to feed their people more meat.    &quot;Self-sufficiency is like beauty,&quot; says Robert Kohlmeyer, an executive of Cargill Inc., a major grain merchant. &quot;It's truly in the eyes of the beholder.&quot;    Nevertheless, many experts now are calling the grain-trade boom of the 1970s a fluke. &quot;The world's ability to produce grain has outrun its ability to sell grain,&quot; says Morton I. Sosland, the publisher of the American publication Milling andamp; Baking News and an industry observer for 40 years. While global grain consumption will continue to climb, he believes, &quot;a declining share of that rising market will be supplied by export shipments.&quot;    For U.S. farmers and taxpayers, this growing autarky in many nations spells trouble. Since the beginning of the decade annual American grain exports have plunged more than 40%. Corn prices on cash markets in the U.S. are at their lowest levels since 1973, while federal spending on farm programs -- which rises as market prices fall -- stands at record levels.    Global commerce in grains and oilseeds such as soybeans is expected to edge higher this year, and for the U.S., the export picture is brightened by the weaker dollar and a new farm bill that lowers crop prices. But grain prices are expected to remain at rock-bottom levels for years, holding down the value of exports.    Moreover, American economists and grain merchants now concede that it will be much tougher than they once supposed for the U.S. to win back lost export markets. &quot;Many politicians thought we'd emerge from darkness into light -- like switching a light on,&quot; says Cargill's Mr. Kohlmeyer. &quot;We still have competition and we have it in spades.&quot;    Other countries that need exports are smarting, too. Farmers from Argentina to Australia have held tractor-cades and boycotts to protest depressed prices. Swelling stockpiles strain bins and national budgets in India, Mali and the European Community. And the battle for the shrunken export market has provoked a global farmpolicy crisis. For the first time, developed nations have put the issue of their expensive farm subsidies near the top of the agenda for trade-liberalization talks.    Any sharp turnaround in the grain trade is unlikely for years, most economists say. The debt crisis has left many customers, if not broke, at least wary of the kind of heavy borrowing that fueled the 1970s buying binge. The World Bank and other international lenders are pressuring Third World nations to dismantle policies that discourage food production. And the spreading &quot;green revolution&quot; is transforming former wastelands into fecund fields.    In the name of self-sufficiency, dozens of countries -- developed as well as developing -- now encourage their farmers to grow even some crops that might more economically be imported. Unless such policies change, warns Dennis Avery, senior agricultural analyst at the State Department, &quot;We may find that in the year 2000 the list of agricultural importers starts with Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan and Mexico and stops there.&quot;    Already, the list has dwindled dramatically, interviews with officials of the Agriculture and State departments, the World Bank, grain-trade firms and farm groups show. The European Community, a major wheat importer just a decade ago, now is the third-largest exporter of the grain. Saudi Arabia, by offering gargantuan subsidies, has literally raised an agriculture out of the sand. Unable to store its surpluses, it donated wheat to Egypt last year.    Turkey has stopped buying corn from the U.S. after increasing its own corn production 66% in the past five years with better hybrids and more fertilizer and pesticides. Now it is building a giant dam on the Euphrates that is expected to irrigate over two million acres and double crop yields in the plain below. With aid from the World Bank, Turkey also is improving its ports, roads, rails and storage facilities.    Some land-poor countries are investing in agricultural resources abroad. Japanese trading firms have shoveled money into remote Brazilian farms and financed construction of Chinese quays. Arab investors are clearing million-acre tracts in the Sudanese plains, a U.S. Agriculture Department official says.    The pressure of debt is influencing production in nations from Mexico to Zambia. In the 1970s, East European nations raised their grain imports more than 50% to feed expanding livestock herds; in the early 1980s, most decided they could no longer afford to borrow to eat meat. Led by Poland, they culled their flocks and herds, shifting resources back to field crops. The region's grain imports now stand at one-sixth of 1980 levels.    Some cash-strapped countries are trying more drastic measures. Nigeria, once the seventh-largest importer of U.S. wheat, banned all wheat imports at the beginning of this year. Caught between its debt and sharply lower oil prices, the West African nation is urging oil workers to return to the farm. Experts doubt Nigeria will achieve its stated goal of food self-sufficiency by the end of this year, but there is no doubt of the trend there.    In China, changes in economic thinking have set off a production explosion despite primitive methods. Many Chinese peasants still fertilize crops with &quot;night soil&quot; (human waste), pick corn by hand and collect grain in horse-drawn carts; one U.S. visitor last fall found the main road to the Ming Tombs partly blocked because peasants had spread soybeans on it to dry.    Yet China, which as recently as 1983 was a net importer of corn and soybeans, now is the world's third-largest exporter of both crops. It is taking away American corn markets in South Korea, even without diplomatic relations with that country. The catalyst for the transformation: Beginning in 1979, the Chinese government raised crop prices, gave families individual plots and permitted them to retain part of their harvest to sell on the open market.    Meanwhile, the so-called green revolution is finally paying off in some heavily populated countries and is beginning to reach others. Multinational farm-supply companies, in search of new markets, are spreading more-productive seeds and methods. And a network of Third World agricultural research centers, established in the 1960s and 1970s, has produced advances ranging from high-yielding hybrid sorghum to new cropping methods that work with clay soils. A growing number of countries are setting up national &quot;extension&quot; services to try to bring such technology to their peasants.    &quot;It's the system of how to do research that's been exported, not just the advances themselves,&quot; says Peter Timmer, a Harvard professor of development studies.    That is paying big dividends in Southeast Asia. In Bangladesh, farmers now grow a wheat crop between two normal rice crops, thanks to expanded irrigation and new grain varieties that mature fast. India has so much wheat it is subsidizing exports and arranging sales or barter deals with North Korea, Nicaragua and Nepal. Still, much of the grain, stored under tarps during the monsoon, simply rots.    Just four years ago, Indonesia was the world's largest rice importer, accounting for 10% of all rice traded. Now investments made during the oil boom are paying off: Indonesian researchers have adapted high-yielding rice varieties to the climates of Java and Sumatra, Mr. Timmer says. This effort, along with policy changes, has turned the world's fifth most-populous nation into a small exporter of rice. Meanwhile, world rice prices, adjusted for inflation, are at their lowest in three-quarters of a century.    All this has left grain exporters increasingly dependent on one major importer: the Soviet Union. Two years ago, one-quarter of the world's grain exports were bound for Russian ports. But Soviet purchases have plummeted since then, and last fall the U.S.S.R. harvested its best crop since 1978.    That raises the possibility that Soviet import needs have peaked. Bureaucratic streamlining, better use of technology and changes in farm incentives are beginning to pay off, observers say. Soviet grain imports over the next five years are likely to hover well below the levels of the last five, says Paul McAuliffe, a wheat analyst at Continental Grain Co., a major grain merchant.    Even if Soviet imports rebound, world grain markets are likely to remain intensely competitive for years to come. So far, says Mr. Avery, the State Department analyst, the U.S. is mostly feeling the impact of the production spurts in China and Europe. The effects of many subsequent policy changes and investments around the globe have yet to be felt, he says.    Moreover, broad structural changes are undermining advantages that have long enabled the U.S. to dominate grain trade. Though the U.S. has superior internal transportation, new regional suppliers like China often enjoy lower freight costs to foreign markets. The U.S. retains a technological lead on the farm, but some other countries are fast closing the gap.    Even Africa may stand at the threshold of an agricultural revolution, Mr. Avery and others say. Spurred by the famine in East Africa, some governments are beginning to make the policy and technology changes necessary to tap the continent's vast resources, they argue. &quot;If the green revolution in Asia took 20 years, Africa may be at year two or three,&quot; says Brian D'Silva, an Africa specialist at the U.S. Agriculture Department. &quot;They've started down that path.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>