<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880309-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis, Jackson and Gore All Score Major Victories </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore surged from behind in the South to topple Rep. Richard Gephardt and join Gov. Michael Dukakis and the Rev. Jesse Jackson in major Super Tuesday victories.    Florida and Texas led a list of triumphs for Gov. Dukakis, who won in his native Massachusetts as well as in Rhode Island, Maryland, Washington State and Idaho, according to NBC News surveys. Riding strong support among Southern blacks, Mr. Jackson won in Georgia, Virginia, Louisiana and Mississippi. Network estimates indicated that he would pick up a significant number of delegates in at least six more states where he was running second.    In addition to a victory in Tennessee, Sen. Gore won in Arkansas, Oklahoma, Kentucky and North Carolina. In Mississippi and Georgia, he was capturing the greatest share of the white vote, and had moved into a position where he was assured of at least a share of the delegates in Texas.    The 39-year-old senator's success came at the expense of Rep. Gephardt. Mr. Gephardt won only at home in Missouri and trailed far behind in the pack in such oil-producing states as Texas and Oklahoma where he had staked much of his candidacy. The winner in earlier contests in Iowa and South Dakota, Mr. Gephardt was viewed as the strongest challenger to Gov. Dukakis in coming contests in the industrial North, and his losses yesterday work to the advantage of the Massachusetts Democrat in the race for the nomination.    There were 1,307 Democratic delegates at stake yesterday in 20 states and American Samoa. The indications were that Gov. Dukakis won the most delegates yesterday, capturing about 30% of the total, with Sen. Gore and Mr. Jackson close behind. Overall, Gov. Dukakis, who unlike Sen. Gore and Mr. Jackson won several earlier contests, leads going into next week's important Illinois primary.    NBC surveys of voters showed that Mr. Gephardt's get-tough message on foreign trade did him little good. Fewer than one in five Democratic voters in many states said they thought his restrictive amendment to the pending trade bill would help the nation's economy. The result was that, except in Oklahoma and Missouri, he was unable to win the support of even one in five white Democratic union members. His poor performance dooms his already endangered trade amendment and may well shift legislative policy away from protectionism.    The exit polls also showed that Mr. Jackson, who continued to attract significant white support in the North, won only negligible support among white Southerners. White Southern Democrats tended to support Mr. Dukakis and Mr. Gore, although only 40% of them said they strongly supported their candidate.    About the only thing these white Southern Democrats seemed to agree on was their unfavorable opinion of Mr. Jackson. Among white Southern Democrats, the NBC polls found Mr. Jackson's unfavorable ratings outweighed his favorable ones in almost every state, sometimes by margins as high as 3 to 1. Only in Virginia did Southern whites narrowly hold a favorable opinion of Mr. Jackson.    Mr. Dukakis celebrated his victories, saying &quot;This was a place where the guy from Massachusetts was not supposed to do well.&quot;    &quot;Dukakis is the front-runner and we're all chasing him,&quot; said Mr. Gephardt's campaign manager Bill Carrick. &quot;There's no question about that.&quot;    Against Mr. Gore, the Massachusetts governor has a significant advantage financially. Apart from Wyoming last week, the senator had no victories anywhere before yesterday's voting, and he will face an uphill fight in the North.    Even now, it is unclear how much of his success is owed to his newly honed populist appeal or the confusion of voters about his opponents. Mr. Gephardt paid a price for exhausting his resources in Iowa. Badly outspent in the South, he bore the brunt of negative ads run by his rivals and a series of damaging profiles on network news shows last week.    &quot;Three of us are going all the way to the convention,&quot; Mr. Gore said last night. His gamble is that the crowded field will deny any candidate a majority, giving him time to compete in such Northern states as Ohio and New York, as well as California. Mr. Jackson's triumphs establish him as a major factor, and while Gov. Dukakis showed he can win in the South, he was denied enough delegates so that he faces a potentially long fight to win the 2,082 needed to triumph at the convention in Atlanta in July.    New York Rep. Thomas Downey, a close friend of Mr. Gore's, denied any intention of Sen. Gore to pull back now in hopes of winning a second spot on a Dukakis ticket. Sensing his new strength, the senator aggressively attacked the governor this week. &quot;I don't think his politics represent a majority in the Democratic Party or in the country,&quot; Mr. Gore said. And while he has sought to shift the focus of his campaign back to economic issues, he faulted Mr. Dukakis for a lack of experience in foreign policy.    &quot;Michael Dukakis represents the same old formula that resulted in the loss of 49 of 50 states in two of the last four elections,&quot; Mr. Gore said last night. Network exit polls indicated a generally conservative vs. liberal split between the two candidates' supporters.    In the hunt for delegates ahead, Mr. Jackson can't be ignored. He stands to do well in the South Carolina caucus Saturday and the Illinois primary Tuesday. In both states, he has a strong base and the claims of a native son, and his candidacy has already shown its capacity to attract Northern white liberals and run on minimum financing. &quot;We are expanding the mainstream. We are turning the mainstream into a river,&quot; the preacher said last night.    His dominance of the black vote and triumphs last night are in striking contrast with the frustration he felt when competing for the nomination under less favorable party rules against former Vice President Walter Mondale in 1984.    ---   Rich Jaroslovsky contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>