<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NORIEGA WAS ORDERED to resign as leader of Panama's armed forces.    In a nationally broadcast message, President Delvalle said he had called for Noriega's dismissal after the military leader declined a request to step down voluntarily. Noriega, who has been indicted on drug-trafficking charges in the U.S., didn't show any sign of relinquishing his post. Delvalle named Col. Marcos Justines to succeed Noriega. He rejected the order. Noriega -- considered the real power behind Panama's government -- received support from the military and police.    A source opposed to Noriega suggested that the U.S., which expressed support for Delvalle, had coordinated the move with Panama's president.    ---   SHULTZ URGED Israel to negotiate with Arabs in the occupied territories.    As violence continued in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the secretary of state arrived in Jerusalem to promote a U.S. peace initiative for the Mideast. He called on Israeli leaders to negotiate a prompt and final accord with the Palestinians. He said Israel's 21-year occupation was the main reason for the unrest, which he called &quot;essentially indigenous.&quot; Shultz is to meet with leaders of several Arab states, and hopes to meet with Palestinian leaders.    Israeli soldiers killed two Arabs in the occupied territories, conducted house-to-house searches and arrested scores of suspected agitators.    ---   THE RED ARMY ENTERED Armenia's capital in an effort to quell unrest.    As thousands of Armenians demonstrated in Yerevan to demand the annexation of an area that had been assigned to a neighboring republic, Soviet troops and tanks took up positions in the capital city as a show of force. Some scattered violence was reported during the protests and strikes, which began almost two weeks ago. A senior Politburo official in Moscow was quoted as saying there had been &quot;human victims&quot; of the daily unrest. Details weren't provided.    The protests appeared to be the largest unsanctioned gatherings in Soviet history, with witnesses saying more than a million people have participated.    ---   Demonstrators hurled rocks and firebombs at riot police in several cities to protest the inauguration of South Korean President Roh. Opposition groups said the new government would renege on its pledge of democratic changes. Roh, meanwhile, met with Japan's Takeshita to discuss security steps for this summer's Olympic Games.    ---   The African National Congress called for &quot;resistance and defiance&quot; against South Africa's prohibitions on black opposition groups. On Wednesday, Pretoria banned the political activities of 17 anti-apartheid groups. In Johannesburg, Anglican Archbishop Tutu said church leaders planned nationwide protest services.    ---   A Soviet official said Moscow was certain a treaty to cut long-range arms can be completed in time for a superpower summit this spring. The senior aide also said the Kremlin would re-establish ties with Israel on the opening day of an international forum on the Mideast, and favored a U.N. presence in Afghanistan following a Soviet withdrawal.    ---   NATO minimized the significance of the dismantling of Soviet medium-range missiles in East Germany and Czechoslovakia, saying Moscow &quot;put these missiles there in the first place.&quot; Western diplomats dismissed the move, which Moscow called &quot;a goodwill gesture,&quot; as a publicity stunt prior to a two-day NATO meeting next week.    ---   Sri Lanka's president offered a general amnesty to Tamil and Sinhalese rebels, provided they renounce violence and accept an accord aimed at ending the island nation's ethnic conflict. President Jayewardene, in a speech to a new session of Parliament, also said he would hold elections in April for semi-autonomous provincial councils.    ---   A presidential study faulted State Department officials, the U.S. ambassador and Marines for neglecting security at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, where a sex-for-secrets scandal erupted last year. The study, conducted by a panel headed by former Defense Secretary Laird, called conditions at the embassy &quot;a national disgrace.&quot;    ---   Two common antibiotics have proved effective at preventing a rare pneumonia that is the leading cause of death among AIDS patients, researchers in Miami said. The two drugs, trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole, used to combat diarrhea, prevented 30 of 60 patients tested from developing pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.    ---   Dole dismissed two top political consultants, saying his GOP presidential campaign was &quot;trying to tighten up&quot; for the March 8 Super Tuesday contests. The Kansas senator's campaign manager said other personnel changes were forthcoming.    ---   An Army helicopter crashed near Chico, Texas, killing at least six of the 17 soldiers aboard, according to authorities in the community northwest of Fort Worth. The aircraft was based at Fort Sill, Okla. The cause of the crash wasn't immediately known.    ---   A homemade bomb wounded 15 people in Manila when it exploded during a ceremony marking the second anniversary of the Philippine revolution that brought Aquino to power. At the commemoration, Cardinal Sin warned that the communist insurgency posed a threat to the government.    ---   Spain's government announced that it was ending peace talks with the country's Basque guerrillas following the kidnapping of a businessman in Madrid. The talks, aimed at ending a 20-year war for Basque independence, began last month.    ---   The Army said a U.S. soldier who defected to the Soviet Union for eight months last year and then returned to the West was acquitted of desertion charges. But he was convicted at his court-martial at Fort Dix, N.J., of being absent without leave.    ---   The Pentagon unveiled plans for cutting Army officer strength in a budget-related move. The Army's steps include appointment of a board to select more than 350 colonels and lieutenant colonels for early retirement, and the start of a voluntary release program for all officers regardless of rank who want to leave the military. </TEXT></DOC>