<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880825-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Child-Care Executive, 58, Retires </HL><AUTHOR> Timothy J. and Paul B. Carroll </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Bowing to the inevitable, Yvonne B. Carroll stepped down as chief executive of the company she helped found almost 33 years ago.    The 58-year-old officer recognized the signs: Her staff had been shrinking for years, the orders weren't followed as quickly as they used to be, there had been whispers that she was getting soft.    Carroll Co. has recently opened several subsidiaries in the Eastern and Midwestern U.S. and a small unit in Europe. But its main products were children -- eight, all told -- with a little love and caring thrown in, and they were disappearing from the balance sheet.    The last spinoff from the conglomerate heads to college early next month and, with the house empty of children, no one saw any reason to keep Mom on the payroll. So the kids gave Mom a watch, said a couple of nice things, and drank a retirement toast in her honor.    True, she didn't take down much in salary, and sentimentalists could argue that we should have found her another position out of a sense of gratitude for a job well done. But the pragmatic woman who didn't buy a single dress for herself for years because she didn't think she needed a new one wouldn't want it that way.    Mind you, this is the woman who one day 27 years ago decided to quit smoking . . . and never touched another cigarette. This is the woman who, after eight children and 33 years of marriage, doesn't fit into her wedding dress. Nothing unusual about that, except that the dress is too big. This is the woman who took up tennis shortly before she turned 40 and her last child was born and now probably could beat five of her own children at the game. (She's enough of a hardnose that she'd say six, while all of the children would argue that five is right, but would insist they aren't one of the five.)    In her day, Mom had a good managerial style. For one thing, she always knew what was going on in all parts of the business. When the three boys would tiptoe around the house at 6:30 on a Saturday morning getting ready for a Boy Scout camping trip and couldn't find something, Mom would call out from her bedroom: &quot;Your canteen is on the third shelf in the family room.&quot; We still can't figure out how she knew what we were looking for.    She also knew how to settle turf battles. Chuck and Paul once got into an all-timer of a fight that made its way through various upstairs rooms of the Pittsburgh headquarters before moving downstairs to Mom and Dad's bedroom, where Mom was knitting. The two preteens fought like Carl Icahn and Texaco for almost half an hour, waiting for Mom to stop them, but she never even acknowledged they were there. They eventually stopped and pretty much gave up fighting as a hobby (at least with each other).    In managing subordinates, Mom learned early that one of the tricks was to encourage the children to be independent as soon as possible. When Mom and Dad's friends commented on their willingness to let go when it came time for the children to leave home, they blithely talked about &quot;working off the inventory.&quot;    Even though Mom stayed out of the public eye during her career, she had plenty of highlights and collected loads of trophies. For instance, there's the black eye the shareholders lovingly gave her a couple of holidays back, when the family thought it would be like the Kennedys and play touch football. Mom continued to play and was one of the few who played the next day.    One time, Dad's taxes, investments and other accounting-type stuff were reviewed by a financial planner hired by Westinghouse, his employer. The report came back with an &quot;Everything's A-OK. Keep getting professional help.&quot; Mom keeps the family books.    Of course, there's also the day that she held a board meeting with Buster, the company cat, and swore Buster talked to her. But raising eight kids is bound to make a person a little daft.    Dad's not retiring because his day job isn't finished yet. In fact, Dad, at 61, has about four years left till May 23, 1992, when he turns 65 and retires. Jennifer's college graduation isn't scheduled yet, but we're hoping that it's before Dad's birthday, so he can have at least a couple of paychecks to himself and not have to pay college tuition bills.    But Mom's job is just about finished. Of course, she goes into high-priced consultancy now. With two grandchildren and another on the way, she'll have plenty of business.    ---   Tim and Paul Carroll, both Journal employees, came off the family production line in 1959 and 1957, respectively. </TEXT></DOC>