<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871222-0143 </DOCNO><HL> Technology Lets Firms EndNation-by-Nation Selling;Ad Restrictions Crumble---Viss Equals Vif Equals Jif---By John Marcom Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP KO PHG VIA BTY NWSTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Every Sunday evening, Rupert Murdoch's Sky Channel bounces the &quot;Coca-Cola Eurochart Top 50 Show&quot; off a satellite to 10.8 million households from Iceland to Greece. Taped in the Netherlands, the program looks like a clone of Dick Clark's &quot;American Bandstand.&quot; But, clone or not, it is a real breakthrough.    Coca-Cola Co. knows that TV commercials sell Coke. But for much of the television age, European governments eschewed advertising on broadcast television. Now, Sky and other new European channels beaming programs via satellite to cable-TV subscribers are letting Coke make its pitch to the youth market all over Europe. The next few years will also bring direct satellite-to-home broadcasts, thus expanding choices even further for viewers and advertisers. &quot;The whole European spectrum is opening up,&quot; says William Lynn, Coke's media director in Atlanta.    Technology has made it easier for the mass media -- newspapers and magazines as well as television -- to reach the Continent. Sky above is a catalyst for change below; government restrictions that determine when and how many commercials may be aired on existing channels are crumbling. So, too, is the need to take a clumsy country-by-country approach to European marketing -- especially for companies like Coca-Cola that can use pictures and jingles to sidestep language barriers.    Companies are exploiting their new freedom to hustle. TV ad spending is expected to double in the next few years. Saatchi andamp; Saatchi Co., the London-based ad agency, predicts European ad spending in general will grow 22% by 1990.    Marketers are eager to push new products and win market share in Continentwide campaigns. Coca-Cola, for example, wants European demand to approach U.S. levels. In America, after all, people consume more soft drinks than they do tap water.    But to accomplish their goals, companies must first dispense with certain little problems, some of which are as basic as renaming a product that has had different names in different places. Unilever Group, for instance, sells a cleaning liquid that is called Vif in Switzerland, Viss in Germany, Jif in Britain and Greece and Cif in France. How do you advertise that to Europe at large?    Then, too, multinational companies have always conferred authority on country managers, who are accustomed to running their own shows. Such power relationships are hard to change. &quot;The resistance is there in a big organization like ours,&quot; says Jan Timmerman, a marketing specialist at Royal Dutch/Shell Group's London headquarters. He says it is very difficult to persuade Shell's 19 independent marketing groups to cede budget money to centralized advertising, although they did get together once to sponsor a series of car races broadcast by Sky Channel. In that instance, the company felt it succeeded in reaching its &quot;target audience of motorsport fanatics and car enthusiasts,&quot; Mr. Timmerman says.    Finally, European companies must become less aloof if they are to begin slugging it out with aggressive U.S. and Japanese rivals. &quot;The States is a big-hype country,&quot; says Denys Henderson, the chairman of Imperial Chemical Industries PLC, Britain's largest manufacturing company, whose products include fibers, chemicals, pharmaceuticals and house paint (Glidden in the U.S.). &quot;As we've got farther into the U.S., we've recognized we have to do better&quot; at marketing and selling.    John Perriss, Saatchi's world-wide media director, says the Americans and the Japanese are &quot;the most attuned&quot; to the changes under way in Europe. &quot;Europeans have been the most reluctant and recalcitrant,&quot; he says.    NV Philips, the Dutch electronics giant, has been among the fastest to change its ways. These days, Philips is plastering its name everywhere -- in airports, in high-traffic city centers and prominently in all its advertising. The aim is to make the Philips logo as ubiquitous as that of Sony, JVC and the other Japanese companies that are Philips's toughest competitors. Japan's inroads on Philips's turf have cost the world's second-largest maker of consumer electronics (after Japan's Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.) heavily in prestige and profit. Between 1982 and 1985, competition narrowed Philips's share of the $315 billion world electronics market to about 4% from 5%.    &quot;If you travel through Europe, you would think Japanese companies have the largest market share,&quot; says Robert Riphagen, the head of advertising at Philips's head office in Eindhoven, the Netherlands. In Europe, Philips is ahead of Japanese makers in many products, including compact-disk players, car audio and TV sets. But the Japanese grab prominent spots for their billboards, even though the payoff from such spending is hard to measure. &quot;They've seen the benefits more easily, perhaps because they were less sophisticated than we were,&quot; Mr. Riphagen says.    If simple exposure counts, Philips's sponsorship of soccer's World Cup last year scored heavily. The day the match began, Philips ran the same ad in 44 countries to trumpet its involvement. In one telecast, Philips's signs on the fence encircling the field were visible for 38 minutes and nine seconds of a 60-minute game watched by 500 million people. Mr. Riphagen marvels at reports that as many as 60 Chinese-potential customers of Philips someday, who knows? -- gathered around each scarce TV set.    The company is among the sponsors of the Seoul Olympics next year. It is beginning to promote its name heavily in the U.S., following its recent takeover of the 42% it didn't already own of North American Philips Corp. The U.S. unit, for years run independently of the Dutch parent, currently sells under a variety of brand names, including Sylvania, Magnavox and Norelco.    Meanwhile, the Philips logo pops up on Agent 007's gizmos in &quot;The Living Daylights,&quot; the latest James Bond movie. (The Philips exploding key ring, it should be noted, isn't available in stores.)    For products that are on the market, Mr. Riphagen is leading the effort to coordinate Philips's European advertising. Beginning with its consumer-electronics business, Philips is &quot;globalizing&quot; management, design and manufacturing along with marketing. The effort, with tariff protection from the European Community, has helped Philips's consumer electronics return to solid profitability from a loss in 1984. The company says consumer electronics and semiconductors are its fastest-growing businesses this year.    Every month, Philips's consumer-electronics marketing executives from various countries meet at Eindhoven with Mr. Riphagen to discuss strategy and review ads. Philips argues that the right message -- often one with a strong visual point -- can work internationally, transcending language barriers.    Mr. Riphagen thinks European advertisers are too often trapped in their own national mind-sets. The British, for instance, are so subtle they almost forget to mention the product, he says. The French do &quot;weird&quot; things like using a woman's hand to display a man's shaver. The Germans tend to be too literal. &quot;If we say we want to communicate (to Germans) that Philips makes the world's most superior CD player, they write a headline, 'Philips makes the world's most superior CD player,'&quot; he says.    Philips decided that its compact-disk player was a good product to promote with an international strategy, using advertising with common themes across markets. The CD player is as global as a Coke or a Big Mac. &quot;You won't find any national characteristic in it -- it's designed and made for the world market,&quot; says Gerrit Jeelof, an executive vice president.    In its CD ads, Philips stresses that it invented the technology (which it licensed to Sony for co-development). &quot;People say, 'I guess the ones who invented it must be pretty good'&quot; at making it, Mr. Riphagen says. In its magazine ads, Philips aims for a sleek, high-style look. &quot;We want to have ads that breathe high tech, modernity and innovation,&quot; Mr. Riphagen says. &quot;A bit bizarre even.&quot;    Philips has tried the bizarre in marketing audio-tape players: a print ad featuring a two-page color photo of a lamb wearing dreadlocks, a knitted cap and headphones attached to a wedge-shaped cassette player. The text says, &quot;A-wham-bam-alamb-bam-a-lamb-bam-bam.&quot;    Philips, like Coca-Cola, is an enthusiastic user of cable television, although the medium really is just getting off the ground in Europe. Less than 10% of the Continent's 120 million households get cable and can thus choose from among a dozen or so channels supplementing local broadcasts.    Besides Mr. Murdoch's five-year-old Sky service, offerings include two German-language channels; &quot;Superchannel,&quot; a British venture featuring nightly international news from London; and MTV Europe. MTV is a new venture of the music-video channel's U.S. parent, Viacom International Inc., as well as British publisher Robert Maxwell and British Telecommunications PLC.    Some observers think the satellite channels will never be more than a sideshow, in part because Europeans aren't about to give up their native languages. But the new channels are more fun than the old state-run, high-minded services, and the threat already has inspired the old channels to make changes of their own. London's main commercial station, known as ITV, is now broadcasting 24 hours a day. The Spanish are setting up private channels, following the French. Even tiny Denmark, with fewer viewers (about five million) than metropolitan London has, is setting up a new advertiser-supported channel.    Television isn't the only new advertising medium. European newsstands display a profusion of international magazines. British publishers, no longer hamstrung by union rules, have started three new major newspapers in the past year, using the latest cost-saving production methods. Mr. Murdoch's U.K. publishing company, News International PLC, in a joint venture with Hachette SA of France, this year launched Sky magazine, a slick English-language youth-oriented entertainment monthly.    Sky is the first major attempt to start a multinational European magazine, but several European publishers are cloning already successful magazines from country to country. West Germany's Bertelsmann AG, the owner of Bantam Books and Doubleday in the U.S., is emerging as a European powerhouse in magazines. Some of its titles are published in several national editions. One of them, Geo, a travel-and-geography magazine aimed at a general audience, has fared well in Europe. Mr. Perriss of Saatchi envisions the big media moguls someday offering &quot;Europackages&quot; combining television and print advertising. It might take years for that to happen, he says, &quot;but I'm sure they will get there.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>