<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870723-0114 </DOCNO><HL> As Cable-TV Networks Proliferate,Newcomers Face Stiff Competition---By Laura LandroStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   Cable-television subscribers may one day get into the habit of buying designer outfits from the Fashion Channel, checking theater listings on Movietime and singing along with the Gospel Music Network.    These are some of the dozen cable networks that have sprung up in recent months, lured by heady growth in the industry. At the same time, a half dozen smaller networks, such as the Learning Channel and the Discovery Channel, are greatly expanding their reach.    But while industry executives say at least some of these young networks will succeed, big hurdles remain, including stiff competition for financing, advertising dollars and viewers, and shortages of unused channels and of transmitters on key satellites. According to the National Cable Television Association, there are currently 46 cable networks in the U.S., compared with about 17 in 1980.    &quot;There certainly are a flurry of new ideas, but most of them won't get off the ground,&quot; says John Sie, the head programming executive at Denver-based Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator. Mr. Sie warns, as do other industry executives, of a coming shakeout among the newer services, arguing that many of the entrepreneurs managing them &quot;don't understand this business.&quot;    The newcomers say they are encouraged by the significant improvement in the industry's prospects. Total subscriptions have grown to 44 million from 17.6 million in 1980. And once-skeptical advertisers now see cable as a viable national and local advertising medium. Ad revenues, just $50 million overall in 1980, are likely to reach $1.4 billion this year and $4 billion by 1995, according to the New York-based Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau.    However, many in the industry expect national advertisers to buy most of their cable time from such large, established networks as Capital Cities/ABC Inc.'s ESPN, Turner Broadcasting System Inc.'s Cable News Network, National Amusements Inc.'s MTV Networks, and USA Network, a joint venture of Gulf andamp; Western Inc. and MCA Inc. After years of losses, these industry leaders are finally turning a profit, and they have become the staple offerings on most cable systems.    &quot;Advertising agencies can't deal with 40 cable networks,&quot; says John Hendricks, chairman of Discovery Channel Inc. &quot;They have to focus their resources on the top 10 or so that have the critical mass&quot; of subscribers. He notes that A.C. Nielsen Co. monitors only networks with 14 million or more subscribers. And because ad rates are usually based on viewership figures, national advertisers are unlikely to buy time on smaller, unmonitored networks.    To succeed, industry executives say, the newer networks will have to find unique programming niches and link up with cable operators as investors in order to secure both capital and exposure. Indeed, operators are in some cases making equity a condition of carrying the networks.    The Discovery Channel, started two years ago with 300,000 subscribers and $3 million in venture capital, got its big break last year when four cable operators agreed to carry the service and invest about $20 million in exchange for 47% of its voting stock. The network also earmarked about 20% of its advertising revenue for operators signing long-term agreements. Largely as a result of the transaction, subscriptions soared to 20.4 million as of June, up from about 10 million last December, according to Mr. Hendricks.    Cable operators say the Discovery Network filled a niche by offering 18 hours a day of programs -- many of them imports from Britain and Canada -- about science and technology, nature, history, human adventure and world exploration. Earlier this year, the network won critical acclaim for airing 66 hours of Russian programming.    Meanwhile, at least a half dozen new networks are attempting to cash in on the home-shopping craze. One of them, the Fashion Channel, is scheduled to make its debut Aug. 1 on cable systems serving five million subscribers. It will sell brand-name clothing and accessories for the family and feature fashion shows, how-to demonstrations and interviews with designers. To cable operators, the network is offering both equity and 5% of the sales revenue generated in their franchise areas.    Like the Fashion Channel, Trans World Airlines Inc.'s Travel Channel is a hybrid shopping and programming network. The six-month-old network, which reaches five million subscribers and expects to have between 10 million and 15 million by the end of the year, offers travel-related products and exclusive bargain-travel packages as well as providing travel information and entertainment programs. Toll-free telephone numbers put viewers in touch with travel advertisers.    The Travel Channel will also produce three- to five-minute travel sales videos for an average fee of $10,000. Cable operators carrying the network get local advertising time slots and a percentage of sales revenue from its &quot;World Shopping&quot; program.    While affiliations with cable operators can give networks a sizable boost, they aren't a guarantee of success. &quot;With the channel shortage, you could have the best programming in the world and still find it hard to get on the air,&quot; says Kathryn Gavert, executive vice president of the You Network, which plans to provide some three to five million subscribers with health-related programming beginning in February.    Cable systems nationwide are expanding capacity, but few currently offer more than 36 channels, and many still have only 21. As a result, compromises are sometimes necessary. In New York City, for example, the Travel Channel was so eager to get on the local cable system that it accepted a part-time channel slot -- from 1 a.m. to 7 a.m. &quot;It's better to be on in the middle of the night than not at all,&quot; says a spokeswoman for the network.    New cable networks also face satellite-related problems. One is cost: Satellite transmitters lease for up to $200,000 a month. Another is that while there are eight satellites offering transmitters to cable networks, most cable systems' receiving dishes are aimed at only three of them. &quot;If you aren't on the right satellite, you can just say goodbye,&quot; says William Airy, founder and chairman of the Gospel Music Network, which was launched last November and claims 3.2 million subscribers.    GMN, which Mr. Airy says &quot;has absolutely no preaching programs and no fund-raising appeals of any kind,&quot; hopes to double its subscribers this year with such offerings as religious-music videos and special features on black, classical and Southern gospel music. The network also hopes to raise about $900,000 with a public offering on the Vancouver stock exchange.    Some new cable networks are trying to lure affiliates by providing special local services along with programming of national interest. For example, Movietime Channel Inc., which plans to make its debut later this month, will supply cable systems with customized local theater listings through a computer hookup. The channel will also feature previews of coming films, behind-the-scenes looks at movies in the making and interviews with producers, writers and stars.    At least one new cable network aims to get viewers directly involved in its programming. Video Jukebox Network Inc. has been experimenting with a &quot;dial-a-video&quot; service on Tele-Communications' Miami network that enables viewers to request a music video by making a $1 toll call. The company says it's taking in $14,000 monthly from just 25,000 subscribers. </TEXT></DOC>