<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880504-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Back to a Monroe Doctrine </HL><AUTHOR> Ted Galen Carpenter </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM FREST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The debate over U.S. policy in Central America features competing liberal and conservative fantasies. Liberals have become wedded to the Arias peace plan while conservatives continue to romanticize the politically murky Nicaraguan insurgents as the &quot;democratic resistance,&quot; and argue that the U.S. has a moral obligation to assist such &quot;freedom fighters.&quot;    Critics of the Reagan administration are excessively optimistic that the Nicaraguan conflict can be solved through negotiations. History offers exceedingly few examples of bitter civil wars ending in negotiated settlements, and despite the much touted cease-fire, it is a forlorn hope that the Sandinista regime will bargain away its monopoly of power. At the same time, despite widespread disenchantment with the Ortega government's illiterate economic policies, the Contras have failed to overcome their own political liabilities and galvanize the Nicaraguan populace into an effective revolutionary force.    The policy debate also fails to define the true nature of U.S. security interests in Central America and the rest of the Caribbean Basin. Liberals and conservatives both concentrate too narrowly on individual nations at the expense of a regional perspective, and even worse, the internal politics of a particular country typically become the litmus test.    Although Nicaragua has been the most frequent object of concern, we are now seeing a similar misguided obsession with Panama's domestic affairs, as the U.S. employs economic coercion in an effort to oust military strong man Manuel Noriega. Even if Washington succeeds, it will do so at the cost of irreparable damage to Panama's economy and a potent legacy of nationalist resentment directed at &quot;Yankee imperialism.&quot;    The internal composition of a foreign government actually has little relevance to legitimate U.S. security interests. Washington has experienced few qualms about dealing with (indeed, sometimes sponsoring) dictatorships in Central America or elsewhere in the Third World. The U.S. did not insist on democracy for Nicaragua during the long Somoza dynasty, or for Haiti throughout the brutal reigns of Francois and Jean Claude Duvalier. Nor is it convincing to argue that while America might be able to endure &quot;traditional&quot; authoritarian regimes, Marxist dictatorships are intolerable. Washington's cordial relations with Yugoslavia, China and Mozambique belie that notion.    But it is equally erroneous to assume that a tiny nation such as Nicaragua cannot pose a security threat. Under certain conditions it can, especially by becoming a base of operations for a larger hostile power -- the Soviet Union. It is this issue -- the nature and scope of political and military ties to the U.S.S.R. by small nations in the Caribbean Basin -- that should be but rarely is the focus of debate about the administration's policy.    The original principles of the Monroe Doctrine may offer some guidance. That doctrine did not attempt to dictate the internal political composition of governments in the Western Hemisphere, but it did stress that any attempt by a European power to gain control over a Latin American nation would be considered &quot;the manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the United States.&quot; Unfortunately, during the early years of the 20th century the Monroe Doctrine became a pretext for Washington to act as the hemispheric disciplinarian concerning the internal affairs of Latin nations, leading to a plethora of interventionist episodes.    That transformation was most unwise, but even worse was the tacit abandonment of the Monroe Doctrine in the early 1960s when Cuba became a military client of the Soviet Union. Indeed, U.S. policy toward Cuba since that time symbolizes the failure to properly define America's vital interests in the Caribbean. For nearly three decades, Washington has railed against the Castro regime's odious ideological sins and responded with a host of ineffectual measures including a trade embargo and, at least initially, a CIA-organized army of Cuban exiles. As if to underscore an inability to learn from its predecessors' mistakes, the Reagan administration has pursued a nearly identical strategy with respect to Nicaragua.    The U.S. should instead emphasize a more pertinent grievance: the extensive economic and military ties that have made Cuba a Soviet surrogate and threaten to do the same for Nicaragua. (Although Reagan administration officials have invoked that argument, it tends to become lost in the more frequent verbal static about Nicaragua's domestic affairs.) Americans have ample reason to be concerned when Cuba receives more than $4 billion annually in aid from Moscow (which Havana has used to build a powerful military apparatus) and in exchange serves as the Kremlin's principal geopolitical pawn. Likewise, Moscow's economic and military assistance to Nicaragua, which approached $1 billion during 1987, is creating precisely the extensive linkage to a non-hemispheric power that the Monroe Doctrine pledged the U.S. to prevent.    A more explicit U.S. security policy for the entire Caribbean Basin -- a new Monroe Doctrine -- is overdue. It should not merely stress, as the Kennedy administration did during the Cuban missile crisis, that the introduction of Soviet nuclear weapons into the region -- or the establishment of conventional military bases for that matter -- would constitute an intolerable threat.    Even less egregious actions on Moscow's part are cause for concern given the Caribbean Basin's proximity to the American homeland. Cuba's willingness to allow the Soviet navy to use port facilities significantly strengthens the operational capability of that force in the Western Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. Nicaragua's desire to create a 600,000-man army equipped with modern Soviet weapons and, perhaps, to obtain sophisticated MiG aircraft may not pose an immediate threat to the U.S., but it would seriously upset the military balance in the region, with unpredictable consequences.    A new Monroe Doctrine must underscore to Nicaragua and Cuba as well as their patron that Soviet surrogates will no longer be tolerated in this hemisphere. In recent months, the Gorbachev government has shown signs that it is weary of the financial drain caused by supporting inept Leninist dependents. The impending withdrawal from Afghanistan is the most recent and startling indication. A firm U.S. position that Moscow's ties to its two hemispheric clients must be reduced dramatically would be an acid test for the Kremlin to demonstrate whether the desire to shed such burdens is genuine.    A carrot is needed with the stick, however. The normalization of economic relations with Cuba and Nicaragua as well as a pledge not to interfere in their internal affairs would be important incentives for both regimes to accept an otherwise bitter geopolitical situation. Although critics might contend such an approach betrays the democratic cause, it merely recognizes the reality that the U.S. cannot bring democracy to Cuba or Nicaragua short of massive military intervention. And few Americans wish to pay that price.    Of course, Washington must be willing and able to enforce its security demands. One of the advantages of a security-based strategy is that it maximizes the chances of attaining a domestic consensus if coercive action should prove necessary. Conversely, American public opinion would be bitterly divided regarding intervention for lesser reasons, and the presence of a sizable anti-war faction would undermine such an initiative from the outset. Military coercion undoubtedly entails risks and should be undertaken only if the Soviet Union insisted on maintaining its network of clients and those clients spurned normal political and economic relations with the U.S. in order to remain Moscow's vassals. Such an outcome would be strong evidence of a Soviet-led drive to threaten the U.S. If that is the reality, most Americans would prefer to confront the problem directly rather than indulge in illusions about benign Soviet intentions.    Even in this worst-case scenario, it should be possible to achieve &quot;core&quot; security objectives without the costly invasions and prolonged occupations that would be necessary to secure ideological conformity. As foreign-policy analyst Alan Tonelson has suggested, a judicious application of air and naval power against recalcitrant Soviet clients would probably be sufficient. Unless the Kremlin leadership is irrational, the U.S.S.R. would be no more likely than it was in 1962 to risk a full-blown military confrontation with the U.S. in a region where Soviet forces would operate at a severe disadvantage.    Although a new Monroe Doctrine is not risk free, the alternative strategies are ultimately far more dangerous. Liberals would tolerate regimes that are not only undemocratic but also Soviet clients, with all the attendant regional security problems. Conservatives would embark on a quixotic crusade to impose freedom and democracy by force of arms. One need only think of Haiti -- paradoxically a prime concern of liberals -- to contemplate how many American dollars and lives might be sacrificed in such endeavors.    A strategy based upon the republic's essential security interests would neither court unnecessary interventions nor tamely accept a menacing proliferation of Soviet surrogates. It would tolerate repugnant ideologies among neighboring countries, but not allow an Old World imperialist state to project its power into this hemisphere. Good policy in the 1800s, and now.    ___   Mr. Carpenter is director of foreign-policy studies at the Cato Institute. </TEXT></DOC>