<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Getting Past South Korea's Party Bosses---By Daryl M. Plunk</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Clashes between government and opposition political parties in South Korea escalated throughout the past year, fueling foreign speculation about a Filipino-style &quot;people power&quot; upheaval in Seoul. The dispute centered on proposed revisions of the constitution. The administration of President Chun Doo Hwan called for a parliamentary form of government headed by a prime minister chosen by the national legislature, while the opposition demanded a presidential system allowing for direct popular election of the chief executive.    Then, with South Korea's presidential election scheduled for late this year under the existing constitution's electoral-college system, President Chun on April 13 called for a moratorium on revision debate. Pointing a finger of blame at the obstinacy of his political opponents, the president said that, since constitutional negotiations had not made even &quot;an inch of headway,&quot; such change would be put &quot;on hold&quot; until after he left office.    This was followed first by the recent shake-up of eight of his 26 cabinet ministers and second by the president's choice last week of Roh Tae Woo, a former general and friend, as his party's presidential candidate. Included in the reshuffling were the key posts of prime minister, home affairs minister and intelligence chief. The widespread assumption that this was a response to new revelations concerning the recent torture-death of a college student at the hands of police tells only part of the story. The key effect of the cabinet changes was to send a message: that President Chun intends to move forward with his agenda and remain very much in control of the political events during the last nine months of his tenure.    As the constitutional-reform debate dragged on over the past year, many began to suspect that the diametrically opposed positions of the government and opposition parties had less to do with &quot;democracy&quot; than with power politics: Opposition leaders felt they could prevail in a one-to-one race, while the government believed it could win enough assembly elections either to govern or at least play a powerful role in a coalition government. Neither the parties' rank and file nor the Korean people in general have had much to do with the debate.    Indeed, the fact that President Chun's ruling party and the main opposition party led by Kim Young-Sam and Kim Dae-Jung (the &quot;two Kims,&quot; as they are called) failed to make any progress in the revision debate was due in large part to serious shortcomings in South Korea's political culture as well as the nature of its political parties. Unlike the broad-based grass-roots parties of Western democracies, South Korea's government and opposition parties are each nearly absolutely dominated by party bosses.    In lieu of constitutional change, President Chun vowed that he would &quot;press ahead . . . with measures to broaden the basis for democratic progress.&quot; To emphasize this, the government announced its intention to introduce a system of local political autonomy and to ease press restrictions. Furthermore, Mr. Chun pledged to guarantee &quot;fair election administration&quot; in &quot;a climate conducive to fair competition.&quot; The president has expressed confidence that public sentiment is on his side and that stability coupled with the first peaceful transition of presidential power in his nation's history are the South Korean people's highest priorities.    His decision to call off the constitutional debate was heavily influenced by the disarray in his opponent's camp. After several months of intensive wrangling among New Korea Democratic Party moderates and hard-liners over the party's leadership and political strategy, the main opposition bloc split. On April 5, the two Kims quit the New Korea Democratic Party and formed the new Reunification Democratic Party. The once-dominant New Korea Democratic Party was reduced to about a dozen National Assembly members while the two Kims' RDP holds about 70 seats. Chaired by Kim Young-Sam, the RDP has threatened to boycott any election under the current constitution, although the party's popular support has been weakened by its internal wranglings.    Despite the optimistic rhetoric coming from both the government and its opponents, most Koreans seem profoundly disappointed in all of their political leaders. South Korean politicians of all stripes are under increasing pressure, particularly from the nation's swelling middle class, to move toward a more responsive system while maintaining social order. For example, a public-opinion poll published in early April by the Dong-A-Ilbo, -- an old and respected Seoul daily newspaper long regarded as fiercely independent and anti-government -- reveals that South Koreans are tired of the partisan bickering over the constitutional power structure and are more concerned about basic civil liberties and the nation's stability.    At the bottom of the people's list of political desires was constitutional revision: Only 8% of the respondents cite this as a high priority. The poll found that the highest priority is expanded press freedom, followed by social stability, a peaceful transfer of power and fair elections.    U.S. policy should take these and other South Korean political realities into account. In the recent conflict among Korean politicians over constitutional revision, concern for expanded civil liberties has been largely overshadowed. Solid progress in areas such as local autonomy and press freedom would be of immediate benefit to Koreans. The U.S. also should continue to praise President Chun for his repeated pledges to step down and thus establish a precedent for Korean leaders to serve their appointed terms and leave office. Finally, the U.S. should stress its strong support for free elections, a principle that obviously is basic to true democracy.    For its part, the opposition should take advantage of this window of opportunity and press the government to place these and other disputed issues on the table for negotiation. Constitutional revision is not the only means through which Korea's political liberalization can be realized. An all-or-nothing approach culminating in an opposition boycott of the upcoming election would not serve the people's desire for continuous yet measured progress toward democracy.    Still, there lingers in South Korea widespread concern that President Chun intends to remain the pre-eminent power &quot;behind the scenes&quot; after he retires from the presidency. Concrete steps by President Chun to dispel these rumors could help bridge some of the differences between the government and its critics.    If there are inequalities built into the current election system, this issue should be considered by both the government and the opposition to be a legitimate matter for negotiation and agreement prior to this fall's election. An election boycotted by the opposition or viewed as rigged will undermine the legitimacy of the next government and doom South Korea to repeat past patterns of political confrontation and crisis.    ---   Mr. Plunk, a senior policy analyst with the Asian Studies Center of The Heritage Foundation, recently spent two weeks in South Korea. </TEXT></DOC>