<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881014-0184 </DOCNO><HL> On Track: Transit Manager Shows New York Subway Isn't Beyond Redemption --- Robert Kiley Makes Progress, Partly by Getting Some Of Foremen out of Union --- Turnaround at 207th Street </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Machalaba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> TRA BIO </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Any newly hired manager expects a tough challenge, but the one greeting the New York region's new transit boss was enough to bring tears to the eyes.    At the cavernous 207th Street subway-car repair shop, some of the workers were spending half their day playing cards or snoozing, untouchable by unionized foremen. Hundreds of locked refrigerators hid their soft drinks or beer. At lunchtime, repairmen determined to avoid their roach-filled cafeteria fired up stoves on the shop floor to cook for themselves and friends.    Out on the routes, ever more riders were shunning the subway system, repelled by delays, dirt, door jam-ups and that exasperatingly frequent announcement, &quot;No passengers, please. This train is going out of service.&quot;    &quot;We thought the subways would collapse on themselves. We thought the track would fall apart, and people would just abandon it,&quot; says William Stead, who was an executive of the city's transit system for several years ending in 1983.    Riding into the mess that year was Robert R. Kiley, a quiet former CIA official and Boston deputy mayor (and a confidant of Michael Dukakis). Taking over as head of New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Mr. Kiley started gradually repairing the miles of separate subway lines, one at a time. He revamped a big capital-improvement program set by his predecessor. And to get managers to crack down, he increased their power and got some of them out of labor unions, offering the unions cash in return.    A jaunt on the IRT is still nobody's idea of a joy ride, but an amazing thing has happened. The New York subways actually run a little better. Derailments, fires, breakdowns and graffiti are all down. More cars are air-conditioned. Ridership is up. Sometimes, both halves of the door even open.    The vast system &quot;has gone from representing the worst in the transit industry to the best,&quot; asserts Mr. Stead, now manager of the San Francisco Municipal Railway. To Alan Altshuler, director of Harvard's Center of State and Local Government, &quot;It's one of the great public management turnarounds of our time.&quot;    If that's true, the methods that brought it about surely deserve a look. They turn out to involve a blend of conciliation and confrontation, a long-term focus, and concentration on limited goals, plus some clever public-relations tactics to deal with the politicians and editorialists endlessly hovering about.    Each weekday, 5.7 million people -- a third of all the transit riders in the country -- take the many far-flung lines operated by the MTA. These include not only 230 miles of subway routes but also 3,964 buses, the commuter railroads to the north and east of the city, and several automobile bridges and tunnels. Each rush hour they must squeeze most of their millions of riders into the lower half of a two-mile-wide island.    The breakdown of one train car often ripples through the system to bring frustration to passengers elsewhere. And breakdowns were plentiful when Mr. Kiley came aboard, as equipment continued to decay because of maintenance omitted during the city's 1970s fiscal crisis. Luckily for him, his predecessor as head of the MTA, Richard Ravitch, had raised $8.5 billion in state and federal money to start rebuilding the system. (Mr. Kiley eventually raised an equal amount.)    Taking over, Mr. Kiley quickly got in trouble with some critics by holding up the rebuilding program for nearly a year while he refocused it from big projects to simply repairing track and cars. His method of dealing with one route at a time has also drawn plenty of criticism -- from those whose route isn't near the top of the list. The lines not yet worked on remain so decrepit &quot;they would be cause for passenger riots in another city,&quot; says Gene Russianoff, attorney for a citizens' group called the Straphangers' Campaign.    A knack for deflecting criticism, however, is among the skills Mr. Kiley brings to the job. As an example, he has advised his top managers to avoid the site of accidents and derailments, lest they generate negative publicity. One earlier subway executive &quot;always went to the scene of the crime, and pretty soon he appeared to be the criminal,&quot; Mr. Kiley says.    Mr. Kiley also has lowered public expectations, with the result that any progress is more likely to look impressive. He met with politicians and editorial writers to explain the depth of the system's problems and caution them not to expect miracles.    One message the MTA boss kept repeating was that drastic management reform was needed. Middle managers were protected by union membership, their promotions based on seniority and civil-service test scores rather than job performance. Decision-making had become centralized, with field managers afraid to take steps, such as disciplining workers, likely to be challenged by unions or headquarters.    &quot;The only way you're going to run a place this big,&quot; says David Gunn, whom Mr. Kiley hired to run the city's bus and subway system, &quot;is to have a lot of initiative and goal-setting in the field. But goal-setting didn't exist in the field.&quot;    When the MTA sought legislation to get some managers out of the unions, however, it ran into a wall of political opposition. So it negotiated. To free 1,200 middle managers -- 25% of the total -- from union and civil-service control, it contributed $1.8 million to health and welfare funds of the unions involved.    At the sprawling 207th Street repair shop in upper Manhattan, this shift promised new discipline for employees used to meeting minimum work quotas and then having a little time to themselves. Workers suddenly faced dismissal for insubordination or inebriation, or suspension for lesser infractions like spending long periods in the coffee line or the bathroom.    Such moves weren't uniformly popular. When Mr. Kiley toured the shop in 1984, he was greeted by catcalls, blasting train horns and flying iron bolts. &quot;We felt he was the enemy,&quot; says repairman Russell Stapleton. A Marxist-Leninist faction in the work force later handed out leaflets calling for &quot;mass action&quot; to fight &quot;slave-labor demands,&quot; and a union coalition waged a $200,000 campaign of newspaper ads against Messrs. Kiley and Gunn.    But gradually the changes took hold, as the number of nonunion managers at the shop rose to 23 from two. With their pay tied to their performance, they began to see to things like availability of parts and steady productivity. Today the place is clean and freshly painted, and a new cafeteria has replaced the old &quot;roach coach.&quot; The repair work force has dropped from over 1,000 people to 680, but productivity, according to shop superintendent Paul Pettit, is up 35%.    Initiative is part of it. When the shop was creating an assembly line for overhauling old cars, managers ordered a homemade switch track made from pieces of steel. &quot;We did it in three days,&quot; says Mr. Pettit. &quot;If I waited for Maintenance of Way {the system's track builders} to do it, it would have been three years.&quot;    Mr. Stapleton, the repairman who once was so critical, acknowledges that many of the changes are for the better. &quot;They used to tell the men to tape bad wires rather than to replace them,&quot; he says. &quot;You don't see anything like that now.&quot; He says he now works seven hours a day, whereas a few years ago he would put in about four and spend the rest of the day &quot;talking, reading a paper, doing crossword puzzles or playing dominoes.&quot; Of Mr. Kiley, the boss he saw as the enemy, he says, &quot;I feel good about the man.&quot;    The repairman wasn't the only doubter five years ago, when Mr. Kiley arrived. &quot;He was so self-effacing, shy and so unlike a New Yorker that I figured he wouldn't last a month,&quot; says Kent Barwick, president of a civic group called the Municipal Art Society.    Mr. Kiley, 53, is a business graduate of Notre Dame who once wanted to be a fighter pilot but failed the eye test. He was involved during the 1950s and 1960s with the National Student Association, a group covertly financed by the CIA. Later he became the CIA's intelligence operations manager and then an aide to director Richard Helms. After that he served as associate director of the Police Foundation, a Boston deputy mayor, Boston's transit chief, a management consultant and an unsuccessful candidate for Boston mayor.    Friends say a 1975 auto crash that killed his wife and two children pushed Mr. Kiley deeper into his work and seared new priorities into his management approach. &quot;Life is short, so keep the agenda short,&quot; he tells colleagues. &quot;Concentrate on things that are truly important and don't get distracted by the rest.&quot;    But to succeed in this job means watching out for political minefields, and he has been pretty good at that. For example, when Mayor Ed Koch urged the MTA board to merge the Transit Authority police force into the city's -- while Gov. Mario Cuomo lobbied just as hard to keep the force independent -- Mr. Kiley voted for the mayor's position, creating a 7-7 tie, but then declined to exercise his right to break the deadlock. &quot;He came out a total winner,&quot; says board member Robert Wagner Jr. &quot;He let the mayor and the governor have a sense he was loyal to them, and he got what he wanted -- to keep the transit police force.&quot;    Mr. Kiley delegates a lot of power and insists on steady progress toward long-term goals. In contrast to the workaholism of his predecessor, Mr. Kiley, who has remarried and has two children, has been known to leave the office in midafternoon to attend a son's piano recital. He insists that MTA executives ease the pressure by taking long vacations, as he does each August at Martha's Vineyard.    But his quiet style does draw criticism. &quot;The subways need a transit evangelist, a table-pounding, fiery advocate,&quot; says Mr. Russianoff, staff attorney for the Straphangers' Campaign. &quot;He's the invisible man.&quot; State Assemblyman G. Oliver Koppell calls Mr. Kiley aloof and stubborn. &quot;When he makes a decision, he resents any interference,&quot; the assemblyman says. &quot;He's the head of a public agency, not the head of Chrysler.&quot;    Some union leaders say Mr. Kiley is too confrontational. &quot;Everyone in the world learned that employees and managers need to speak to one another instead of hollering at each other,&quot; says Sonny Hall, president of Transport Workers Union Local 100. &quot;It's taken the Kiley-Gunn team three years to learn that.&quot;    And there still is room for improvement in the subways, to say the least. Plenty of New Yorkers would scoff at the idea that they are any better at all. Serious crime is up. Thieves jam turnstiles to retrieve tokens or to demand payment from riders to be let through. And as the weather turns colder, droves of panhandlers and homeless people can make the subways seem like public shelters. The MTA has no better success addressing such problems than the police, courts and social scientists do.    In addition, a program to rebuild subway stations is far behind schedule and over budget. And an MTA manpower problem may loom. A law passed two decades ago let skilled shop and train workers retire after 20 years at half their final year's pay; now, skilled workers who replaced the wave of retirees at that time are about to retire themselves.    The MTA, however, prefers to point to gains in the operation of the trains, and these are measurable. The breakdown rate is half that of five years ago. Derailments are down sharply. Spray-can graffiti, which once covered almost the whole fleet, are gone from 90% of the cars (Mr. Gunn began a program of washing trains after every circuit of their route, so graffiti artists would never get to see their work). Some 1,425 of the system's 6,250 cars are new, mostly bought under the program Mr. Ravitch started. Subway ridership, sliding for decades, has bounced back to the highest level since 1975.    To try to raise it further, the MTA soon will add more express trains. Mr. Kiley is aiming for a third $8.5 billion cash infusion from state and federal sources, partly for new rail links and expanded parking lots at suburban stations. He has a new mission of reducing urban auto traffic, a goal he is taking national as head of a planning team for the American Public Transit Association. He also criticizes the Reagan administration a lot for seeking to cut federal transit spending.    These activities raise suspicions he is angling for a job in Washington if Michael Dukakis wins. Mr. Kiley says he has talked with the governor a dozen times in the past 15 months, but he insists he plans to continue in his current $150,000-a-year job.    For much remains to be done at the MTA, Mr. Kiley says. It is a remark that would draw few dissenters. Still, even Oliver Koppell, the assemblyman who accuses the MTA boss of high-handedness, thinks progress has been made in the Kiley years. &quot;We're not back to the level of the 1950s, when the subways worked very smoothly,&quot; the Bronx legislator says, &quot;but the system is working better than it has in 15 years.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>