<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880317-0004 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL><AUTHOR> James P. Miller </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ELE ENV PHA EDP </IN><TEXT>      Hey, Check the Shades   On That Robot   ROBOTS may get more work done when they are wearing dark sunglasses.    Industrial robots and some other computers &quot;see&quot; by translating visual images into electronic impulses that they can understand. But even a simple image can contain such a massive amount of data that it overwhelms the machine's computing power and slows response time.    Using a bigger computer is one answer. But G. Michael Morris of the University of Rochester's Institute of Optics says there's an easier and cheaper way.    Using extremely dark filters that block all but a millionth of the light available on a moonlit night, Prof. Morris reduces the amount of information taken in by the computer's &quot;eye.&quot; The resulting image is initially almost pitch black. But as more photons of light build up over a period of milliseconds, the computer can compare the scattered dots of light with an image in its memory. Because the load of information that must be processed is drastically reduced, the machine's response is almost instantaneous for the simple recognition tasks most robots face.    Prof. Morris says he's still ironing out some problems, such as having the computer recognize familiar objects when they're upside-down or askew. But he says the process holds promise for industrial robots that inspect or work on products, and for some medical practices using computer-imaging.    Making Dental Crowns   The High-Tech Way   COMPUTER-ASSISTED engineering is moving from the drafting table to the dentist's chair.    As anyone who has had a damaged tooth replaced with a dental crown will testify, the current state of the art, which involves sinking your teeth into a vile-tasting molding material and waiting two weeks for a gold or ceramic crown to be cast, isn't much fun.    Now, researchers at the University of Minnesota at Minneapolis have created computer software that translates photographs of teeth into three-dimensional computer images. The software also takes into account information about adjoining teeth, so that precise measurements can be made for the replacement, says Dianne Rekow, an orthodontist and mechanical engineer who is leading the research group.    Using computer-aided design and manufacturing, or CAD/CAM, technology, &quot;the design is converted into an array of paths for a milling machine,&quot; which would shape the crown on the spot in less than an hour, she says. Eliminating the need to cast crowns means that cheaper materials may be used to make the replacement tooth, she adds.    The system, which is expected to be available commercially within a year, is likely to cost $150,000 to $200,000 initially, Dr. Rekow says, meaning it probably would be affordable only for large group practices. Individual dentists, however, could pony up $5,000 for a specialized camera lens and then send the photos to a dental lab equipped with the CAD/CAM system.    Fiber Optics Offers   New Test for Pollutants   TESTING groundwater near hazardous waste sites or landfills currently means drilling a test well, taking samples, and subjecting them to time-consuming laboratory analysis.    But such testing can occasionally be rendered inaccurate by mishaps such as evaporation of the often-volatile chemicals in the samples. And, at best, the method offers only an intermittent look at water quality.    Fiber-optic technology and new chemical sensors called optrodes may offer faster and more accurate testing. At the site, the optrodes would convert pollutants into a compound that fluoresces a telltale shade when struck by a laser beam passed through the optical fiber. The fluorescent signal given off by the sensor can then be analyzed by a spectrometer, providing immediate and continuous readouts about the contaminants. The devices could either be installed during construction of a waste site or brought in when needed.    So far, the systems that have been developed and field-tested at the University of Alabama at Huntsville and the Department of Energy's Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory respond only to specified contaminants. The scientists are trying to improve the system so that it can detect general types of pollutants.    Some other problems remain. For instance, the light signals coming up the fiber from underground are vulnerable to minute disturbances that can distort a reading, says Huntsville researcher James E. Smith. Still, the Alabama scientists hope to have a test network in place at a waste site within two years.    Computer Shoot-Out   Helps Train Police   AN IMAGINARY police chase is made to feel like the real thing in a computerized simulator developed at Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, N.Y.    Designed for the Department of Energy -- which wanted a better way to train the guards at its nuclear plants -- the simulator uses a life-size video screen, a computerized videodisk system, and a laser gun. During the &quot;chase,&quot; the system also measures the trainee's heart rate and blood pressure.    The trainee stands about 10 feet in front of the nine-foot-high video screen, poised with the laser gun. As the scenario develops -- a suspect scaling a nuclear power plant fence, let's say -- quick reactions are required. If the cop opens fire on the intruder, an infrared camera tracks the laser beam, and the computer identifies where the criminal was hit. The computer then sends a signal to the videodisk system: If the bad guy gets a leg wound, for instance, the computer instructs him to fire back at the cop. </TEXT></DOC>