<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880506-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   POLISH POLICE RAIDED a Krakow steel mill and crushed a 10-day strike.    Riot squads stormed the strikebound Nowa Huta steel mill, hurled percussion grenades and rounded up 38 leaders of the work stoppage. Poland's government denied that there were injuries, but opposition spokesmen said strikers were beaten and at least 32 required medical treatment. The raid came only hours after the failure of a mediation effort endorsed by the Roman Catholic Church. In Gdansk, thousands of police surrounded the Lenin Shipyard in a tense standoff with defiant strikers, including Solidarity founder Lech Walesa.    The White House condemned the raids and cautioned the Warsaw government against using &quot;repressive measures&quot; against striking workers.    ---   CHIRAC INDICATED that France may restore diplomatic ties with Iran.    As three Frenchmen freed Wednesday in Lebanon by pro-Iranian kidnappers arrived in Paris, the conservative premier said that Tehran had intervened on behalf of the captives and that their release &quot;falls into the framework of our relations with Iran.&quot; French officials denied any deal for the hostages' release, but reports in Paris and Beirut said France agreed to repay the balance outstanding of a loan originally totaling $1 billion. While the move is seen as a boost to Chirac in Sunday's presidential election, Mitterrand remains the favorite.    French troops stormed a Kanak separatist hideout in the Pacific island of New Caledonia and freed 23 hostages. At least 17 people were killed.    ---   A NASA official said the destruction Wednesday of a rocket-fuel plant in southern Nevada threatened U.S. plans to rebuild its space shuttle program. And the Air Force said the explosions may limit future production of modern missiles. At least one person was killed and more than 250 people were injured in the blasts.    An explosion rocked a Shell Oil refinery in Louisiana, killing at least one worker and injuring 42 people, authorities said. In Los Angeles, a fire raged through a 62-story tower. One person was killed. The fire points up a major problem for companies in urban centers: a lack of fire sprinklers or modern elevators.    ---   Defense Minister Rabin said Israel wouldn't hesitate to make raids similar to its two-day operation into southern Lebanon this week. At least 40 Arabs were killed in the incursion, and sources said as many as 20 guerrillas taken prisoner. An Israeli-backed militia demolished dozens of homes. The Hezbollah vowed retaliation.    A Jewish settler killed a Palestinian shepherd and wounded another Arab in the West Bank, where the Israeli military demanded a three-day halt to all commerce in an effort to punish Palestinian merchants and residents for Wednesday's one-day strike in the occupied territories.    ---   The Transportation Department proposed rules requiring random drug testing for railroad workers. The move by Secretary Burnley, which was immediately criticized by rail labor officials, came as the agency appeals a federal court ruling striking down its program of testing train crews involved in accidents.    ---   The House voted to slash funds for the MX missile and increase spending for the Midgetman. The move would reverse the Reagan administration's strategy for land-based missiles. The Pentagon ultimately wants to kill the Midgetman and rely solely on the MX missile.    ---   Jackie Presser temporarily stepped down as Teamsters union president, citing health problems. Presser, who has lung cancer, is facing charges of payroll padding at the union's Cleveland local.    ---   A House subcommittee chairman said he will seek a criminal inquiry into the approval and sale of an anesthetic that has been associated with about 40 deaths in the U.S. since 1986. The Hoffmann-La Roche drug, Versed, is used in intravenous form to sedate patients undergoing certain common outpatient procedures.    ---   Pope John Paul II is scheduled to begin a 12-day pilgrimage to Latin America tomorrow, a mission aimed at helping the predominantly Catholic population resolve the problems of poverty and drugs. The pope will visit Uruguay, Peru, Bolivia and Paraguay during the tour, his ninth to the region.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci said congressional demands for U.S. allies to pay more for defense are misguided. Speaking in New York, Carlucci said that calls for the U.S. to spend less on maintaining troops and military bases abroad could create a backlash and damage American trade relations.    ---   California's Supreme Court refused to allow the state legislature to reduce Medi-Cal payments for abortions for poor women. The move, the 10th consecutive year that state courts have overturned lawmakers' restrictions on abortions, was viewed as a stinging defeat for anti-abortion groups.    ---   The White House accused Nicaragua's Sandinista government of &quot;systematic moves . . . to undermine the peace process and intimidate its political opposition.&quot; On Wednesday, Nicaraguan police detained opposition leaders, and Managua suspended two radio stations from broadcasting news and closed another station for a day.    ---   Lawmakers lambasted the Defense and State departments for allowing U.S.-designed rifles built in South Korea to be sold to foreign interests despite an accord barring such sales. A Colt Industries official told a House panel that U.S. officials ignored warnings about sales of M-16 rifles to Indonesia by a South Korean firm.    ---   Died: George Rose, 68, actor, Wednesday, near Puerta Plata, the Dominican Republic, in an automobile accident. </TEXT></DOC>