<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): Essay --- The Case for Low Tech: Electronic Gadgetry Isn't Worth Much To People Who Need a Good Charcoal Stove </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC EUROP JAPAN LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   YOU'VE BEEN READING in these pages about floating trains, high-definition television, supercomputing and many other hi-tech wonders. But of the five billion people on the planet, how many could draw any real benefit from such things?    Not that many. The real beneficiaries are a few hundred million people in the developed countries. This technology is of little use to most of the world's people, who can't afford the technology and who haven't the skills to apply it. And yet, all too often, this is what gets transferred to the struggling nations of the underdeveloped world.    The aid programs of the past few decades have brought billions of dollars of technology to the Third World, but they are an embarrassing legacy. Whatever the perceived benefits to donors and recipients -- diplomatic gains and exports for the aid givers, symbols of modernization for the recipients -- the practical benefits are illusory.    Moreover, the problem is worsened by the growing gap between North and South. As the U.S. and Japan pull away from the rest of the world technologically -- and even from Europe to some extent -- less and less American and Japanese technology is of any value to people in developing countries. Instead of getting what they could really use, the poor cousins in the family of nations wind up with technology that is inappropriate and wasteful.    Like the $40 million French-financed airport at the Tanzanian capital of Dar es Salaam. It has all the modern airport trappings -- air conditioning, video monitors and a loudspeaker system among them -- and when it was completed in 1984, it was hailed as a monument to progress in Africa. Some monument.    An unknown but doubtlessly huge percentage of the Tanzanian population can't afford to fly anywhere, for one thing. The nation is so poor that few people have electricity, much less air conditioning. And even those who can buy a ticket have trouble getting off the ground; many flights in Tanzania are routinely canceled because of a chronic shortage of fuel. That's only one shortage. Tanzania is having trouble producing even such essentials as bricks and cooking oil.    Which leads to this: Isn't there technology from the U.S., Europe or Japan that would be of more value to the average Tanzanian than a video-display monitor telling him about canceled plane flights that he couldn't afford to take anyway?    Of course, and it is the most basic kind of technology: better backhoes, stoves that use 50% less charcoal, hydraulic palm-oil presses, simple wheelchairs, a substitute for cement, a pedal-operated cassava grinder or a way to store milk for five days in a village with no electricity. It is these things, not supercomputers and jetports, that spell progress to the poor of the world.    But much of the time they have gotten instead failed megaprojects, white elephants that in many cases have proven to be obscene wastes of time, money and manpower -- bridges that nobody crosses, idle sugar-processing plants rusting in the jungles, grain silos where there is no grain.    These massive miscalculations have been compounded by numerous smaller ones. Not long ago, for example, an agency of the Dominican Republic charged with giving money and technical assistance to small business gratefully accepted the gift of a mainframe computer. Mainframe computers are wonderful things, no doubt, but in a country where electricity outages occur almost daily, their biggest impact on small-business development has been to paralyze it while everyone waits for the juice to go on again.    Looking back over a bleak landscape of failures large and small, experts in aid to underdeveloped countries sometimes seem close to despair. We tried big projects, they say, and many of them sank of their own weight. We tried smaller ones and a lot of them flopped, too. We watched Dutch scientists design a wood-burning stove, only to find it was less efficient than an open fire. We sent medical inoculants, but the local water was so impure they couldn't be used.    And as these individual projects -- large or small -- have failed, some economists and policy makers have figured that broad economic changes would help the struggling poorer nations. Get world prices right and things will turn around, they say. But these macroeconomists, too, have turned largely pessimistic; commodities prices have mostly headed down, instead of up. Let the world's money slosh around among the developed nations of the northern hemisphere, the pessimists seem to be saying. Lend the world's excess cash to good credit risks like the U.S. -- the biggest debtor of all. Forget about the poorest nations; their futures are bleak.    A better idea would be to concentrate our energy, ingenuity and will on providing practical solutions to the most basic problems in poor countries -- a reliable supply of food, sturdy housing, clean water. We can still afford this kind of aid, and the technology either exists or is in promising stages of development.    In Woods Hole, Mass., for example, a small company called Ecological Engineering recently installed a sewage-treatment plant at a Vermont ski resort that uses gravity, sunlight, animals and plants to process wastes through a series of tanks. Building a plant like this to serve a city of 100,000 might cost about $3 million, a fraction of the usual cost. Among the interested parties are Ghana, Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone, all African coastal states whose fishing industries are threatened by fouled ocean waters.    In Guatemala, a non-profit U.S. outfit called Appropriate Technology International is creating a vertically integrated wool industry by developing new crossbreeding, shearing and spinning techniques, and by organizing artisans' cooperatives to sell the final products -- blankets, scarves, rugs. In India, borrowed agricultural technology has led to better seeds and a &quot;green revolution&quot; thought impossible to achieve a decade ago.    In extending help, the developed nations might do well to remember that the simplest ideas often have the greatest impact, and that local people often know best how to apply them. People like Kamwanna Wambugu of Tigoni, Kenya, a school principal turned entrepreneur.    A couple of years ago, Mr. Wambugu had an idea. He imported a little basic technology, adapted it to village needs and came up with something of vital importance to his countrymen, something others had tried and failed to develop: a better, charcoal-burning stove.    High technology counts, but what much of the world needs are things like better stoves. And a lot more men like Mr. Wambugu. </TEXT></DOC>