<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Gore Is Betting Brash, Untested Youth Appeal On South's 1,300 Delegate, Super Tuesday Roll </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> COTULLA, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the South Texas brush country where Lyndon Johnson taught school a half-century ago, Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore preaches the gospel of boldness from a flatbed truck.    &quot;We need to rise above our limitations,&quot; the young Democrat tells Hispanic supporters who welcome him as &quot;the new American&quot; and &quot;nuestro hermano&quot; -- our brother. &quot;When one person stands up and says 'I'm going to make a difference,'&quot; the senator says, &quot;That person sends out ripples of commitment that affect all around him.&quot;    Mr. Gore might well be talking about himself. All but written off in Iowa and New Hampshire this month, his campaign must ride whatever ripples he can stir in the South and West before the Super Tuesday primaries next month. More than 1,300 delegates are at stake March 8, and his gamble is to capture a large enough share to lead the field when the race moves North again to industrial states in April and May.    &quot;I have to be among the two winners,&quot; he says of the unprecedented elections across 20 states on Super Tuesday. &quot;I hope to have more delegates than anyone else in the race at that point.&quot;    It is a tall order. He lacks the natural base and name recognition of the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who is black, and risks being pushed further into obscurity by the weeks of attention that will be lavished on the winners in Iowa and New Hampshire.    Matched against these factors are at least $2 million for television ads and a youthful appeal as brash as it is untested. Mr. Gore won good reviews in New Hampshire and South Dakota debates last week. In between he sandwiched a sweep through Alabama, Texas and Wyoming, demonstrating the diversity and potential of his campaign.    In a private home decorated with portraits of Confederate generals, Alabama Lt. Gov. Jim Folsom Jr. puts the arm on (upwardly) Mobile Democrats -- and Republicans -- to help Sen. Gore. The next day the candidate charms an auditorium full of Mexican-American high school students in Rio Grande City, Texas, and receives the endorsement of the South Texas County Judges Association here at Cotulla. Hours later at the Union Pacific depot in Cheyenne, he accepts the public blessing of Wyoming's popular and wily former governor, Ed Herschler.    Voters may pay scant attention, but the endorsements bring activists and money. Ron Carr, a South Texas judge who lobbied hard on behalf of Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, accepts the endorsement given Mr. Gore and switches his allegiance to the Tennessee Democrat. When all eyes turn to Iowa next Monday, the senator will be raising money in Atlanta as the guest of Georgia House Speaker Tom Murphy. Two days later Mr. Gore goes to Dallas for an evening that could yield $1.5 million when federal matching funds are counted. Television ads have been filmed and may be on the air as early as next week. &quot;We will have the most effective and most pervasive media campaign&quot; in the Super Tuesday states, he boasts.    Sen. Gore's refrain -- &quot;You can make a difference&quot; -- echoes of the Rev. Jackson's appeal -- &quot;You are somebody.&quot; Like the black preacher too, the senator uses symbols more than his rivals. At the red brick school where Lyndon Johnson was once principal here, he speaks of education. In Cheyenne, he honors the railroad workers who built the Union Pacific and pledges to &quot;retrace&quot; their steps -- flying in a LearJet, of course -- across the rugged terrain of southern Wyoming.    For all the hokum, it is an attempt to connect with voters and use history to give context to his campaign. He casts the 1988 election as one between two eras. He casts himself as young enough for one generation and smart enough for its elders. He bellows loudly in small rooms and meanders like an over-educated 39-year-old trying to justify being president. But Mr. Gore is a pol who likes to run.    History colors his match-up with the Rev. Jackson. The Democratic field in Iowa and New Hampshire compete in virtually all white environs, but Sen. Gore is a modern Southerner who must meet the black preacher directly. His own crowds remain largely white but he can't ignore the black vote even as he concedes most of it will go to his rival. He marches in Atlanta in honor of Martin Luther King Jr. and challenges the Rev. Jackson as too far to the left -- regardless of race -- to win the presidency.    With modest success, he compiles endorsements from black Southern officials, such as South Carolina's James Clyburn, state commissioner for human affairs, and expects to announce more backing just before Super Tuesday. But of equal importance is where Mr. Gore's alliances with white conservatives will pull his campaign. &quot;A vote for Gore is going to be a vote to hold Jackson down,&quot; says Terry Ellis, an Alabama businessman and supporter.    Mr. Gore's campaign chest now reflects savings -- possibly as high as $1 million -- that would otherwise have been spent in Iowa. His decision to defy conventional wisdom and virtually pull out of the caucuses next week has worked more to his benefit than many expected. But he still risks being overridden by his likely white rivals coming out of Iowa and New Hampshire -- especially if, as current polls suggest, they are Missouri Congressman Richard Gephardt and Gov. Dukakis. Mr. Gephardt will contest the same moderate whites Mr. Gore attracts, and Mr. Dukakis has worked the South and expects to match Mr. Gore's financial resources on Super Tuesday.    While three-quarters of the delegates chosen that day will come from 12 Southern and border states, eight other states -- including Massachusetts and Missouri -- also hold primaries and caucuses on Super Tuesday. Thus for the Tennessee Democrat to come out ahead of the pack that day as he hopes, he'll probably have to capture more than a third of the vote in the South, a difficult feat when facing potentially formidable white rivals and the Rev. Jackson's hold on most of the black vote.    Mr. Gore's money gives him a fighting chance to increase his visibility, and he aggressively uses the televised debates, holding mock &quot;war&quot; councils beforehand with advisers.    The darling of the New Republic magazine, and the get-tough foreign-policy views of its editors, he has honed his foreign-policy message to appeal to the South. And whether it's the Persian Gulf or the deployment of U.S. missiles in Europe, his rivals have handed him the chance to appear forceful at little political cost. His greater vulnerability may be in fiscal matters. His ambitions -- from space exploration to ending child illiteracy -- carry a price tag, and he is less willing to cut weapons to pay for his domestic agenda. He flirts with an oil-import fee to win support in Texas, but later says he is uncommitted.    These issues will be joined when Mr. Gore is given greater scrutiny. For now, he rides around his opponents like a modern Jeb Stuart, staging lightning raids before returning to safety in the South. The Union army caught up with the flamboyant Confederate cavalryman, but Sen. Gore is waiting confidently for his Northern adversaries. &quot;We've dug our trenches,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>