<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Shultz Is Culpable in Word and Deed---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 12/11/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   It is comic to witness the way in which George Shultz has been singled out as a man of sagacious principle, sticking out like a healthy thumb from the corruption of President Reagan's foreign-policy apparat. &quot;Principled&quot; was the very word applied to him last Monday by no less a conscience-keeper than Anthony Lewis of the New York Times. And in the respectful audience accorded the secretary of state's testimony that same day in the House Foreign Relations Committee there was the sense that if John Poindexter and Oliver North represent the perverted means, George Shultz represents the noble ends of the administration's policy toward the rest of the world, particularly Nicaragua.    Yet in the person of Mr. Shultz we may find, in ways both small and great, the reasons for the disasters now being so beneficially aired. This scandal began because Mr. Reagan and his associates, including Mr. Shultz, have from the outset been determined to overthrow the government of Nicaragua. Mr. Shultz, so adept at twitching his shoes out of the mud, can scarcely claim that he did not know this was the policy he was helping to administer, any more than he can deny his part in prompting the flight of the U.S. government from the World Court.    And if Mr. Shultz was one of the artificers of the policy that required the money and arms being squirreled to the contras by the shadow government administered by Col. North, Gen. Richard Secord (Ret.), Gen. John Singlaub (Ret.) and others, he bears equal responsibility for the lurching stupidities of U.S. policy in the Middle East, which have made this country an object of detestation to many in the region. If Lebanon and other countries are filled with desperate men contemplating violent acts against the U.S. it is certainly in part because Mr. Shultz and his colleagues have overseen or endorsed policies that have left these men without families or homes, their lives destroyed by a country -- Israel -- whose conduct has been endorsed by Mr. Shultz to a degree hitherto unknown at the State Department.    In fact, one of the few foreign-policy achievements of any sort one can lay to Mr. Shultz is the famous accord of May 17, 1983, that he brokered between Israel and a Lebanese &quot;government,&quot; which Israel had just installed at the point of a gun. This had the same pacifying effect on the area as the shells earlier lobbed into civilian homes from the 16-inch guns of the New Jersey, which led to the blowing up of the Marine barracks -- another Reagan-Shultz achievement. The accord, de facto recognition of Israeli hegemony in Lebanon, speedily collapsed, whereupon Mr. Shultz abandoned all pretense to the arts of diplomacy and contented himself with vociferous applause for each new act of Israeli brigandage -- such as the attack on the PLO headquarters in Tunis in which 20 Tunisians and 55 Palestinians were killed, and after which Mr. Shultz announced the U.S. government's &quot;considerable sympathy for the Israeli action.&quot;    The attack on Tunis was an attempt to kill Yasir Arafat, and this form of aerial would-be assassination prefigured another would-be assassination, illegal under U.S. law, of which Mr. Shultz was an enthusiastic supporter: namely, the bombing of Tripoli, in which the prime focus of the attack was Col. Gadhafi's tent, in which it was accurately supposed by the planners of the bombing mission that the colonel would be residing at the time.    All this was justified by Mr. Shultz and others as part of the war on terrorism, justifications uttered just as arms were being smuggled with Mr. Shultz's knowledge to one of the most blood-stained regimes on earth, in Iran.    President Reagan is often accused of rearranging reality to suit his convenience, and Mr. Shultz shares this talent, which perhaps explains why the trading with Iran did not prompt this self-proclaimed warrior against terrorism to resign. According to Mr. Shultz, &quot;freedom fighters or revolutionaries don't blow up buses containing noncombatants. Terrorist murderers do. Freedom fighters don't assassinate innocent businessmen or hijack innocent men, women and children. Terrorist murderers do. . . . The contras in Nicaragua do not blow up school buses or hold mass executions of civilians.&quot;    Here we come to the heart of the matter. Mr. Shultz and the boss he hailed on Monday as a &quot;freedom fighter&quot; have been the untiring sponsors of terror across the world, from the South African secret police and intelligence forces (with which the U.S. continues to share information against the African National Congress) to Savimbi's thugs in Angola to the contras perched above Nicaragua's northern border. It was the U.S.-backed contras who blew up a truck carrying 34 civilians on July 2 outside El Cua. It was the U.S.-backed contras who, according to the Washington Post, as recently as Nov. 8 attacked the village of El Nispero in southern Nicaragua, killed and mutilated a one-year-old boy named Arlin Saballos and killed by gunfire a one-year-old girl, Reina Lopez, and Arlin's 24-year-old mother, Duana. They abducted two women and a five-month-old infant.    For all the hold Mr. Reagan and his colleagues have been able to exert over a press almost entirely servile through six years, the administration has been unable to convince a majority of the U.S. public the contras were anything other than a bunch of child-killers or in Mr. Shultz's own words, &quot;terrorist murderers.&quot; For much of that period it was unable to convince Congress either. Hence the illegal shuttling of arms and money. Both the ends and the means of the policy were foul, and this foulness is echoed in the kind of language Mr. Shultz has either used or approved, concerning Nicaragua.    On the one hand there was the ugly echo in his cry, in a speech at Kansas State University, that &quot;Nicaragua is a cancer, and we must cut it out. . . . Negotiations are a euphemism for capitulation if the shadow of power is not cast across the bargaining table.&quot; On the other there was his keen enjoyment, shared at some length Monday with the foreign relations panel, of a State Department dispatch from Managua in which the author contemptuously reported a visit of the Bolshoi ballet and remarked that &quot;Fragments of 'Swan Lake' passed before the eyes of Third World revolutionaries and rustic Sandinistas, whose sensibilities to the expression and synchronization of the dance are, to put it kindly, imperfectly developed.&quot;    It takes a truly loutish disposition, entirely characteristic of the Reagan crew, to honor the murderers of women and children as &quot;freedom fighters&quot; and at the same time to sneer at the targets of such terrorism attacks for attending a ballet.    Such, though, is the disposition of Mr. Shultz, and in this disposition are reflected the follies and cruelties of U.S. foreign policy under Mr. Reagan. Mr. Shultz was witting of the ends of this policy, because he helped formulate them, and under his supervision Elliot Abrams oversaw the implementation of the means -- discussing the military supplies of the contras in minutest detail, the Baltimore Sun has reported.    It thus seems entirely incredible that neither Mr. Abrams nor Mr. Shultz -- mendicants to the Sultan of Brunei -- knew how the contras were being supplied. But even without evidence that may emerge, it is the policy they carried forward that is on trial, day by day being seen for the nefarious and destructive activity that it was. </TEXT></DOC>