<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Opposing Politics Cause ViolentStruggle in South Africa---By Roger ThurowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> PIETERMARITZBURG, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Dumisani Mbanjwa andPenwell Malunga are members of rival black politicalorganizations. Yet, they say, they share a common foe:apartheid.   &quot;We're supposed to be allies in the struggle against white minority rule,&quot; says Mr. Mbanjwa, who sympathizes with the United Democratic Front, or UDF, anti-apartheid coalition. Mr. Malunga, who supports Inkatha, the political arm of Zulu Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, concurs: &quot;We should be fighting together for the rights of black South Africans.&quot;    But, for much of the past year, the local Inkatha and UDF branches have been fighting against each other, waging a vicious feud for numerical and ideological supremacy in the black townships around this lush provincial capital. There have been reports of street-side massacres by vigilantes, of parents being shot in front of their children, of a little boy being beheaded. Scores of houses have been burnt down, and dozens of local defense committees, bent on revenge, have sprung up. So far, this black-on-black violence, as the government calls it, has left more than 170 people dead, with many more injured.    But the biggest casualty has been the anti-apartheid struggle itself. The bloody Inkatha-UDF feud has shattered the solidarity among opposition groups fostered by the government's state of emergency clampdown, and it has accentuated the deep ideological differences among the various anti-apartheid factions. It has also provided more fuel to those whites, including some members of the government, who argue that this kind of factional violence is a preview of what will happen under black majority rule.    So far, peace has proved to be elusive, despite the urgent pleadings of black leaders from around the country. &quot;How can you hope to defeat your opponent {apartheid} when you are constantly hurting yourself?&quot; Anglican Archibishop Desmond Tutu asked at a Pietermaritzburg prayer service. Implored Chief Buthelezi, following the massacre of a group of Inkatha youths: &quot;Blacks must show each other that we have not been so dehumanized by the system {of apartheid} that all that is left is to turn on each other like a pack of rabid dogs.&quot;    Local Inkatha and UDF leaders met yesterday, under the auspices of the Chamber of Commerce, for the first face-to-face talks designed to forge a truce. But third-party observers believe that any peace would only be temporary, for the feuding stems from fundamental, virtually irreconcilable, differences in the groups' respective strategies of attacking apartheid and of constructing a post-apartheid South Africa.    The UDF advocates economic sanctions and corporate disinvestment as a means to pressure the South African government; Inkatha opposes any action that will damage the country's economy. The UDF has consistently refused to enter into any kind of negotiations with the government under the current state of emergency; Inkatha has been eagerly involved in the Indaba, which is an effort to establish black-white power-sharing in Natal province.    What's more, the UDF is generally sympathetic with the banned African National Congress, which is trying to direct the anti-apartheid struggle from its headquarters in Lusaka, Zambia. The ANC, which envisions a unitary South Africa with a socialist-oriented economy, is deeply suspicious of Chief Buthelezi, who is the leader of the government-created black homeland of kwaZulu. The ANC and UDF view Chief Buthelezi as being too close to the government, and they reject his attempts to find a regional solution in Natal to what they say is a national problem. For his part, Chief Buthelezi condemns the ANC's use of violence, and he claims the ANC and UDF are out to destroy capitalism along with apartheid.    In anti-apartheid circles throughout South Africa, these differences are a matter of fierce debate. But in the townships around Pietermaritzburg, they have become a matter of life and death.    Mr. Malunga, an organizer for the Inkatha-related United Workers' Union, shivers with fright as he remembers the September night when 13 young Inkatha supporters were killed as they came running out of their burning house. He blames UDF-sympathetic vigilantes. &quot;This can't go on,&quot; he says, burying his head in his hands.    Mr. Mbanjwa, an organizer for the National Union of Metalworkers, a UDF affiliate, agrees that the violence must end. &quot;It is a very sad state of affairs,&quot; he says, recalling the murders of two of his union's shop stewards -- one was stabbed, the other shot, allegedly by Inkatha members. &quot;This is retarding progress in the campaign against apartheid by shifting the focus to black-on-black violence. This is just what the government wants.&quot;    Indeed, although the South African police say they are trying to control the violence by hunting down those responsible for it, township residents, from both Inkatha and the UDF, contend that the police have been slow to act, and in some cases, they claim, the police have even taken sides.    Inkatha members point out that three policemen were arrested following the September massacre of the Inkatha youths. And some UDF supporters say their charges against Inkatha instigators aren't being properly pursued. Both sides lashed out at the police for interfering with the peace negotiations when more than a dozen UDF leaders were detained recently. (They have since been released in an effort to get the talks moving.)    &quot;You have to ask, in whose interest is it for peace to take place?&quot; says Peter Kerchhoff, a white man who monitors the violence at the Pietermaritzburg Agency for Christian Social Awareness.    The violence has been intensifying by the month. According to his agency, 50 people died between January and August. In September, the number of deaths jumped to 40, and in October 49 more people died. The mid-November count had surpassed 30.    According to affidavits of township residents filed in the provincial Supreme Court, the stage was set for violence in 1985 when the UDF, which was formed nationally in 1983, began gaining in popularity, particularly among the youth. Inkatha saw this as a threat to its traditional dominance in the Natal/kwaZulu region, and, in response, stepped up its recruitment efforts.    As the turf feud developed, according to the affidavits, township residents were split into two groups: Inkatha members or Inkatha opponents. Even those non-Inkatha members who didn't identify with the UDF, or its close labor affiliate, the Congress of South African Trade Unions, known as Cosatu, were labeled as Inkatha opponents. Threats by each group against the other evolved into house-burnings, torture and death. These actions triggered revenge attacks, and quickly a vicious cycle of terror gripped the townships.    In one of the affidavits, filed in support of attempts to get restraining orders against several Inkatha members, 15-year-old Jaminah Mthiyane, who says she is a supporter of the UDF, tells of Inkatha supporters splashing paraffin on her and threatening to set her afire if she didn't provide information on the whereabouts of other UDF members. In another, 13-year-old Khathula Mkhize relates how he hid under his bed while attackers shot and killed his mother and 11-year-old sister when they couldn't find two of his brothers, who belonged to a UDF affiliate.    &quot;It's bloody awful,&quot; says Mr. Kerchhoff. &quot;The community wants peace. But the fighting serves the purpose of apartheid.&quot;    Just then, Fred Sikakane, a 22-year-old teacher, stops by Mr. Kerchhoff's office with yet another tale of terror. For three days, he says, he has been on the run from vigilantes who chased him from his school and then from the house where he was hiding. He says he has heard 10 of his pupils had been taken by the vigilantes and told to sign statements saying that Mr. Sikakane had been teaching UDF views in school.    Mr. Sikakane rolls up a pant leg to show where he was stabbed by a spear during his escape from the school. But that's not why he has come with his story. &quot;My concern is what is happening to the pupils,&quot; he says. &quot;I want to know: are they dead yet?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>