<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Faster Action:FDA Rule ChangesMay Rush New DrugsTo Very Sick Patients---Companies Can Sell ProductsStill in ExperimentationTo AIDS Victims, Others---Nagging Questions of Risk---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> RIBI IMRGA AMGN XOMA ICN BITXPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>   When Marie Shelby died of AIDS last year, she was also a victim of the way drugs are developed in this country.    The 66-year-old woman, who contracted AIDS from a blood transfusion, was too old to qualify for early clinical trials of the drug AZT, which later proved to be effective in prolonging the lives of certain AIDS victims. At the same time, her desperate family spent about $500 in the black market for ribavirin, a touted drug that has yet to be proved useful against AIDS.    Now, as a result of new Food and Drug Administration rules that became effective June 22, pharmaceutical companies will be allowed under certain circumstances to recover their costs by selling experimental drugs that merely show promise. The new procedures represent the sharpest change in 25 years in the way new drugs are approved, although much discretionary power is retained by the FDA commissioner. It remains unclear whether, in the long run, the new rules will help the sick or hurt them.    Supporters hope to get such drugs as AZT to very sick people more quickly. They consider the changes a long-overdue reform of the FDA's drug-development process, which has been bitterly attacked as too bureaucratic, exorbitantly expensive and unresponsive to the needs of the sick. Under the old rules, getting a new drug approved usually has taken about two years, while biotechnology has been churning out many potentially useful drugs.    &quot;Allowing cost recovery . . . and earlier release makes good sense,&quot; says Robert Levine, a Yale University professor of medical ethics. Adds Peter Barton Hutt, the FDA's former chief counsel, who helped refine the rules: &quot;It shows the best of the regulatory process. If you're going to entice small venture companies into drug development, you need a new mechanism because the {old} regulations drove them out. Companies can't afford it.&quot;    Detractors of the new rules claim that they generate problems of their own. The sick and dying won't be adequately protected from unproven drugs, or worse yet, from drugs that turn out to have lethal side effects, the critics charge. The sale of unproven drugs, they say, could impede researchers' use of scientific method in controlled studies to establish the safety and efficacy of new drugs. Selling experimental drugs could well mean that only patients with money will qualify for the latest treatments.    Charles Moertel, a cancer consultant to the Mayo Clinic, condemns the new rules as &quot;premature marketing {that} threatens to impair the conduct of research&quot; and may threaten patients as well. &quot;We have the possibility of repeating the thalidomide disaster, but on a much larger scale.&quot;    Under the old drug-approval system, companies could make experimental drugs available, free of charge, on a &quot;compassionate&quot; basis to gravely ill patients. But drugs couldn't be sold until they had been through an exhaustive series of FDA-supervised tests, including testing that contrasts the reaction of large groups of patients, half of whom are given only placebos, harmless preparations without medical effects. In the double-blind studies, neither researcher nor patient knows who is getting the drug and who is getting the placebo until the study is completed.    Under the new procedures, companies testing a product for serious conditions such as Alzheimer's disease or multiple sclerosis can release it for treatment to doctors, or sell it, if they have some preliminary evidence of safety and effectiveness and a go-ahead from the FDA. Companies testing a drug for life-threatening conditions, such as advanced cancer and AIDS, need show only that there is a &quot;reasonable basis for concluding&quot; the product &quot;may be effective&quot; and wouldn't expose patients to &quot;significant additional risks.&quot;    A drug that meets these criteria -- called an investigational new drug for treatment, or &quot;treatment IND&quot; -- can be sold after companies give the FDA 30 days' notice. Companies still conducting clinical trials must get the FDA's permission to sell an IND. The agency will try to restrict the sales price of experimental drugs to recovery of costs, with no profit to the seller. It will also prohibit companies from advertising or promoting unapproved drugs. Patients who buy unapproved drugs will still be required to sign &quot;informed consent&quot; forms outlining risks and potential benefits.    FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young describes the new procedures as a way &quot;to get breakthrough drugs to the American people&quot; before final safety and effectiveness are proved. &quot;Where a person's going to die in months, and where patient and doctor are informed, we can take a bit more of a risk,&quot; Dr. Young says. He considers the new rules a way to codify the extraordinary &quot;fast-track&quot; approval AZT got last year. That drug was approved for sale to thousands of dying AIDS patients because of test results showing that 90% of the patients on AZT survived for at least a year, compared with a 60% nine-month survival rate for patients given a placebo.    Despite the new FDA rules, advocacy groups still are protesting what they see as cruelly slow drug development and approval. National Gay Rights Advocates, a California public interest law firm, has filed a class action suit on behalf of AIDS patients against the Department of Health and Human Services, FDA and National Institutes of Health. It charges that the withholding of drugs violates patients' constitutional rights. California's governor, George Deukmejian, recently signed into law a controversial bill permitting drug companies to test experimental AIDS drugs in California without FDA approval.    In the next few months, many businesses, particularly small biotechnology companies, will seek under the new FDA rules to rush experimental drugs to patients. Ribi Immunochem Research Inc., of Hamilton, Mont., plans to seek IND status for an anti-cancer vaccine, while Imreg Inc., of New Orleans, will try to sell a drug it says may restore immune response in AIDS patients. Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., is thinking of marketing two drugs that might restore blood-cell growth in patients undergoing kidney dialysis or cancer chemotherapy. Xoma Inc. plans to ask FDA permission to sell an experimental drug for a condition called graft-vs.-host disease, which occurs in bone-marrow transplant recipients.    &quot;We intend to take advantage of whatever the new regulations will permit us to apply for,&quot; says Imreg's chairman and president, Arthur Gottlieb, who wants to recoup the $8 million Imreg has invested in its AIDS drug, which is called Imreg-1.    These drug concerns expect heavy demand. Just how frenzied the demand might be is demonstrated by the pioneer in the indirect marketing of experimental drugs, Biotherapeutics Inc., of Franklin, Tenn. Since 1984, its founder, Robert K. Oldham, has been charging patients $4,000 to $35,000 for the laboratory work needed to provide a range of customized treatments designed to stimulate the body's resistance to cancers. Ostensibly, the patients are charged only for lab work, not for the drugs themselves. The FDA says it is &quot;monitoring the operations&quot; of the company.    The treatments involve interleukin-2, activated killer cells, cancer vaccines and monoclonal antibodies, which are proteins believed capable of carrying chemotherapy drugs to specific tumor targets. By far its most promising treatment is a program of constant dosage of interleukin-2, to enhance the body's resistance to malignant tumors. A well-regarded Biotherapeutics study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine in April, confirmed the findings of other researchers in showing that about one-third of 40 gravely ill cancer patients showed partial tumor remission under such treatment.    Since its founding, the publicly held company has received some 4,000 inquiries. It has accepted more than 300 patients for treatment, patients who had tried potentially effective traditional treatments elsewhere and who came to Biotherapeutics as a last resort.    Fees paid by patients tripled Biotherapeutics' revenue to $3.2 million for the year ended April 30. (Nevertheless, the company had a $3.3 million loss.) Dr. Oldham has ambitious national and international expansion plans. His firm has already opened satellite labs in Memphis, Tenn.; Plantation, Fla.; Los Angeles; San Diego, and Newport Beach, Calif. Biotherapeutics is also considering cities in Japan and Europe.    Hambrecht andamp; Quist Inc., a securities firm that specializes in biotechnology stocks, predicts that Biotherapeutics' revenue will soar 120-fold in the next five years, to $385 million, with net income reaching about $25 million by 1992.    Results of Dr. Oldham's cancer research have been published in reputable medical journals, and his work has won some admirers among scientists. He is a former director of the National Cancer Institute's so-called &quot;biological response modifier&quot; program, which develops treatments like interleukin-2. In his private venture, he has demonstrated that the sale of experimental drugs can provide financing for needed research.    But Biotherapeutics raises most of the troublesome issues that alarm opponents of the expanded use and sale of experimental drugs. It doesn't have a single proven product. Even with the interleukin-2 program, the remissions are believed to be only temporary, the drug has many toxic side effects and didn't benefit the majority of patients. None of the vaccine and monoclonal treatments have yet shown much effect.    The continuing demand for Biotherapeutics' services despite its mixed track record suggests how willing desperately sick people are to spend their own money (health insurance hasn't picked up any of the charges) on drugs that may very well not work. And doctors now expect to see a flood of second-rate or inadequately tested drugs developed by companies that lack Biotherapeutics' scientific rigor.    A focus of such concern is ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s ribavirin, which has been aggressively promoted in the AIDS-patient underground. It might have been considered a candidate for IND status last year after the company asserted its tests showed that ribavirin patients who suffered AIDS related complex, a precursor of AIDS, didn't progress to AIDS as often or as quickly as did patients in a control group given placebos. But the study was discredited when ICN reseachers admitted that the placebo patients had been sicker than the ribavirin patients at the outset of the study.    Pressure groups continue to promote ribavirin and to demand that it be sold in the U.S. FDA Commissioner Young hasn't yielded; ICN's application to sell the experimental drug was turned down on the ground that submitted data were insufficient. ICN says it will reapply. Still, drug cults are likely to urge the agency to release drugs on the basis of tests that are initially promising but flawed, critics say.    Imreg's drug for boosting immune response to AIDS is also in dispute. The company says Imreg-1 helps patients gain weight, slows the killing of T-cells by the AIDS virus and restores immune response. But Imreg so far bases its claims for the drug on uncontrolled tests, without giving any comparison group a placebo or an alternative drug so as to ensure objective evaluation. Some researchers have sharply criticized Imreg's methodology. Imreg's chairman, Dr. Gottlieb, defends his experimental methods and says he now is conducting controlled studies and expects to know results by the end of the year. Still, the new FDA rules explicitly commit the agency to review uncontrolled studies such as Imreg's, or even more preliminary animal and test-tube trials, a fact that alarms scientific purists.    Critics worry that companies with ineffective drugs will settle for simply recovering their costs, without ever seeking to pass the rigorous tests required for final FDA market approval. The FDA says companies must &quot;actively and diligently&quot; pursue final approval, but one prominent researcher at the National Institutes of Health fears that the rules &quot;will create a secondary market for unproven agents.&quot;    The FDA promises to control profiteering and the promotion of experimental drugs, but that could prove difficult. Commissioner Young concedes that the agency &quot;doesn't have the expertise to do detailed economic analysis&quot; of a company's profit.    Some researchers are more worried about health implications than about profiteering. Thomas Merigan, the chief of infectious diseases at Stanford University Medical Center, says making patients pay for drugs still in clinical trials &quot;is very dangerous.&quot; He adds, &quot;It's a very small step to the kind of charlatanism that prevailed in pre-FDA days.&quot; FDA restrictions have in the past protected Americans from such drugs as thalidomide, the sedative that caused grave birth defects in Europe in the early 1960s, and Laetrile, the useless extract of apricot pits peddled in Mexican cancer clinics.    &quot;Today, we have drugs of much more potency and subtle toxic reactions,&quot; says Dr. Moertel, the Mayo Clinic consultant. &quot;They hold potential for greater benefits, but also greater harm and require greater protections.&quot; For example, he says that the anti-cancer drug Methyl CCNU caused leukemia and kidney damage-reactions that didn't show up until very late in drug trials.    Some of the biggest U.S. drug companies still don't plan to charge for experimental drugs, and that may limit the ability of other concerns to make money. But demand for certain drugs is likely to far outstrip free sources, and other drugs will be available only from companies charging a fee. The big companies worry that sales by small competitors of the very same drugs they are researching could interfere with their ability to do objective trials. Patients, they reason, would rather buy a drug than enter a trial in which they have a 50-50 chance of being assigned to a control group receiving a sugar pill.    Patients' advocates raise another ethical question: To what degree should the affluent be able to obtain experimental drugs that the poor can't afford? So far, both governmental and private insurers generally decline to pay for experimental drugs. The wider use of such drugs, at a cost, suggests a two-tier system of experimental medicine: limited trials for the poor, and unrestricted purchases for the rich. Relatively wealthy and influential people, of course, may always have had advantages in the black market and in gaining entry to promising experimental treatment programs.    Patients -- affluent and otherwise -- will go to great lengths to avoid dying. James Masterson, a 71-year-old orthopedic surgeon in Falls Church, Va., tried to get treatment for his lymphoma from Biotherapeutics, but at the company's insistence, he is trying chemotherapy first. Still, Dr. Masterson believes that patient-financed research is &quot;the only way to go. Somebody's got to pay the bill. It's either the taxpayer's dollar, or your money.&quot;    Tom Jefferson, a 55-year-old San Franciscan suffering AIDS-related complex, spends thousands of dollars each year on experimental drugs available at farmacias in Mexico. He is prepared to spend his money in the U.S. instead if the new FDA rules make the drugs available here.    &quot;I already do&quot; spend the money, Mr. Jefferson says. &quot;Companies aren't in it for altruism.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>