<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0034 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Recipe for Fuel of the FutureCalls for Help From the Sun---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><TEXT>   COULD CLUB SODA become the fuel of the future? That, in a much oversimplified nutshell, is the possibility raised by a recent experiment in Switzerland. Swiss chemists, with American funding, recently mixed a little carbon dioxide, the gas that gives soda its fizz, with some hydrogen and tossed in a few flakes of a metallic powder. They then put the mixture under simulated sunlight. To their delight, the mixture began producing traces of methane, the flammable ingredient of natural gas.    The Swiss experiment marked a scientific milestone. It was the first time scientists had been able to convert carbon dioxide and hydrogen to methane without having to heat the mixture or put it under pressure. The reaction took place at ordinary room temperature and pressure, with the only input of energy coming from the simulated sunlight.    The experiment, described in the British scientific journal Nature, puts a new light on an area of research that has received scant attention in these days of plentiful oil and gas. This is the effort to find a new source of fuel by mimicking the energy cycle of plants. Plants take in carbon dioxide, water and sunlight, and produce chemical energy and oxygen.    DURING THE FUEL shortage of the early 1970s, the natural gas industry, through its Gas Research Institute in Chicago, started supporting research into ways to convert carbon dioxide and water to methane. Carbon dioxide (two oxygen atoms linked to a carbon atom) dissolved in water (two hydrogen atoms linked to an oxygen atom) is, of course, carbonated water or club soda. It has all the atoms necessary for methane, which is four hydrogen atoms linked to a carbon atom.    Now, when there are plentiful supplies of methane or natural gas, the gas institute has switched to finding new uses and markets for methane while continuing to support on a modest scale basic research for turning carbon dioxide and water into methane. The aim is to provide the groundwork for the day, a few decades hence, when supplies of natural gas may run low, says Robert V. Serauskas, assistant director for physical science at the institute.    IT TAKES ENERGY to break apart carbon dioxide and water molecules and to get the atoms to recombine into methane and oxygen. Humans can cause these reactions but only with brute force, such as building a fire under compounds and keeping them under pressure. This, however, is difficult to control and may produce other chemicals besides methane.    Plants, on the other hand, can carry out such simple carbon chemistry using only the energy from sunlight. The plants' secret is a catalyst in chlorophyl, the chemical that makes plants green. Nature hasn't yet revealed the secret of its catalyst and this photosynthesis process. But scientists are looking for man-made catalysts that could trigger these chemical reactions using only the modest energy from sunshine.    That's why the recent Swiss experiment is more than a laboratory curiosity. The experiment, funded by the gas institute, was carried out by Michael Gratzel and two colleagues at the Ecole Polytechnique Federale in Lausanne.    Their secret was a catalyst made of titanium oxide and ruthenium. They sprinkled a layer of the catalyst over the bottom of a glass flask in an oxygen-free environment. They then filled the flask with carbon dioxide and hydrogen, carefully keeping the flask in the dark. To their surprise, methane -- and only methane -- began to form in the flask, selectively produced by the catalyst.    WHEN THE FLASK was exposed to artificial sunlight, the reaction speeded up, running four to five times faster than in the dark. The reaction began at about 77 degrees Fahrenheit, or room temperature, but went faster at about 114 degrees, still mild compared to the more than 250 degrees normally required for such chemistry. Within 24 hours, all the carbon dioxide in the flask was converted to methane.    &quot;It appears this is a clear-cut example of photoactivation of a catalyst with sunlight,&quot; says the gas institute's Mr. Serauskas.    Not that anyone will run out and start producing methane from carbon dioxide any time soon. Natural gas, which is 90% to 95% methane, is too plentiful and cheap. Moreover, the reserves of natural carbon dioxide stored in the earth are unknown and research still has to determine whether the carbon dioxide emitted from factory and power plant smokestacks can be used for making methane. The next step is for scientists to figure out exactly how the catalyst accomplishes this feat. An understanding of the chemistry involved could lead to better catalysts and would be a big step toward learning how to convert carbon dioxide and water to methane.    For the gas industry, the experiment buttresses one hope. In the years since the energy crisis, there has been much talk about a &quot;hydrogen economy&quot; in which solar energy, algae, nuclear power or some other source of energy would be used to split water into its constituent hydrogen and oxygen. It's been proposed that hydrogen gas from such water splitting would become the nation's major fuel. It has the advantage of being not only inexhaustible but nonpolluting, since the only product of burning hydrogen is water.    The gas industry, however, argues that converting to hydrogen may require replacing or modifying the vast network of pipelines and the huge investment in appliances that are designed for methane. Better, it suggests, is to take a second step and convert the hydrogen from water splitting to methane. The experiment shows this is possible using only the energy of sunlight. </TEXT></DOC>