<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Healthy Giant:New Cholesterol DrugEnhances Merck's RoleAs a Leader in Research---Firm Also Excels in MarketingAs Its Persistence PaysAnd New Products Gain---The Prostate-Drug Prospects---By Michael WaldholzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MRKPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> RAHWAY, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Americans concerned about fighting heart disease are about to get some good news -- a new prescription drug will soon be available to lower cholesterol levels.    &quot;It's going to be earth-shaking,&quot; says Robert M. Stark, a cardiologist and assistant professor of medicine at Yale University's medical school. Its widespread use, he says, will prevent &quot;tens of thousands of heart attacks a year.&quot;    Even if the drug is approved, as expected, by the Food and Drug Administration in coming months, its developer, Merck andamp; Co., still faces a tough task convincing millions of otherwise healthy Americans and their physicians that high cholesterol levels raise their risks of getting heart disease. It wouldn't be the first time doctors and patients largely ignored a promising Merck drug to fight heart attacks. Moreover, the drug is intended for long-term use, and there is little precedent in medicine for doctors to prescribe such long-term therapy as a way of preventing disease.    But some industry analysts, betting Merck will succeed this time, predict annual sales of the drug, called Mevacor and known chemically as lovastatin, will top $1 billion by 1991, making it one of the biggest-selling prescription medicines ever.    For Merck, Mevacor is the culmination of almost 10 years of research begun with the discovery of a tiny molecule in a bit of fungus back when the importance of fighting cholesterol was still unproved. The drug's emergence also illustrates why Merck has become the star performer in an industry just beginning to reap commercial benefits from a host of recent biomedical advances.    Indeed, Merck is setting the industry standard for turning good science into good medicine, combining the know-how of a premier research operation and the marketing acumen of a Procter andamp; Gamble. &quot;Merck is the class of the industry,&quot; says Charles Sanders, the head of research at Squibb Corp.    Dr. Sanders should know. Several years ago Squibb developed a novel drug for lowering blood pressure called Capoten. When Merck officials realized Capoten would make their comparable medicines obsolete, they ordered their scientists to develop a better one. Within a year, Merck's labs discovered Enalapril, a more potent version of Capoten. While both drugs are booming, sales of Merck's entry are growing faster than Squibb's.    Merck also gets credit for foresight and perseverance as it collects the payoff of a prolonged commitment to research. During much of the 1970s, Merck and the entire industry hit a drug-discovery drought. To sustain growth, most drug makers diversified into cosmetics, confectioneries and high-technology medical equipment. But Merck invested almost solely in itself, pouring more money into drug research than any other U.S. company, hiring some of the nation's foremost scientists. It backed the kind of scientific inquiry, such as the work on Mevacor, that was being pursued in only a few labs in the world.    &quot;Merck, almost alone, was undeterred,&quot; says Joseph D. Williams, the chairman of Warner-Lambert Co., a Merck competitor. &quot;Heck, they're on a roll now, and the rest of us haven't missed the message. You gotta give Randamp;D all the support you can.&quot;    Merck's tenacity is becoming legendary in the drug industry. In 1971, for instance, Merck scientists found a microbe that produced a &quot;super-antibiotic&quot; with the astonishing ability to kill almost every bacterial infection known to afflict man. But when the excited scientists tried the antibiotic in human beings, it was destroyed by a natural enzyme in the kidney.    Elsewhere, scientists would probably have been told to put the antibiotic back on the shelf. Research dollars were being siphoned off to develop drugs known to be effective, and there was little money left over for basic research on such esoterica as kidney enzymes.    Yet at Merck, overcoming the enzyme became an obsession. And last December, 14 years later, Merck introduced Primaxin, a powerful infection fighter. Among its uses, Primaxin is expected to extend the lives of young cystic fibrosis patients, who ultimately succumb to intractable lung infections. &quot;In my opinion, it was the best piece of developmental science in the pharmaceutical industry,&quot; says David Paisely, a professor of chemistry at University of Illinois. &quot;Most companies would have thrown the drug away.&quot;    These days, Merck's research and marketing operations are running full-throttle, riding what Chairman P. Roy Vagelos calls &quot;the crest of an unprecedented wave of new products.&quot; Besides Enalapril, the company recently began selling an unusually potent antibiotic and an anti-ulcer drug more powerful than current therapy. In January it will begin selling its vaccine against hepatitis, the first human vaccine made by genetic engineering.    This productivity comes at a time when other drug companies are struggling to bolster flagging sales. Like the rest of the industry, Merck finds that some of its profitable older drugs are under siege as Americans increasingly buy their less expensive, generic versions. But unlike other companies, Merck is swiftly replacing its older products with new ones it can market exclusively at premium prices.    Of course, Merck has had some problems. A few years ago, it developed a version of a beta blocker, a popular type of prescription medicine for controlling high blood pressure. It spent $7 million and three years proving that the drug, Blocadren, reduced the risk of heart attacks in high-risk patients. The findings were published in a prestigious medical journal. But doctors ignored the drug, choosing to stick with older beta blockers. Speaking of the drug's dismal sales, one competitor gleefully says, &quot;We call it Bloca-bomb.&quot;    Financially, however, Merck is riding high. For 1986, analysts expect sales to grow 15% from last year's $3.55 billion, compared with the industry's average rise of about 10%. They predict earnings for the year will be up 28% from last year's $317.1 million, or $3.79 a share, and over the next few years analysts predict earnings growth of 20% to 25% a year, up from average annual increase of about 6% for the past four years. The company's shares on the New York Stock Exchange are currently around $118, which is nearly 75% above the end of last year, taking into account a 2-for-1 stock split earlier this year.    Chairman Vagelos, a thin, white-haired man who appears nervous in public gatherings, seems to have accomplished what he was hired for in 1975 -- to pull the company out of the discovery doldrums. For Dr. Vagelos, arriving at Merck had a touch of romance: As a teen-ager, he worked in his parents' luncheonette only blocks from Merck's headquarters here in Rahway, where he often overheard Merck scientists discussing projects.    When he returned to Rahway at the age of 45, he was already a widely acclaimed scientist, having helped to show that biochemical reactions underlying some disease could be controlled by interrupting the activity of certain human enzymes with blocking agents. That strategy for drug development, increasingly taking hold in the pharmaceutical industry, has become dogma at Merck since Dr. Vagelos arrived.    Nowadays, says Eugene Cordis, a Merck scientist, every drug-development program at Merck &quot;is an effort to inhibit or promote the action of some target,&quot; a hormone or enzyme of some type in a biochemical chain of events that underlies a health problem.    Dr. Cordis leads a team, for instance, that is tracking the chemical chain involved in the enlargement of the prostate gland, the affliction that will hospitalize President Reagan for surgery next month. The urinary-tract problem, common for men over 50, is treatable now only by surgery. The Merck researchers found the chemical link while studying pseudo hermaphrodites -- males who, because of an enzyme deficiency, physically resemble females when newly born. These men never get acne, go bald, or develop enlarged prostates. Dr. Cordis's group recently developed a chemical that blocks the enzyme in normal men and is studying it as a potential drug to treat the more common prostate problem.    Elsewhere in Merck, research teams apply the same strategy to advanced testing of a drug to treat dementia and another for preventing osteoporosis, the bone-loss disease that often affects older women. The target strategy is also the basis for preliminary research on drugs to fight the common cold, cancer, asthma, arthritis and some allergies.    But the development of the cholesterol-lowering agent, Mevacor, may eventually overshadow all. In the late 1950s, several teams of scientists, including Dr. Vagelos, were slowly mapping the chemical pathway that leads to the manufacture of cholesterol in the body, where it is used to make the membranes that encase all cells. By 1975, it was clear that a certain enzyme, called HMG-CoA, was at the head of the cholesterol-making chemical chain and was the best target to shoot.    Still, only a handful of companies sought a blocking agent. At the time it was only a theory that certain types of cholesterol cause the fatty deposits that can clog arteries and lead to heart attacks. &quot;We figured if we blocked the enzyme, it might lead to further basic knowledge about choleseterol synthesis, and we figured that alone would be important,&quot; Dr. Vagelos recalls. &quot;Nobody knew for certain it would lead to a drug.&quot;    But another company, Sankyo of Japan, was the first to find a blocker. The Japanese identified a substance produced by a fungus that, in the test tube, stopped the enzyme's activity. Immediately, Merck researchers began scouring similar fungi, and, in 1978, Merck and several other drug makers found their own blockers. Merck scientists breathed a sigh of relief when the other American teams abandoned the work as blockers failed to affect cholesterol levels in animals.    &quot;We were lucky,&quot; says Alfred Alberts, who helped find Merck's blocker. Merck, having studied cholesterol for three decades, had bred lab animals with cholesterol activity that closely mimicked that of human beings. In its experiments, the agent worked. And when Sankyo dropped its studies because its blocker caused cancer in some animals, Merck found in its animals that the drug was safe.    Two developments outside Merck soon propelled the research. First, scientists came to realize that a specific type of cholesterol, called LDL, was behind the buildup of the fatty deposits. Mevacor, it now is known, turns off the production of LDL. Second was the 1984 release of a huge government study proving beyond doubt that reducing LDL over time substantially reduced heart disease.    The government study &quot;convinced us we had something important,&quot; says Dr. Vagelos, noting that studies of Mevacor show it can produce sharper reductions of cholesterol than the drug used in the government study. Moreover, the drug in the government trial, called cholestyramine, has annoying side effects that sharply limit its use.    Getting doctors to use the medicine, however, won't be easy. Many Americans who would benefit from Mevacor aren't aware that the levels of cholesterol in their blood pose a health hazard. Moreover, many &quot;doctors still aren't convinced lowering cholesterol is that helpful,&quot; says a skeptical John Laragh, a cardiologist at New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center. &quot;Merck's got one big job to convince us&quot; as well as the public, Dr. Laragh says.    Merck's marketers know it. In coming months they plan an advertising and public-relations blitz to paint cholesterol as America's No. 1 health adversary. Company marketers hope to sponsor a national Citizens for Public Action on Cholesterol Association and finance local clubs to &quot;raise public awareness,&quot; says Jerry Jackson, a top company marketing executive.    Merck must still get FDA blessing for the drug's widespread use. Because the drug must be taken continually to sustain a low cholesterol level, the drug is a potentially big moneymaker for Merck if it gains wide use. But many doctors are reluctant to subject relatively young patients to lifelong drug therapy, especially one without a long-term track record.    While Merck believes the drug has almost no side effects, some research indicates its long-term use may cause cataracts. Many researchers believe the FDA may limit its use to patients with identifiably high LDL, a condition that would require a vast screening program to spot. One strategy being considered by Merck is the sale to doctors of cholesterol-testing kits that can be used in the office.    The company has also begun a study to show that Mevacor can reverse clogged arteries, a condition that contributes to the deaths of almost 700,000 Americans a year. &quot;If we can show that, then we'll hit the jackpot,&quot; says Dr. Vagelos.    But Dr. Vagelos says he is looking beyond Mevacor. Now 57 years old, he says he hopes to double Merck's $465 million annual research budget by the time he retires, building the company's ability to &quot;search for drugs to treat every major health problem there is.&quot; Dr. Vagelos, said by colleagues to be a fierce competitor obsessed with being the first to market new drugs, clearly relishes his mission. &quot;I can't think of anything,&quot; he says, &quot;not even getting the Nobel Prize, that can compete with making a valuable medicine.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>