<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0028 </DOCNO><HL> Junk-Bond People Think Book on Them Is So Much Trash --- 'The Predator's Ball' Depicts Drexel Burnham Lambert In a Rather Bad Light </HL><AUTHOR> Laura Landro (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GW WIX SB GNG HLT TAXES </CO><IN> SCR BON PUB </IN><TEXT>   Last month, Simon andamp; Schuster Inc. sent out a publication notice cleverly designed as an engraved party invitation: &quot;The American Lawyer and Simon andamp; Schuster invite you to read 'The Predator's Ball: The Junk Bond Raiders and the Man Who Staked Them' by Connie Bruck.&quot;    Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the subject of Ms. Bruck's book, has already accepted the invitation, and it isn't flattered.    After reviewing a draft provided by the author, Drexel charges that the book contains hundreds of errors and viciously misrepresents the investment bank and its junk-bond chief, Michael Milken. Drexel is particularly riled by such passages as one describing the company as &quot;the brass-knuckles, threatening, market-manipulating Cosa Nostra of the securities world.&quot;    In recent months, Drexel has enlisted the aid of its clients, attorneys and public-relations advisers in a campaign to discredit the book and to persuade its publisher to make significant changes in the manuscript. And Drexel isn't ruling out legal action now or after the book is published June 29.    The imbroglio pits one of Wall Street's most powerful firms against the country's biggest publishing house. On a personal level, it is an unusually complicated battle: Many of the people involved have friendships or business relationships with both sides.    Simon andamp; Schuster's parent, Gulf andamp; Western Inc., is a Drexel client. Gulf andamp; Western's chairman, Martin Davis, has attended the annual junk-bond conference for which the book is named. Arthur Liman, a partner at the law firm of Paul Weiss Rifkind andamp; Garrison (which has frequently worked for Gulf andamp; Western), has pitched in on behalf of Drexel and Mr. Milken. Ralph Ingersoll, a publisher and Drexel client, wrote to his acquaintance, Simon andamp; Schuster's Chairman Dick Snyder, raising questions about the book.    The fight over &quot;The Predator's Ball&quot; also illustrates the pitfalls of cooperating with an author on a book project in the expectation of favorable treatment. Drexel's president, Fred Joseph, arranged for Ms. Bruck, a reporter for American Lawyer magazine, to interview executives. Mr. Joseph wasn't worried because the company was riding high when Ms. Bruck started her research in 1985. She had also made him a highly unusual offer. In a letter of understanding, she agreed to show Mr. Joseph a draft of her book. If he objected to any part of it and if the two of them couldn't agree on a modification, Drexel was given the right to publish a rebuttal in the book itself.    Chapters from &quot;The Predator's Ball&quot; have already been excerpted in American Lawyer and in Manhattan, inc. magazine. The Wall Street Journal also has acquired first-serial rights to several chapters. A draft of the full manuscript was obtained for this story through other channels.    The book's many alleged mistakes, Drexel contends, range from statements concerning the nature and the value of various transactions Drexel was involved in to more sensational allegations that a former Drexel executive hired call girls to entertain at the annual Los Angeles bond conference. Drexel maintains that Ms. Bruck uses distortions and misinformation to conclude that the company has engaged in widespread illegal activities. And Mr. Joseph contends she violated her agreement to allow Drexel to have its say. &quot;We were given only limited access to {the book}, and we were only able to correct a few of the hundreds of errors,&quot; says Mr. Joseph. He adds that &quot;the book's conclusions, which are based on those errors, are wrong.&quot;    Although Ms. Bruck has declined to comment on Drexel's allegations, her publisher maintains that the book has been thoroughly checked for accuracy and that errors, where found, have been corrected. The book was being corrected even as it went to press last week, they add.    The publisher says Drexel's Mr. Joseph and his attorneys had every opportunity to read and suggest changes in the book, yet failed to request specific corrections before the book's final proofreading. &quot;This is all simply an effort on Drexel's part to derail the book,&quot; says American Lawyer's publisher, Steven Brill, who is co-publishing the book.    Mr. Brill and others involved in the book's publication contend that much of what Drexel calls factual error is simply disagreement over how facts are interpreted. Among the passages Drexel protests is one in which Ms. Bruck describes alleged strong-arm tactics used by Drexel to lure Wickes Cos. away from rival Salomon Brothers Inc. She asserts that Drexel got the company as a client by using financier Saul Steinberg's purchase of a stake in Wickes as a club; Drexel denies that any such tactics were used and denies Mr. Steinberg's purchase of the stake was linked to Drexel.    In other instances, though, the disputes seem to be over questions of fact. Drexel points out that the book says Golden Nugget made a $1.8 billion bid for Hilton Hotels Corp.; in fact, Golden Nugget offered $488 million for 24.7% of the company owned by the Hilton estate, Drexel notes. The book says Mr. Milken paid little in taxes; Drexel says he regularly paid 35% of his income. The book says Mr. Milken is an amateur magician, who does tricks for his friends; Drexel says he isn't, doesn't and can't.    Drexel is also furious over Ms. Bruck's description of Mr. Milken as an eccentric recluse. And the company denies Ms. Bruck's allegation, made in the book, that Mr. Milken offered to pay her not to write it.    According to Drexel, Ms. Bruck had just one interview with Mr. Milken, lasting five hours, during which she didn't ask him to respond to any of the serious charges raised in the book.    Drexel objected to Ms. Bruck's assertion that Milken employees had become millionaires by 1978 because of his investment partnerships; Drexel says the partnerships weren't started until 1979. But Ms. Bruck does appear to have cut from her manuscript certain passages Drexel objected to, including one in which she said Mr. Milken owned 67% of Drexel. (He owns about 6%.)    Mr. Brill says Gulf andamp; Western and its chairman, Mr. Davis, have been supportive, thus making it clear to him that the company won't interfere with Simon andamp; Schuster's editorial decisions. Mr. Snyder of Simon andamp; Schuster maintains that that has always been the case with his company's books; Gulf andamp; Western's policy is to keep out of editorial decisions. &quot;It has never wavered from that position,&quot; even when Gulf andamp; Western itself has been the target of a book's criticism, he says.    Although Mr. Davis won't comment on the battle, he does say in a written statement: &quot;Every time we publish a book, we take reasonable steps to satisfy ourselves that it is the work of a responsible author, responsibly done. Connie Bruck's book investigates a significant area of interest and concern to the public, and the results of those investigations are worth considering, in our opinion, whether we agree with them or not.&quot;    Drexel's advisers acknowledge that Mr. Joseph may have been naive when he agreed to open Drexel to Ms. Bruck in 1985. But, at the time, he had little reason to be concerned. Drexel was getting a lot of attention for its rise to prominence on Wall Street through its aggressive use of junk-bond financing and its prowess as a deal maker.    In a Dec. 18, 1985, letter to Mr. Joseph, Ms. Bruck said she couldn't guarantee the subject matter, which kept changing as she conducted her interviews. And in late 1986, Ms. Bruck's subject took a new turn; it was widely disclosed that Drexel and Mr. Milken were under investigation for possible securities-law violations. Instead of the flattering profile Drexel expected, the book became an unflattering look at the company's central role in the takeover frenzy of the 1980s, linking Drexel to illegal activities that fueled the current federal investigation into insider trading.    The publishers and Drexel officials agree that Ms. Bruck showed Drexel a draft of the book in early March. Beyond that, they offer very different accounts of recent events. Drexel says it had just six hours in which to read the book over a two-day period while a Simon andamp; Schuster clerk hovered nearby to make sure it wasn't photocopied. Mr. Brill responds that Drexel's Mr. Joseph and his attorneys spent at least 30 hours with the manuscript and had other meetings and conversations with the author about it. They never submitted a formal rebuttal to include in the book, he says.    Mr. Joseph didn't submit a formal list of alleged errors, but he wrote a number of tough letters to Ms. Bruck and Simon andamp; Schuster's attorney Elizabeth McNamara. On March 10, he assailed Ms. Bruck for writing a book materially different from what he believed her to have been planning -- and he asked for a copy of the manuscript so he could review it with others at the firm. Mr. Joseph's position was that he alone could not correct the many errors in the book.    Mr. Joseph met again several times with Ms. Bruck and Drexel attorneys. People involved with the book say several changes were made in the manuscript at Drexel's behest for the sake of accuracy. On April 7, however, Mr. Joseph wrote yet another letter proposing that, within 48 hours, they all sit down to review the manuscript with a number of other Drexel executives and attorneys. He reiterated that Drexel was prepared to document the many alleged errors in the book.    But Mr. Brill disputes Drexel's claim that it was thwarted in its every attempt to have errors corrected. &quot;We pleaded with them to tell us about mistakes, and we warned them this would have to stop April 1&quot; because of publication deadlines, Mr. Brill says. &quot;They kept saying there were mistakes, we kept meeting with them, then they would wait two weeks and write us a letter.&quot; He characterizes the letters as &quot;a paper trail&quot; designed to make it appear that Drexel wasn't getting cooperation.    People close to Drexel say Mr. Joseph failed to come up with timely corrections because of sharp disagreement in the Drexel camp over how to handle the situation. When it became clear that the book would be published on schedule, Drexel and its various lawyers and public-relations advisers began their campaign with the publishers in earnest, the executive says.    Drexel wasn't the only party putting heat on Simon andamp; Schuster. Ralph Ingersoll, the chairman of Ingersoll Publications and a longtime Drexel client, invited Mr. Snyder of Simon andamp; Schuster to lunch at the Knickerbocker Club after reading a copy of the manuscript. Mr. Ingersoll says he got his copy from his own publishing sources. At Mr. Snyder's invitation, Mr. Ingersoll wrote a five-page letter detailing his complaints about the manuscript and lambasting its conclusions.    The executive says Drexel didn't put him up to interceding. But he did say in the letter that he had spoken to Mr. Joseph. &quot;I'm wondering,&quot; he wrote, &quot;if your own fact checkers wouldn't like to huddle with Fred to get absolutely as much right as possible.&quot; Mr. Ingersoll noted, among other things, that Ms. Bruck incorrectly identified the Beverly Wilshire hotel as the site of the 1985 Drexel bond conference that took place in fact at the Beverly Hilton. (Simon andamp; Schuster made the correction.)    Mr. Ingersoll wrote a second letter to Mr. Snyder in which he said that young women at the conference and its parties were typically Drexel employees, not the prostitutes Ms. Bruck describes. Fred Sullivan, the chairman of Kidde Corp., another Drexel client, wrote to Ms. Bruck -- sending copies to attorneys at Gulf andamp; Western and Simon andamp; Schuster -- denying that he had made certain remarks attributed to him by Ms. Bruck describing the women as &quot;paid varying amounts, depending on how pretty they are and what they'll do.&quot;    Mr. Sullivan didn't return calls seeking comment. Ms. Bruck apparently added a line stipulating that female Drexel employees, as well as other women, were present, but she didn't retreat from her other statements on the subject of call girls.    On April 11, Ms. McNamara, the Simon andamp; Schuster lawyer, wrote to Mr. Joseph saying she believed the publisher and Ms. Bruck had fulfilled their obligations to Drexel. Mr. Joseph waited nearly a month, until May 4, to reply, saying he had been busy with other things. But he charged that the publisher and the author had frustrated every effort to correct inaccuracies.    Paul Weiss's Mr. Liman called Mr. Brill last week to press for more time for Drexel to present a formal list of corrections, but Mr. Brill told him it was too late: The book had already gone to press. &quot;We moved heaven and earth to get the book to be accurate,&quot; says Mr. Brill. &quot;Now the only thing left to do is let it speak for itself.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>