<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Ground Down:Machine-Tool MakersLoose Out to ImportsDue to Price, Quality---But U.S. Firms Seek to HaltLong Decline by OfferingParts-Producing Systems---Stories of Three Big Contracts---By Ralph E. Winter and Gregory StricharchukStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> HDI CMZ GM BAINDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   With a thumbs-up gesture, President Reagan last May 7 praised Harley-Davidson Motor Co. for beating back imports. &quot;Like America, Harley is back and standing tall,&quot; he declared, as workers at the motorcycle maker's York, Pa., assembly plant shouted their approval.    Aided by a temporary duty as high as 45% on large motorcycles, the once-sputtering Harley has roared back into the competitive race and no longer requires import protection, Mr. Reagan said.    But just eight days later, Milwaukee-based Harley delivered a stiff blow to another import-battered industry, the domestic machine-tool producers. Harley picked Japan's Toyoda Machine Works Ltd. over Cincinnati Milacron Inc., this country's largest machine-tool producer, and eight other bidders for a $1.7 million order for eight electronically controlled machining centers.    &quot;We agonized over this decision,&quot; says Thomas A. Gelb, Harley's vice president of operations. &quot;Everything being equal, we'd rather buy U.S.&quot;    But everything is seldom equal anymore for U.S. machine-tool producers. A detailed inside look at the letting of three major machine-tool contracts shows why. It shows that Harley gave the Japanese the orders largely because of their lower prices and reputation for quality. It shows how General Motors Corp., seeking advanced-design metal-stamping presses, bought most of the huge machines from West Germany and Japan. But the third contract shows how the U.S. industry is fighting back. Ingersoll Milling Machine Co. won a big order from Boeing Co. with a nontraditional approach to selling: The Rockford, Ill., company offered to supply a sophisticated parts-making system rather than just individual machines.    The grinding down of America's machine-tool business is a startling economic development. Machine tools are critical to manufacturing. They shape metal parts, ranging from refrigerator doors to automobile engine blocks, and they also make other machines, which manufacturers use to keep their own plants competitive. And because machine tools are complex, costly equipment, a producer that wins over a customer often lands future orders. Thus, the competition is intense.    U.S. machine-tool producers have slid a long way from the days, not long ago, when they ruled the global market. Last year, foreign companies captured 49% of U.S. machine-tool sales, up from 25% five years earlier, and the number of domestic machine-tool plants has shrunk by one-third to about 500, the National Machine Tool Builders' Association says. In addition, prominent old names such as Warner andamp; Swasey, Jones andamp; Lamson and Lodge andamp; Shipley -- whose machines helped forge this country's industrial might -- have been absorbed by larger companies or are up for sale. Industry employment has plunged 28% from 1980 to about 72,000.    &quot;We're just hanging on,&quot; declares Kermit Kuck, the chief executive of Monarch Machine Tool Co., of Sidney, Ohio. And industry executives expect the shrinkage to continue.    &quot;There's too much machine-tool capacity in the world. In some ways, it's similar to steel,&quot; says James A.D. Geier, Cincinnati Milacron's chief executive. &quot;The Japanese machine-tool industry is way, way too big. We'll see a whole series of bankruptcies around the world, including in Japan,&quot; he predicts. Japanese producers are hurting because both their exports and their domestic sales have slumped in the past year.    Nevertheless, half a dozen Japanese concerns are opening assembly plants in the U.S., mainly because of the higher yen and the American industry's efforts to limit machine-tool imports. In addition, West German, Swiss, Scandinavian and other foreign producers have bought U.S. machine-tool builders, which now assemble and market the parent concerns' machines as well as their own.    The American toolmakers' decline reflects all the complex forces plaguing U.S. basic industry -- from foreign competitors who at times resorted to predatory pricing to management nearsightedness. Although the gyrations of the world economy and currency markets during the past decade battered the domestic tool makers, the U.S. industry's failure to stay at the forefront of technology and product quality was just as damaging. No longer do foreign toolmakers have to fight the notion that their products are poorly made. Indeed, it is the U.S. producers that must prove that their machines stack up.    The market has changed in other ways, too. In many cases, machining work formerly done in the U.S. now is being done abroad. A lot of auto-parts production and similar metal-working is being handled in Japan, South Korea, Brazil and elsewhere, often on locally produced machine tools.    In addition, manufacturers require less metal-cutting these days. They are substituting plastic and other materials for metal in applications ranging from auto parts to airplane wings, and they have learned to cast or forge metal parts more precisely, reducing the machining required. Moreover, one new computer-controlled machine tool frequently replaces half a dozen older machines. And many companies are solving manufacturing problems by better management of people and existing equipment rather than spending millions of dollars on new machines.    The combination has been devastating. Even though machine-tool bookings in May and June increased because of big orders from Chrysler Corp. and an automotive supplier, domestic producers booked only $987.9 million of orders in the 1987 first half, down 19% from a year earlier. The order rate so far this year has been less than half the 1979-80 pace, before the industry was walloped first by the 1981-82 recession and then by the import surge largely attributable to the high dollar.    Currently, the decline in the dollar's value promises some relief to domestic producers. About 75% of U.S. machine-tool imports come from Japan, Germany, Britain and Switzerland, all of whose currencies have surged against the dollar.    However, some U.S. machine-tool makers contend that so far their Japanese competitors, having greatly overexpanded and targeted the U.S. as the best market for their swollen production, haven't raised prices much on lathes and machining centers, two areas of particularly intense competition. Although the yen has risen about 60% against the dollar over the past two years, &quot;we haven't seen any evidence of that at all,&quot; Monarch's Mr. Kuck says. The Japanese, he adds, &quot;will cut the price to whatever level is required to get the order.&quot;    Also disappointing to the U.S. industry have been the &quot;voluntary&quot; quotas on imports from Japan and other major producers. The quotas were based on 1981 import figures, when foreign companies already were supplying more than half the machining centers and lathes used in the U.S. &quot;When you add in other imports -- from countries unaffected by the quotas -- it doesn't leave much for U.S. producers,&quot; Mr. Kuck complains.    Harley Davidson   The Harley-Davidson contract illustrates how Japanese producers, in particular, have put companies such as Monarch on the ropes by slashing prices and stressing quality. At the outset, Harley says, Toyoda's price was about 30% below those of U.S. bidders. Some U.S. suppliers, including Milacron, offered to cut prices about 20% to stay in contention, but at the end, Toyoda's winning edge over Milacron still was $185,000.    &quot;We gave them the best deal we could,&quot; maintains Charles W. McAllister, Milacron's general sales manager for machine tools. Milacron worried that granting extreme discounts to land one order might force it to give comparable price cuts to its many other buyers. Toyoda says its bid was only slightly below its list price and contained a normal profit.    Besides price, other major factors in the award of the contract were quality and service. Harley engineers were convinced that Toyoda would supply more reliable, more accurate machines. Six of the Toyoda machines will replace 45 machines, some 30 years old.    Toyoda had won an important ally in Dana A. White, a manufacturing engineer at Harley's engine and transmission plant in Milwaukee. Mr. White says that &quot;we were really impressed&quot; by a flawlessly performing Toyoda machine bought by Harley last year.    &quot;Nobody from the outside really sells a machine,&quot; contends Howard Michael, Midwest regional sales manager for Toyoda Machinery Works USA Inc., a unit of the Japanese concern. &quot;The selling has to be done by an insider, and Dana was the driving force. You've got to have a champion, a flag waver.&quot;    But Mr. Michael himself took a bold risk last December to get that first machine into the plant and win over Harley's engineers. Learning that the plant's budget allowed for the purchase of one machining center, he ordered the driver of a rig hauling a machine to a Florida customer to turn around and deliver it to Harley.    &quot;The trucker was in Georgia when he just happened to call in,&quot; Mr. Michael recalls. &quot;I figured it was worth the risk&quot; of offending the Florida customer. (Mr. Michael says he &quot;forgot&quot; what he told that customer.)    The gamble gave Toyoda a leg up on its competitors not only because Harley's quality-control people liked the quality of the parts produced. In addition, Mr. White recalls, the machine's operator began boasting about it during lunch breaks. The operator especially liked the machine's controls, which were easy to use and reliable, and his enthusiasm meant a lot to Mr. White, a former machine operator himself.    And the Toyoda machine also impressed a colleague, Thomas F. Romoser, who, in a more scientific approach, graded competing equipment on a one-to-10 scale for 44 specifications. The final tally: Toyoda 1,425, Milacron 1,358.    A Milacron offer to supply a modified machine with features that the Toyodas didn't have backfired, Mr. McAllister says. &quot;We couldn't get across&quot; to Harley engineers that it wouldn't be new, untested equipment, he explains.    Meanwhile, Harley, which turns out about 185 heavyweight motorcycles a day, was having &quot;more problems than we should have&quot; with two Milacron machines, Mr. White says. Although Milacron servicemen responded quickly to the problems, such as loss of computer memory, Harley &quot;can't afford down time,&quot; he adds. To keep its parts inventory low, Harley has reorganized the engine plant to enhance flexibility in parts production, but it doesn't have a warehouse full of parts to fall back on if a machine breaks down.    Milacron's Mr. McAllister concedes that the machines &quot;had some warts,&quot; especially coolant problems, but he calls that &quot;a minor point&quot; in the competition.    Harley also couldn't ignore Mr. Michael's promise that the Toyoda machines would operate 95% of the time. And Toyoda promised to pay Harley for down time if the machines didn't meet that standard and to haul away and replace any machine that proved to be a lemon.    Mr. McAllister says Milacron &quot;thought we had neutralized&quot; that issue by noting that it had an expert who lived only 15 minutes from the Harley plant and a service center about 70 miles away. &quot;Right up to the end,&quot; he says, Milacron executives thought that they &quot;had a good chance&quot; for the order. Milacron is trying to land Harley's next order.    The Toyoda machines will be in operation before year-end, Harley says. To minimize criticism for buying Japanese machines, Harley requested that they carry a special logo -- &quot;Toyoda USA&quot; -- showing that they were assembled at Toyoda's plant in Arlington Heights, Ill., just outside Chicago. Toyoda told Harley that the machines have 55% U.S. content.    General Motors   At GM's body-parts plant outside Mansfield, Ohio, a huge yellow monster stamps out 800 roofs an hour for GM's new Beretta cars, which are battling imports in the sporty-car market. Ironically, however, the highly automated press, which a GM executive contends equals anything on the horizon into the 21st century, was made in Japan.    In fact, GM's Mansfield workers have an American flag hanging over the lone U.S.-brand machine -- made by Danly Machine Corp., of Chicago -- among 15 new presses added there in the past two years. And since the beginning of 1983, GM has ordered about 100 new presses as part of a $2.5 billion overhaul of its U.S. stamping plants; 88 of them were ordered from Japanese or West German suppliers, and Danly is supplying 12, using some parts from Japan and Italy.    GM says that it needs the latest technology to compete and that it simply went where that technology was. It wasn't just shopping abroad for a lower price, GM contends.    At Mansfield, most of the presses came from Ishiwawjima-Harima Heavy Industries Inc., usually referred to as IHI, and Komatsu Ltd., both of Japan. Two were supplied by Schuler Inc., a German company that pioneered some of the technology with a press installed at a Ford Motor plant in Germany in 1981.    The foreign orders, placed at a time when GM itself was fighting imported cars -- with the aid of a quota on Japanese imports -- created a flap among suppliers. And GM could hardly sneak the huge presses into the plant in the dark of night. They were as wide as a football field and nearly as long. A caravan of two-lane-wide trucks, escorted by police cars, a helicopter and an airplane, blocked traffic on Interstate 71 as the presses were moved about 80 miles from the Cleveland docks to Mansfield.    The new GM transfer presses automatically move sheet steel from one press to another for sequential stamping. That makes them highly efficient. And they make better parts, improving fit and finish on the new Beretta and Corsica cars by 50% over previous models, says Lewis B. Campbell, manufacturing manager for GM's Chevrolet-Pontiac-Canada group, which operates the Mansfield plant.    In addition, a new die can be installed to make a different part in less than five minutes, he says. On many older presses, such a change takes eight hours, and then the press sometimes makes poor parts for a couple of hours while workers make adjustments. Thus, there is a temptation to pound out a lot of one part before changing dies -- thus increasing inventories.    U.S. press builders knew how to make transfer presses, but they admit being behind in developing ones big enough to make car hoods, roofs and quarter panels.    &quot;The stamping-press business is a pretty stodgy business,&quot; a Danly executive says. &quot;The level of technology in other areas (of manufacturing) is Star Wars compared to stamping,&quot; he says. In the new GM equipment, he adds, &quot;The level of sophistication was a quantum leap over what people were used to supplying, including electronics and software.&quot;    But domestic press makers say the U.S. auto industry is partly to blame. They contend that Japanese rivals could afford the huge development costs because they knew that the Japanese auto companies would buy the machines. U.S. press builders say they hadn't any such assurance.    Furthermore, the American companies have been so weakened over the past decade that they didn't have the capacity to meet a major share of GM's sudden, huge needs for equipment. Their weakness reflects, in part, the extreme swings in machine-tool demand. The GM buying spree, for example, was five times the total orders received by domestic press builders in 1983, the previous year. For more than two years, GM tied up most of the available capacity for large presses in Europe and Japan.    U.S. toolmakers say it is hard to invest heavily in new-product development and provide good delivery when orders fluctuate so widely. For instance, the U.S. industry's total 1979 orders were about four times its 1972 bookings. But by 1982, orders had fallen back to about 1972 levels.    GM doesn't necessarily disagree. In fact, it subsequently assured machine-tool groups that GM will work more closely with suppliers in developing new technology and will provide more advance notice of its equipment needs.    Boeing Co.   Ingersoll's $7 million-plus contract with Boeing is a giant step toward the future for the U.S. machine-tool industry, both companies believe. Ingersoll contends that it is selling solutions to manufacturing problems instead of just machinery.    &quot;Years from now, people will look back and say it was a turning point,&quot; says Edson I. Gaylord, Ingersoll's chairman. The new ingredient: a long-term partnership between the tool builder and the customer to develop a parts-producing system.    Like most manufacturers, Boeing traditionally solicited bids for machine tools meeting certain specifications for speed, accuracy and other characteristics. Winning the order was the builder that met or exceeded the specifications at the lowest price and could deliver promptly.    However, the Boeing-Ingersoll agreement is built around the concept of simultaneous engineering. The parts to be produced -- big structural pieces of the landing gear and wings -- and the system to produce them are engineered at the same time. The parts may be changed to make them simpler to manufacture.    In May 1986, Boeing laid out its plans in a Portland, Ore., hotel room to representatives of seven major toolmakers -- two Japanese, one German and four American. The aerospace company turned over &quot;stacks of prints, general guidelines and areas it wanted to attack,&quot; says Thomas Shifo, Ingersoll's vice president of sales, but it didn't specify the design of the machine to be used.    Boeing also sought long-term pledges rather than a one-time purchase determined primarily on the basis of price. &quot;Some of the vendors weren't comfortable because they like the more traditional approach,&quot; Mr. Shifo says. &quot;Myself, I was tickled to death.&quot;    A 13-member Ingersoll team studied Boeing's needs and responded with three boxes of drawings and other information, showing how Ingersoll proposed to reduce the cost of making the airplane parts. The competition narrowed rapidly to Ingersoll and Toshiba Machine Co., a big Japanese producer.    One Boeing executive says Toshiba offered &quot;a very innovative approach to machining.&quot; However, he says, it could supply only the machine; Boeing would have to put together the parts-making system.    Toshiba &quot;lacks manpower, engineering power&quot; in the U.S., says Takashi Osato, vice president and general manager of its U.S. machine-tool arm. The unit has only one engineer in the U.S., he says, &quot;and that's a big disadvantage.&quot; Furthermore, he says, &quot;in our company, lots of people don't speak English.&quot;    By contrast, Ingersoll was willing to supply the whole system and guarantee productivity gains. &quot;It's an engineer's dream because we can be bold in the work we do,&quot; says James O. Holtey, Ingersoll's chief project engineer. In addition, Ingersoll is eager to work with Boeing on design of a whole plant that some years hence will contain a number of production cells, which Ingersoll also hopes to supply.    In Rockford, Ingersoll is starting to build a computer-controlled manufacturing cell that will include a specialized machining center called a profiler, materials-handling equipment and electronic controls. It will remain at Ingersoll's plant for six months or more while its productivity is improved before being installed at Boeing's Portland plant.    Other machine-tool executives agree that the U.S. industry's best hope for survival rests with such customer-builder cooperation. SRI International, a Menlo Park, Calif., research and consulting concern, says that, to succeed, domestic toolmakers must change to supplying manufacturing systems instead of individual machines. And, SRI adds, they will have to increase spending on product development and modernize their own plants.    &quot;The future will depend on what we do to enhance the value of the machines we manufacture,&quot; says Daniel J. Meyer, Cincinnati Milacron's executive vice president of finance and administration. </TEXT></DOC>