<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880401-0135 </DOCNO><HL> On the Growth of Presidents in Office </HL><AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   One peculiarity of our presidential system is that we have no way to prepare its holder for the office of president. As each one comes along he must learn by on-the-job training.    The original intent, I suppose, was that a person would learn first by being vice president. In the beginning, the vice president was a strong presidential contender and got the second spot only because the other man beat him for the top.    In the beginning, John Adams succeeded Washington and Jefferson followed Adams. Then came the 12th Amendment, and thereafter a president and vice president were elected together, the latter being chosen less for his presidential possibilities than for any political support he might give the president in the voting. The two men needn't, and often didn't, even like each other. From then on the vice president got very little experience in governing. If he succeeded to the first office due to the president's death, he had to learn from scratch.    The classic example was Harry Truman. Though he was Franklin Roosevelt's last vice president, he came to the presidency with almost no idea of the Roosevelt plans and program; he didn't even know about the atom bomb.    A contrast is with the British system in which would-be (and future) prime ministers get to show their mettle in the cabinet, which is a working political body participating in all decisions, unlike our own cabinet. In modern times, only Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover went from the cabinet directly to the presidency, and look what happened to him.    That makes it all the more remarkable that our presidents have, taken all in all, worked out so well. Lincoln had been only a congressman when elected, Woodrow Wilson a college president and governor, FDR a governor, Jack Kennedy a young senator.    The gods, I must say, have looked kindly upon us.    This year our candidates consist of a two-term vice president, two senators, two ministers who have held no political office, and one sitting governor. Each has his political supporters. None has yet faced the trials, the agonizing decisions, that would greet him in the Oval Office.    Vice President George Bush has seen close up the future problems but has had no experience in meeting them when any decision must be his and his alone. Gov. Michael Dukakis has managed the affairs of a large state but hasn't had to decide such crucial matters as negotiating with the Soviets or what to do about the Middle East or Latin America. Among the others is legislative experience but none involving command decisions on which the fate of nations might depend.    All that being so, how is it that by and large we have been so well served by our presidents, taken all in all?    One clue was given to me years ago by Charles Ross, a one-time newspaperman who was Harry Truman's press secretary. Truman was just beginning his term amid much confusion. I was just a young reporter, and a cynical one no doubt.    Anyway, Ross told me the chief quality for any president was the ability to grow in office. Some do and some don't. Truman, he insisted, was a &quot;grower,&quot; as Ross had found watching him grow from a politician of the Pendergast machine in Kansas City to a thoughtful senator to Roosevelt's unlikely choice for vice president. Truman, he thought, would grow in the Oval Office.    Charlie Ross didn't live to see it all, but Harry Truman grew strong enough to take the risk of the Korean War, to read Joseph Stalin truly, to launch the Marshall Plan, to stand firm against the Soviet efforts to starve out West Berlin. Of what matter now a foolish letter to a music critic?    I have often brooded upon what Charlie had to say that long-ago afternoon, and found in it both mystery and wisdom. The wisdom is that men use stepping stones within themselves to climb heights undreamed of. Lincoln comes immediately to mind; none of his contemporaries, and perhaps not even he himself, could see the steel that came to him in a time of trial. No one thought Theodore Roosevelt (&quot;that clown&quot;) would be such a president. Nor FDR (that &quot;pleasant country squire who wanted to be president&quot;) -- Walter Lippmann's phrase.    Then there were those who came with so much promise but never quite grew to meet their challenges. One in our time was Jimmy Carter, who wasn't really a bad president but who never seemed to quite fill that Oval Office. Before him there was Herbert Hoover, who in a different time would have made a first-class president but who stayed his growth while the world he knew collapsed around him.    And what, in the end, will history make of Ronald Reagan? Few beforehand could picture this movie actor as governor of California, much less president. Yet he found the mettle to send American arms into the far corners of the earth, to cut the people's taxes, with what consequences we may not know until some future hour. But that he grew from minor movie roles to a major one on the world's stage is indisputable.    I wish I could draw some lesson from all of this to measure our would-be presidents, but I know not what it is. We know what these men have done till now; the record is spread out before us for all to see and, hopefully, to judge. But which of them, once chosen, will grow to meet the challenges neither we nor they can know; that is the great unknown.    Perhaps, though, there is something to be learned from looking backward and brooding on Charlie Ross's passing thought. If Harry Truman had been president at a different time he would not have been the same president; nor would Lincoln nor Roosevelt, nor Ronald Reagan either for that matter. They could just as well have been Millard Fillmores or John Tylers.    Richard Nixon, our only president driven from office, arrived there with the best of credentials. He had had long political experience and one of the best minds to apply to international affairs. But he was snared in the Vietnam War bequeathed him by John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson. He managed to disentangle us from that, but only at a personal cost that undid his judgment. He never got to grow in office, more's the pity.    So you never can tell. Charlie Ross was right that some do and some don't. He was also right about Harry. But I wonder if even he could look at the present hopefuls and guess which ones would grow and which wouldn't?    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>