<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870112-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Underestimating the Philippine Communists---By Thomas A. Marks</HL><DD> 01/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   The cease-fire declared Dec. 10 between the government of Corazon Aquino and the insurgent forces of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) continues fitfully. Even if the planned 60-day respite lasts its full term, however, it is unlikely to bring real peace any closer.    Debate on the merits of a cease-fire has dominated the Manila political scene for months. Arrayed on one side within the government have been those in favor of pursuing the peace initiative. This group includes Mrs. Aquino and her closest advisers, many of whom have pronounced leftist sympathies. In the other corner have been the conservative elements, typified by former Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile, who see the cease-fire in its present form as little more than a communist ploy to allow the CPP to rest and regroup.    The soft-liners in the government cling to the belief that the insurgents are alienated individuals who will make their peace with the system once it addresses their grievances. This view confuses the guerrilla manpower -- in the main composed of so-called &quot;grievance guerrillas&quot; who have taken up arms to fight perceived injustice -- with the leadership and hard core of revolutionaries dedicated to the seizure of power. The latter see reform only as a government tactic to conceal the realities of oppression.    It follows that ceasing hostilities, far from being an end in itself, can work only if it is part of a larger plan to bring back to the fold the &quot;grievance guerrillas,&quot; separating them from the ideologues. Resettlement and retraining schemes, for example, must be available for guerrillas who want to return to normal life.    In two weeks of interviews and travels in the Philippines last month, I found little evidence of efforts to woo back guerrillas who might want to rejoin society. Instead, there seems to be just more of the wishful thinking that led many in the Philippines and abroad to believe that the ousting of Ferdinand Marcos in itself would induce the insurgents to give up the struggle. The misleading nature of this view now seems obvious to all but the last of the true believers, many of whom, alas, are in positions of influence around Mrs. Aquino. For a long time they themselves were in opposition to Mr. Marcos; now they project their own motivations onto the communists, trusting in the good intentions of those who shared their exile.    For its part, the CPP recognizes that it stumbled badly by refusing to take part in the February 1986 election that precipitated the end of the Marcos regime. After decades of justifying its insurgency in terms of opposition to the &quot;U.S.-Marcos dictatorship,&quot; the CPP suddenly found itself having to explain its continued existence in a post-Marcos era dominated by a tremendously popular, democratically elected leader, dedicated to the very causes of social and economic justice the communists claimed for their own. After much discussion, the CPP leadership decided that intra-party unity and future success could best be assured by giving in to the strong public sentiment for a cease-fire. Now the CPP hopes to be ready should another political crisis arise. Its leaders plan to be in the forefront of any such struggle, allegedly protecting the Philippines from the return of a dictator.    To that end, party political workers have been specifically directed to press on with their recruiting and organization efforts. The premier CPP front organization, the National Democratic Front (NDF), a body comparable in structure and function to the communist National Liberation Front (NLF) of the Vietnam War, has been given the lead role in this activity. The effort to conceal ultimate CPP authority and intentions has meant that the cease-fire negotiations and activities have been carried out by, and in the field allegedly implemented on behalf of, the NDF.    The NDF was created by the CPP, however, in 1973. So was the terrorist New People's Army (NPA) some years earlier. But both take orders directly from the CPP leadership. By allowing the NDF heads to appear in public -- many key NDF figures are reasonably well-known personalities of various backgrounds who crossed over to the insurgent camp in opposition to the Marcos regime -- the CPP fosters the image it wishes to project. The image is that of the abused, driven to armed revolt by social injustice and government repression. NDF notables, identified as such in government intelligence files, adeptly defend themselves and their cause in public forums. The real leadership, the CPP hierarchy, does not subject itself to such scrutiny.    The Philippine military is aware of the communist strategy and feels strongly that the ultimate effect of the cease-fire will be to increase CPP capabilities. Because the security forces, especially the military, bear the brunt of the war against the Aquino government, they are naturally dissatisfied with anything they interpret as ceding an advantage to the other side. Among the units I visited, I found a deep sense of disquiet, even betrayal, exacerbated by the material shortcomings and hard terms of service. The change of governments, from Marcos to Aquino, has made virtually no difference in the lives of field units. They are at war, and what counts is staying alive. The actual terms of the cease-fire and the government's expectations were ill-defined for the units I stayed with. This left relatively junior officers to interpret what the truce involved. Men in uniform seemed certain of one thing, succinctly put by a young officer: &quot;It is all a joke. We know the fighting will begin again soon. If we do not prepare, we will be the ones {to die}.&quot;    Not surprisingly, then, the military seems disinclined to come to the aid of President Aquino's government should its support be needed. It is noteworthy that during last year's coup attempt at the Manila Hotel, soldiers in provincial units alerted to move to the capital openly grumbled about being called to participate in &quot;their fight in Manila&quot;; that is, the confrontation between rebel and loyalist units.    The sentiment appears to have grown even stronger as disenchantment has developed with the Aquino administration's approach to the insurgency. It is not that units are at the point of rebellion. But in a crisis -- such as would have occurred had Mr. Enrile fought for the defense minister's position rather than leaving quietly -- the confrontation would be played out with the forces at hand in Manila. Most other units would simply decline to participate.    As far as many military figures are concerned, the truce and its open use by the communists to organize additional forces is close to the final straw. Yet the antagonism toward Manila could be dispelled. For that, the government would have to plan a steady course and make clear to its security forces that the cease-fire fits into a viable framework for peace -- on terms acceptable to the government, not just the communists. With more conflict in the offing, it is essential for the future of Filipino democracy that Mrs. Aquino deal with the rift within government ranks that has been created by a spurious cease-fire.    ---   Mr. Marks, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Hawaii, is a former U.S. military-intelligence analyst who specialized in revolutionary warfare. He has traveled extensively in the Philippines, most recently for two weeks in December. </TEXT></DOC>