<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880928-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Oil Prices Weaken Broadly as Output By OPEC Members Continues to Surge </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD MIN PET </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   World oil markets weakened further following signs that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is ready to sacrifice short-term gains for long-term improvement.    Many oil traders quickly turned bearish after the meeting of OPEC's price committee in Madrid ended Monday without a call for an immediate emergency ministerial conference to deal with the cartel's overproduction. Markets deteriorated further on evidence yesterday of a fresh surge in OPEC production and of bigger price discounts being offered Japanese customers.    On European spot markets, North Sea Brent crude oil fell below $13 a barrel in early dealings, ending the day's active trading 50 cents to 55 cents a barrel lower. October Brent was quoted as low as $12.70 a barrel in late trading.    Prices of OPEC's basket of crudes fell sharply, too. The Dubai grade, an important Middle East crude, was being quoted near $11 a barrel late yesterday with projections from pricing experts that it will decline to $10.65 a barrel or less. Some Persian Gulf producers were said to be offering discounts of as much as 25 cents a barrel off the Dubai spot price to Japanese refiners.    &quot;We're coming down into new (pricing) territory,&quot; said Peter Gignoux, London manager of the international energy desk at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.    U.S. petroleum futures appeared to fare slightly better yesterday. Although futures prices were sharply lower at the opening, reaching the weakest levels in more than two years, they had steadied by midday. West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery then recovered somewhat on the New York Mercantile Exchange to close at $14.14 a barrel, down only six cents.    Traders generally blamed the price slump on OPEC's performance at Madrid. As previously reported, the five leading oil ministers who met in the Spanish capital elected to abandon the search for a quick fix to OPEC's patchwork system of production curbs, choosing instead to take a longer view.    Their idea is to hold a joint session of OPEC's price and long-term strategy committees next month to begin assessing whether a majority of the 13 member-nations want higher prices or higher oil production, and then tailoring the cartel's future actions accordingly. Some analysts noted that the flip side of the coin in this &quot;sea change&quot; in OPEC's strategy could mean a new race toward higher production.    The race may have already begun. After a lull during September's first half, which saw OPEC output drop one million barrels a day from the August level to around 19 million barrels, production is up again -- to a new peak for the year. The latest estimates put OPEC output at more than 20 million barrels a day following last week's surge.    Petro-Logistics Ltd. of Geneva, which closely tracks OPEC production, estimates the average for September will be 20.3 million barrels a day, largely because of a Middle East jump paced by Saudi Arabia. &quot;The Saudis have simply opened the taps,&quot; said Conrad Gerber, president of Petro-Logistics.    Although the Saudis aren't alone -- several others in OPEC also are producing well above their quotas -- Mr. Gerber suggested that &quot;prices below $10 a barrel are becoming a very real possibility.&quot; Some others agree. Norman Higby, Menlo Park, Calif., energy forecaster, predicts that by year's end OPEC's basket of crudes will average $10 a barrel and West Texas Intermediate will be under $12.    But many oil experts see rising demand offsetting OPEC's increased production, thus spurring a recovery in petroleum prices. &quot;We think that if OPEC comes up with a credible agreement -- and it looks as if it will -- $16 WTI (West Texas Intermediate) for the end of the year is very plausible,&quot; said Antonio M. Szabo, manager of petroleum planning for Bonner andamp; Moore Market Consultants, Houston.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most corn and soybean futures prices rallied from Monday's plunge. Traders attributed the rebound in part to renewed rumors that the Soviet Union will continue its recent corn buying spree. Traders also bought corn futures contracts in anticipation of the harvest ending shortly, and easing the downward pressure on prices. Prices usually slip during the corn harvest, which is in full swing, as elevators sell corn futures contracts to hedge the corn they purchase from farmers. Cash and futures prices usually rally as harvest pressure eases, said Victor Lespinasse, a floor broker for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago. Many traders expect dry weather in the Midwest this week to permit corn farmers to complete the harvest earlier than normal. Soybean futures prices rose as traders short in the market bought back contracts. The short-covering rally was triggered when the price of the November soybean contract firmed after Monday's drop. Wheat futures prices fell slightly.    SUGAR: Futures prices rebounded and more than erased Monday's plunge. The March contract rose 0.64 cent a pound to 9.34 cents. On Monday, the March contract fell 0.59 cent. According to one sugar dealer, there weren't any new developments to account for the strong demand. &quot;The market was simply oversold on Monday, and the sellers, principally one big trade house and a big brokerage, became heavy buyers, pushing prices higher. It was a technical bounceback,&quot; he said. Also, some demand for futures contracts was thought to have come from Japan, he said. There was a rumor that China had bought some sugar in the world cash market, but the dealer said he tended to disbelieve it. Tunisia bought 12,000 tons of refined sugar, but he said this was routine business and didn't affect futures.    COPPER: Futures prices again rose to life-of-contract highs because of worries that supplies are decreasing. September delivery copper rose as high as $1.2150 a pound, before settling at $1.2140, up 1.70 cents. December copper was up 1.70 cents to $1.0825, after reaching a high of $1.0850. One analyst noted that copper in New York's Commodity Exchange warehouses, which amounted to 18,000 tons at the end of 1987 when the price reached a record $1.46 a pound, subsequently dropped to 9,500 tons before recovering to about 25,000 tons. The current inventory is 14,675 tons. Another analyst said that amount isn't enough to satisfy the September contracts outstanding that haven't been offset by either an opposite trade or a delivery. Those contracts end Wednesday. The number of September open contracts -- 1,476 -- at the beginning of yesterday's trading represented the equivalent of 18,450 tons of copper, or 3,775 tons more than there are in the exchange inventory, he said.    COFFEE: Futures prices rose on improved prospects for an accord on global export quotas for the new coffee year, beginning Oct. 1. The December contract advanced 2.41 cents a pound to $1.2924. An analyst said optimism was spurred by a report that Colombia and Brazil had proposed an initial export quota of 54 million bags during International Coffee Organization talks in London. That compares with 58 million bags at the start of the current year. A bag weighs 132 pounds. However, the analyst said, the quantity would gradually grow to a total of 58 million bags, with the increase coming in mild coffees if their prices exceed those of Robustas by 25%. </TEXT></DOC>