<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870127-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Immigrant Saga:Indians in U.S. ProsperIn Their New Country,And Not Just in Motels---Fields Range From InsuranceTo Newsstands to Science;One Anesthesiologist in 10---Higher Education Gives Edge---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   To understand why every other motel in America now seems to be owned by somebody named Patel, it helps to know something about Benjamin Disraeli and a girl nicknamed Drina.    She grew up to become Queen Victoria. He was a politician who kept extending his term of endearment by doing things she liked, such as wheedling out of Parliament in 1876 a new imperial title for her: empress of India. This meant she couldn't help but invite Indian colonial troops to England for royal celebrations, like the Diamond Jubilee in 1897 marking her 60th year on the throne.    Some went. Some returned home by way of Canada, which left such a deep impression that many of them returned and became farmers and foresters along the Canadian and U.S. west coasts.    And that, more or less, is how Indians discovered America.    How they discovered motels many years later is a more complicated saga involving both the U.S. Congress and former Ugandan dictator Idi Amin. In any case, one study estimated that by last year, 28% of the 53,629 motels and hotels (mostly small ones) in the U.S. were Indian-owned. In Anaheim and along San Francisco's Route 1 and in sections of Georgia, Oklahoma and Texas, it is hard to find one that isn't.    Motels, however, are small chapatis for Indian immigrants, who now number more than 500,000 and who are arriving in the U.S. at the rate of 500 a week. For a group that the U.S. government until recently categorized as &quot;Asians -- Others,&quot; Indians, like the newsstands they run in New York City, have become highly visible.    Their education and income levels are higher than those of most of the 5.1 million Asians who now call the U.S. home. And their success in business, science and a wide variety of other pursuits may be unmatched by any other recent group of immigrants.    To mention only a few among the significant &quot;Others&quot;:    Har Gobind Khorana, the first person to synthesize a gene in a laboratory; Mohan Murjani, the man who put Gloria Vanderbilt's name on the blue-jeaned derrieres of millions of American women; Jaydev Patel, the best of New York Life Insurance Co.'s 9,000-odd agents; Didhar Singh Baines, the biggest peach farmer in America; Sankar Chatterjee, the paleontologist who discovered the fossil bones that may prove that dinosaurs evolved into birds; Raj Reddy, the president-elect of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence; and Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, the astrophysicist who discovered what would become known as black holes and white dwarfs in a universe of dying stars.    If you have surgery, chances are one in 10 that your anesthesiologist is from India. Many of the 28,000 Indian-trained physicians in the U.S. went into this specialty when anesthesiologists were in short supply here. Indian doctors are also filling other medical jobs, manning the U.S.'s inner-city hospitals, psychiatric wards and rural clinics. Others, who can't get medical jobs right away, are selling shoes, clerking and doing hospital laboratory work while they wait for hard-to-get internships and residencies.    If you have a toxic dump to clean up, there is a good chance that an Indian engineer's company will do it. Not many U.S. firms want such dirty work. At universities, tenured professors prefer young Indian graduate students as research assistants. They work hard without complaining, knowing that this ticket to eventual U.S. residence can be punched or canceled at professorial whim.    Among other diverse success stories are those of Zubin Mehta, the director of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra; Sant Singh Chatwal, a restaurateur and hotel keeper; Narendra Karmarkar, the Bell Laboratories wizard whose algorithm for linear programming is making computers speedier; Sirjan Lal Tandon, the founder of Silicon Valley's Tandon Corp.; Amar G. Bose, who reinvented stereo speakers; and Ostaro, a swami, astrologer and market forecaster whose uncanny World Series predictions were marred only when the sixth game lasted beyond midnight, thus confounding his prediction of a Saturday Red Sox victory. The Mets won several minutes into Sunday.    All immigrant groups, of course, have their success stories. Asians now seem particularly zealous in pursuit of the American dream. The Indians -- despite discrimination -- have made it look almost easy. Nearly two-thirds of male Indian immigrants hold managerial or professional jobs.    It is true that for every rising entrepreneur there are poor Indians scrubbing restaurant kitchens, but 1980 census data showed that while the overall U.S. poverty rate was 12.4%, it was only 9.9% for ethnic Indians. The median income for all Indian households was $25,644, compared with $18,544 for Chinese-immigrant households and $16,841 for all U.S. households. In India, per-capita income is only $284 a year.    Higher education gives the Indians an edge. Some 78% of the men and 52% of the women, according to the same 1980 census data, had college degrees. Less than 20% of all Americans do. Many Indians come to the U.S. at first for graduate study, then stay on. (Today there are some 16,000 Indian college students in the U.S.) In this way, India loses many of its best and brightest. Back home, only one in three Indians is literate.    Already speaking, thinking and dreaming in English helped give the Indians a leg up. But in dozens of talks, Indian immigrants say that they were helped the most by growing up in a country that, like the U.S., is democratic and pluralistic. India's is a more raucous democracy, with more than 100 political parties and a bureaucracy that hobbles economic initiative with red tape and makes political issues of the tiniest decisions. But anyone who survives, let alone succeeds, in such an environment is likely to acquire talents to put the average American tax-shelter promoter to shame.    Few other Asian immigrants come from nations with such social and cultural diversity as India, with 33 major languages and some 1,500 minor ones, seven major religions and new ones propounded by every sidewalk guru, and a melange of six major ethnic groups. &quot;There is nothing homogeneous about Indians,&quot; says K.G. Jan Pillai, a Yale Law School graduate. &quot;Tolerance and adaptability are rooted in our culture. We are not pigeonholed.&quot; Thus in the U.S., he observes of Indians, &quot;we're scattered all over; we don't have Indiatowns.&quot;    Mr. Pillai, who oversees analysis for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, is the highest-ranking Indian in the government. He was the founding chairman in 1980 of the National Association of Americans of Asian Indian Descent, formed to enhance Indian visibility and political influence. In 1982, the group got the Small Business Administration to recognize Indians as a minority group, eligible for the preferences given black, Hispanic and other minority businesses in competing for government work.    It came too late to help immigrants like Jaydev R. Patel, who arrived at New York's Port Authority bus terminal one day in 1969 with little more than a master's degree in organic chemistry and a U.S. residence permit, or green card.    Mr. Patel had gone to New York from the small farming town of Sojitra in the west-coast Indian state of Gujarat, north of Bombay, by way of Kenya and Canada. The name Patel, from a landowning clan that evolved into a merchant class, is common in Gujarat. (Next to Hasidic Jews, Indians make up the largest group of merchants in New York's diamond district. Almost all of them come from the single Gujarati town of Palanpur.)    Under British rule, Mr. Patel's grandfather, father and uncle were among Gujaratis encouraged by the British to man plantations in East Africa, where they took up trade. Mr. Patel followed his family to Kenya and taught for a year there before deciding to move to Canada.    He earned a meager living in a Toronto unemployment office as a $1.21-an-hour clerk and stayed only 18 months. Once in the U.S., he got a chemist's job in a Newark, N.J., laboratory. Over the next three years, he saved enough to return to India to acquire a wife, a common practice among Indian immigrant men. Back in the U.S., he was jobless again but aware of certain trends.    Patels, he knew, were going into motels. Why?    From the turn of the century until 1965, only about 16,000 Indians came to the U.S., largely because of a &quot;Hindu exclusion&quot; policy that paralleled that set by the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. There were anti-Indian riots in Washington state in 1907, and as late as 1935 billboards that read &quot;No jobs for Japs or Hindus.&quot; After the more liberal immigration act of 1965, Indians and other Asians began arriving at the allowable rate of about 20,000 a year. In 1972, Idi Amin expelled tens of thousands of Indians from Uganda. Many of them were Patels who ended up &quot;by hook or by crook,&quot; says Mr. Patel, in the U.S.    It is a phenomenon of emigration that success by pioneers in one business in a new land gets trumpeted back home, encouraging others to emigrate and go into the same business. That happened with the Patels, for whom the motel business seemed a perfect fit: The Patels were security-conscious savers, eager to own property; small motels were relatively cheap up to the early 1970s, and it amazed the Patels that up to 95% of the purchase price could be financed at interest rates that were rock-bottom by India's standards. A motel provided property, home, business and employment for a large extended family.    Later the motel business became harder and more expensive to enter. In some places, Indian owners have had to hire non-Indians as receptionists to make guests feel more comfortable, and Caucasian competitors have advertised their own motels as &quot;American-owned.&quot; So while Jaydev Patel didn't buy a motel, he did begin selling life insurance to motel keepers named Patel. He found many of them in telephone books, along with other Gujarati prospects with names like Gandhi and Mehta.    In 1973, Mr. Patel broke New York Life's record for first-year agents, selling coverage of about $4 million. In 1983, he sold policies with $86.5 million in coverage, the company's all-time record for sales by a single agent. Today Mr. Patel, now 44, serves some 4,000 clients from his Livingston, N.J., office. Almost all are of Indian origin, and about half are named Patel.    New York Life is delighted, and not only because of Mr. Patel's sales. His clients are mostly nondrinking, nonsmoking vegetarians, and their claims rate is low.    Mr. Patel says he now has too many potential customers to handle. In part, this is because of an influx of less affluent Indian relatives of established immigrants. Relatives get entry priority under current U.S. rules.    By the 1990 census, Indians expect their numbers in the U.S. to exceed 900,000. The largest concentrations are in the New York-New Jersey-Pennsylvania area (about 120,000) and in California (about 60,000), but generally the Indian immigrants are widely dispersed. That makes it difficult for them to flex their muscle at the polls, although Dalip Singh Saund represented a Los Angeles district in Congress for three terms in the 1960s. The Indians hope to gain electoral clout through political-action committees instead.    Walter Mondale ran afoul of the nascent Indian political machine in 1984 when his campaign staff demanded an $80,000 upfront contribution in return for his speaking at an Atlantic City convention of the National Association of Americans of Asian Indian Descent. The group refused. Sen. Robert Dole showed up for nothing. The group endorsed Ronald Reagan for president, and it remains very friendly to Sen. Dole. </TEXT></DOC>