<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0168 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:France May Yet Give Mr. Mitterrand a Second Term---By Philip Revzin</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The French, torn by years of economic uncertainty, riven by left-right partisan strife, divided by explosive racial issues, shaken by AIDS, are looking for a healer in their next president, a centrist who can unite them on a platform of moderation, decency and tolerance.    They may have found him in an unlikely quarter: the Elysee Palace.    Francois Mitterrand, who in 1981 stormed the electoral Bastille holding high the red rose of socialism, will spend the holidays sifting through appeals from left, right and center that he run for a second seven-year term next April. If he does decide to run it won't be as a starry-eyed reformer this time, but rather as everybody's favorite uncle, the one politician so unburdened by ideological baggage that he can pull the country together. If he does decide to run, he could well win.    Either Mr. Mitterrand, now 71 years old, has changed France, or vice versa. The reality is a little of both, but mainly the vice versa. After trying some radical changes during his first two years in office, Mr. Mitterrand turned full-speed astern in 1983, dumping his Communist Party allies in the process, and relegating them to the margins of electoral politics. It wasn't enough to save his Socialist Party colleagues, who got trounced in the 1986 parliamentary elections, but Mr. Mitterrand has been for the past 20 months a skillful constitutional arbiter, restraining the alleged right-wing excesses of Jacques Chirac and creating the maximum political havoc for the right in the process.    At this he is an unquestioned master. The other day, Mr. Chirac was having trouble getting a favorite bill -- to change the legal status of auto maker Renault from that of a state agency to that of a normal, though still state-owned, company -- through the National Assembly. The bill was mildly opposed by the Socialists, but virulently opposed by the Communist Party, whose union practically used to run Renault. The Communists proposed 3,500 amendments to the bill, making it impossible to finish work on it during the current session. OK, said Mr. Chirac, we'll deal with it during a special session in January called to consider other legislation. Wait, said Mr. Mitterrand. It's the president, not the prime minister, who decides such things, so forget it. With one stroke Mr. Mitterrand had defended the constitution and shored up his credibility on the left, left Mr. Chirac looking disorganized, and effectively left the Renault bill to be decided by the next president.    Mr. Mitterrand also has managed to shrug off Gallically the myriad &quot;affaires&quot; that have implicated members of his Socialist government in assorted quasi-legal and illegal activities, including sales of arms to Iran. It's not so much that no mud sticks, it's just that here mud seems to stick to everybody, left and right, fairly equally.    If Mr. Mitterrand decides he'd like to be the next president, he'll obviously need more of a campaign theme than embarrassing Mr. Chirac. The 1981 slogan, &quot;Change Your Life&quot; will no longer do. Hints of what the new themes might be are now being carefully dropped by Mr. Mitterrand and his aides. The themes center on building a better Europe, with France at its heart. The president, for instance, welcomed the INF treaty more warmly than did Mr. Chirac, but added pointedly that now the real work of defending Europe must begin. He says he favors NATO, though not the reintegration of French forces into the military wing, and he wants U.S. troops to stay in Europe. But he also is priming French and European opinion for the day the troops might leave. He has favored a joint Franco-German military brigade, and has been busily reassuring the West Germans that France's shorter-range nuclear weapons, which can reach only as far as Germany, won't be fired at them as a warning to the Russians. He has even stepped up military cooperation with Britain.    On economic matters, Mr. Mitterrand has become a social democrat, letting the conservative government try free-market policies that have been mildly, if unspectacularly, successful. If he runs and wins he'd almost certainly name a new prime minister, but he wouldn't necessarily switch policies. Talk of renationalizing what Mr. Chirac has denationalized is rarely heard. Tax increases, even soak-the-rich ones, are barely mentioned. He has continued to push proposals for international monetary reform that have gotten nowhere, but might in the world after the Oct. 19 stock-market crash. Perhaps more important, he, like everybody else here, is worried that when the European Community's internal barriers fall in 1992, it will be German, not French, companies ready to grow to European scale.    But, so far at least, the pre-presidential campaign here hasn't been about issues but rather about personalities, and more specifically about one personality, that of Mr. Mitterrand. The central question of French politics is &quot;will he or won't he?&quot; and that suits the president fine. His utterances on this question have been characteristically Delphic, leaving the impression that he'd just as soon retire to write books, but if his country really needed him, he might be available.    With an announcement not expected until February or March, Mr. Mitterrand is nonetheless now being solicited by artists, writers and politicians to run again. Yves Montand, the actor who once thought about running for president himself on a right-of-center platform, went on television the other night to bow out and throw his support to Mr. Mitterrand. The latest issue of the Paris magazine Globe has on its cover a silhouette of Mr. Mitterrand, looking a lot like the famous silhouettes of Alfred Hitchcock, imploring him to &quot;not leave us. . . .&quot; Tributes to the president in this issue included one from Dominique Jamet, an editorial writer for the virulently right-wing Quotidien de Paris newspaper. Mr. Jamet was promptly fired.    This campaign of imploration is reminiscent of the quadrennial spectacle performed by the late Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago, who would always deny wanting to run again, would then receive countless delegations of businessmen and civic leaders begging him to save the city, and then agonizingly decide to run just one more time, as he had intended to do all along.    Could Mr. Mitterrand really be re-elected? Current polls show non-candidate Mitterrand beating handily both Mr. Chirac and former Prime Minister Raymond Barre, who are both expected to run, splitting the right-wing vote in the first round of the voting. A recent poll by the Sofres agency in the Nouvel Observateur magazine showed that of 1,000 Frenchmen questioned, 61% thought Mr. Mitterrand would be a good president over the next seven years. Mr. Barre trailed with 56% and Mr. Chirac lagged with 50%. Perhaps more significantly, the polls show Mr. Mitterrand doing substantially better against the right than would Michel Rocard, the Socialist's probable candidate should the president retire. In Mr. Mitterrand's favor, too, is the split among supporters of Messrs. Chirac and Barre, significant numbers of whom would, if forced to choose in a runoff, vote not for the other right-wing contender but for Mr. Mitterrand.    ---   Mr. Revzin is Paris bureau chief of The Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>