<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880118-0033 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN WILL SEEK more Contra aid despite concessions by Nicaragua.    The White House said the president would request congressional approval of further aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, a request it delayed last fall rather than risk criticism of interference in the Central American peace plan. Nicaragua's Ortega, following a weekend meeting of five presidents from the region on the plan's deadline, said he would suspend a six-year state of emergency and hold the first-ever direct cease-fire talks with the Contras.    A rebel leader predicted the Contra directorate, which is to meet today in Miami, would insist on a wide-ranging agenda before agreeing to talks.    ---   HAITIANS STAYED AWAY from a military-run presidential election.    No violence was reported at the mostly empty polling places, in contrast with election-day violence that killed 34 and led to the junta's cancellation of a civilian-run November vote. Four candidates from the canceled election led a boycott of yesterday's vote and a weekend general strike. The opposition said only 5% to 20% of the three million eligible voters turned out. Election officials refused to make an estimate.    Official returns aren't due for a week, but journalists and one of the 11 candidates said balloting was manipulated in favor of Leslie Manigat.    ---   An Israeli judge temporarily blocked the deportations of four more Palestinians accused of fomenting violence in the Gaza Strip. Israel's deportation to Lebanon of four Palestinians last week provoked U.N. condemnation. Meanwhile, the army reported a lull in the six-week wave of violence in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.    ---   Argentine troops began surrounding a northeastern garrison where a rebel army officer and about 100 sympathizers have dug in. Lt. Col. Aldo Rico escaped house arrest in Buenos Aires Friday, where he was being held on charges of leading a rebellion in April aimed at ending prosecutions of army officers for human rights abuses.    ---   Filipinos began voting in local elections involving about 150,000 candidates for 16,000 posts in more than 1,500 municipalities. Gunmen killed a gubernatorial candidate hours before polls opened, bringing the campaign death toll to at least 81. The elections may allow President Aquino's government to consolidate power.    ---   The Arizona House will begin impeachment proceedings this week against Gov. Mecham, the House speaker said. A special counsel's report released Friday said Mecham had concealed a $350,000 campaign loan and improperly borrowed $80,000 of state funds. Mecham was indicted Jan. 8 on charges involving the campaign loan.    ---   Iran said it has agreed to talks with the six-member Gulf Cooperation Council, which generally supports Iraq in the seven-year-old Persian Gulf war, but Western diplomats in the region said Iranian attacks on shipping could endanger any dialogue. Syria, an Iranian ally, has helped arrange contacts between Tehran and gulf states.    ---   The Justice Department withdrew a two-year-old arrest warrant for Mohammed Abbas, wanted in connection with the 1985 hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro and the murder of an American. U.S. officials said the warrant was withdrawn after an Italian court convicted him in absentia and sentenced him to life in prison.    ---   Shevardnadze arrived in Bonn for talks on arms control and a range of bilateral issues with Chancellor Kohl and other top West German officials. The Soviet foreign minister's trip marks the highest-level Soviet visit to West Germany in five years.    ---   South Korea called for international trade and diplomatic sanctions against North Korea. The steps were urged after a woman confessed on South Korean television to blowing up a Korean Air Lines jet with 115 aboard in November on orders from a top North Korean official.    Kim Dae Jung said he will give up his party leadership if South Korea's opposition unites for legislative elections. Kim broke away from the main opposition party before last month's presidential election, splitting the opposition vote and allowing the election of ruling party candidate Roh Tae Woo.    ---   Prime Minister Chirac declared he is a candidate for the French presidency, becoming the first major contender to enter the race. Chirac was expected to enter the race late, but a recent poll put him behind a conservative rival and gave President Mitterrand an edge of more than 2-to-1.    ---   Cuban athletes expressed support for Havana's decision to stay away from the Seoul Olympics. Cuban leader Castro Friday announced that his country's athletes would not attend, citing political unrest in South Korea and a North Korean demand that it be allowed to host some Olympic events.    ---   Died: Sean MacBride, 83, winner of the Nobel and Lenin peace prizes, Friday, in Dublin, of pneumonia. </TEXT></DOC>