<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890821-0136 </DOCNO><DD> = 890821 </DD><AN> 890821-0136. </AN><HL> Social Security's Insecure Future@  ----@  By Dorcas R. Hardy </HL><DD> 08/21/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GOVMT LABOR </CO><IN> FINANCIAL, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Imagine walking into your congressman's office with irrefutable evidence that the U.S., in the next century, will face a potentially devastating economic and social crisis. You assure your representative, however, that opportunity exists to take early corrective action to head off this impending disaster.    Your optimism that such action will occur is damped when you tell your congressman what issues are involved. Social Security? Forget it. The senior-citizen organizations won't allow Congress even to discuss the issue. The federal deficit? It's a no-win topic. Private pension policy? It's boring, a non-vote-getter.    Due to its politically unappealing nature, the most critical economic issue America will face in the 21st century continues to simmer unabated.    This potential crisis involves the nation's trickiest political football, a Social Security system that already spends $600 million per day, one-fifth of the entire federal budget. It focuses upon the country's largest voting bloc, the 75 million members of the baby-boom generation who will, in the next century, start receiving federal retirement benefits in cumulative amounts of unprecedented scale.    And this crisis will stem largely from the birth dearth that has followed the baby boom. With more people choosing to stay single, a 50% divorce rate and a fertility rate of 1.9 per woman per lifetime, prospects for a future population boom are quite dim. Even 750,000 new immigrants annually, an optimistic number, will not alter this scenario. The pared-down generation will be asked to pay the way for the waves of &quot;baby-boom retirees.&quot;    Add to this mix the rising federal deficit, the nation's poor personal-savings rate and the small number of workers currently covered by private pension plans, and you have a clear picture of the convergence of factors that threatens this nation's future economic security.    This is a combination of issues that no politician interested in self-preservation wants to touch.    On the positive side, the U.S. has a healthy economy and a stable Social Security system that provides a window of opportunity to prepare for tomorrow's challenges. Policy makers, though, need to acknowledge the existence of a potential problem and find the courage to address it. Here's how they can start:    --Inject integrity into the policy-making process. The existence of a bulging Social Security Trust Fund, growing by billions of dollars each year and projected to reach a peak of $12 trillion, presents a dangerous irony. Its presence could actually result in less support for future retirees.    Even if we accept Social Security Administration projections, which assume continuing economic growth and accompanying high increases in real wages, the government will start tapping into the Trust Fund in the 2020s, when current revenues will no longer be able to meet the substantially increased benefit outgo, and exhaust it shortly thereafter. That's if there is anything there to tap.    The inclusion of the Trust Fund in the unified Gramm-Rudman-Hollings federal budget enables Congress to present its constituents with the illusion of deficit-reduction progress. Thus, there is less pressure to reduce spending, the operating budget continues to grow, Social Security's Trust Fund (by law, invested in government securities) is used to finance that deficit, and sufficient resources won't exist when they are desperately needed to finance an aging America.    It's time for Congress to follow a truth-in-spending policy. At the very least, the public should be given two deficit figures: one with Social Security included, one without. The result would be increased pressure to make tough budgetary decisions and leave the nation's retirement nest egg alone.    And, as difficult as it may be, legislators must resist the temptation to use the Trust Fund to help education, repair the nation's infrastructure or bail out or expand the Medicare program. That money already is committed and its integrity must not be compromised.    --Expand the retirement revenue pool. Preventing the Social Security system from undergoing even greater stress will require that retirees enhance their incomes with revenue from other sectors. The program was, after all, designed to provide a floor of retirement protection, not to be the predominant source of income.    Continuing the current level of dependence on Social Security -- almost two-thirds of current retirees rely on the system for more than half of their income -- would require further increases down the road in the Social Security payroll tax, particularly as the work force shrinks.    That's not feasible. Increased payroll taxes will fuel the likelihood of intergenerational conflict, as well as potential socioeconomic tensions stemming from the disparity between unskilled, low-paid immigrant workers and middle-income Caucasian retirees.    It's clear we must create a larger pool of resources of which Social Security, while maintaining stable benefits, occupies a smaller share.    Start with individual savings. The Individual Retirement Account was an effective tool that generated $250 billion in new savings during its pre-1986 tax-preferred heyday. It should be resurrected. Also, tax incentives should be utilized to spur the financial services industry into creating attractive, innovative vehicles, such as plans that combine health insurance with asset accumulation or reverse-mortgage programs that allow the elderly to take advantage of their home ownership.    Then Congress should move to simplify the complex maze of pension laws and regulations that lead to prohibitive administrative and compliance costs for many employers, particularly the small businesses that create the preponderance of new jobs.    It's become a popular sport of some federal policy makers to chastise the public for doing a poor job of saving. They should end their berating.    The American worker has had every reason to use his or her money for purposes other than investment into savings vehicles that may not be viable tomorrow. Betting on government consistency in recent years has been a sucker bet.    The treatment of IRAs is one glaring example of Washington changing the rules mid-game. If the government won't keep the rules of the savings game clear and consistent, then it should stop blaming the public for choosing not to play.    --Bring the retirement age into the 1990s. The idea of retiring at age 65 is increasingly archaic. If 65 was the proper retirement age in the U.S. in 1940, then today, based on rising life expectancy, it should be 73.    The Economist magazine editorialized last year that the best kind of pension reform is to encourage the old to work longer. This not only makes sense but, in light of smaller work forces and the need for additional revenue, it becomes an economic necessity.    Both the public and private sectors can make this happen. Congress should do away with the counterproductive Social Security retirement-earnings test, which penalizes retirement-age people who continue to work. Private employers should reconsider pension policies that offer early-retirement incentives.    With the enactment of these steps must come a greater public awareness of the vulnerabilities of Social Security and the need for a cohesive retirement-income policy. A Wirthlin Group survey last November showed 80% of the working public having a positive outlook on retirement. Given what we know about the future, some might call that blissful ignorance. I would prefer to call it optimism that won't be betrayed by a federal lack of vision. We have a massive task ahead of us. Having seen firsthand, though, the revitalization of a Social Security program to which many had delivered last rites early in the decade, I believe that solutions always accompany the willingness to look for them.    ---   Ms. Hardy was, until July 31, commissioner of Social Security. </TEXT></DOC>