<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID U.S. ships must escort Kuwaiti oil tankers in the Persian Gulf.    In the face of mounting domestic criticism and tepid allied support, the president said in a televised speech that &quot;if we don't do the job, the Soviets will.&quot; He also said a new allied agreement reached at the Venice summit has created a &quot;historic opportunity&quot; for an arms-control accord with the Soviets, and told U.S. negotiators to propose eliminating short and medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe.    Reagan said leaders of the other industrialized countries have &quot;a sense of unease&quot; about U.S. budget deficits, but he offered no concrete reduction plans.    ---   STUDENTS FOUGHT South Korean police in nine cities, injuring more than 200.    Chanting &quot;Rise up, rise up,&quot; 60,000 students at 45 universities protested against President Chun's government. In pitched battles, students attacked at least five police stations and trapped and beat 43 officers south of Seoul. Meanwhile, 10,000 Roman Catholics attended a Mass for democracy at Myuongdong Cathedral in the capital, site of a six-day takeover by students that ended peacefully when police withdrew.    The U.S. praised the moderation of security forces in handling the student protest at the cathedral, but expressed concern about the continuing violence.    ---   Lt. Col. North learned of Attorney General Meese's inquiry into the Iran-Contra affair within hours of the decision to go ahead with the investigation in November, a former White House aide told congressional committees. Meanwhile, a U.S. judge ordered North to testify under a grant of limited immunity.    ---   A federal appeals court ruled that Deaver must stand trial on perjury charges. The former White House aide had argued for the dismissal of charges of lying to a congressional panel and grand jury investigating his lobbying activities, claiming the independent counsel who handled the case lacked constitutional authority.    ---   The Supreme Court struck down, 9-0, a Los Angeles airport rule that bars &quot;First Amendment activities,&quot; such as collecting signatures or distributing pamphlets, in the terminal. Justices also ruled, 5-4, against the use of &quot;victim impact statements&quot; during sentencing in trials that may involve the death penalty.    ---   A Warsaw Pact ship shelled a West German vessel observing an East Bloc exercise in the Baltic Sea, wounding three sailors. A West German defense official, who said the attack was accidental, said the tender Neckar was hit four times by antiaircraft shells as a target drone passed near it during the gunnery practice.    ---   TWA crew members traveled to West Germany to try to identify a suspect in the 1985 hijacking of a jet to Beirut in which a Navy diver was killed and 39 Americans held hostage for 17 days. Security officials didn't say if the crew members identified Mohammed Hamadi, whose extradition is sought by the U.S., as a hijacker.    ---   Communists appeared headed for a major defeat, dropping to 27% in Italian voting, while a gain to 14% was predicted for Socialists, and Christian Democrats appeared to be holding even at 34%. The projections in the two-day election were made by a private research institute considered reliable by all parties, with final returns expected today.    ---   Israeli troops took control of a U.N. post in southern Lebanon held by Norwegian peace-keeping forces and, in other fighting, wounded a Nepalese soldier, the head of the U.N. force in Lebanon said. The Israelis abandoned the U.N. post after three hours, the official said. Israeli army officials in Tel Aviv denied that the fighting took place.    ---   Sikh gunmen killed two people in random attacks on crowds in Amritsar, India, bringing the death toll in three days of separatist fighting in Punjab and New Delhi to 32. Meanwhile, police searched house-to-house in the Indian capital for the Sikhs who staged attacks in wealthy areas of the city Saturday that killed 14 and wounded 20.    ---   Shultz said he is convinced that Philippine President Aquino is winning her battle against Communist insurgents and that the U.S. will continue to offer economic and military support but no large increases. The secretary of state, in Manila for talks with Aquino, is expected today to sign accords releasing $163 million in U.S. aid.    ---   Two black youths were shot and wounded in an attack on a South African police patrol as tensions mounted on the eve of the 11th anniversary of 1976 mass riots in Soweto, in which 575 people were killed. A two-week protest by anti-apartheid groups is scheduled to begin today with thousands of blacks expected to stay home from work.    ---   Sri Lanka agreed to allow unarmed Indian ships to bring supplies to Tamils in the Jaffna peninsula. Colombo turned back a relief flotilla earlier this month during an offensive against separatist guerrillas. Meanwhile, eight rebels were killed and six government troops wounded in guerrilla attacks near the provincial capital of Jaffna. </TEXT></DOC>