<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:In Defense of Animal Rights</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Donald Kennedy's editorial-page article &quot;The Anti-Scientific Method&quot; (Oct. 29) is a masterpiece of intellectual dishonesty in its critique of the animal-rights movement and its pretension to speak for scientific rationality.    First, it begs all the questions raised, not only by animal-liberation partisans but also by respected philosophers and scientists about whether science is ethically neutral, whether science should be subject to some control with regard to its ethical implications, and whether the advancement of research at all costs is a legitimate a priori. These questions have been part of the debate by scientists, intellectuals, politicians and part of the public at least since the development of the atomic bomb. The insinuation that they reflect a mentality that favors quack cures or are taken seriously because of the public's belief in astrology and the efficacy of pyramids is nothing but smear tactics.    Mr. Kennedy also leaps over the large and growing philosophical literature that argues on strictly rational grounds for the rights of nature, both animate and inanimate. And it also avoids the questions raised, not only by activists but also by scientists, about the legitimacy of research involving the torture of animals. There are genuine issues here, about which animal-rights partisans and scientists themselves are in disagreement.    Should an animal be tortured just to duplicate prior experiments, to produce a better eye shadow or deodorant, or to test weapons of destruction? To help save the life of an existing person? To help keep an unborn person from getting a cold? How many such tests could be done instead through computer simulation? How many of their results are actually transferable to human beings? Animal-rights activists have helped raise these issues. Their only common response to them is that they should be discussed. By speaking from the position of a monolithic science and cutting off all critical questions, Mr. Kennedy abandons the position of critical rationality that is the justification of scientific research.    Second, his article falsely portrays science and scientists as a minority threatened by hordes of animal-rights activists, whereas in our society all the institutional power is with the scientific-technical-industrial establishment. It is the research laboratories of large corporations, universities and the military, from Star Wars research down to cosmetics companies, that have the billions of dollars, the political influence, the media connections and the general support of the public. That representatives of this power should feel threatened by a handful of activists who have been able to obtain a small public hearing shows either bad conscience or paranoia.    The idea that there is currently a struggle between the interests of vast hordes of &quot;animal lovers&quot; and a small embattled minority of parents of cystic-fibrosis children being protected by well-meaning and misunderstood scientists is laughable. It functions as a manipulative attempt to make the existing overwhelming institutional power of science invulnerable to criticism and to protect the activities of biology departments and university planning boards and real-estate development projects from public discussion.    In fact, the threat to scientific rationality comes from completely different sources: not from the few hundred or perhaps thousand animal-rights activists, most of whom are educated, rationalistic and take science seriously enough to care about its consequences, but from a government that disregards what scientists know about acid rain, the ozone layer, overpopulation and venereal diseases; from industries that want to make a buck regardless of what scientists know about chemical pollution, and from the millions of people who are trying to suppress science and rational inquiry in favor of the original intent of either the Bible or the Constitution.    It is disingenuous to worry about the rights of &quot;future loved ones&quot; to benefit from pharmaceutical research in a context of social and ecological policy in which the general rights of future generations play no part, and to worry about the science education of voters when we cannot even scientifically educate the White House. Perhaps this is where Mr. Kennedy should turn his attention.    Jeremy J. Shapiro   Fielding Institute   Santa Barbara, Calif.   ---   Mr. Kennedy speaks on an important subject that has a direct impact on the future human health and economic strength of the U.S. The program he proposes to remedy the problem misses the key element.    We must train scientists to be able to advocate, in lay terms, their positions. Scientific questions will continue to be debated in the context of narrowly focused local issues. The scientific community is losing in such confrontations not because the public is scientifically ignorant, but because the scientists are unable to communicate effectively in the political arena. The mistrust of science is a result of a profound failure by scientists to describe their aims and processes in terms that can be understood by people outside their particular specialties.    Peter A. Michel   Darien, Conn.</TEXT></DOC>