<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870527-0082 </DOCNO><HL> Sweden FilesCharges in ProbeOf Nobel Unit---Two Businessmen NamedFor Alleged SmugglingOf Explosives to Iranians---By Stephen D. MooreStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><DATELINE> STOCKHOLM, Sweden  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Prosecutors filed smuggling charges against two Swedish businessmen in the first legal action stemming from a three-year investigation of Sweden's largest defense contractor, the AB Bofors unit of Nobel Industrier Sverige AB.    Special prosecutor Stig Age announced his office will seek indictments for felony counts of smuggling against Mats Lundberg, former marketing director of a Bofors explosives division; and Karl Erik Schmitz, owner of Scandinavian Commodity AB, a trading company based in Malmoe, Sweden, which allegedly conducted numerous arms deals with the Iranian government.    Prosecutors base their charges on 42 alleged incidents between 1981 and 1985, Mr. Age said. Police and customs investigators believe Mr. Lundberg and Mr. Schmitz conspired to smuggle explosives and powder used to manufacture ammunition to Iran via East Germany and Yugoslavia.    If convicted, the two men face jail terms of between six months and six years. Mr. Age said the government also will seek to recover several hundred million Swedish kronor in damages from Nobel Industrier, Scandinavian Commodity, and Messrs. Lundberg and Schmitz. (One U.S. dollar equals about 6.23 Swedish kronor.)    Mr. Lundberg said he will fight the charges in court, and denied that he admitted any wrongdoing during two years of police interrogation. Last year he was reassigned to a non-marketing post by Bofors, but he will continue in his present post pending outcome of his trial. The trial isn't expected to begin until September, a Bofors spokeswoman said.    A Scandinavian Commodity spokeswoman said Mr. Schmitz was out of the country, and refused further comment.    Mr. Age's office didn't bring charges against six other Bofors employees previously suspected of involvement in the smuggling case.    In all, the indictment alleges that illicit shipments valued at the equivalent of about $12 million were completed, while attempts to smuggle another $11.9 million in goods were thwarted by Swedish customs authorities, Mr. Age said. The volume of smuggled goods represents about one-third of the Bofors explosives division's annual output, he added.    Prosecutors displayed what they said were false documents seized in searches of Bofors offices, and outlined circuitous routes allegedly devised by Messrs. Lundberg and Schmitz to conceal the true destination of the deliveries. Swedish law bans sales of arms or military explosives to countries in so-called war zones; both East Germany and Iran are off-limits to Swedish arms producers.    In the largest single incident cited by prosecutors, Bofors and arms producers in the Netherlands, France and Finland were allegedly enlisted by an Italian explosives concern to deliver to Iran 5,300 tons of explosives valued at $50.7 million. Only a small part of the order had been filled when Italy froze permits for all deliveries of goods to Iran.    To fulfill the transaction with Iran, Mr. Schmitz was said to have organized an alternative route via Yugoslavia. According to prosecutors' accounts, Mr. Schmitz's company, Scandinavian Commodity, collected orders from the various European suppliers, arranged false documents in Yugoslavia, and arranged for ultimate delivery through the Suez Canal to the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas.    Hans Johnsson, chief of a surveillance unit at Sweden's National Customs Authority, said customs counterparts in several European countries are mounting separate investigations based on information amassed in Sweden. One court case against a Finnish concern already has begun, while similar proceedings are imminent in the Netherlands, Mr. Johnsson said.    Meanwhile, many analysts here believe additional indictments against Bofors officials may follow. Mr. Age's office is continuing a probe of suspect deliveries of antiaircraft missles to Singapore and to other Middle Eastern nations off-limits to Swedish arms dealers.    In late March, Nobel admitted an internal company investigation showed two units had intentionally violated Swedish curbs on arms exports. The Swedish concern said auditors had discovered several cases of unacceptable re-export of defense materials, including large orders for its Robot 70 missile destined for Singapore, but forwarded to Dubai and Bahrain.    Addressing another much-debated point, Mr. Age insisted &quot;nothing whatsoever&quot; in the findings by his office suggested that Swedish cabinet ministers had any knowledge of the smuggling activities by Bofors. Some Bofors executives have alleged that government officials were aware of, and tacitly approved, the violations of Swedish arms export rules. </TEXT></DOC>