<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861208-0044 </DOCNO><HL> ---High Stakes for the Marketers---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Early this year, Oystein Noreng of Norway's Institute of Energy Policy and his condominium neighbors in Oslo stocked up on cheap fuel oil. &quot;We bought enough to last the winter,&quot; Mr. Noreng says.    Last summer, after petroleum prices dropped to the year's low of $10 a barrel, Idemitsu Kosan Co. went on an even bigger oil-buying binge. Now, the large Japanese trading company has more oil than its refineries need and is anxiously awaiting this week's meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    &quot;Everybody wants to hold petroleum inventories now,&quot; says Ysuhiko Tashiro, an Idemitsu economist. But if OPEC doesn't back up its new goal of $18 oil with stiff new cuts in production, he adds, &quot;we would want to be very low on inventories by the end of March because oil prices could fall below $10 by next summer.&quot;    Chasing cheap oil, petroleum buyers big and small have been purchasing extra supplies for months in anticipation of price increases. Now, stocks are so big that they may well determine future oil prices.    In the murky world of oil inventories, figures are imprecise, but informed guesses put the world-wide total 10% higher than a year ago. Even more important is the inventory &quot;overhang&quot; -- the surplus above-ground stocks not currently needed -- which is widely estimated at 300 million to 400 million barrels. At the current $15-a-barrel price, that is $5 billion of oil, and much of it is in nervous hands. If dumped onto the glutted market, it could trigger a new crash in oil prices, one far more costly to the oil industry than the value of the surplus supplies themselves.    &quot;Inventories are the biggest single danger to oil prices,&quot; worries Robert B. Horton, the chairman of Standard Oil Co. &quot;There could be panic selling.&quot;    For Saudi Arabia and other members of OPEC, the inventory surplus, which is partly attributable to past overproduction, threatens their dream of raising oil prices to a range of $18 to $20 a barrel next year. For the oil companies, it has suddenly kicked off a high-stakes game in which perceptions may be more important than reality as they nervously assess OPEC's mood in the wake of Saudi Arabia's recent firing of its once-powerful oil minister, Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani.    If it weren't for the high inventories, several forces would already be pushing prices up, says Marion Stewart, a Rutgers University economist who publishes the Stewart Energy Outlook. World oil demand is increasing. Non-OPEC production is beginning to decline. OPEC has apparently restored production discipline, at least so far. And Saudi Arabia has become more aggressive in pricing; the dismissed Sheik Yamani was the architect of &quot;net back&quot; pricing, which tends to reduce prices because it ties crude-oil quotes to the value of products refined from the oil.    &quot;But any price recovery,&quot; Mr. Stewart says, &quot;is likely to be labored and subject to periodic reversals as long as world oil stocks remain at current levels.&quot;    Like OPEC, the oil companies want higher prices. Much of their extra oil buying this year has been based on expectations of increases. And prices have climbed 50% from the $10 low because of OPEC's September cutback of four million barrels a day from the summer's production peak. The companies will keep the surplus stocks and go into the market for more oil if it looks as though OPEC's members will curb output sufficiently to prop up prices to $18 or $19 a barrel.    But skepticism abounds. &quot;My assumption is they are not going to be successful,&quot; says Allen Murray, the chairman of Mobil Corp. &quot;My guess is we're not going to see much change in oil prices until sometime next year, but I hope I'm wrong.&quot;    Although total oil inventories were low when prices began collapsing last January, some refiners were caught holding big supplies. As a result, they sustained losses of millions of dollars from write-downs of inventories purchased earlier at higher prices. This time, the companies, at the first sign that OPEC's price propping may fail, probably will rush to sell extra inventories on a bet that later they will be able to buy back oil more cheaply.    &quot;If OPEC muffs it,&quot; says George Q. Lumsden Jr., the petroleum director for the Paris-based International Energy Agency, &quot;there's a colossal hopper of stuff out there that will come plunging down.&quot;    Industry executives fear that widespread inventory liquidations would set off a free fall in prices. &quot;If you think, in reading the tea leaves, that prices are going to fall, you sell inventories, and it's a self-fulfilling prophecy,&quot; says George M. Keller, the chairman of Chevron Corp. A similar view is expressed by Samuel Schwartz, the senior vice president of planning for Du Pont Co. and its Conoco unit. &quot;Everybody will ditch if it looks as if oil is going to $10,&quot; he says.    But there is much confusion because no one knows how much oil really is above ground. It is impossible to measure all the petroleum products in storage, such as gasoline held by wholesalers and service stations and fuel oil in consumers' tanks. Governments and national oil companies also stockpile oil, and some are secretive about inventories.    In Japan and the European and North American nations that make up the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, company inventories stored on land rose 1.9 million barrels a day in the third quarter, the International Energy Agency says. That followed a second-quarter buildup of 1.1 million barrels a day.    But the agency is mystified by an apparent extra supply of 1.5 million barrels a day in the third quarter that the OECD statistics don't cover. It believes that this extra volume could represent errors in consumption and supply estimates, understatements of company inventories, or increases in stocks at sea. Or the missing oil could be accounted for by higher inventories being held by producing countries.    Nonetheless, the world's fuel tanks are believed to be full. It is known, for example, that West Germany, which has huge capacity for residential storage of fuel oil, took advantage of lower prices to fill its tanks early this year.    Some other reasonably accurate accounts of crude oil and petroleum products stored by refiners also point to an ominous level of inventories. For the U.S., the American Petroleum Institute is estimating total stocks of crude oil and petroleum products at more than one billion barrels. That is 100 million barrels higher than a year ago. Moreover, the API figures don't include an additional 500 million-plus barrels in the government's Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which is up 4% from a year ago.    With so much at stake, major oil companies try to track inventories world-wide, both ashore in tanks and afloat in tankers. For internal planning purposes, one big company, which doesn't want to be identified, estimates total non-Communist world stocks at nearly 5.6 billion barrels. That approaches the record six billion barrels in 1980, after the panic buying stemming from the Iranian revolution doubled prices in an 18-month period. In contrast, so-called normal inventories are about 5.2 billion, the 1984 level.    Because enormous amounts of oil are consumed -- currently 46.5 million barrels a day in the non-Communist world -- a lot of it is in transit in tankers, pipelines and trucks. Setting logistical needs aside, one major oil company calculates &quot;usable commercial inventories,&quot; which it then converts to days of supply at current levels of demand. &quot;Normally,&quot; an official says, &quot;we would expect 10 days of stocks ashore and two days afloat by year-end. But this year, at the outside, we will see 20 days -- an extra eight days, or 350 million barrels of excess stocks.&quot;    The surplus is already putting heavy pressure on prices, suggests Edward N. Krapels, the president of Energy Security Analysis Inc. After OPEC cut production to 17 million barrels a day in September, oil prices firmed to $15 a barrel, just $3 short of its new $18 target. But, Mr. Krapels says, &quot;the only reason prices didn't go back to $28 a barrel {the 1985 level} was because of inventories.&quot;    A specialist in monitoring global oil stocks, Mr. Krapels estimates that OPEC produced one million to three million barrels a day more oil than needed last summer. As a result, he says, world-wide inventories have increased 340 million barrels since the end of April. &quot;It isn't hard for the world to soak up that much oil, but it doesn't leave OPEC much room,&quot; he says.    An extremely cold winter in Europe and the U.S. could siphon off some of the extra oil. Longer term, inventories could shrink because of higher petroleum demand, which is expected to grow at least 1% next year, and because of the expected decline in non-OPEC production, particularly in the U.S., where many low-yielding wells are unprofitable at today's prices.    But in the short term, the high inventories underscore the pressure on OPEC for more painful production cuts. Jean Carrie, the economics director of Cie. Francaise des Petroles, estimates that if global inventories were at normal levels and remained there, OPEC members could reasonably expect to produce an average of 17.3 million barrels a day next year. Although that would be down sharply from the more than 18 million barrels a day averaged in 1986, it would be up a bit from OPEC's current ceiling of 17 million barrels. But Mr. Carrie makes clear that his estimate for 1987 OPEC oil output does not allow for probable inventory reductions.    Because inventories are high, however, some reductions beyond the usual seasonal changes are anticipated. During the winter, oil companies usually take one million to 1.5 million barrels a day from inventories to meet the seasonal surge in demand; the withdrawn oil is replaced when demand later slackens. In coming months, even modest drawdowns would replace OPEC oil; so, industry executives say, OPEC may have to pump less oil just to maintain today's prices.    &quot;So much depends on what happens in December,&quot; says Ray G. Steiner, the vice president of supply and transportation at Phillips Petroleum Co. &quot;If we see a lessening of OPEC production, the inventory overhang won't mean much.&quot;    But executives say that if prices seem likely to be depressed by excess production in OPEC, the inventory drawdowns would double to three million barrels a day and last for six months or longer. To avoid a price collapse, OPEC would have to slash output again to as little as l4 million or 15 million barrels a day -- too small a pie, some say, for the oil exporters to slice. </TEXT></DOC>