<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880201-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Scientists' Spinoffs: Federal Labs Give Out Fruit of More Research For Commercial Uses --- Program Is to Help Industry, But Critics See It as a Way To Push Star Wars Plan --- How Navy Aids Brain Scanner </HL><AUTHOR> Eduardo Lachica (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For years, the Navy, seeking a breakthrough in anti-submarine warfare, bankrolled a plan to detect subs by sensing their magnetic emanations.    So far, this technology has failed for the Navy, but the Navy encouraged Biomagnetic Technologies Inc. to incorporate it into a brain-scanning machine. The device, called a neuromagnetometer, can detect brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease or epilepsy simply by reading the magnetic discharges from nerve cells.    &quot;We helped BTI and other Navy contractors commercialize their products in the knowledge that what helps them would eventually advance technology helpful to the Navy, too,&quot; says Donald Gubser at the Naval Research Laboratory here.    Such assistance reflects a government effort to plant the fruits of publicly financed research in the marketplace. The huge U.S. trade deficit stirs concern that the U.S. doesn't turn discoveries into products quickly enough. &quot;We win the Nobel Prizes, but the Japanese get most of the profits,&quot; says Sen. Ernest Hollings, a South Carolina Democrat who heads the Senate Commerce, Science and Technology Committee. Seeking to make U.S. industry more competitive, Congress passed the Federal Technology Transfer Act of 1986, which requires the government to speed diffusion of technology from its labs.    But the military-reform lobby, cynical about the administration's motives, charges that the program is a way to promote President Reagan's controversial Strategic Defense Initiative. &quot;This is part of the administration's attempt to sell Star Wars as the road to America's technological renaissance,&quot; says Brian McCartan, a senior analyst at the Washington-based Center for Defense Information. &quot;As for the Pentagon's recent spinoff record, it isn't all that great.&quot;    The Defense Department spends $38 billion a year on research and development. It runs 72 laboratories where 27,500 scientists and engineers work on projects ranging from finding new ways to preserve food or waterproof field jackets to sunspot research and artificial intelligence.    Over the years, defense labs have produced innovations with civilian uses. For example, the Naval Research Laboratory has developed satellite communications, aircraft collision-avoidance equipment and firefighting chemical foam.    Other military products that proved commercially significant include underwater exploration systems, high-density lithium batteries and night-vision optics. And fiber-optic sensors that the Naval Research Laboratory has designed to report ship damage under intense battle conditions are generating a new high-tech industry. &quot;They can report the presence of methane gas in a mine to a monitor several miles away,&quot; says Thomas Giallorenzi, who heads the laboratory's optical-sciences division.    Many industrialists contend, however, that there aren't enough research spinoffs, particularly from the Pentagon's labs. &quot;I'm hard-pressed to understand why, for all the enormous funds being spent on defense research, precious little finds its way back into the civilian economy,&quot; complains Robert Noyce, vice chairman of Intel Corp., a semiconductor maker.    The Pentagon, however, also wants its research to spawn more commercial products because it believes that the U.S. technology base, already one of the West's primary advantages over the Soviet bloc, would thereby be strengthened. In the past, the military itself has reaped major benefits when commercial improvements evolved from its work. World War II research on code-cracking machines helped pave the way toward the modern computer, and the Air Force's postwar investment in integrated circuits laid the foundation for today's microchip industry.    To comply with the technology-transfer law, the Pentagon is making its research and development work more accessible to industry. It hopes to compile soon a catalog describing unclassified projects in defense labs and listing the specialists to contact for further information.    &quot;Odds are that the useful idea is buried in some technical report; so we're putting our scientists and the potential buyers on a one-on-one basis,&quot; says Ted Berlincourt, who heads the Pentagon's research and laboratory management.    As an incentive to Pentagon scientists, the department will soon authorize them to receive 20% of royalties earned from commercial use of technology that they create in their defense research or $1,000 a year, whichever is higher. Now, the government has the sole right to the profits.    The Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, which is managing the Star Wars program, already is encouraging entrepreneurs to dip into its technology pool for innovations that might produce medical lasers to cure inoperable tumors or carbonfiber injectors to strengthen automobile-engine parts.    Air Force Col. James Ball, the SDI program's director of technology applications, describes himself as a matchmaker. &quot;We put a person in need of technology in touch with a person with a potential solution,&quot; he says. His office has hundreds of unclassified Star Wars technology abstracts to which any Pentagon-cleared American citizen can gain access. It also has more than 70 technical advisers on tap to tell potential users about available technology. Some SDI offshoots may be applicable to fields as diverse as mineral surveying, eye surgery and bee culture, he says.    Some corporate giants -- such as Westinghouse Electric Corp., Du Pont Co. and Digital Equipment Corp. -- employ scientists just to watch what is coming out of federal labs. But the government wants to reach out to other companies, too.    Nonetheless, transforming military findings into marketable products can be difficult. Some executives worry that the Pentagon's penchant for exotic, high-cost products impairs their conversion to commercial use. &quot;Most companies can't wait too long for a payback,&quot; warns R.C. Forney, a Du Pont executive vice president. &quot;Government programs must clearly represent the potential for generating revenue streams if companies are to justify their involvement.&quot;    For example, a program at the David Taylor Research Center in Annapolis, Md., to construct a 50,000-horsepower engine using energy-saving superconductive material is drawing little attention despite its promise to revolutionize ship design. &quot;Except for a few inquiries about using the engine for icebreakers, nobody's beating down our doors,&quot; says the project's supervisor, Michael Superczynski.    Other companies, dedicated to developing their own products, find it hard to integrate new ideas. &quot;This is where the Japanese do better than us,&quot; laments James Ling, a Washington-based technology broker. &quot;They aren't inhibited by corporate egos or career biases from importing a good idea.&quot;    Most of the known examples of recent transfers involve start-up companies or still-maturing concerns unafraid to experiment with new products. For example, Automated Sciences Group Inc. of Silver Spring, Md., has just acquired from the Army's Construction Engineering Research Laboratory in Champaign, Ill., a voice-recognition computer system that vastly simplifies routine inspection work.    &quot;You'd be staggered by the enormous number of people who do this kind of work every day -- forest wardens, traffic designers, factory-floor inspectors,&quot; says Michael Teague, a company vice president. He explains that instead of scribbling data on clipboards, an inspector can speak into a tape recorder, and later a computer extracts significant trends from scores of similarly taped reports.    The Army's construction lab has an exceptionally active transfer program because its products are immediately useful to civilian builders. For example, the lab recently authorized Johnson Controls Inc., of Milwaukee, Wis., to adapt some of its work in heating instrumentation.    Like BTI's neuromagnetometer, some of these research products are finding commercial markets even before satisfying their original military purpose. For instance, a free-electron laser being developed at Stanford University for the Star Wars program won't be fielded as a defensive weapon for another decade or so. But the Baylor Research Foundation in Dallas soon will unveil a technique for using this versatile laser to vaporize tumors without hurting the surrounding healthy cells. &quot;There are a number of companies ready to market the device once the technique is proven,&quot; says James Lester Matthews, the foundation's director.    Many transfers occur when a small contractor finds a civilian market for a product commissioned by a Pentagon agency. Spire Co., of Bedford, Mass., got its start that way. An ion-implanting device that it built for the Naval Research Laboratory now is its basic tool for supplying wear-resistant artificial limbs. </TEXT></DOC>