<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880115-0043 </DOCNO><HL> The Rising Sun May Be Too Hot for U.S. Contractors --- Americans Fear Invasion by Aggressive Japanese Building Firms </HL><AUTHOR> Rhonda L. Rundle (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> CON REL </IN><TEXT>   After losing overseas business to Japanese rivals in recent years, U.S. construction and engineering concerns are starting to worry that their home turf now is being targeted by aggressive Japanese builders.    By bidding contracts below cost, the Japanese are gaining a U.S. toehold &quot;just like with TVs, cars and semiconductors,&quot; gripes Mark Chalpin, a spokesman for the International Engineering and Construction Council, which represents general-contracting, engineering and architectural companies.    Japanese success here especially galls U.S. companies, who complain that -- at least until now -- they have been effectively locked out of Japan, the world's second-largest construction market. During his visit to the U.S. this week, Japanese Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita proposed a plan to increase U.S. construction companies' access to the Japanese market.    The share of the vast U.S. construction market held by the Japanese still is small -- less than 1% -- but is growing quickly. Last year, the value of Japanese contracts rose to an estimated $2.3 billion to $2.5 billion, from just $114 million in 1982. Japan topped West Germany for the first time last year in domestic contracts awarded to foreign companies, says Charles T. Pinyan, chief editor of International Construction Week, a trade paper.    To a large extent, the explosive growth in Japanese construction business here mirrors Japanese investment in U.S. real estate, development projects and automotive assembly plants. And rather than queue up with competitors to bid on assignments, big Japanese construction companies often initiate projects and help with the financing. Because of their excellent credit ratings and low interest rates in Japan, these corporate giants can raise capital much more cheaply than U.S. competitors.    Japanese manufacturers or real-estate developers planning important construction projects in the U.S. usually turn to Japanese suppliers, with whom they have long-standing relationships and a common language. In 1985, $1.3 billion of the total $1.8 billion in Japanese construction contracts in the U.S. were awarded by Japanese or joint-venture clients.    Increasingly, the trend is that &quot;American companies need not apply&quot; for Japanese projects, grouses Mr. Chalpin, the industry spokesman.    In recent years, Kajima International Inc. won the prime contract to design and build the Mazda Motor Corp. plant in Flat Rock, Mich., and the Diamond-Star Motors Corp. plant, a joint venture of Mitsubishi Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp., in Bloomington-Normal, Ill. Toyota Motor Corp. named Ohbayashi Corp. as the project manager on construction of its new plant in Georgetown, Ky.    Entry into the U.S. 15 or 20 years ago by the first Japanese construction companies, including Kajima and Ohbayashi, didn't result in much business at first. But when Japanese automobile and electronics concerns began establishing U.S. plants a few years ago, those Japanese construction companies already in the U.S. had an advantage -- over Japanese-based contractors and U.S. builders alike.    &quot;When other (Japanese) companies saw Kajima and Ohbayashi here, they had to come to protect their base in Japan,&quot; says Yukuo Takenaka, who handles Japanese business for Peat Marwick Main andamp; Co., an international accounting and management-consulting concern. At about the same time, a sharp drop-off in new projects in the Middle East, Singapore and Malaysia led the world's largest construction and engineering concerns to look for work elsewhere. And competition focused more sharply than ever on the U.S. market.    Japanese construction companies are more visible in the U.S. than other foreign competitors, which tend to acquire established U.S. companies rather than set up affiliates with foreign-sounding names.    In August, however, Shimizu Construction Ltd. helped to finance a management-led buy-out of Dillingham Construction Co. and retained a 45% interest in the company. Last fall, a Japanese suitor was rumored to be looking at M.W. Kellogg Co., an oil-industry engineering and construction company that Dresser Industries Inc. later agreed to buy.    The Japanese concerns are injecting capital and creating jobs in the U.S. because they often finance their own projects and hire U.S. workers, asserts Tetsuro Nagase, a spokesman for Japan's Ministry of Construction in Washington.    In Long Beach, Calif. for example, Kajima is a joint-venture partner with IDM Corp., a large Southern California developer, in construction of a $550 million world-trade center. Kumagai Gumi Co. has invested more than $300 million with developer William Zeckendorf Jr. for seven major projects in New York City.    While most Japanese contracts in the U.S. involve private development in New York, Southern California, and the Hawaiian Islands, Japanese are also competing for -- and sometimes winning -- public-works projects. Ohbayashi has landed jobs building segments of metro rail systems in Washington and Los Angeles, and it has a contract from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to build a $63 million dam in Oregon. Ohbayashi beat out two large U.S. contractors, Morrison-Knudsen Corp. and Bechtel Group Inc., for the dam contract.    Two years ago, when work began in Osaka Bay on the $8 billion Kansai International Airport, construction services emerged as a major trade issue between the U.S. and Japan. U.S. companies complained that Japanese companies could successfully compete for U.S. public-works projects, but that Japanese government jobs were closed to them. In retaliation, Sen. Frank Murkowski (R., Alaska) and Rep. Jack Brooks (D., Texas) sponsored a provision, signed into law last month, to bar Japanese construction companies from bidding on U.S. public-works projects during the current fiscal year.    While their Washington lobbyists fume publicly over the trade imbalance, many U.S. construction companies are quietly pursuing another tack. They are cultivating Japanese partnerships that they hope will lead to more Japanese clients both in the U.S. and in Japan. Westinghouse Electric Corp. and National Gypsum Co.'s Austin Co. unit each have said they could link up with a Japanese partner to bid on Kansai airport contracts. And this week, a unit of Fluor Corp., an Irvine, Calif.-based construction and engineering concern, said it signed a cooperative agreement with Ohbayashi.    &quot;I'm very excited about the potential,&quot; says R.D. Mitchell, a Fluor vice president who participated in the Ohbayashi negotiations. He says Fluor and Ohbayashi are currently pursuing four or five projects with values ranging from $10 million to $250 million. The Japanese presence in the U.S. construction market will continue to grow rapidly because it is becoming economical for Japanese companies to build products in the U.S. and ship them back home, he predicts.    Some industry specialists think the joint-venture approach could backfire, however. They argue that once Japanee companies learn better how to do business in the U.S., they will go it alone more often. &quot;In the long-run, the Japanese won't need their American partners,&quot; says William Beddow, a former construction-industry lobbyist. </TEXT></DOC>