<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880525-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Europe's Dilemma: The EC Fears Letting Turks In -- and Also Keeping Them Out --- Entry Could Swamp Budget, But a 'No' Might Drive Key Ally to Eastern Camp --- The Unspoken Issue: Islam </HL><AUTHOR> Kathryn Christensen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> ANKARA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   One might expect Western Europe to be delighted. A large nation on its periphery, strategically situated and progressing economically, has come to it in friendship, asking to be its full ally and partner.    The Europeans are horrified.    The supplicant is Turkey, which has tired of years of cooperating with the West without really being included. As one of the region's largest democracies and a major contributor to its security, Turkey believes it is entitled to be a member of the European family. Last year it formally applied for membership in the Common Market.    It was an overture European officials had hoped never to see. Accepting the Turks would be terribly costly: Their low incomes, high unemployment and soaring birthrate would severely tax the strained resources of the EC just as it is struggling to build a totally free European market.    But rejection is equally risky. Only the U.S. provides a bigger army to NATO, and no European country has more sensitive borders. As the geographic barrier of Soviet expansion in the Mediterranean, the alliance's closest point to the Persian Gulf and the site of critical U.S. air and intelligence-gathering bases, a Turkey spurned by the West would be one wooed by the East: by Communists and by Islamic fundamentalist radicals.    A Turkish businessman is blunt about it: &quot;If Turkey becomes another Finland or Iran, there will be a big investigation in the West about what went wrong. But it will be too late.&quot;    The West's dilemma isn't lost on Turkey's Prime Minister Turgut Ozal. Softspoken but shrewd, Mr. Ozal has spent the past 4 1/2 years maneuvering to make it difficult for anyone, at home or abroad, to say no to his plans for Turkey. Though an associate EC member since 1963, Turkey now urgently needs the unrestricted access to Western markets that full membership would bestow.    Until recently, European countries could afford to ignore the Turkish issue. They felt secure in the certainty that Greece, already an EC member and steeped in hostility to the Turks, would veto Ankara's entry into a group that aims to integrate its members' economies into one giant market.    But that changed in January, when Mr. Ozal and Greek Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou met in Davos, Switzerland, to begin to thaw the freeze. Though the steps taken then and at a second meeting don't begin to address their two intractable disputes -- over Cyprus and the Aegean Sea -- the rest of Europe can no longer be sure Greece will do its dirty work.    &quot;Now,&quot; says an Ozal political ally, Mehmet Kececiler, referring to Britain, France and West Germany, &quot;we will see how much of a friend they really are.&quot;    For the EC, Turkey's timing could hardly be worse. The community already is struggling to integrate two relatively poor members, Spain and Portugal. Entry of an even poorer agricultural nation would badly hamper efforts to fix an EC farm policy staggering under subsidies that absorb two-thirds of its budget. Much remains to be done before the end of 1992, the target for a barrier-free market.    Full membership would give Turkey three privileges EC members consider too costly: free movement of capital, of goods and of people. Turkey's per-capita income, at about $1,200 a year, would be the EC's lowest and strain its social funds. With 55% of Turks under the age of 25, unemployment stuck around 20% and a birthrate that creates a population the size of Denmark's every five years, Europe fears an invasion of Turkish labor that would aggravate its own unemployment and tax its welfare states. And by the year 2000, Turkey would be entitled to demand more seats than any current member of the European Parliament.    Turkish EC membership &quot;will never happen,&quot; says a high-ranking politician in West Germany's Social Democratic party, perhaps more hopefully than declaratively. Like many other European officials, he finds the issue so sensitive he won't comment for attribution.    Europeans also have the jitters over another matter, one they are even more reticent about: Turkey would be the Common Market's first Islamic member. &quot;Look,&quot; says one diplomat, &quot;we all have great reservations about Turkey on economic grounds, but the big question is whether we can accept its Moslem culture.&quot;    However bad the timing is for Europe, Turks say they couldn't delay their bid because of its move toward a borderless market. &quot;If we don't get in within the next five or six years, it will be impossible,&quot; says Erol Manisah of Istanbul University. Economically, &quot;Western Europe will be a single state within 12 to 17 years; after that, entry is impossible.&quot; And drift toward the East will be difficult to resist.    That, the West knows, would be unacceptable. Though Prime Minister Ozal scrupulously avoids threatening a lesser commitment to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, other Turks frequently cite their contribution -- some 600,000 troops -- as reason enough for a ticket to Europe's economic club. And these conventional forces will get more important, they note, as the U.S. withdraws European missiles.    &quot;For the defense of Europe, Turkey is keeping a large army, allocating considerable amounts of her economic resources, thus encountering serious war risk,&quot; writes Vehbi Koc, honorary chairman of Turkey's biggest company, in a European journal. Noting that all European NATO members are also EC members, he calls Turkey's exclusion &quot;irrational.&quot; Turkey, he says, &quot;has a right&quot; to join.    For now, the EC will stall. It took nearly nine years to accept Spain and Portugal. &quot;Europe will study this one to death,&quot; one diplomat says. Leaders will cautiously praise Turkey's progress and some will note its vital role in the West, but none will speak for EC entry.    &quot;Turkey is very important as far as NATO is concerned,&quot; British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher told the BBC on an April visit to Ankara. &quot;She stands at the junction of Europe and the East, and, of course, she is making strenuous efforts to put her own economic house in order and is succeeding.&quot; Asked, however, what assurances she would give Mr. Ozal of British support for the EC application, Mrs. Thatcher demurred. &quot;We can't go any further until the commission has in fact examined the application,&quot; she said. &quot;It does take quite a long time to do that.&quot;    But the clock is running. Mr. Ozal, the force behind Turkey's march toward Western economic and political stability, needs signs of support if he is to continue. This is especially so now, when his go-go expansion must, in the face of high inflation and foreign debt, give way to austerity. Austerity could encourage factions opposed both to him and to Westernization.    Though Mr. Ozal has a large parliamentary majority, he got it with only 36% of the popular vote. &quot;He doesn't have a mandate that allows him to do anything he wants,&quot; notes Mumtaz Soysal, a professor and columnist for the newspaper Milliyet. &quot;For the European integration he sees as the ultimate goal, he has paid certain political prices. His relations with Europe are likely to hurt relations with the Islamic countries. It is difficult to be a Turkey between two worlds.&quot;    Mr. Ozal has pursued a complex agenda. At home, where the military has intervened three times in three decades, he boldly intruded to name a new chief of staff. Then, seeking a cost-free show of democracy, he called a referendum on whether former political foes -- banned in 1982 from public life -- should remain muzzled. When the public surprised him by voting to lift the ban, Mr. Ozal called an early election that caught his resurrected rivals unprepared. A booming victory cleared the way for five more years in power.    Abroad, Mr. Ozal is mending fences with three touchy neighbors: Syria, Bulgaria and the Soviet Union. He has steered Turkey into position to portray itself as an Iran-Iraq peacemaker, serving as conduit for each in the other's capital. And after narrowly avoiding war last year with archenemy Greece, he opened the talks with Mr. Papandreou.    An underlying goal of each move is to make Western Europe accept Turkey. Better relationships with Bulgaria, Syria and the Soviet Union would ease EC fears of having a member with hostile borders; at the same time, Europe would know that these better relations reduced Turkey's dependence on the West.    Sitting at the immaculate dining table that serves as his desk, Mr. Ozal sporadically fingers beads as he answers Europe's objections to EC membership. Turkey's labor will remain at home, he says, as the West finds his country a profitable location for its own low-tech factories and plants. Turkey's connections outside Europe, such as its ties to Iran and Iraq, will improve Western relations with the Arab world and the East bloc.    Yes, he says, entry to the EC will take time. And yes, he is willing to negotiate a transitional entry pace. But not before the EC says yes to full membership. Never does he concede the possibility of rejection, and never does he threaten.    &quot;It is not very easy to be a full member because some consider you are not European if a Moslem country,&quot; Mr. Ozal says, publicly raising the issue no European government will. &quot;I say that is an asset which will add something, by our good relations with the rest of the world. Turkey will become a member, but for that reason I say Turkey must be a better member.&quot;    Turkey must prove two things to win a place in the EC -- that it is a democracy with full human rights and that it is economically fit. Under Mr. Ozal, it has made large strides toward both. His economic liberalization is &quot;incredible,&quot; says a Western economist, &quot;compared to the true disaster of 1979-1980, when protectionism had been carried to the point of near autarky, and the penalties for even carrying foreign currency were practically like those for violent crime.&quot; But heavy spending, on social programs and a vast construction campaign, has driven the foreign debt to $37 billion and pushed inflation as high as 49% at year end. The economic battle is far from won.    As evidence of their democracy, Turks point to several smooth elections. As for human rights, groups like Helsinki Watch and Amnesty International say conditions, though better than in the early 1980s when torture was reportedly widespread, still aren't acceptable. The European Parliament has just cited &quot;flagrant violations of democratic rights&quot; in May Day arrests in Istanbul, and asked Turkey to restore trade-union and political rights for all democratic groups currently banned.    But nearly everyone acknowledges gains, such as an amnesty for former anarchists and agreement to international accords barring torture. Turkey also has permitted a human-rights association and allowed its citizens to petition the European Commission of Human Rights.    All this progress gives them a right to Common Market membership, Turks argue. And while they profess as much confidence and patience as Mr. Ozal, many are less reserved about the consequences of rejection. &quot;If Turkey's heart is broken by the EC,&quot; says one government official, &quot;the choice will be the Soviet Union or {Islamic} fundamentalism, and we have gone too far to go to communism.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>