<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0158 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Ecuador's Free-Market Experiment Takes Wrong Turn </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Hollihan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> GUAYAQUIL, Ecuador  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When the government of Leon Febres-Cordero took office in late 1984, domestic entrepreneurs, foreign investors and the majority of the Ecuadorean electorate had great expectations. The administration was committed to dismantling statist economic policies dating back, in one form or another, to the conquistadors. And throughout the first half of his term, the president and his young, enthusiastic supporters (of whom I was one) seemed well on their way to making Ecuador a showcase model for freemarket policies in Latin America.    Today, four months before the end of the administration, it is more realistic to think that this government will be remembered not as the one that reversed Ecuador's historical commitment to statism, but merely as the one that faced a catastrophic drop in the price of oil, from an average of $26 per barrel in 1984 to $12 per barrel in 1986. Oil exports, which had accounted for 70% of total exports (and 50% of the government's budgeted income), decreased to 44% of total exports within a period of less than 24 months. An additional blow came in March 1987 when an earthquake disrupted our oil pipeline causing total suspension of oil exports for seven consecutive months.    Many of the president's critics claim that his administration went too far in implementing free-market policies. However, some of his former supporters now despair that, in reacting to the accounts crises, the administration has gone too far in applying brakes to policies that were working.    One of the first attempts of the Febres-Cordero administration to inject market incentives into our sluggish economy came in 1985, when financial institutions were allowed to issue certificates of deposit at market-determined interest rates (all rates previously had been fixed by the government). By August 1986, such floating-rate instruments had grown from 11.8% of total financial savings to 40.1%.    Interest-rate ceilings were lifted on other savings and lending instruments about the same time, and market forces were allowed to determine a new, real exchange rate. Commercial policy -- including tariffs, export subsidies, quotas and import and export restrictions -- together with monetary policy also was liberalized in a carefully coordinated manner to ease -- rather than shock -- the country into a more open economy. All these measures created the conditions for a significant capital inflow, together with a greater incentive for domestic savings, which partially compensated for the economic shocks of 1986 and 1987.    The results were encouraging in the short run. The inflation rate was successfully reduced from 31.2% at the end of 1984 to 23% at the end of 1986. Nontraditional exports were increasing at rates greater than 10% per annum. Real gross national product grew at an average of 3.9% between 1984 and 1986 including a positive 2.9% in 1986, a year marked by the decline in oil prices. And while obtaining a budget surplus is considered an impossibility in Latin America (or in the U.S., for that matter), a surplus of about 2% of GNP was achieved in 1985.    However, not everybody was happy. As a result of the more open economy, local producers of consumer goods were faced with greater competition as many of the import prohibitions introduced in the past were removed. These privileged private-sector groups saw the change of relative prices for their goods as a diminishment of their economic power, even though the change benefited Ecuadorean consumers and a host of new entrepreneurs. To this unhappy group of private-sector protectionists could be added all the president's socialist critics, who disapproved of the open-market policies on ideological grounds.    These critics did not have to wait long to see the president's (and the economy's) fortunes change. The budget surplus quickly faded away as the price of oil dropped, reaching an estimated 10% deficit of GNP by 1987. However, only half of this deficit was the consequence of the pipeline rupture; another half was due to an increase in government spending. Suddenly, all the advances made in liberalizing trade and financial laws and regulations were in jeopardy.    The lack of fiscal discipline that has come to characterize so many Latin governments began to show up again, as the administration felt backed into a political corner by the crises. Government expenditures increased during 1987 at an estimated 42%, while the inflation rate reached only 29% during the same period. The money supply moved to a 32% annual growth rate during 1987 (from a 23.8% rate of growth achieved in 1986 and 20.2% in 1985), and estimated real GNP showed a decline of approximately 3.4% for the same period.    Especially bothersome was the fact that the spending was financed via the timehonored custom of allowing cheap credit from the Central Bank. Under such a scenario, it comes as no surprise that in a small economy freely determined interest and exchange rates should experience some escalation. The market exchange rate increased from approximately 188 sucres to the dollar in June 1987 to 400 sucres per dollar at the end of February 1988. Inflation also has rebounded from the above level of 23% for 1986 to an annualized rate of 36% for February 1988.    All this has pushed the government in its last semester to intervene in patchwork style, attempting, via different means, to control the exchange rate for import and export transactions and create a financial exchange rate for capital flows. The continuation of these varying rates of exchange is unsustainable in the long run, because under- and over-invoicing will strongly undermine the difference between the two rates. This is exactly what happened several years ago, before the exchange rates were liberalized.    Furthermore, several import prohibitions have been reintroduced. This causes severe distortions by giving undue protection to the domestic industries. While the dollar amounts of such restrictions are not great, they set a dangerous precedent for future government manipulations in the marketplace, and make local and international investors very nervous.    Rhetoric by the two presidential candidates (elections are set for May 8) has not held back capital flight, either. Both candidates have emphasized that they do not believe in market-determined policies and that government intervention in the economy should be greater. Abdala Bucaram, the Guayaquil-based populist candidate, said on Feb. 4 that after his inauguration as newly elected president he &quot;would incinerate, in a television broadcast, all the economic policies introduced by the current government.&quot;    The administration is in a race against time to show the public that a government still can control temporary market reactions -- caused in part by the same government -- without having to undo all the market-oriented policy changes that have been enacted. It is doubtful that self-interested protectionists and political opportunists will give consideration to the human costs of abandoning financial and trade liberalization policies, which had been doing so well in Ecuador.    ---   Mr. Hollihan was an adviser at the Ecuadoran Central Bank until June 1987. </TEXT></DOC>