<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0086 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Accumulates Evidence SupportingCase Against Drexel, Milken, Sources Say---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Government investigators have unearthed substantial evidence to support charges of criminal violations of securities laws by Michael M. Milken and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., according to people familiar with the government's investigation.    They said the evidence obtained by the government includes both documents and testimony that corroborates statements incriminating Mr. Milken and Drexel made by Ivan F. Boesky, the former arbitrager at the center of Wall Street's biggest insider-trading scandal. Mr. Boesky agreed last November to cooperate in the government's investigation.    Mr. Milken, the head of Drexel's &quot;junk bond&quot; operations in Beverly Hills, Calif., has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing, as has Drexel. Yesterday, Frederick H. Joseph, Drexel's chief executive officer, reiterated that &quot;we still haven't found any wrongdoing by anybody at the firm.&quot; As previously reported, Drexel is the subject of investigations by both the Securities and Exchange Commission and a Manhattan federal grand jury. The government hasn't filed any charges against either Mr. Milken or Drexel. Nonetheless, should the government pursue the matter, the outlines of its case are becoming clear.    At the heart of any case against Mr. Milken and Drexel is the testimony of Mr. Boesky, who agreed last year to settle SEC charges and to plead guilty to one felony. The criminal information to which Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty last week outlined facts that suggest a conspiracy to destabilize and gain control of Fischbach Corp., and the document indicated that Mr. Boesky has implicated others who the government described as co-conspirators. People with knowledge of the government's investigation said that Mr. Milken is one of those people implicated by Mr. Boesky.    The government's case, however, would not turn solely on Mr. Boesky's word against that of Mr. Milken. The Boesky information pointedly included reference to a &quot;reimbursement&quot; received by Mr. Boesky from a conspirator that was &quot;part of an attempt to reconcile other outstanding money differences&quot; with the conspirator, lawyers noted.    The people familiar with the government's case said that portion of the information refers to a $5.3 million payment that Mr. Boesky made to Drexel in March 1986. They said that the government has documents that show how the payment was calculated -- what prosecutors usually refer to as a paper trail. Moreover, the documents were prepared by employees of Mr. Boesky's companies and of Drexel who are in a position to provide further testimony buttressing Mr. Boesky's contentions.    At least several of those individuals are known to be cooperating with the government, among them, Michael Davidoff, Mr. Boesky's former head trader, who pleaded guilty to a single felony of net capital violations for his role in the scheme, and Charles Thurnher, previously identified as a Drexel official in the firm's Beverly Hills office who kept records of the transactions with Mr. Boesky on behalf of Mr. Milken.    Mr. Thurnher and his lawyer didn't return phone calls. A lawyer for Mr. Milken also didn't return phone calls.    Lawyers said that the cooperation of record-keepers, as well as copies of the records, are crucially important to the government. Lee Richards, a former federal prosecutor now in private practice, said he wouldn't comment on specifics of the government's potential case against Mr. Milken or Drexel. But he said that in insider-trading cases generally, &quot;a single piece of paper can dramatically tip the balance in favor of the prosecution. Documents can't be cross-examined&quot; by defense lawyers. &quot;And the people who keep documents are difficult to cross-examine,&quot; because their testimony is inherently corroborated by the documents themselves, he said.    The people familiar with the government's case said that the documents and testimony obtained by the government suggest that Fischbach was just one of numerous instances in which Messrs. Boesky and Milken appear to have collaborated to profit from takeover situations and which figured in the reconciling of money differences that led to the $5.3 million payment. The other stocks involved in the calculation of the payment, all previously reported by this newspaper as figuring in the government's investigation, are Gulf andamp; Western, Unocal, Trans World Airlines, Phillips Petroleum, Diamond Shamrock, Lorimar-Telepictures, and Harris Graphics, they said.    They said that the testimony and calculations obtained by the government suggest that Mr. Boesky purchased stock at Mr. Milken's behest, and Mr. Milken agreed to protect Mr. Boesky from loss and, in some cases, promised him a percentage of the profits on the stock transactions. For example, the government alleged that Mr. Boesky incurred a loss on the Fischbach holdings that was reimbursed by the conspirator. In other situations, the people said, Mr. Boesky earned large profits on the holdings acquired for Drexel, some of which he was allowed to keep, but most of which he was required to pay back to Drexel.    In at least two instances -- Gulf andamp; Western and TWA -- evidence suggests that Drexel acquired and held stock for Mr. Boesky, the people familiar with the evidence said, pursuant to a similar arrangement. In both cases, they said, Mr. Boesky was trying to force the companies into leveraged buyouts or takeovers.    The calculations that resulted in the $5.3 million payment reflected the suspected arrangement, according to people familiar with the records. Mr. Boesky totaled the losses and profits from the stock positions he allegedly held for Drexel, then subtracted the percentage he was allowed to keep. The result was a multimillion-dollar sum due Drexel, they said. In turn, the people said, Mr. Thurnher in the Beverly Hills office kept secret records for Drexel relating to the suspected arrangements. Profits earned on the positions held for Mr. Boesky, which were also substantial, were subtracted from the amount Mr. Boesky owed Drexel to arrive at the $5.3 million payment, people familiar with the investigation said.    In the transactions that figured in the payment, there are likely to be other witnesses cooperating with the government who can provide possible motives for the suspected arrangement between Messrs. Boesky and Milken, the people familiar with the government's case said. In the case of Fischbach, for example, company officials have explained that financier Victor Posner, who was seeking to gain control of the company, was prohibited by the terms of a standstill agreement from acquiring more than 25% of the company's stock unless someone else acquired over 10% and filed the required disclosure statement with the SEC.    By buying more than 10% of Fischbach and filing a disclosure form with the SEC, Mr. Boesky liberated Mr. Posner from the standstill. Fischbach capitulated to Mr. Posner not long after. In that context, lawyers who aren't involved in the case note, Mr. Boesky's action looks like a favor for Mr. Posner and Drexel, which helped provide financing for Mr. Posner's successful effort to take control of Fischbach.    Former prosecutors and defense lawyers note that although dealings such as Fischbach are complicated and appear to be part of a much broader pattern involving Messrs. Milken and Boesky, the potential criminal law violations of the suspected scheme to profit from corporate takeovers are straightforward. Among them are the failure to disclose the alleged arrangements in SEC filings, net capital violations, prohibitions against market manipulation, tender offer regulations, record-keeping requirements, prohibitions against falsifying documents, anti-fraud provisions of the securities law, and conspiracy to commit any or all of the above offenses.    But they note that the suspected scheme involves potential criminal violations of laws against insider trading. If Drexel had a profit interest in stock &quot;parked&quot; with Mr. Boesky at a time when the firm's officials had inside information about coming takeover activity involving those stocks, then Drexel and its officials involved may have engaged in insider trading. The lawyers said that Drexel might be subject to triple damages under the insider trading act for all or part of its profits. According to people familiar with the government's case, the $5.3 million figure is the net difference between Mr. Boesky's profits and Drexel's, suggesting that total profits from the activity are much greater.    The strength of the government's case, of course, depends in large part on the strength of Mr. Milken's and Drexel's defenses. They have assembled an array of some of the top criminal defense lawyers in the country.    So far, Drexel and Mr. Milken have given few clues to their defense strategy. Lawyers for Drexel, however, have acknowledged that a crucial component of any defense would be Drexel's alternative explanation for the $5.3 million payment. Drexel has said repeatedly that the payment was for legitimate investment banking advice it provided Mr. Boesky, with Drexel officials citing advice Drexel rendered with respect to Scott andamp; Fetzer, U.S. News andamp; World Report, and Financial Corp. of Santa Barbara.    Drexel has indicated it has documents supporting its claim that work on those matters was done for Mr. Boesky. Drexel hasn't disclosed any details, however, to explain how such advice might have resulted in a $5.3 million bill.    The people familiar with the government's case said that investigators haven't been able to confirm Drexel's explanation of the $5.3 million payment, even though employees of Drexel and Boesky companies have been questioned specifically about it. Several witnesses cooperating with the government have contradicted Drexel's version, according to people familiar with their statements.    Moreover, the invoice Drexel prepared for the payment was hastily produced after the payment was already made and only because Mr. Boesky's auditors questioned the lack of documentation for such a large disbursement. The invoice made no mention of the three companies about which Drexel said it rendered advice.    Drexel has said repeatedly that it conducted its own internal investigation of the $5.3 million payment and found nothing improper about it. Mr. Joseph said again yesterday that &quot;we have looked at the fees and think they were for legitimate investment banking services, and we have no evidence to the contrary.&quot;    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Transworld Corp.&quot; -- WSJ April 29, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>