<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890809-0016 </DOCNO><DD> = 890809 </DD><AN> 890809-0016. </AN><HL> What's News --@  World-Wide </HL><DD> 08/09/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. REJECTED a bid to link hostage talks to frozen Iranian assets.    The White House, trying to dispel any notion that it might allow Iran's assets in the U.S. to be included in bargaining over hostages in Lebanon, rejected an overture from Tehran that it would be willing to help free the captives if Washington released billions of dollars in frozen funds. Administration aides suggested that the assets might be discussed after an improvement in U.S.-Iranian ties. In Tel Aviv, Israel rebuffed an appeal by a U.N. envoy to free an abducted Moslem cleric.    The wife of Higgins said it was almost certain that her husband was dead, and she offered support to Bush as he &quot;tries to save the living.&quot;    ---   Nicaragua's Ortega called on the U.S. to respect a plan to disband the Contras by Dec. 8. The accord, signed Monday by five Central American leaders, set a 30-day deadline to establish an observer force and another 90 days for the rebels to demobilize. Washington expressed reservations about the pact.    ---   Canada's Supreme Court struck down an injunction obtained by a Quebec man to prevent his former girlfriend from having an abortion. The Ottawa court's decision came after it was learned that the 21-year-old woman went ahead with the procedure. Canada has been without an abortion law since a January 1988 decision by the high court.    ---   A federal jury convicted Meese's associate E. Robert Wallach of racketeering and fraud charges in the Wedtech scandal. Two co-defendants were found guilty of racketeering, fraud and conspiracy. The ex-attorney general had testified for Wallach at the trial in New York.    ---   The space shuttle Columbia blasted into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Fla., with five astronauts aboard for a five-day mission for the Air Force. NASA sources said the crew of the overhauled spacecraft, the space agency's oldest shuttle, is to launch a 10-ton reconnaissance satellite on a path over the Soviet Union, China and the Mideast.    ---   Wright is being investigated by a federal grand jury in Washington about whether he illegally asked groups to buy quantities of a book he wrote instead of paying speaking fees. It is illegal for officials to exchange favors for gifts. The Texas Democrat, accused of violating House rules, resigned as speaker May 31.    ---   Rescue crews in Ethiopia searched remote areas in the southwestern part of the country for a missing plane carrying Democratic Rep. Leland of Texas and 13 others. The plane failed to arrive Monday at a refugee camp near the border with Sudan. It took off from Addis Ababa. Leland was examining famine-relief efforts in Africa.    ---   U.S. soldiers detained 29 Panamanians who entered a restricted area near the Panama Canal, the Southern Command said. Their weapons were confiscated. Among those held briefly were 10 military officers, including a brother-in-law of Noriega.    ---   Kaifu was designated as Japan's third prime minister this year. He is to assume office today. As the newly elected president of the ruling Liberal Democrats, Kaifu, whose predecessors resigned over sex and financial scandals, must prepare for parliamentary elections that could come as early as October.    ---   Lawmakers in Soviet Estonia approved a law tightening residency requirements for voting and running for office. The move was aimed at stemming the influence of the republic's Russian minority, which is about a third of the region's 1.6 million people. Some Russian workers briefly went on strike last month to protest the legislation.    ---   Bush pledged to work with civil-rights advocates to halt the decline of the nation's inner cities and to remove barriers for minorities. In a speech to the National Urban League, the president didn't unveil any initiatives or address several complaints from rights groups, such as a recent Supreme Court ruling limiting affirmative action.    ---   New Zealand's Palmer was installed as prime minister and said Wellington's policies would remain the same, including barring U.S. warships from New Zealand ports because they might carry nuclear arms. Palmer succeeds Lange, who became involved in disputes with the U.S. and France over the issue. He resigned Sunday.    ---   Two political parties in Poland agreed to consider a proposal by Walesa to form a coalition government with the Solidarity-led opposition that would exclude the Communist Party. But Warsaw's Communist leaders said a coalition of Solidarity and the Communist-allied Peasant and Democratic parties could destabilize the country.    ---   A Jordanian soldier crossed the border into Israel, wounded an American woman and held an off-duty soldier hostage for nearly four hours before being killed by an Israeli sharpshooter. The incident occurred at a collective farm less than a mile from the Jordan-Israel border. Jordan said its soldier had abandoned an observation post.    ---   An earthquake struck the San Francisco Bay area, causing a man to fall to his death from a fifth-floor apartment window. The temblor, measuring 5.2 on the Richter scale, caused minor damage, but was felt in San Luis Obispo, 230 miles to the south. It was followed by at least two aftershocks.    ---   Died: H. Thomas Hallowell Jr., 81, former chairman of SPS Technologies Inc., Monday, in Abington, Pa., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>