<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871007-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BORK'S NOMINATION WAS SENT to the Senate and rejection was urged.    The Judiciary Committee voted 9-5 to recommend that Bork be rejected for a seat on the Supreme Court. The vote was a setback for Reagan, who insisted that he would continue to seek confirmation of Bork's nomination. Bork was named by the president to fill the seat vacated by the retirement of Justice Lewis Powell, a moderate swing vote among the nine members of the high court. A vote on Bork could come in the full Senate within the next few weeks.    A crucial vote against Bork was cast by Democratic Sen. Heflin of Alabama, who was viewed as the main guidepost for undecided senators.    ---   Sessions was hospitalized in Texas with a relapse of a bleeding ulcer, causing the indefinite postponement of his swearing-in as FBI director, officials said. He was said to be in stable condition. Sessions, 57, who was to have taken an oath of office tomorrow, had been hospitalized last week, a day before the originally scheduled ceremony.    ---   Congress approved legislation barring Iranian imports from entering the U.S. Some administration officials, however, are concerned that a total embargo wouldn't be effective. In the Persian Gulf, Iraq vowed to respond to Tehran's latest missile attacks on Baghdad with air raids on Iranian cities.    ---   Fiji's military leader proclaimed the South Pacific island chain a republic, ending a 113-year bond with the British monarchy. Col. Rabuka, who led a coup in May and another last month, pledged a constitution to guarantee the political dominance of ethnic Fijians over the larger Indian community.    ---   Chinese military police arrested more than 60 people, most reported to be Buddhist monks, during a pro-independence demonstration in the Tibetan capital of Lhasa, authorities said. The protest, the second in five days, came on the eve of today's 37th anniversary of Beijing's annexation of Tibet.    ---   The White House said Reagan may submit a request for renewed Contra aid before the Nov. 7 cease-fire deadline called for in a regional Central American peace plan. In Nicaragua, the Managua government began preparing for a partial truce, and Ortega said the U.S. was &quot;working against&quot; the five-nation peace proposal.    Salvadoran peace talks ended with the Duarte government and rebels agreeing to form a joint commission to study ways to bring about by Nov. 7 a cease-fire in El Salvador's eight-year-old civil war.    ---   Ramos said Philippine coup leader Honasan diverted arms and other gear from armed forces channels before his August attempt to topple Aquino. The armed forces chief's comments came in an interview with The Wall Street Journal. In Manila, as many as 20 people were arrested before a new coup attempt.    ---   Officials in Santo Domingo said more than 50 people drowned when a boat carrying illegal refugees from the Dominican Republic to Puerto Rico sank. About 23 people were rescued from the shark-infested waters dividing the Caribbean nations.    ---   Tamil rebels attacked a Sinhalese village in eastern Sri Lanka, killing at least 38 men, women and children. Earlier, the Liberation Tigers separatist group killed 14 other Sinhalese in response to Monday's mass suicide of 12 Tamils in police custody.    ---   A U.S. appeals court overturned a judge's ruling that there were &quot;vestiges of segregation&quot; in Alabama colleges and universities. The three-judge panel in Atlanta ordered the case returned to a lower court. It also said the judge should have disqualified himself because he &quot;actively participated&quot; in events involved in the case.    ---   Mulroney is encountering strong opposition from provincial government leaders in Ontario and Manitoba to the U.S.-Canada trade pact. But premiers of several other provinces welcomed the pact after a briefing by Mulroney.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett released an AIDS handbook emphasizing the avoidance of premarital sex and illegal drugs as &quot;the smartest way to prevent infection.&quot; The publication reflects Bennett's criticism of government reports that point out the protection condoms provide, without encouraging abstinence.    ---   Egypt's Mubarak was elected to a second six-year term as president by a majority of more than 97%. Turnout in Monday's referendum, in which Mubarak was unopposed, was about 88.5% of Egypt's eligible voters.    ---   Britain's Conservative Party affirmed its commitment to a strong nuclear defense at the opening of a four-day annual conference in Blackpool, England. It was the first gathering since the Tories scored their third consecutive election victory in June.    ---   Warsaw authorities accused the outlawed Solidarity movement of involvement in a &quot;terrorist&quot; shipment into Poland of weapons, tear gas, electronic surveillance devices and printing materials. Meanwhile, the Communist Party Politburo discussed a program of economic changes that are expected to draw internal opposition.    ---   Israel has seized and fenced off southern Lebanese territory with barbed wire, and Beirut has protested to the U.N. Security Council, Lebanon's acting prime minister said. The Israeli government said the action was an attempt to tighten security.    ---   Sweden's government said it would close the first of its 12 nuclear reactors by 1995 as a step toward scrapping the entire network. Stockholm proposed closing a second reactor by 1996; the remainder by 2010. The move is part of an environmental plan. </TEXT></DOC>