<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871207-0065 </DOCNO><HL> U.S., SovietsLook to SummitWith Optimism---Reagan, Gorbachev to MeetAmid High ExpectationsOf New Era in Detente---By John Walcott and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Amid rising expectations that the superpowers are poised for a new era of detente, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev arrives here today for a summit meeting with President Reagan, which will set the course of U.S.-Soviet relations for 1988 and beyond.    Mr. Reagan, Mr. Gorbachev and their top aides have expressed optimism that the three-day summit can produce not only a treaty eliminating medium-range nuclear missiles, but the sketch of other agreements halving the superpowers' arsenals of strategic, or long-range, nuclear weapons and providing for the withdrawal of 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan.    Asked on CBS-News's &quot;Face the Nation&quot; about the prospects for negotiating a strategic-arms-reduction treaty, chief U.S. arms-negotiator Max Kampelman said: &quot;I think it can be done. I'm not predicting that it will be done. But I think it can be done by March or April.&quot;    Soviet officials accompanying Mr. Gorbachev have unleashed a blizzard of hints that the Kremlin has relaxed its opposition to Mr. Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, which remains the major obstacle to a treaty reducing long-range weapons.    But it still isn't clear whether the Soviets are prepared to eliminate much of their offensive nuclear force without some concrete assurances that the U.S. will slow the development of space-based missile defenses.    Soviet officials have hinted that on the heels of congressional action restricting SDI research to limits in the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, Mr. Gorbachev may be prepared to accept deep cuts in strategic forces without additional constraints on the so-called Star Wars program.    But the Reagan administration has adopted a broader interpretation of the ABM treaty than either the Soviets or Congress; President Reagan has given no sign that he is prepared to accept any limits on SDI other than those forced on him by Congress.    &quot;As far as strategic defense is concerned, the president is pressure-proof on that,&quot; Secretary of State George Shultz told ABC-TV's &quot;This Week&quot; program. &quot;We are going to do the research and testing necessary to find out if we can defend ourselves against ballistic missiles.&quot;    The dispute could be resolved in several ways. As their hints have suggested, the Soviets could decide that congressional and budget pressures will slow the program enough that they can afford to ignore it for the time being and press for the elimination of more nuclear weapons.    The Reagan administration may decide, as some officials believe, that the SDI program can continue successfully within even the narrow interpretation of the ABM treaty and that some agreement with the Soviets will protect it from deeper budget cuts and congressional restrictions.    Finally, U.S. and Soviet officials could negotiate a list of exactly what tests are permitted and banned by the treaty. The Soviets have offered one such list, but U.S. officials have rejected it.    During the past week, it has become clearer that if the leaders can overcome their differences on SDI, they are poised for a surge of progress toward a treaty drastically reducing both sides' long-range nuclear arms.    Both sides already have agreed to cut their arsenals of strategic nuclear warheads in half, to 6,000 each, and the Soviets have agreed to halve their force of big SS-18 missiles, which carry 10 warheads apiece and are fast and accurate enough to destroy American missiles in their silos.    The major sticking point now, U.S. officials say, is agreeing to limits within those ceilings on specific types of weapons -- for example land-launched and submarine-launched ballistic missiles and manned bombers armed with cruise missiles.    Last week in Geneva, Mr. Kampelman said, a senior Soviet official suggested that Moscow is prepared to remove one of the main obstacles by agreeing to a sublimit on the number of warheads carried by ballistic missiles. Because they fly faster, carry larger warheads, and can travel farther than cruise missiles, ballistic missiles are considered the most threatening weapons in the superpowers' arsenals.    While arms control will be at the top of the agenda during Mr. Gorbachev's 75 hours in Washington, he and Mr. Reagan also will discuss Afghanistan and other regional conflicts, Soviet human-rights practices, East-West trade, and such bilateral issues as scientific and educational exchanges.    Soviet hints of flexibility on Afghanistan have fueled hopes that Mr. Gorbachev may be bringing a timetable for the withdrawal of Soviet troops and a plan for a coalition government that would include members of the U.S.-backed resistance.    &quot;I believe the forces will be withdrawn next year,&quot; Yevgeny Primakov, an academic and Gorbachev adviser on the Mideast, told journalists and foreign-policy analysts at Washington's Brookings Institution Friday.    However, the coalition government outlined by Afghan and Soviet officials would leave the Afghan communist party in control of the army and the internal-security forces. The Soviets also have demanded a halt to U.S. aid to the Afghan rebels at the beginning of a Soviet withdrawal.    The U.S. so far has refused to suspend its covert aid to the mujaheddin, as the resistance is known, until all Soviet troops have left Afghanistan and has demanded that the Afghan people decide who will govern them.    The outcome of the meetings may depend heavily on the personal chemistry between the two leaders, who are to meet alone with only interpreters and note-takers at least four times.    Mr. Reagan believes Mr. Gorbachev represents a new, and potentially less hostile, breed of Soviet leader, and Mr. Gorbachev and his aides have stressed their desire for a productive summit and have offered concessions on arms-control and human-rights issues during the past year.    The two leaders begin their meetings tomorrow morning, and in the afternoon will sign the treaty eliminating their intermediate-range nuclear forces.    On Wednesday and Thursday, Mr. Gorbachev will meet other influential Americans, including congressional, business, scientific and media leaders, to discuss his goals of restructuring the Soviet economy and reducing East-West tensions.    &quot;Mr. Gorbachev is coming as the Soviet leader, but he's also coming as his own best lobbyist,&quot; said one senior U.S. official. &quot;He's hoping he can encourage others to put pressure on the administration, especially on SDI and on trade issues.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>