<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890809-0141 </DOCNO><DD> = 890809 </DD><AN> 890809-0141. </AN><HL> Global Reach:@  Citicorp Strives to Be@  McDonald's and Coke@  Of Consumer Banking@  ---@  Despite Far-Flung Network,@  It Faces Large Hurdles;@  Needed: Big Acquisitions@  ---@  A Spanish Coup, French Flop@  ----@  By Robert Guenther@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/09/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> CCI EUROP FREST LATAM </CO><IN> BANKS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   In West Germany, its bankers are making house calls to time-pressed yuppies. In Spain, it quickly became the biggest auto lender. In Taiwan, it introduced the 20-year home mortgage.    Citicorp is trying, in short, to become the world's first global consumer bank, with the Citibank branch, credit card and mortgage eventually becoming as ubiquitous around the world as the McDonald's hamburger, Coca-Cola or Italian knitwear.    &quot;We want to be like Benetton -- location indifferent,&quot; says Pei-yuan Chia, the Shanghai-born chief of Citicorp's international consumer business. Already, eight million households in 40 foreign countries are Citicorp customers, and Mr. Chia is aiming for 16 million within five years.    &quot;No one else has the network that Citicorp does,&quot; says Robin Monro-Davies, who heads IBCA Ltd., a London bank-ratings firm. &quot;They've got as good a shot as anybody at building a global consumer business.&quot;    Whether the biggest U.S. banking company can achieve that won't be known for years. Selling as basic a product as soap world-wide isn't easy, and global marketing of banking services is far tougher. It runs into a welter of government regulations and cultural differences, and it requires huge commitments of managerial talent and capital.    &quot;Personally, I don't know how to make a retail bank work outside my own country: Mr. Meunier isn't Mr. Mueller,&quot; says Marc Vienot, the chairman of Societe Generale, a major French bank that has been frustrated in its attempts to serve consumers in other nations.    Other grand visions of global consumer franchises have already faltered. After big losses in mobile-home financing, Britain's Barclays Bank PLC is shifting its U.S. focus to corporations. Midland Bank PLC, similarly disenchanted, sold Crocker National Bank in California to Wells Fargo andamp; Co. several years ago.    U.S. banks have fared little better. Chase Manhattan Corp. has retrenched, selling its Belgian bank earlier this year. BankAmerica Corp., Chemical Banking Corp. and Manufacturers Hanover Corp. have largely quit trying to serve consumers overseas. Japanese banks, despite their huge size, haven't tried hard to get into consumer banking abroad.    Nevertheless, Richard S. Braddock, who heads Citicorp's consumer business, contends that it can succeed where others have stumbled. He gives three reasons: &quot;First, the fundamental needs of consumers world-wide differ only in degree. We also believe that we can lever our size quite effectively and export financial products from one market to another. Lastly, we're perceived as large and innovative. We're quite credible in other countries.&quot;    Even some Citicorp executives are dubious, however. They argue that the company is stretching itself too thin and should focus on a relatively few foreign countries. Thomas Theobald, former vice chairman for investment banking at Citicorp and now chairman of Continental Bank Corp., strongly opposed Citicorp's push for European consumers and instead favored expansion in the U.S.    But the critics have been wrong before. In the 1970s, Citicorp lost millions trying to build its U.S. consumer banking business. That business is now highly profitable, and John S. Reed, who led the effort, has become Citicorp's chairman. Citicorp, a leader in back-office automation, is convinced that its marketing and technological know-how can make global banking work. So, it is hunting for big overseas acquisitions.    &quot;It's no secret that we're looking to buy in the U.K. and France,&quot; Mr. Reed says.    The bank's international consumer business already is churning out healthy profits. Last year, according to a source at the bank, it earned about $170 million and posted a return on equity exceeding 20%. Meanwhile, Citicorp's U.S. consumer business, which has 20 million households as customers, earned about $500 million. Internal plans call for Citicorp's consumer banking, domestic and international, to earn more than $1 billion a year in the 1991-93 period. Last year, Citicorp's total net was $1.9 billion.    How has Citicorp been able to penetrate foreign consumer markets? It has made the right acquisitions on favorable terms, exploited underserved markets and used its back-office technology to provide superior service. It also has tried hard to look like a local bank by employing local people; Mr. Chia says only 2% of its branch managers or higher executives overseas are U.S. citizens. And it has attempted to introduce a &quot;sales culture&quot; in its foreign banks and to make customers comfortable during their bank visits, countering the old hat-in-hand atmosphere. As one Citicorp executive says, &quot;There's enough anxiety associated with financial services that people will pay a premium for comfort and peace of mind. This is a people business, not a money business.&quot;    This approach to foreign banking worked in Spain and West Germany.    In 1983, Citicorp bought Banco de Levante from the Spanish government. The bank was a mess; about 65% of its commercial loans had soured. Margins between what it paid for funds and what it charged on loans were anemic. Its 100 branches were spread too thinly across the country to give it strong market presence anywhere. Its biggest asset, an ornate marble and brass headquarters, was a white elephant. Moreover, Spain, with about one bank branch for every 1,300 residents, is so over-banked that a Spanish businessman says half-jokingly, &quot;Banking and bullfighting are our national sports.&quot;    For Citicorp, Spain's entry into the Common Market in the early 1980s outweighed those problems; it galvanized the Spanish economy. Moreover, Citicorp sensed an opportunity because Spanish banks had disdained retail banking; many viewed consumers primarily as a source of deposits for commercial loans.    The bank, renamed Citibank Espana, quickly began pursuing consumer loans. It realigned its branches to concentrate on big urban centers; Madrid now has 20 branches, up from four. To mesh with the local culture, Citicorp brought in Hispanic executives from its operations in Chile and London.    And to differentiate itself from rivals, Citibank Espana tried to seem friendlier. Personnel seated at desks replaced tellers at long, elevated counters. Stylish furniture, ebony stone floors and artwork decorated the branches. And Citibank Espana promised mortgage commitments in 15 days to consumers used to waiting as long as two months. Now, they wait only 48 hours.    Citibank Espana also introduced point-of-sale auto financing. Tomas Martinez Perez, a Madrid Peugeot dealer, says, &quot;Before Citibank, banks didn't make auto loans. Private finance companies were the primary source of financing. . . . Now, the finance companies aren't in the car business at all because the banks are cheaper.&quot; With Citibank's computer systems recently upgraded, car buyers can get loans approved in minutes.    The bank also exploited a regulatory loophole that in effect allowed it to pay interest on checking accounts and avoid having to lure deposits through high-rate savings accounts. The checking account has attracted $600 million in deposits, and other Spanish banks have copied it.    Since 1983, Citibank Espana's assets have grown to $1.2 billion from $43 million. It began turning a profit in 1986.    In contrast to its turnaround of a sick Spanish bank, Citicorp bought the thriving Kundenkreditbank, West Germany's biggest consumer bank, and developed it into the crown jewel of Citicorp's overseas empire. In 1974, Citicorp paid about $100 million for a stake in the well-regarded KKB when a KKB partner needed cash and apparently feared that KKB would fall into hands of Deutsche Bank AG, Germany's largest bank. German bankers say the remaining partners figured that eventually they could buy back Citicorp's stake. Instead, Citicorp bought them out.    &quot;One of the keys to Citicorp's success was that it didn't immediately make changes,&quot; a former KKB partner says. That reluctance was understandable. German bankers say KKB's loans and services consistently carry higher charges than its competitors impose, and thus it is one of Germany's most profitable banks.    The 291-branch KKB has largely avoided interest-rate battles by competing on service. But its strong appeal among blue-collar workers may pose future problems. Manufacturing's share of the German economy is declining and the population is aging. In the future, fewer traditional KKB customers will need installment loans.    So, KKB is going after German yuppies needing investment services. Its bankers also are making house calls to customers in the evenings; they offer, at no extra charge, a full range of banking services, including checking and savings-account deposits and withdrawals, insurance policies, and applications for mortgages, installment loans and credit cards. And it is changing its advertising, offering new products, installing the latest automated tellers and trying to get debt-wary Germans to accept credit cards in place of charge cards, on which balances have to be paid monthly.    Despite the successes, Citicorp's global strategy is fraught with risks. The most obvious is political risk.    China's recent turmoil, for example, is casting a shadow over Citicorp's highly profitable, 21-branch Hong Kong system, which is second in size only to Hongkong andamp; Shanghai Bank's. If residents flee en masse in anticipation of Hong Kong's reversion to Chinese control in 1997, Citicorp could start losing money there.    In Panama, Citicorp's seven branches have been hurt by U.S. economic sanctions and an economic slump stemming from Gen. Manuel Noriega's refusal to recognize the 1988 presidential-election results. Yet Mr. Chia says, &quot;Our commitment to Panama is still there. We're not there as a bunch of barracudas -- to be there in good times and leave in bad times.&quot; And Mr. Braddock adds philosophically: &quot;You take a hit every once in a while. That's why we're in 40 countries.&quot;    In its rush to grow, Citicorp also risks making an ill-advised acquisition -- as it did in France. About four years ago, Citicorp bought a small Paris bank, Compagnie Generale de Banque, hoping to serve medium-sized French companies. That strategy flopped. Now, Citicorp is trying to reposition the 12-branch Compagnie Generale as a consumer bank. But the French have been unimpressed, and the bank, having attracted only 3,000 consumers, continues to hemorrhage red ink.    Why can Citicorp reinvigorate a sick Spanish bank but not a solvent French one? Ricardo Angles, a Uruguayan who ran Citicorp's Spanish bank and now runs the French one, says, &quot;The French banks are very good, and we haven't put a clear strategy together there.&quot; Mr. Vienot of Societe Generale comments, &quot;Paris has been very difficult for foreign banks. In Spain, except for Banco Santander, banking was in the Middle Ages until recently.&quot;    In the years ahead, Citicorp faces difficult choices. Some current and former Citicorp executives see its international consumer business at a crossroads. They say some foreign operations are too narrowly focused; in Britain it only makes mortgages and offers credit cards. Such niche banks must grow in size and product array if they are to compete effectively. But growing by a branch at a time will take too long. So Citicorp is shopping, thus far unsuccessfully, for big acquisitions.    In 1987, Citicorp came close to making such an acquisition. Well-placed executives say Citicorp seriously considered an offer to buy Midland Bank, one of Britain's four large clearing banks. That year, however, Brazil declared a moratorium on interest payments to Western banks. That chilled investors in Citicorp and Midland, both big lenders to Brazil, as well as Citicorp's interest in Midland.    But these executives say even Citicorp, with $10 billion in shareholder equity, lacks the resources to simultaneously build banks in 40 countries into significant market shares and expand its U.S. branch network to 2,000 -- its stated goal -- from 600 now. Some say Citicorp should forgo big, costly acquisitions in developed markets such as Japan and Britain and focus on about a dozen or so countries where economic prospects, market inefficiencies and Citicorp's technological prowess promise rapid growth.    And some contend that Citicorp should concentrate on U.S. acquisitions. Mr. Theobald, the former vice chairman, argued that the stock market discounts foreign earnings, lumping such local-currency businesses together with bad loans to developing countries. Better for Citicorp's stock, he added, to buy a U.S. bank.    Mr. Braddock agrees that in the past, Citicorp's overseas expansion hasn't done much for its stock. &quot;The market tends to reward acquisitions where the benefits are obvious and immediate,&quot; he concedes. But he and others argue that many leading U.S. corporations, such as International Business Machines Corp., make 50% of their sales overseas and that the contributions of overseas profits are evident.    &quot;We're going to have some difficult choices to make,&quot; Mr. Braddock says, &quot;but it's not an either/or situation. We have priorities, and we'll be doing things in phases.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>