<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0118 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Bookshelf: The Pursuit of Happiness </HL><AUTHOR> David Brooks </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Think about the happiest time of your life. Perhaps you were starting a business or a family, or working in the Peace Corps or playing college football. You were probably confronted by a challenge, where the possibility of failure was real. Your fate most likely rested in your own hands, and to succeed it was necessary to call upon a wide range of your abilities. Challenge, self-responsibility and competence are the raw materials of happiness. It is unlikely, on the other hand, that the happiest period of your life is the period in which you were richest.    Certainly a person cannot be happy if starving, but once there is enough money for food and shelter, money is almost unrelated to happiness. In &quot;In Pursuit of Happiness and Good Government&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 341 pages, $17.95), Charles Murray cites a wide array of data showing that richer people are almost no happier than poorer people, and if they are, money itself is not the cause of their added satisfaction. Today, a family living at the poverty line has twice the constant dollar income of a family in 1900 living at the median income. Obviously, the poverty-stricken family of today is not twice as happy as the median family of 88 years ago.    Yet when we discuss social policy, we talk as if money, the poverty rate, was all that matters. &quot;It is the generic stand-in for the social problems of our age,&quot; Mr. Murray writes. &quot;Solve the riddle of poverty, we have often seemed to hope, and the rest of our problems will solve themselves.&quot;    Social scientists focus on poverty because it lends itself to quantification. Finding that their analytic tools don't fit with real-life social problems, they have redefined the problems to mesh with their analytic tools. Politicians focus on poverty because it seems amenable to a definitive solution, yet by ignoring the real causes of happiness and misery, they only end up creating programs that make life worse. The most remarkable aspect of the welfare-reform bill to be signed by the president tomorrow -- the first such bill in a decade -- is that almost nobody expects it to do any good. We have reached a dead end on welfare policy and disguised it as a consensus.    With &quot;In Pursuit&quot; Charles Murray offers us a new way of seeing social problems. The book is playful and relaxed, and also daring and paradigm-shifting. It is radical but not polemical. It is innovative and rigorous, yet its task is to reintroduce us to the wisdom of Jefferson. Mr. Murray respects current research, yet discards the &quot;Homo Economicus&quot; of today's social scientist. His subject is happiness, our pursuit of satisfaction, and he does not try to segregate our thinking about the poor from our thinking about ourselves, about how we raise our own children, or design our own workplaces, or pursue our own goals. &quot;In Pursuit&quot; is invigorating and possibly historic; it opens up gaping holes of opportunity for politicians and for people who want to enhance their own happiness.    When people today confront the South Bronx or other urban ghettos, they tend to become engineers, and try to imagine what social-engineering project we can devise to build a healthy community. When Charles Murray is confronted by the South Bronx, he is astonished. After all, men and women naturally pursue their own happiness, and in America healthy communities arise, as if, in de Tocqueville's words, &quot;directly from the hand of God.&quot; Mr. Murray assumes the perspective of a healer in the South Bronx, and tries to imagine what cancer could have invaded the community and forced individuals to act so unnaturally.    On the housing problem, for example, he wonders &quot;why an economic system that pours out a profusion of cheap-but-decent shoes, food, clothes and every other basic of life is prevented from pouring out a profusion of cheap-but-decent apartments for rent.&quot; Mr. Murray does not offer specific policies in this book; his purpose is to provide liberals and conservatives with new approaches to welfare problems. Along with the founders of our Republic, Mr. Murray knows that individuals are not blank slates. People have their own energy, their own natural inclinations toward building a healthy community, inclinations that precede government. When there are communities of misery, it is probably because something artificial has gotten in the way.    For example, people naturally construct community services for the unfortunate. People do this because it gives them satisfaction. When government assumes this function, on the other hand, community institutions become less needed and therefore less rewarding. People become withdrawn, self-absorbed and atomized. When you remove responsibility for problems from the community, you remove community.    Through most of this century, for example, charitable giving increased year after year. But in 1964, when the Great Society programs gave government a bigger social role, charitable giving declined. It continued dropping until 1981, when government cuts were much discussed. Since 1981, charitable donations and community service have risen dramatically each year. Mr. Murray does not necessarily oppose government aid to the unfortunate; he merely wants us to see how bad policies warp the natural pursuits that lead to communities of mostly happy people.    Over the past decades government has endeavored to eradicate social blights and remove burdens from citizens. Parents no longer have to bother themselves much with schooling, for example, as state and federal governments have taken responsibility for curriculum, teacher hiring and graduation standards away from local institutions.    As life becomes less burdensome, Mr. Murray points out, happiness has become more elusive. A child who is sheltered from burden is unlikely to grow up happy. Workers who labor in a company that shields them from challenge and independence are unlikely to enjoy their work. As government absolves people of the sort of community burdens that gave satisfaction to earlier generations, people create artificial challenges. The guy who lives in the apartment next to you may enjoy marathon running or rock climbing, but it is unlikely that he will bring over a cake when your favorite uncle dies.    Mr. Murray, who has been a Peace Corps volunteer and a longtime social worker, and who is now a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, may have launched a new era with this magnificent book. The War on Poverty was predicated on the belief that panels of experts could go beyond ideology and scientifically construct effective social policies. The Great Society administrators believed they had mastered macroeconomics. &quot;Men are learning how to make an industrial economy work,&quot; Daniel Patrick Moynihan enthused in 1965. Nobody believes that anymore. The next era, which Mr. Murray heralds, will focus on the individual, not the society, and it will involve rediscovering the wisdom of the Founders. </TEXT></DOC>