<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Give Me That Old-Time Pragmatism---By Rodney Clapp</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   For those on the outside looking in, there are probably several perplexing aspects to the recent scandal involving televangelist Jim Bakker, as well as compatriot Oral Roberts's theological twist on &quot;your money or your life.&quot; Not the least has to be the simple fact that, however bizarre the behavior of Messrs. Bakker and Roberts and others of their colleagues may appear, these religious television personalities continue to be supported by their viewing audiences.    Granted, the televangelists report a significant dip in their incomes, and the latest revelations in the Bakker affair certainly won't end that decline. But the loyalty of the televangelists' supporters is still remarkable. Until Jerry Falwell's board dismissed Jim and Tammy Bakker Tuesday, the PTL had sponsored a &quot;forgiveness campaign&quot; in solidarity with the Bakkers. Even as more and more allegations of immorality accumulated, thousands of PTL Club supporters stood behind the embattled couple. Oral Roberts, of course, has received the millions he wanted for his funding appeal supposedly made under divine duress. He is now making sounds that he will use the same fund-raising appeal again. There are few indications his followers are put off.    Given such abuses, why do the conservative evangelicals who watch these and other religious television programs continue to support them, both with their time and their money? Sociologists and psychologists offer their own theory: The disproportionate number of lonely, sick, desperate, elderly viewers will grasp at any straw thrust forth, however ludicrous it appears to others. Surely there is much to such a theory. But there will be no real understanding of the staunch support of faltering televangelists until these devout viewers are considered on their own terms: the terms of faith.    Evangelicals, as the term implies, are centrally serious about one thing, and that is evangelism. Most of the prominent televangelists -- including Jim Bakker, Oral Roberts, Pat Robertson, Jerry Falwell and Jimmy Swaggart -- are &quot;premillennialists.&quot; Like huge numbers within their audiences (there are an estimated 31 million evangelicals in the U.S.; eight million to 16 million of them are premillennialists), these televangelists believe the world is deteriorating and Christ's second coming is imminent. Christ will return in these &quot;last days&quot; and initiate a 1,000-year reign on earth. Those who have not taken him as Savior will be judged and condemned to eternal damnation. Those who have will enjoy the millennial kingdom of peace and happiness.    These are sincere, profoundly held and often considerably complicated religious beliefs. Thus for the conservative evangelical, everything of any importance hinges on winning souls to Christ. People are lost forever if they do not hear and accept the Gospel. Those people include one's own children, the friendly neighbor across the street and the unknown billions in lands across the sea. Billy Graham, a premillennialist, has told the story of an Englishman who was sent to the gallows and, at the scaffold, was cautioned by the chaplain of the wrath to come unless he repented. The convict told the chaplain, &quot;If I believed the way you believe, I would crawl across England on broken glass to warn people.&quot;    Such is the genuinely compassionate motivation of the evangelical movement as a whole. There are currently more than 17,000 private evangelical primary and secondary schools in the nation; at least 300 evangelical periodicals; more than 70 evangelical publishing houses and 6,000 Christian bookstores; and, in 1980, 30,000 U.S. evangelical missionaries -- 11 times the number of mainline Protestant missionaries.    Rank-and-file evangelicals support these efforts -- and the thousands of religious radio and television programs -- because they believe all of them are furthering evangelism. Such ready and generous support for evangelism is the reason nearly all the evangelical TV personalities refer to themselves as evangelists.    Still, can this alone account for the fact that some televangelists bring in close to $150 million a year? The evangelistic motive is certainly the crucial condition, but the magnitude of the televangelists' earnings suggests something else is at work. Why have they become evangelism's most visible spokesmen? Perhaps because they have wedded evangelism with potent, old-fashioned American pragmatism.    In a book released late last year and growing more timely by the minute, evangelical historian Douglas Frank chronicles the rousing success of Billy Sunday, an evangelist who achieved his peak popularity in the days of Prohibition. Sunday, a former major league baseball player, was flamboyant and athletic even as an evangelist. He preached in his shirt-sleeves and was apt to slide across the platform, throw chairs at the devil and warn mockers that if he were not a man of God, he would challenge them to a fistfight.    The epigrammatic evangelist boasted that he knew no more about theology than &quot;a jack rabbit knows about ping-pong,&quot; and preached a Gospel suspect on more than one count. But, as Mr. Frank writes in &quot;Less Than Conquerors,&quot; few stopped to ask how many of the thousands &quot;walking the sawdust trail&quot; had already been converted before they heard Sunday, how long the new converts stayed converted, or even if they were responding less to the Gospel truly presented than to the force of Sunday's personality.    &quot;The logic of the numbers,&quot; Mr. Frank observes, &quot;simply seemed irrefutable.&quot; One minister testified that Sunday &quot;has trampled all over me and my theology. He has kicked my teachings up and down that platform like a football. . . . But what does that count against the results he has accomplished?&quot; Even the president of Brown University -- theological leagues away from the fundamentalist Sunday -- spoke out in support: &quot;God bless any man who, by any method, can reach the hearts of men.&quot;    It hardly seems deniable that the same mix of evangelism and results-oriented pragmatism is at work today. Many televangelists think in very pragmatic terms. Mr. Swaggart, for instance, has testified that &quot;the greatest propagation tool of all, that which will catapult 'the witness' {to the Gospel}, will be television.&quot; And Mr. Robertson believes, &quot;The church won't be able to do much if {the world} can keep it poor and underfinanced. The billion-dollar category is what is needed to be truly effective.&quot;    Audiences are clearly infatuated with outward signs of success. They look on the televangelists' multimillion-dollar budgets, their Crystal Cathedrals, their theme parks larger than some farms, their studios filled with better equipment than that of the networks, their modernistic university campuses that are (as in Mr. Roberts's case) the leading tourist attractions in their home states -- and the logic of the numbers indeed seems irrefutable. In an age determined to judge everything by quantifications and statistics, it should come as no surprise that marketers and demographers pretend to plumb the mysteries of God's grace. And so evangelical viewers seem not to notice the incongruity of the oft-repeated declaration that a single one-hour broadcast reaches more people than Jesus preached to in his lifetime.    And so they also continue to ignore the studies that consistently have shown that the majority of viewers of religious television are already committed Christians. For the most part, the TV &quot;evangelists&quot; are not converting the unconverted so much as consoling, inspiring and entertaining the converted.    Do evangelism and pragmatism make for a good combination? That is a question not only Jim Bakker or Oral Roberts would like to duck.    ---   Mr. Clapp is associate editor of Christianity Today. </TEXT></DOC>