<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0135 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> JAPANELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)COMPUTERS (EDP)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan and the U.S. are on the verge of signing an agreement paving the way for Japanese companies to join research for President Reagan's so-called Star Wars missile-defense program.    But the controversy over Toshiba Machine Co.'s sale of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union threatens to undermine Japanese corporate enthusiasm for the project, officially known as the Strategic Defense Initiative, or SDI, say Japanese government officials and businessmen.    Executives here worry that Americans increasingly perceive Japanese companies as a security risk. Such mistrust, they fear, could mean that SDI guidelines will be applied so strictly that joining the research effort will be unprofitable, and that their participation will attract negative international attention.    &quot;The Toshiba case has taught companies that this time they had better stay out of any risky business that may put them on the front page of a newspaper,&quot; says a Foreign Ministry official, who asked not to be identified. Japanese companies will be content to concentrate on noncontroversial areas, where they aren't &quot;held responsible for the flow of confidential information or the flow of technology,&quot; he adds.    Toshiba Machine, a 51%-owned unit of Toshiba Corp., sold technology that, according to U.S. officials, enabled the Soviets to make submarine propellers quieter and thus more difficult to detect. The discovery triggered the U.S. Senate to approve a bill to ban Toshiba imports for five years, leading the parent company's president and chairman to resign to take responsibility for the furor.    Washington has been pressing for access to advanced Japanese military technology. In 1983, Japan agreed to exempt the U.S. from its ban on exporting such technology. Two years later, a U.S.-Japan agreement on overall military technology transfer was signed; it opened the way for the transfer of SDI technology as well.    But in the wake of the Toshiba row, U.S. companies are expected to delay plans to link up with Japanese concerns on military research. The American reaction could make already gun-shy Japanese companies simply avoid the battleground, say government and business officials.    Military research has been unpopular in Japan since World War II, though attitudes are changing. Japan has a small domestic military market and bans the export of arms. After 18 months of touchy negotiations, the government last September gave its blessing to Japanese companies to join SDI research.    An official note on the agreement is expected to be signed in Washington Friday, according to Japanese news reports, though its details will remain secret. Japan would become the fifth country to join Star Wars, after Britain, West Germany, Italy and Israel.    SDI originally drew Japanese corporate interest because it looked like a window on U.S. research. Engineers and scientists are still eager to take part, officials say, but managerial interest began to wane even before the Toshiba controversy.    &quot;At first Japanese companies were shown a grandiose frontier for technological innovation,&quot; says the Foreign Ministry official. &quot;But now they're questioning whether it's profitable to divert 80 to 100 researchers to a project of unknown destiny whose result they haven't been given very strong assurances they can utilize.&quot;    Says an NEC Corp. official: &quot;We're afraid that in a negative environment, the various articles of the agreement may be applied more strictly. You can't cooperate and work on joint development when there isn't trust.&quot;    The government has sought to assure Japanese companies that the agreement allows them to exploit commercially technologies they develop for SDI, according to Kyodo, the Japanese news service. It also quoted government sources as saying that, under the agreement, the right to use technology owned by Japanese companies before taking part in SDI research won't be affected after they join the project. The sources added that secrecy for SDI research would be maintained by Japan's existing laws, and agreements between Tokyo and Washington, Kyodo said.    Ultimately, Japanese and U.S. government officials say, Japan's participation in Star Wars is likely. But joint research will be entered into slowly and cautiously.    Defense analysts say major defense contractors that are used to dealing with security matters, such as Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., aren't likely to be deterred. &quot;Defense-related technology is their bread and butter,&quot; says a defense analyst. &quot;But for most Japanese companies whose main field of activity is dual-purpose production, the overall sentiment is, 'No, we don't want to get involved.'&quot; (Dual-purpose technology can be used in commercial and military products.)    But it is exactly these companies that the U.S. is most interested in involving in SDI. Companies that make consumer electronics or semiconductor chips, such as NEC, Fujitsu Ltd., Mitsubishi Electric Corp. and Hitachi Ltd., have well-financed and advanced research programs in such dual-purpose areas as fiber optics, heat-resistant ceramics, integrated circuits and gallium-arsenide chips.    The American reaction to the Toshiba case isn't making it easy to allay Japanese apprehensions, says an American expert on U.S.-Japan defense-technology issues. &quot;A mania, an insanity is starting to take root&quot; in the U.S., he says. &quot;These statements that accuse Japan of being a leaky sieve of high technology -- that doesn't help the situation at all.&quot;    Scenes of U.S. congressmen smashing a Toshiba cassette recorder in front of the Capitol haven't eased Japanese fears. And Sen. John Glenn's announcement that he will reintroduce a bill to bar SDI research contracts to non-American companies unless the Pentagon certifies the work can't be done as effectively by U.S. concerns was &quot;a discouraging message&quot; for Japanese companies, says an official.    Meanwhile, the Senate vote to ban Toshiba products, though not law, has already scuttled at least one SDI plan. Toshiba had been discussing a subcontractor role with U.S. aerospace and defense producer LTV Corp. for SDI research on defense against tactical ballistic missiles. But since the Toshiba furor erupted, LTV has said it can't proceed.    The Toshiba case also has implications for the broader effort to encourage military-technology transfer. Unlike European companies, which eagerly participate in U.S. defense work, getting Japanese companies involved hasn't proved easy. Only two transfer projects, concerning shipbuilding and repair technology, have been carried through. Both involved Ishikawajima Harima Heavy Industries Co.    A third attempt at military-technology transfer was damaged by the Toshiba controversy. Toshiba had all but signed a contract with the U.S. Army to transfer guidance-system technology for portable surface-to-air missiles. But the signing has been postponed pending investigation of the Toshiba Machine case. </TEXT></DOC>