<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861210-0154 </DOCNO><HL> Shopping Spree:Baby Bells DiversifyInto Non-Phone Areas,Spark Much Criticism---Regional Firms Are AccusedOf Unwise Acquisitions,Using Subsidies Unfairly---Growth Is Needed, They Say---By Johnnie L. RobertsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AITTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Several months after U S West Inc.'s birth in the breakup of the Bell System, two seasoned miners offered it an intriguing proposition: Would the regional Bell telephone concern like to buy a valley in the Rocky Mountains?    The miners held precious-metal claims there and thought that a business park would be a good use of the surrounding land. Itching to diversify, Denver-based U S West listened to the proposal before spurning it.    &quot;Just because they had an idea that sounded offbeat didn't mean we'd kick them out the door,&quot; a U S West spokesman says, adding: &quot;We aren't interested in limiting ideas for diversifying.&quot;    And diversify it has, along with the six other regional Bell telephone holding companies that American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. divested itself of. Ten days after the breakup on Jan. 1, 1984, Bell Atlantic Corp. announced a proposal to buy a leasing company. That set off a continuing binge of acquisitions by the seven regional companies. They have been buying Yellow Pages publishers, cellular-telephone properties, computer stores, software companies, financial-services concerns and real estate. So far, the spree has cost an estimated $3.5 billion; and that doesn't include ventures started from scratch and acquisitions valued at less than $100 million.    &quot;We are actively seeking acquisitions,&quot; says Sam Ginn, Pacific Telesis Group's vice chairman.    But regulators, consumer groups, securities analysts and potential Bell competitors are growing increasingly uneasy. Their concerns vary. Some analysts contend that the Bells, in their headlong rush to diversify, may be paying too much for acquisitions. Some competitors accuse them of &quot;cross subsidizing&quot; the new businesses with revenues from their telephone monopolies, with phone customers picking up the tab. Potential competitors such as newspaper publishers fear that the Bells will enter new electronic-based information services in which the regional companies will have an unfair advantage because of their phone networks.    Most serious of all, industry analysts, consultants and others wonder whether the Bells really know what they are doing. One critic says the seven companies' non-telephone operations lost almost $1 billion in 1985; the companies themselves are generally secretive about financial details. The doubters note that never before did Bell executives -- nurtured in the 100-year-old monopoly culture of Ma Bell -- manage diverse businesses, face competition, map strategy or acquire companies.    &quot;They have little understanding of how to compete in most industries because their management team comes from a single industry,&quot; says Craig Boyce, an industry consultant and investment banker.    Bell-company officials say their critics are off base and, at this early stage of the diversification efforts, are unfairly speculating about eventual results. In their own defense, the officials say the acquisitions are largely related to communications and, therefore, are conservative moves. &quot;We aren't buying popcorn stands,&quot; says Robert Pope, vice chairman of Southwestern Bell Corp. Bell managers add that the new, diversified operations and the telephone companies are separated to preclude cross subsidies. &quot;We refuse to use our leverage in the monopoly,&quot; says Howard Doerr, a U S West executive vice president.    The heavy losses at the non-telephone operations are narrowing sharply, Bell officials say. With non-telephone revenues ranging from a few hundred million dollars to about $1 billion at each of the companies, the non-phone operations will begin contributing significantly to earnings next year or in 1988, the Baby Bells say. At Bell Atlantic, whose efforts are regarded as among the more successful, non-telephone operations will provide as much as 40% of earnings growth this year, says Raymond Smith, vice chairman and chief financial officer.    The acquisition drive stems from the deregulation of telecommunications. The Bell System breakup left the Bells to provide local phone service on a regional basis. But they see diversification as essential because, they say, lucrative parts of that business face competition. Also, phone profits face slowing growth and can't exceed limits set by regulators.    &quot;These companies are going to increasingly feel a sense of urgency to diversify,&quot; says Jack Grubman, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst.    Thus, the deal-making proceeds apace. Bell Atlantic, the most acquisitive regional, bought a real-estate portfolio in September and completed acquisition of a second leasing concern in October -- a total outlay of $290 million. Speaking to analysts last month, Mr. Smith hinted at acquisitions in computer software and financial services.    Meanwhile, Southwestern Bell reaffirmed its controversial plan to acquire Metromedia Inc.'s cellular-telephone and paging interests for $1.2 billion. It also agreed to buy related cellular interests for about $200 million more. At Nynex Corp., a daring plan to buy a transatlantic long-distance business is moving forward. Last July, the company paid an estimated $100 million for International Business Machines Corp.'s computer stores.    &quot;We look at six to 12 situations in any given week,&quot; says Robert Runice, U S West's president for commercial development. U S West is rumored to be looking at E.F. Hutton Group Inc., a big securities firm.    So far, the Bells haven't made any huge mistakes. They have spurned proposals for acquisitions far afield such as oil and gas properties, a furniture maker and a metals fabricator.    Nonetheless, doubts are growing among securities analysts, who note the unenviable diversification record of non-Bell telephone companies, such as GTE Corp. ATandamp;T's reversals in the computer market have forced it to reemphasize its core communications business. Telephone concerns have had &quot;tremendous difficulty identifying markets,&quot; says Eileen Polsky, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. &quot;A lot of companies would be more profitable today if they hadn't pursued some of their diversification efforts.&quot;    As deals dry up in areas familiar to the Bells, &quot;you have to call into question their ability to analyze potential acquisitions not within the confines of telecommunications,&quot; PaineWebber's Mr. Grubman says.    Questions still linger over Nynex's acquisition of the 83 IBM Product Centers, now renamed Nynex Business Information Centers. &quot;How much more does Nynex know about operating those stores than IBM?&quot; Mr. Grubman asks. Even Mr. Smith, whose Bell Atlantic acquired the smaller Compushop computer-store chain, expresses skepticism about telephone companies' prospects in computer retailing. &quot;We are all testing to see if the business-center strategy is sustainable, and the jury is still out. That is why we bought a small company at a low price -- $21 million for 60 stores,&quot; Mr. Smith says.    Delbert Staley, Nynex's chief executive, says outsiders don't understand its strategy. &quot;The problem is people assume we're in it purely for computer retailing,&quot; he says. He adds that through the acquisition, Nynex gained &quot;a national presence&quot; that can help it reach business customers and distribute products and services.    Almost from the start, some critics have contended that the Bells pay too much for acquisitions. Edward Greenberg, an analyst at Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., says the $215 million that Ameritech paid for Applied Data Research Inc., a software concern, was an &quot;astronomical&quot; price. Analysts made the same charge following Bell Atlantic's $175 million acquisition of Sorbus, its computer-maintenance unit, and U S West's $120 million acquisition of Applied Communications Inc. Each company contends that it paid a full but fair price.    But the issue of overpaying is looming ever larger in the wake of Southwestern Bell's $1.2 billion cellular-phone and paging transaction. The transaction arose when the company preempted a planned auction of the holdings of Metromedia, whose principal owner, John Kluge, wanted to liquidate for estate and tax purposes. With the move, Southwestern outmaneuvered 30 or so potential bidders, including two of the Big Three auto makers, ATandamp;T and two other Bells that also sought a preemptive bid -- U S West and Pacific Telesis, sources say.    Southwestern's original proposal, a $1.65 billion offer, included a &quot;crown jewel&quot; corridor in the Northeast encompassing cellular properties in Boston, New York, Philadelphia and Washington-Baltimore. Subsequently, New York and Philadelphia were dropped because of legal problems at Metromedia, and the price was reduced. But the initial price is still being questioned. Says James M. Piepmeier, Ameritech's director of corporate development: &quot;We ran a number of investment models on those properties and had some difficulty getting anywhere near&quot; the initial figure.    Although the acquisition will dilute earnings, Southwestern defends it as a strategic move, a chance to land choice properties unlikely ever to go on the block again. &quot;We look at this as offering us an opportunity to get into the national paging and cellular businesses,&quot; the company's Mr. Pope says. &quot;There is some value in fulfilling a long-term strategy.&quot;    Bell critics and backers alike say acquisition prices have been climbing partly because the Bells have been bidding against one another. The Bells deny this but concede that the same acquisition prospects are often offered to several of them.    Bell officials expect the new businesses to be highly profitable even though, under federal regulations, non-telephone revenue must be kept to no more than 10% of the total. By 1991, &quot;a company we acquired in 1986 should be earning at a level that will be as good as or better than any alternative investment,&quot; including the phone companies, Bell Atlantic's Mr. Smith says.    But some Bell competitors, citing the losses at those operations, are bringing charges of cross subsidies. The telephone concerns &quot;are corrupting the ratepaying process, using the revenues of the local service monopoly to fuel an ambitious acquisition binge,&quot; Edwin B. Spievack, the president of the North American Telecommunications Association, said in testimony earlier this year before a congressional subcommittee. The group's members make or distribute telecommunications gear and thus compete with the Bells' unregulated units that sell such equipment.    Utility regulators also are concerned about the potential for cross subsidies. A subcommittee of the National Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners said it found evidence of cross subsidies during a recent investigation. The panel's report noted &quot;concern that the {Baby Bells} are draining off the capital of the {telephone companies} to finance their growth into unregulated operations and that the integrity of basic service is threatened.&quot;    Bell officials deny cross subsidizing non-telephone operations. The holding-company profits, much of which are invested in non-telephone operations, belong to the stockholders, they say. &quot;It sure as hell doesn't belong to the ratepayers,&quot; declares U S West's Mr. Doerr, who adds that phone customers get top-notch service for a fair price. &quot;Whatever we do with the profits, the only people we have to answer to are the shareholders,&quot; he adds.    Like other Bell executives, Mr. Doerr says the companies are reinvesting heavily in telephone service. U S West put $1.7 billion into it this year, he says.    Complaining competitors, Bell officials say, simply want the Bells relegated solely to the local telephone business. But diversification is imperative, they add.    &quot;You need to have an engine that motivates the growth of the organization,&quot; says Carl E. Horn, Ameritech's senior vice president of corporate strategy. &quot;If you don't grow, you tend to die.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>