<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0085 </DOCNO><HL> SDI's Broken Promises---By Bennett Johnson and William Proxmire</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The strategic defense initiative that was advertised four years ago is not the same research program that is in place today. In effect, Americans have become the victims of a bait and switch on Star Wars.    Four years ago, President Reagan sold SDI to the public on the promise that it would be a &quot;long-term research and development program&quot; that &quot;probably would take decades of effort on many fronts,&quot; but that its goal would be a leak-proof astrodome shield over the U.S. to render nuclear weapons &quot;impotent and obsolete.&quot;    In later statements, the president elaborated on his vision, explaining that he did not want a &quot;crash program&quot; and insisting that his strategic defense initiative would focus its research on &quot;advanced technologies&quot; consistent with the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.    During the past four years, however, the strategic defense initiative has changed dramatically in three respects.    First, instead of being a long-term, stable research program, SDI has requested funding for a crash program, which is eating away at the research budgets for other important military programs.    Even with the fiscal brakes Congress imposed, SDI's budget is more than what the Army, Navy and Air Force combined pay for basic technology research.    Last year, for example, SDI's budget grew by 29% to $3.5 billion in real terms while overall defense spending decreased in real terms. The then-Republican-controlled Senate Armed Services Committee complained in its report on the fiscal 1987 defense bill that the administration's five-year spending plan for SDI &quot;threaten(ed) to absorb an inordinate proportion of defense dollars allocated to research and development.&quot;    For fiscal 1988, however, the administration wants a 55% increase in SDI's budget to $5.8 billion, which would be more than the Army's total spending for researching, testing, developing and evaluating its weapons.    Second, instead of working toward a leak-proof astrodome shield in the far term, SDI research is now focusing on the near-term deployment (early to mid-1990s) of thin defense, which the program's director, Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, estimates would cost $40 billion to $60 billion. A Senate staff study we commissioned earlier this year estimated that such a defense would allow about four out of every five Soviet warheads to slip through.    SDI supporters maintain that such a defense, as token as it might be, would nevertheless disrupt what Gen. Abrahamson has termed the &quot;timing&quot; of a Soviet nuclear attack, thereby enhancing U.S. deterrence.    The U.S., however, already has deterrence in good measure with largely invulnerable nuclear forces and will continue to enhance it with the planned modernization of those forces. The addition of a thin ballistic missile defense that is 20% or less effective would not add appreciably to U.S. deterrence and would be hardly worth the resulting increase in strategic instability, the destruction of the ABM Treaty, a new arms race in space between the superpowers and the diversion of billions of scarce U.S. defense dollars.    The underlying reason for the research program being reoriented to pursue a near-term deployment is that SDI has become not just a scientific quest but a political crusade for the Reagan administration -- and political crusades tend to lose momentum without instant gratification.    The Strategic Defense Initiative Organization concedes that an astrodome ballistic missile defense -- even one that allows a small percentage of Soviet warheads to slip through -- would require exotic laser and beam weapons attacking Soviet rockets at the speed of light.    But laser and beam weapons, known as directed energy weapons, won't be ready until the next century. That's not fast enough for the SDI supporters. &quot;Like it or not, we see a political reality staring us in the face,&quot; Allan Mense, the SDI program's acting chief scientist, explained to the press in January. &quot;If we don't come up with something specific, people are not going to let us play in the sandbox for 10 years.&quot;    To come up with something, SDI has dusted off a quarter-century-old proposal to deploy on orbiting space platforms thousands of conventional rocket interceptors that would destroy Soviet ballistic missiles. The idea, however, was rejected after exhaustive study in the early 1960s. It continues to be fatally flawed because these space-based interceptor rockets would end up being too slow and vulnerable to Soviet countermeasures.    In fact, just months before the president's famous 1983 Star Wars speech, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and his then deputy, Frank Carlucci, refused to spend money on this conventional rocket concept (then called &quot;High Frontier&quot;). An analysis by their defense experts had concluded that &quot;the High Frontier proposals are unrealistic regarding state of technology, cost and schedule.&quot;    Nevertheless, SDI is reorienting its research toward a token deployment of these spaced-based interceptors. SDI scientists concede that the Soviets could soon defeat the interceptors and they don't know now whether exotic beam and laser weapons can ever be developed to shore up the defense.    Moreover, to remove legal barriers to testing and development of this non-exotic system, the administration has trained its sights on the ABM Treaty, which brings us to the third major shift from the president's original SDI vision.    Instead of pursuing only research consistent with the ABM Treaty, the administration in 1985 suddenly reinterpreted the treaty in order to allow SDI testing and development that the accord previously banned. Platoons of administration lawyers are now working overtime to justify implementing the reinterpretation so SDI can conduct a few near-term experiments of dubious technical value.    What's more, SDI's supporters in the Senate are holding up consideration of next year's entire defense bill to preserve the president's right to implement his reinterpretation of the treaty.    It's time to end these crusades and return to high-quality research in the strategic defense initiative. The SDI program cries out for stability.    We have three recommendations:    1) Adhere to the &quot;strict&quot; interpretation of the ABM Treaty, which the U.S. itself proclaimed and observed for 13 years. The president's original pledge to conduct SDI research within the strict interpretation was sound. Moreover, Congress has been assured repeatedly that the research necessary to make a &quot;high confidence&quot; decision on SDI's feasibility can be accomplished within the strict interpretation.    Until that research is completed -- perhaps in a decade or more -- no one can responsibly conclude that a militarily effective SDI system can even be developed, much less deployed. Consequently, neither can anyone conclude until then that the treaty's ban on testing and developing space-based anti-missile weapons is contrary to U.S. national-security interests.    It makes no sense to prematurely relax the treaty restrictions until we know such a reinterpretation serves our interests. A future president might conclude, as did Mr. Reagan's three predecessors, that these restrictions are beneficial.    2) Allow a more measured increase in funding, not the crash program the president originally said he didn't want. Already, Congress has allowed SDI's budget to more than triple since the program's inception. Former Defense Secretary Harold Brown has noted in congressional testimony that such huge funding increases end up wasting a lot of tax dollars.    The president's own science adviser, William R. Graham, recently complained to Congress about the slow growth in other basic technology research programs in the military. One reason those programs have grown so little is because SDI's budget has grown so much.    We believe that the total funding for SDI in fiscal 1988 should not exceed about $3.7 billion, which would allow for a 3.5% increase over fiscal 1987-about equal to the most growth the entire defense budget can expect for next year. Even at this level, SDI would remain the most heavily funded research program in the budget.    3) Don't shortchange promising long-term research to pay for early deployment of a token defense of questionable military value. SDI scientists warn that one of the inevitable consequences of shifting SDI research to pursue an early deployment of conventional rocket interceptors is that funds will be diverted away from the basic and advanced research on innovative and exotic technologies. But it is the research into these far-term technologies that will determine whether a militarily feasible strategic defense that the Soviets cannot defeat with countermeasures can ultimately be built.    We should note that we do not believe the president's vision of a leak-proof -- or even nearly leak-proof -- defense will ever be feasible against a determined Soviet adversary. SDI, nevertheless, should take a more balanced approach in investigating whether it is. The heavy investment in near-term technologies should be redirected more toward the far-term research that will enable us to decide if strategic defenses work in the long run.    It's time to end this bait and switch on Star Wars. What the American people need, and what they should have gotten from the vision the president dangled before them, was a vigorous yet stable strategic defense initiative, which will remain within the strict interpretation of the ABM Treaty and which pursues promising and innovative technologies. Let's give the American people what they were promised.    ---   Sen. Johnston (D., La.) and Sen. Proxmire (D., Wis.) are members of the Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittee. </TEXT></DOC>