<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861215-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Tokyo's Troubles:Japanese Auto MakersFind the Going ToughBecause of Yen's Climb---Cars Lose Price Edge to Big 3And Feel Korea's ImpactOn Their Profit Margins---Brake Shoe on Other Wheel?---By Paul Ingrassia and Damon DarlinStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/15/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FREST TOYOY NSANY HMC F GM CMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   TOKYO -- The Japanese auto makers have been pushed onto a bumpy road by the rise of the yen and the resulting drop in their profits.    These are the same auto makers that went from success in the 1970s to a virtual rout of Detroit in the early 1980s. Only import restraints kept them from running Chrysler Corp. and perhaps even Ford Motor Co. right off American highways. And their growth world-wide between 1970 and 1985 has been equally spectacular, with their total vehicle exports soaring fivefold.    But now, Japanese cars have largely lost their price edge over U.S. Big Three models and have also become more expensive in other markets where currencies have weakened against the yen. Their world-wide vehicle exports this year appear stalled at 1985 levels.    Despite sliding a bit recently, the yen has climbed 47% against the U.S. dollar in the past 16 months, and that has forced the Japanese auto makers to increase their U.S. prices some 15% and to absorb the rest of the cost increase in lower profits. Moreover, Detroit is narrowing the Japanese edge in quality. And Korean cars are filling the entry-level niche that the Japanese abandoned, and soon more low-priced models will be coming from countries such as Brazil and Mexico.    As a result of all this, U.S. inventories of unsold Japanese cars and light trucks jumped 60% from a year earlier to 292,102 vehicles as of Oct. 31. Those stockpiles are climbing even though U.S. sales of Japanese cars so far this year have edged up to 2.1 million from two million a year ago.    How the Japanese companies attack their problems is important not only to them and the U.S. auto industry but also to the economies of both nations and global trade patterns.    The Japanese industry, which exports more than half of the 12 million cars and light trucks that it makes each year, accounts for 10% of Japan's total employment, if parts suppliers and other supporting industries are included. For the first time, the Japanese economy may face a hollowing of its industrial base, with many auto-related jobs moving offshore. In a nation accustomed to little unemployment, the auto industry's problems could turn into a political issue.    For the U.S., too, the stakes are huge. In the first nine months of this year, passenger cars and trucks accounted for 38% of the $40.34 billion U.S. trade deficit with Japan. Moreover, many Americans view the Japanese auto industry as a relentless competitor, the decimator of Detroit and of American jobs, the symbol of what the U.S. is doing wrong. The notion that the Japanese auto makers are in trouble could carry an emotional impact far beyond the raw statistics.    And as the world's auto industry becomes more and more internationalized, with major producers making and selling cars world-wide, the changes will be felt all around the globe. The Japanese now sell one out of every three vehicles in the world.    Most directly affected, of course, will be the Japanese industry itself. With nine auto makers still fighting it out in Japan and no longer reaping enormous profits in the U.S., the easy-money days, when the companies superficially looked equally good, are gone, and the current problems are highlighting individual strengths and weaknesses. A shakeout or restructuring of the export-dependent industry may become inevitable, some observers believe, with winners being sorted out from losers.    That sorting out may have already begun. Nissan Motor Co.'s operations have sunk into red ink. Over the years, the company has been weakened by a series of bad decisions, internal dissension and some stodgy cars. Inevitably, it was hit especially hard by the higher yen.    The damage is widespread, however. The high yen is pushing down industry profits by more than 35% this year because the Japanese auto makers fear that any further increases in their U.S. prices would drive away potential buyers. Thus, the Japanese are swallowing the difference, and that goes down hard. Net income of Honda Motor Co. plunged 44% in its first half, ended Aug. 31. Since last summer, Toyota Motor Corp.'s operating profits have been running about 66% below a year ago-though that isn't as bad as it sounds, because it follows several years of robust profits.    Over the longer term, a trend away from producing cars in Japan for export could have far-reaching implications. &quot;I don't see Japan's auto industry being a major exporter 10 or 15 years from now,&quot; says Gary R. Saxonhouse, a University of Michigan expert on Japan. &quot;Instead, the companies will become true multinational corporations,&quot; producing as well as selling cars world-wide. He adds:    &quot;What Japan accomplished in the 1970s was historically unique. The conventional wisdom was to produce cars where you sell them, because cars are heavy, bulky and thus expensive to ship. Japan would have done that except for a special set of circumstances that kept the yen very cheap at a time when productivity in Japan was rising. The '70s will be viewed as a special era -- an aberration in the history of the auto industry.&quot;    Although that view may be somewhat extreme, one portent that an era is ending is the specter of severe overcapacity. Despite too many plants in Japan itself, eight of the nine Japanese auto makers are building or operating plants in North America. Those facilities could add up to 1.8 million more cars by 1989 to already-excessive global capacity -- at a time when U.S. competitors are reacting to overcapacity by closing plants.    With few signs that sales can grow enough to absorb more production capacity, the weaker Japanese companies -- perhaps Nissan would be first -- may have to cut back. &quot;The more they build in the U.S., the less demand there is for a plant in Japan,&quot; says Michael A. Cusumano, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor who recently wrote a history of the Japanese auto industry. Closing plants in Japan would exacerbate the nation's growing unemployment and other social problems that, so far, it has largely avoided.    Moreover, plant closings would increase the pressure for a restructuring of the Japanese auto industry. The upshot could be mergers or a stepped-up trend toward development of joint product lines between two companies. Or a producer expert in making one component -- transmissions or engines, for example -- might develop a specialty of selling that product to other auto makers. That would increase the seller's revenue and cut the buyers' product-development costs.    Another theory runs like this: The eight Japanese auto makers building or operating plants in the U.S. or Canada face high costs there, and, in an increasingly competitive market, all eight may not succeed. The losers could wind up in a financial bind. &quot;Events here in North America could be the trigger for a restructuring back in Japan,&quot; says a U.S.-based official of one Japanese auto maker.    However, some Japanese auto executives dismiss the idea of restructuring. &quot;I don't think the integration and restructuring of the Japanese auto companies is the solution&quot; to the current difficulties, says Shoichiro Toyoda, Toyota's president. Some affiliations already exist, he notes, such as Toyota's part ownership of Daihatsu Motor Co., which makes minicars.    Even if speculation about an auto-industry shakeout may be premature, the Japanese companies are already looking to get parts and even entire cars from Korea, Taiwan and other developing nations -- just as Detroit's Big Three now buy from Japan. Says John F. Smith, who oversees GM's relations with its Japanese partners: &quot;This is clearly the age of uncertainty for the Japanese auto industry.&quot;    One uncertainty, of course, is the possibility that a few years down the road, the dollar may strengthen once again and Japanese auto makers may get stuck with uneconomic U.S. plants. Conceding that another such currency reversal is possible, the Japanese say the trick is to avoid putting all their eggs in one basket. That's essentially what they first did with the yen, of course. Now, they are taking a few eggs out of the yen basket, but they aren't shifting them all into the dollar basket.    &quot;You can't be a slave to exchange-rate movements,&quot; says John F. Devine, the Tokyo-based head of Ford's Far East operations. &quot;The only certainty is that things are going to change. This puts a premium on foresight, flexibility and luck.&quot;    Moreover, moves by the Japanese to produce more cars in other nations are likely to thrust them into the sort of problems that plague competitors such as GM. They will tend to lose some of the cost savings from their highly touted just-in-time inventory system, in which suppliers locate their plants nearby and thus help reduce inventories and inventory costs at assembly plants. And as the supply lines stretch around the world, the companies will become more vulnerable to supply disruptions due to shipping problems in bad weather, political discord in foreign countries, and strikes by workers not as eager and docile as the hard-working Japanese.    So far, the Americans working in Japanese plants in the U.S. have proved cooperative. Fearing defeat, the United Auto Workers suspended its organizing drive at Honda's Ohio plant last March. Workers at the GM-Toyota plant in California are represented by the UAW, but the facility is the most efficient, highest-quality plant in the GM system. The Japanese success in labor relations is partly due to careful screening of the workers hired and partly to continuing care about labor relations.    However, such initial success doesn't guarantee that, some years down the road, the Japanese auto makers in the U.S. and elsewhere may not run into the labor turmoil that now hampers their rivals.    The Japanese industry's problems are producing some ironic twists. The U.S. assembly plants that the Japanese started building to placate American protectionists suddenly have developed real economic value, and their owners are treating them accordingly. Toyota, for example, recently trucked in portable football-stadium lights to Georgetown, Ky., to allow round-the-clock site-preparation work for the assembly plant that it is building there.    To compensate for lower profits overseas, Toyota also is striving, with some success, to raise sales in Japan -- and it is hurting an archrival. Nissan remains second in size to Toyota, but its sagging market share in Japan helped produce an operating loss of $121.9 million, at the yen's current rate, in the first half ended Sept. 30.    The Toyota-Nissan disparity illustrates how Japan's auto makers can no longer be viewed as a monolithic entity. &quot;The strongest Japanese companies will emerge stronger than ever,&quot; Ford's Mr. Devine says. &quot;They will be forced to become even more cost-efficient than now and will set up international operations of a larger and deeper nature than we've seen before. Toyota is a good example&quot; because of its financial, manufacturing and distribution strengths. So is Honda, which has a reputation for innovative styling and engineering and already makes more cars in the U.S. than any of its Japanese rivals.    But Nissan, which also has a U.S. plant, is struggling to overcome years of stodgy styling and internal factionalism. Mazda and Mitsubishi Motors Corp., meanwhile, must give their cars distinct identities in a market where Japanese cars no longer clearly outclass Big Three models.    Amid all this scrambling, Japanese auto makers clearly retain some crucial strengths. Though their lead over Detroit's Big Three in product quality and manufacturing efficiency has narrowed, it remains significant. Moreover, the strong yen makes it cheaper for Japanese auto makers and parts suppliers to import raw materials and build plants overseas.    And although profits are down, most auto maker balance sheets are in enviable condition. Toyota has practically no long-term debt and huge cash resources; that is so incredible for a concern whose sales totaled $38.2 billion in the fiscal year ended June 30 that the company is known in Japan as the Bank of Toyota. Last year's 15% profit drop didn't keep Toyota from increasing capital spending 54%, and the expectations of a further earnings drop in fiscal 1987 aren't squelching plans for high outlays over the next several years. </TEXT></DOC>