<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880208-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Pentagon Warrior: Adm. Crowe Is Seeking Bigger Role in Setting Overall Military Policy --- Chairman of Joint Chiefs Is Outspoken but Finds He Is Ignored in Some Areas --- A Draining Row Over Money </HL><AUTHOR> Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> DEF EXE </G><TEXT>   Adm. William Crowe doesn't always feel bound by convention.    Last year, he ordered the deployment of Army helicopters with night-vision equipment to help the Navy patrol the Persian Gulf. &quot;This got the typical reaction from the theologians,&quot; says Adm. Crowe, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. &quot;They said you can't put Army helicopters on Navy ships.&quot; Adm. Crowe's view prevailed, and the helicopters later proved crucial in a U.S. attack on an Iranian mine-laying ship.    Armed with a willingness to challenge conventional wisdom and a 1986 military-reform law that gives the nation's top military officer a more powerful role, Adm. Crowe is trying to redraw lines of authority in the Pentagon. If he succeeds, he will set a new course for JCS chairmen, who have long been hamstrung by powerful service chiefs and bypassed by the president and defense secretary.    So far, his record is mixed. Adm. Crowe (rhymes with wow) has emerged as the Pentagon's most decisive voice in mapping U.S. military operations, such as those in the Persian Gulf. But on questions of overall military policy, it is a different story. Although the Reagan administration has spent more than $1.4 trillion on the armed forces, it often ignores, or even avoids, the advice of military leadership.    The 63-year-old admiral is philosophical about his position. &quot;The chairman isn't in command,&quot; he says matter-of-factly. &quot;I'm an adviser.&quot; Indeed, the JCS chief isn't in the chain of command, which proceeds from the president to the defense secretary to major commanders around the world. And although Adm. Crowe believes that the military-reform law strengthens his hand, he doesn't expect it to transform the JCS chairmanship quickly. &quot;It's tough to change attitudes,&quot; he says.    In the past, the JCS chairman was required to present the consensus view of all the service chiefs. The upshot: Military advice was often ill-timed and shaped more by interservice rivalries than by reason. When the Carter administration planned the ill-fated 1980 hostage-rescue attempt in Iran, for example, the military included a role for each of the services, an approach experts later said increased the confusion. To speed decision-making, the 1986 law empowered the JCS chairman to advance his recommendations whether or not the other service chiefs agree.    Currently, Adm. Crowe is taking an unprecedented role in the Pentagon's most draining battle -- shrinking a five-year budget plan by $250 billion to bring it into line with fiscal constraints. In the past, the JCS budget recommendations were often considered irrelevant because they mainly reflected perceived military threats around the world and service expansion plans rather than political financing realities. &quot;They had no real-world framework,&quot; a senior department official says. At a meeting in December, Adm. Crowe made it clear that this had changed. &quot;He was speaking up, giving clear evidence that fiscal limitations are being considered in the JCS,&quot; says one official who attended the session. Adm. Crowe has emphasized that his priority is to keep the military forces well-trained and equipped, even if the trade-off is to shrink them somewhat. He wants to avoid a replay of the 1970s, when, under dwindling budgets, the Pentagon stuck with a sprawling military structure that it couldn't maintain, leaving it with ships that couldn't fight and aircraft that couldn't fly. &quot;Crowe provides the synapse between the war-fighter and planner and equipper,&quot; says Robert Helm, the Defense Department comptroller.    Tailoring spending to the new budget realities is one of the toughest jobs military leaders face. &quot;It's going to be chaos,&quot; Adm. Crowe predicts. The Army has killed a major new helicopter program and will cut back by 10,000 troops. The Air Force is reducing its fighter wings to 35 from 38. And the Navy is retiring 16 ships ahead of schedule and dropping plans to buy an improved A-6 attack plane.    A U.S. Naval Academy graduate, Adm. Crowe has never commanded a ship larger than a diesel submarine. He learned the politics of the Pentagon and of Washington in a series of staff jobs; as a young officer, he served in the White House and as an aide to the chief of naval operations. At 37, he interrupted his military career to pick up a Ph.D. in politics at Princeton University, a move friends warned could shoot down future promotions.    During the Vietnam War, he served as the senior U.S. adviser to the Vietnamese riverine navy. After the fall of Saigon in 1975, the Crowe family -- Adm. Crowe and his wife have three children -- took in a Vietnamese military officer and his entire family in their suburban Virginia home.    Unlike many officers, Adm. Crowe gives political as well as military advice. In 1983, when commanding U.S. forces in the Pacific, he challenged the Reagan administration's then-unswerving support for Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos. &quot;There was no way that we could continue to work with Marcos and get what we wanted,&quot; he explains. He sent several sharply critical communiques to Washington, and, eventually, President Reagan and Caspar Weinberger, then the defense secretary, called him in to discuss his prognosis.    &quot;When Admiral Crowe came in and said this wasn't going to get any better, this had a staggering effect,&quot; says Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Armitage. The warnings sparked a policy reassessment, with the administration distancing itself from the Marcos government in 1985 and supporting the Aquino government that replaced it. That year, Adm. Crowe was named the nation's senior military officer, and he moved back to Washington, where he festooned his office with some of the 800 hats he has collected around the world during his Navy career.    Adm. Crowe continues to speak out. Amid calls for quick deployment of strategic defense weapons, he reminded enthusiasts that &quot;it's not something out there in the parking lot&quot; but a batch of technologies still in the research phase. In mapping the Navy's operations in the Persian Gulf, he repeatedly warned Congress of possible American casualties.    But Adm. Crowe's military advice isn't always followed. In October, when the U.S. planned a retaliatory strike against Iran for an attack on a U.S.-flagged tanker, President Reagan turned away the JCS chief's suggestion that the U.S. strike an Iranian ship. He chose instead a more cautious attack on an offshore military platform.    On other important military moves, Adm. Crowe hasn't even been consulted. When President Reagan in 1986 offered to scrap all ballistic missiles in 10 years, he asked for a top-level military analysis of the plan only after he got home from the negotiating table in Iceland.    And when Adm. Crowe offered his views, the White House misrepresented them. According to Pentagon officials, he was dismayed by the far-reaching plan and told the president that he and the other service chiefs opposed it. However, White House officials, eager to display unity after the somewhat-confused Reykjavik summit, told the Washington Post that the administration had coalesced into a &quot;unified position&quot; behind the proposal and that the military chiefs supported the &quot;broad principle.&quot; Defense Department officials term the characterizations false.    Adm. Crowe was also cut out when the administration planned its arms deals with Iran. Although the sales affected military relationships throughout the region, Adm. Crowe learned of them only in June 1986, more than six months after they had begun. Then, he had to scrape together information on the operation from his own intelligence sources.    But the chairman has exerted considerable influence when the U.S. deploys its forces, and he has been particularly aggressive in bolstering those operating in the Persian Gulf.    At first, the U.S. hoped for quiet success in its plan to shield Kuwaiti tankers from Iranian attack, and the Pentagon only slightly increased its normal naval detachment in the gulf. For Adm. Crowe, this approach was shattered at 2 a.m. on July 24, when he was jangled awake with the news that the USS Bridgeton, a Kuwaiti supertanker under U.S. protection, had struck a mine that had blown a gaping hole in its hull. The U.S. wasn't prepared for mine attacks.    Adm. Crowe left immediately for the Pentagon and began mapping what turned into a huge naval buildup in the region. &quot;We had to put some capability there that we had hoped to avoid,&quot; he says. Others weren't ready to veer from the early strategy of protecting tankers with the smallest possible increase in forces. &quot;People said, 'You're trying to put an armada out there,'&quot; he recalls.    Adm. Crowe isn't defensive about mistakes. &quot;If there's one profession in which you can't mount an error-free operation, it's the military,&quot; he says. In this case, the JCS chief feared that Congress might curtail the Navy operation if the U.S. repeatedly looked ill-prepared. &quot;I had really underestimated how involved Congress would get and how determined they would be to politicize it,&quot; he says.    The JCS chief kept pushing for additional forces. Although his manner is informal and seldom blustery, &quot;he's not easily bulldozed,&quot; says retired Gen. John Wickham, formerly the Army chief of staff. The U.S. sent a small fleet of mine-sweeping helicopters and three types of mine-clearing ships into the gulf.    Adm. Crowe thinks that the JCS chairman would have greater influence on national-security policies if he regularly attended meetings of the National Security Council. As it is, he goes to them if military operations are on the agenda, but he is left out of many sessions about broader diplomatic and security issues.    Whether or not he is included in all the inner workings of the national-security apparatus, Adm. Crowe usually is well tapped in. In previous military posts in Europe, the Mideast and the Pacific, he built a formidable private information network. He also is a stickler for improving the military's intelligence. For example, he pushed the Navy to improve its information on Iranian forces' activities.    However, he says, &quot;An operation is always mounted with imperfect intelligence. You never know everything you should.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>