<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   LEBANON'S GEMAYEL NAMED an interim regime as factional fighting flared.    As his term expired, the Lebanese president appointed a six-member military government, with army commander Gen. Michel Aoun as prime minister. The official decrees were issued after civilian Moslem figures refused to participate in an interim cabinet headed by a Maronite Christian premier. The dispute over formation of a new government prompted clashes between Moslems and Christians in Beirut, and three top commanders of Amal, the main Shiite Moslem militia, were assassinated.    Lebanon's parliament is scheduled to hold a presidential-election session today amid heightened concern that the country's civil war will be rekindled.    ---   DUKAKIS HAS NARROWED Bush's lead in the presidential race, a poll shows.    A new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll shows Bush leading the Democratic nominee among likely voters by a margin of 45% to 41%. Just after last month's Republican convention, the GOP candidate held a 47%-40% lead. The survey also indicated that the vice president is dominating the agenda of the campaign and that the favorable-unfavorable ratings of the candidates are close.    Bush was endorsed by Boston's police union as he and the Massachusetts governor continued cramming for their first presidential debate Sunday.    ---   Soviet tanks and troops patrolled the southern republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan. Radio reports said protesters attacked a government office, rallied by the thousands and staged strikes in an escalating dispute over the Nagorno-Karabakh region. At least one person was reported killed and about 50 injured in ethnic clashes.    ---   The U.S. and Soviet Union launched a comprehensive review of their relations as Reagan hinted that the two sides may be drawing closer to resolving some differences. Shultz met with Shevardnadze to discuss proposals to reduce long-range nuclear arms. The talks also were expected to cover conventional forces and chemical weapons.    ---   Nicaragua's President Ortega canceled his scheduled visit to the U.N. because the U.S. delayed visas to his delegation, an official in Managua announced. Ortega was to address the General Assembly next Wednesday. The State Department denied that it was blocking or delaying the visas.    ---   The House approved an anti-drug bill that includes penalties for drug-related crimes ranging from the loss of federal benefits to execution. The vote was 375-30. The measure would punish offenders from recreational users to murderers. The election-year legislation could face constitutional tests if enacted.    ---   South Africa indicated that a summit between Pretoria and its black majority-ruled neighbors to negotiate a settlement of the Angolan conflict was &quot;a distinct possibility.&quot; The commentary on state-run radio came as U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar arrived in South Africa to discuss plans for Namibian independence.    A fourth anti-apartheid activist escaped detention in South Africa and took refuge in the U.S. consulate in Johannesburg, where three others have been sheltered. Separately, five bombs exploded across the country, injuring almost 50 people. Pretoria said the blasts were aimed at disrupting next month's municipal elections.    ---   Opposition leaders in Burma demanded the release of Buddhist monks, students and others arrested during a crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrations following Sunday's military coup. Gen. Saw Maung, who became premier Wednesday, vowed to hold elections as soon as peace is restored.    ---   A federal jury in Los Angeles convicted a former Mexican police officer of the 1985 kidnap and murder of a U.S. drug agent and a pilot. Raul Lopez Alvarez, 29, was the first of three alleged members of a Mexican drug ring to be convicted in the case. Sentencing was scheduled for next month.    ---   Japan's Crown Prince Akihito assumed all his father's duties while 87-year-old Emperor Hirohito remained bedridden with a serious illness. Thousands of pilgrims gathered outside the Imperial Palace in Tokyo. The heir to the Chrysanthemum Throne's duties will include promulgating laws and officiating at various formal ceremonies.    ---   The FAA ordered that all planes with 30 seats or more be outfitted with equipment that detects and helps pilots escape wind shear. The weather condition, characterized by sudden changes in wind speed or direction, has contributed to at least five airline accidents in 10 years.    ---   Mobs in Haiti attacked members of the Tontons Macoutes, the private army of the Duvalier regimes, as rebellious soldiers wound down their purge of army commanders. The new military government, which seized power in a weekend coup, appealed for an end to lawlessness.    ---   House Speaker Wright denied disclosing classified data when he criticized Tuesday a CIA operation aimed at fomenting unrest in Nicaragua. GOP lawmakers, however, pressed for formal ethics and intelligence inquiries of the Texas Democrat's remarks.    ---   Britain accused three Czechoslovak diplomats of espionage and ordered them to leave the country within two weeks. The expulsions prompted speculation that the envoys were linked with a London art dealer who is charged with forming a spy ring.    ---   Israeli troops fired at masked Palestinian youths who hurled stones and wielded axes in the occupied West Bank, wounding at least 12 of the Arabs. In the Gaza Strip, Defense Minister Shamir escaped injury during a tour of the area when a Palestinian assailant hurled a stone from a rooftop.    ---   Died: Sheldon Coleman, 86, chairman of Coleman Co., Wednesday, in Wichita, Kan. </TEXT></DOC>