<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Financial Planning (A Special Report): Investing---Too Good to Be True:If One of These Deals Comes Your Way,Call the Cops, Grab Your Wallet and Run---By Martha Brannigan</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>   In 1919, an immigrant named Charles Ponzi promised investors a 50% return in 45 days if they would let him invest their money in foreign stamps. He paid off a few investors, thus attracting many more. By the time authorities put him out of business, he had suckered 30,000 people out of $9.5 million.    Mr. Ponzi has not lacked for imitators. Con men, limited only by their fertile imaginations, promote get-rich-quick schemes in every sort of investment, from gold and land to worms and U.S. securities.    If specifics vary, the modus operandi doesn't. Their essential trick is to promise a return that far exceeds the norm, and they are adept at moving from one scheme to the next. &quot;When things get hot in one place,&quot; says Mark A. Tepper, an assistant attorney general in New York state, &quot;they look for a place where things are not so hot.&quot;    Swindlers' victims follow a pattern, too. Typically, they are so blinded by greed that they are easy marks for a salesman with a slick yarn.    There is no sure-fire way of recognizing con artists, but the following examples suggest one cautionary maxim: If a deal sounds too good to be true, then it probably is.    If creating something out of nothing is an art form, then J. David Dominelli probably ranks among the Rembrandts of the financial world.    An obscure and not terribly successful California stockbroker, he seemed unlikely to distinguish himself in finance. But after stints with five different brokerage firms, Mr. Dominelli founded J. David andamp; Co. in San Diego in 1979, and so began a brief but splashy financial empire.    Mr. Dominelli's specialty was buying and selling foreign currencies. He sought investors, pooled their money and invested it in the arcane and volatile interbank currency market.    His following grew, mainly by word of mouth, based on his claim that investors could regularly get annual returns of 40% or more. San Diego's rich and famous poured in money, and Mr. Dominelli's once-modest position in life grew apace. He had six homes, three jets and more than two dozen expensive cars. He supported auto-racing teams and local charities.    His staff grew, too, to 270 people -- though Mr. Dominelli claimed that he did all of his currency trading by himself at his luxurious La Jolla office. In fact, his command over his empire, which grew to include insurance and stockbrokering, was such that no one knew exactly how the whole thing worked except for Mr. Dominelli himself.    Then the Rembrandt was disclosed to be a fake.    Some of his investors tried to get their money back, and in February 1984 J. David andamp; Co. was forced into involuntary bankruptcy. Investors discovered that they were out roughly $80 million.    &quot;It boggles the mind, the nature and extent of the fraud that was perpetrated,&quot; said federal Judge William Enright of San Diego.    Mr. Dominelli, now 45 years old, is serving a 20-year term in prison. As part of his guilty plea, he admitted in a signed confession that he had lied about almost every aspect of his business.    The International Gold Bullion Exchange was founded in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., in 1979 by William Alderdice, a flamboyant jewelry salesman, and his brother, James.    The Alderdice brothers attracted at least 23,000 customers by promising gold and silver at below-market prices to investors who were willing to wait for delivery.    Many are still waiting.    IGBE was shut down by Florida regulators for fraud in April 1983. It currently is in liquidation proceedings in federal bankruptcy court in Fort Lauderdale.    When authorities inspected the vault, they found wooden bricks painted to look like gold bullion bars and cash bags stuffed with cut newspapers. More than 13,000 customers, some from as far away as Alaska and West Germany, say they lost a total of $75 million.    In July 1984, while free on bond and awaiting trial, William Alderdice was killed by a man whom he had met in the county jail. James Alderdice pleaded guilty to fraud and other charges and is currently in federal prison.    It was the sort of thing you'd expect from a man named Melvin Bogus.    As head of marketing for Federal Bank andamp; Trust Co.'s tax shelter program, Mr. Bogus promoted a plan to about 2,000 citizens who were desirous of lightening their federal tax burdens.    He and his cohorts raked in about $18 million from clients. Using the bank and several offshore shell corporations, his group generated confirmations showing $140 million in commodity trading losses, which the customers deducted from their income taxes.    Unfortunately for those customers, the trading never took place. And the bank proved to be a shell bank, no more than a printed charter kept in an office on the Caribbean island of St. Vincent.    &quot;The taxpayers got confirmation slips showing losses in Treasury bill trading, but there were never any trades. They just manufactured paper,&quot; Robert Lehner, assistant U.S. attorney, said during Mr. Bogus's trial earlier this year in Miami.    Mr. Bogus was convicted of conspiracy and fraud and is currently serving time at federal prison in Montgomery, Ala. Three others connected with the case are also in prison.    And the taxpayers? A few of them are in litigation with the U.S. government, which says their deductions weren't legitimate. The rest have already paid back the Internal Revenue Service with interest.    A couple of California land-fraud artists bilked some 3,000 investors out of about $25 million in a scheme notable for its longevity: It spanned 17 years. James McGowan and James Farrara sold desert land in the Antelope Valley area of Los Angeles to people from Japan, Italy, Switzerland, West Germany and the U.S.    Through companies such as Far-Mac Investments Inc., the two pitched investments in &quot;can't miss&quot; properties that supposedly were poised to benefit from the continuing growth of Los Angeles. According to a federal indictment, some 3,500 acres of desert land, promoted as &quot;the next San Fernando Valley,&quot; were illegally subdivided and sold off in small parcels at grossly inflated prices.    &quot;The land was in the flood plains where all hell breaks loose when it rains,&quot; says Gary Feess, chief of major fraud for the U.S. attorney's office in Los Angeles. &quot;Of course, none of that was disclosed to investors.&quot;    How did they get away with it for so long?    It took the investors, who bought on the installment plan, years to actually get their deeds. When they did, federal prosecutors say, they found that development was conditioned upon their building roads and making improvements.    Messrs. McGowan and Farrara, who began selling land in 1964, weren't indicted until 1982, following a long investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Authorities say there was little if any restitution. Mr. Farrara died before he could face trial. Mr. McGowan, an ex-vaudeville performer who went by the name Johnny Paysee, was convicted of conspiracy and mail fraud and sentenced to 18 months.    The desert land -- or some of it -- is still owned by the investors.    Superior Worm Brokers Exchange Inc. in Indianapolis sent mass mailings peddling potential riches from &quot;worm farms.&quot;    The exchange promised to set up investors in business raising hybrid red earthworms and to provide a ready market for them. It said worms are in demand as ingredients in shampoo and dog food, as food in the Republic of China, as soil developer for nurseries and garden shops, and for sewage and waste disposal.    All lies, federal prosecutors say.    Worm farmers in 10 states lost about $6.5 million in the scheme between 1979 and 1983. Superior Worm's president, Jack Taylor Burns, pleaded guilty to mail fraud and was sentenced to 12 years in federal prison. Three of the company's salesmen also pleaded guilty to mail fraud, and each was sentenced to a year and a day.    &quot;There's no real market for worms except as bait,&quot; says K. Tate Chambers, the assistant U.S. attorney in Peoria, Ill. He adds: &quot;They make fish bait and sucker bait.&quot;    It seemed like easy money.    All investors had to do was send in a minimum of $350. In return, Activator Supply Co. would send them a white powder for growing a yogurt-like culture.    The culture, the company said, unlocked a beauty secret sought since the time of Cleopatra that had recently been rediscovered in Africa.    All investors had to do, the company added, was mix the powder with milk and grated Cheddar cheese, and leave it on a kitchen shelf for a week. This would result in a globby, highly valuable bacterial culture that could be used in making &quot;Cleopatra's Secret,&quot; an exotic new cosmetic.    Why was the Lawrence, Kan.-based operation so eager to let others in on its bonanza? The secret &quot;lactic culture,&quot; Activator claimed, couldn't be grown in large vats -- only in six-ounce glasses.    The real secret was that there wasn't a commercial market for the product. By the time the enterprise was shut down last year, 28,000 investors from 30 states had lost roughly $80 million, according to Kansas securities regulators. In one instance, two schoolteachers put $3,950 apiece in the company, despite having been warned that it was about to be shut down. The logical explanation, says Craig Stancliffe, associate general counsel for the securities commissioner of Kansas, is that the victims &quot;were blinded by the greed.&quot;    Five of those connected with Cleopatra's secret pleaded guilty to fraud-related charges. Five other defendants are awaiting trial.    Top brass at E.S.M. Government Securities Inc. lived like royalty, collecting polo ponies, yachts, fancy cars, corporate jets, horse farms, and in one instance, a $78,000 dog. One officer chartered a jet and flew an entourage of friends to Rome for his wedding. Meanwhile, the little-known Fort Lauderdale, Fla.-based securities dealer was losing millions of dollars of its customers' money, while using accounting sleight of hand to conceal its problems.    The customers, mostly small municipalities, were offered above-average returns on money invested through E.S.M. when they left their collateral securities at E.S.M.'s clearing bank -- instead of, as is prudent, taking possession of them. When E.S.M. was closed for fraud in March 1985, investigators found that the firm had pledged the same securities as collateral to multiple customers who had entrusted E.S.M. with their cash. It owed customers about $320 million.    E.S.M. is now in liquidation in federal bankruptcy court. Ronnie R. Ewton, its chairman and co-founder, five other officers and the outside auditor pleaded guilty to a variety of fraud charges in April. Three other former employees were convicted in a jury trial in July.    Few financial scams have had such far-reaching effects. E.S.M.'s collapse spurred the failure of Cincinnati-based Home State Savings Bank, which had invested heavily with E.S.M., and the temporary closing of some 70 other Ohio state-chartered thrifts. The unraveling of the scheme also triggered a sell-off of the dollar on international markets.    ---   Ms. Brannigan is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Miami bureau. </TEXT></DOC>