<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871007-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Prices Plunge After Report SaudisPropose Linking Quotes to Spot Market---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PETROLEUM (PET)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   Feverish selling drove oil futures prices lower following a report that Saudi Arabia proposed linking some oil sales to spot prices.    In New York, where the report by Dow Jones International News Service came early in the session, prices recovered a bit in later trading as the report remained unconfirmed.    However, prices sank again toward the end of trading at the New York Mercantile Exchange, where crude oil for November delivery finished just above the lows of the day at $19.44 a barrel, down 38 cents. Prices of petroleum products were dragged down by the drop in crude.    The spot price of West Texas Intermediate, a benchmark U.S. crude, fell 35 cents a barrel to $19.45.    In London, the reports occurred late in the session, and prices there fell throughout the day. November gasoil, the British version of crude, fell $2 a metric ton to $165.50 on the International Petroleum Exchange.    The spot price of North Sea Brent, a widely traded European crude blend, fell 20 cents a barrel to $18.75.    According to the report by the Dow Jones International News Service, policy makers in Saudi Arabia proposed, in effect, letting its price rise and fall in connection with cash prices. At the moment the move wouldn't lower Saudi prices to below the current Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries benchmark price of $18 a barrel, analysts said, because cash prices right now are higher than the OPEC fixed quote.    Although interpretations varied as to why Saudi Arabia would make such a move, two main explanations were offered: Saudi Arabia wants to increase its market share, which has been smaller than the quota allotted to it by the OPEC production and pricing accord. And Saudi Arabia wants to use economic pressure to temper Iran's aggressiveness in the Persian Gulf.    Saudi sales would be linked to spot prices in different areas of the world. That means that, for instance, if Saudi Arabia sold its oil to countries around the North Sea at a spot price of, say, $18.75, a buyer in one of those nations would receive a rebate of 75 cents.    However, analysts said, because supply outweighs demand right now, spot prices could slip, and buyers could get Saudi oil for less then $18 -- in effect bypassing the OPEC floor price. That possibility triggered the selling in the futures market.    Traders and analysts questioned whether Saudi Arabia had, indeed, taken the step. According to at least two sources, a petition outlining such action had been drawn up to be presented to King Fahd, although it wasn't known whether the king had signed the document. Some leaking of the document's contents may have taken place, they said.    Saudi output has been running about 3.7 million barrels a day, compared with its OPEC quota of more than 4.3 million barrels. Total OPEC output was said to have totaled as much as 19.7 million barrels a day in August and more than 18 million barrels in September, while the overall OPEC quota is 16.6 million barrels a day.    &quot;Saudi Arabia may be tired of subsidizing other OPEC producers and could be giving them notice to shape up,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director at Elders Futures Inc. in New York.    Nauman Barakat, an energy analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York said &quot;Saudi Arabia may be looking toward the fourth quarter when demand is at its peak and spot prices may be higher. Iraq tried to do the same thing two months ago.&quot;    David T. Mizrahi, editor of the New York-based newsletter MidEast Report, said: &quot;It's mostly a move to push prices downward to deprive Iran of hard currency it needs to buy armaments. Saudi Arabia can do this because it has reserves of close to, if not more than, $80 billion, while Iran's are only between $3 billion to $5 billion. With Saudi Arabia's population at only seven million, compared with Iran's 45 million, who can afford better to do this?&quot;    In other futures markets yesterday:    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices plunged as inflation concerns and arbitrage-related program trading sparked a massive sell-off. The bellwether Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index future contract for December settlement dropped 10.95 to 319.85. Meanwhile, the Dow Jones Industrial Average had its biggest one-day point decline, dropping 91.55 to 2548.63. Stock-index futures prices opened lower in response to a weak bond market and a declining dollar. Traders were reacting to an &quot;expected tightening of the system&quot; in which the Federal Reserve Board may restrict credit to stem rising inflation and may raise interest rates, said J.R. Fredricks, an analyst at E. David Stephens Commodity Corp. in Chicago. Recent comments by Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan that the Fed could be forced to increase the discount rate again fueled concerns about inflation. Similar concerns also hit the bond futures market, where Treasury bond futures for December settlement fell 1/8 to 81 19/32. The declines in index futures prices accelerated as traders responded to a bearish market prediction from widely followed technical analyst Robert Prechter, said Leigh Stevens, a stock-index futures strategist at PaineWebber Inc. in New York. Analysts also cited profit-taking. The sell-off sparked at least three waves of arbitrage-related buying, said Courtney Smith, head of futures and options trading at Banque Paribas in New York. The arbitrage trading was triggered as the spread between the futures prices and the underlying indexes led traders to buy the relatively less expensive futures and sell the stocks making up the indexes. Although the arbitrage-related buying boosted index futures prices momentarily, it wasn't enough to stem the slide.    SUGAR: Futures prices rose, bolstered by rumors that world demand for sugar may pick up and by a forecast that global output will fall. There was talk in the sugar industry that the Soviet Union, whose harvest has had delays because of wet and cold weather, may buy an unspecified amount of sugar, analysts said. Also mentioned as a prospective buyer was India, whose output is expected to drop a bit but whose domestic consumption is increasing. Routine demand from Middle East countries also was mentioned as a possibility, analysts said. Meanwhile, the West German sugar statistical firm F.O. Licht andamp; Co. issued its first estimate for output in the current season that began Sept. 1 and said world production would fall to 102.7 million metric tons from 103.4 million tons last season, mostly because of expected production declines in northern and western Europe stemming from wet and cold weather. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Corn futures prices are expected to drop slightly at the open of trading today in the wake of an estimate by an industry letter that the harvest could total 7.267 billion bushels. That estimate by the Chicago-based Leslie Crop Survey, based on Oct. 1 corn crop conditions, is about 125 million bushels higher than many market projections. Meanwhile, most analysts are expecting little change in the Agriculture Department's monthly estimate of harvest conditions, which is slated for release after the close of trading tomorrow. Last month, the department pegged the corn harvest at 7.14 billion bushels. Most analysts also don't expect any big changes from the government's September estimate of a soybean harvest of 1.96 billion bushels. Revisions are usually sparked by bad weather or disease. This fall, good weather has allowed the harvest to move much faster than usual. The corn and soybean harvests are about 40% and 44% completed, respectively, analysts said. </TEXT></DOC>