<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880824-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Policing the Market: Pressed by Congress, Broker Firms Beef Up Compliance Efforts --- Distrust Grows in the Wake Of Insider-Trading Cases; Focus on Company Cops --- Widows and Orphans First </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> CNG SEC </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Wall Streeters don't always play by the rules. At Salomon Brothers, that's when Allan Pessin and his handcuffs come in.    Rule breakers usually start out small, perhaps by opening an account for a wealthy speculator without asking for a home address, says Mr. Pessin, Salomon's chief compliance officer. Securities laws require that a firm &quot;know&quot; its customers, so when Mr. Pessin sees a new account form listing only a post-office box, he grabs his handcuffs and heads for the firm's trading floor.    With the cuffs dangling symbolically from his hands, Mr. Pessin confronts offending salesmen, warning them to shape up lest they one day face the shackles of federal marshals.    &quot;You have to embarrass them in front of their peers,&quot; he says.    Salomon's Mr. Pessin is one of a legion of internal cops who walk beats down the halls of Wall Street securities firms. For years these compliance officers labored in obscurity, sifting through piles of computer printouts in back rooms, searching for rule breakers. But no more. In the era of Ivan Boesky, insider trading and diminishing public trust in the securities industry, compliance is getting all sorts of new official attention -- much to the chagrin of Wall Street.    Congress, angered over Wall Street's inability to police itself, is pressing securities firms to crack down on insider trading, in which a person trades on confidential, nonpublic information. A bill before the House would allow the Securities and Exchange Commission to recover triple damages from a firm involved in insider trading if it can prove that the firm wasn't policing its employees carefully enough.    &quot;I have an overall concern about the Street's procedures and the extent to which these firms accept responsibility for monitoring their employees' activities,&quot; complains Rep. Edward Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat and a sponsor of the bill. Also, the New York Stock Exchange plans to require chief executives of its member firms to sign quarterly statements certifying that they have checked their firms for wrongdoing.    In response to the official pressure, brokerage houses are expanding their compliance staffs -- which search for violations ranging from insider trading to theft from client accounts -- and giving them new license to find wrongdoers before the wrongdoers embarrass the firm.    &quot;You'd have to be brain damaged not to see that the compliance departments of our firms needed to be beefed up,&quot; says a senior officer at a major Wall Street firm. Worries Leslie Quick III, president of the discount brokerage, Quick andamp; Reilly Group Inc.: &quot;'They're all crooks' -- that's what people are saying about us.&quot;    Of course, there have been major compliance success stories. It was Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., after all, that discovered the insider trading trail that led from two Merrill brokers in Venezuela eventually to Mr. Boesky and several other Wall Street figures. And at Salomon, Mr. Pessin and his handcuffs apparently have made their point: Salomon is one of the few major securities firms untouched by the insider trading scandal. A senior Salomon official calls compliance &quot;one of the few things we've done well -- up to this point.&quot;    But these are largely exceptions to a disturbing trend: securities firms seem generally unable to prevent wrongdoing by their employees and clients.    For example:   --Despite computerized surveillance techniques, several firms didn't detect suspicious advance trading on stocks mentioned in Business Week magazine until it was uncovered by the computers of a news service. &quot;I don't think they catch half the {illegal} stuff that goes on,&quot; says Quick andamp; Reilly's Mr. Quick.    --Although Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. computers detected suspicious trading by Taiwanese businessman Fred C. Lee last November, the firm's investigators concluded that Mr. Lee was simply an amateur speculator. But in June, the SEC charged Mr. Lee with trading on inside information that a young Morgan Stanley analyst sold him. Morgan Stanley says it found nothing illegal about Mr. Lee's trading, and declines further comment. Mr. Lee's attorney couldn't be reached for comment.    --Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. concedes that until one of its partners was indicted for insider trading last year, the firm rarely scrutinized the personal-trading activity of its partners. &quot;We were sort of on the honor system,&quot; one senior Goldman official says. The charges against the Goldman partner, Robert Freeman, subsequently were dropped, although federal prosecutors have said they intend to file new charges. Mr. Freeman and Goldman have vigorously denied any wrongdoing.    The rash of scandals in the past few years has affected more than just reputations. The government fined Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. $25.3 million last year for failing to detect insider trading and other securities law violations within the firm. Kidder's chairman, president and general counsel were ultimately forced to resign, in part because of the firm's inability to police its operations.    It is the compliance officer's job to help prevent that kind of violation within the firm. Cases, in turn, that involve more than one securities concern usually are handled by self-regulatory organizations like the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the National Association of Securities Dealers, whose computers and investigators can track trading on a broader basis. Securities firms have plenty of power over their own employees, but neither firms nor a stock exchange can compel a firm's customer to cooperate in an investigation. When they suspect a client of wrongdoing, they generally notify the SEC, which has the broadest investigative powers of all.    Still, the SEC and the exchanges have been putting more pressure on the securities firms themselves to spot lawbreakers, and that means more pressure on compliance officers. &quot;Firms are not equipped to detect insider trading at large,&quot; grouses the head of compliance at one of Wall Street's most influential firms. &quot;Our structure is to keep salesmen from beating up on widows and orphans.&quot;    And to keep big producers producing, many critics say. More than one compliance officer interviewed said the unspoken understanding at some securities firms is that success shouldn't be questioned, and big customers shouldn't be hassled. Salomon Brothers' Mr. Pessin says his counterparts at other companies tell him horror stories about not wanting to do business with certain customers, but management saying, &quot;We don't care, we'll take our chances.&quot;    Compliance also largely remains a low-paid and thankless job. While firms can generally enlist experienced investigators or attorneys for senior compliance positions, it is more difficult to find talented people willing to scan the numerous computer printouts generated by electronic surveillance systems. Junior officers are often recruited right out of college for $22,000 a year to police other employees sometimes making several million dollars annually.    The turnover can be high. &quot;It's tough to train good people,&quot; says the 55-year-old Mr. Pessin, who, with a staff of 10, watches over Salomon's 5,000 employees. &quot;The ability to surveil and confront problems depends on gut feeling&quot; and a strong knowledge of the markets.    Then there is the sheer magnitude of the compliance task. Merrill Lynch's 100-person department is one of the largest in the industry. The firm handles more than 100,000 trades a day, and has six million customer accounts and 43,000 employees. In addition to watching for insider trading, Merrill's compliance department has done everything from uncovering real-estate scams to persuading an elderly woman that she shouldn't turn over the money in her account to a fringe political activist.    Insider trading is one of the most difficult crimes to detect, compliance officers say. They complain that they often have neither the information nor the investigative authority to uncover wrongdoing, that there are too many potential sources of inside information, and that violators have too many ways to cover their tracks. Says O. Ray Vass, head of Merrill Lynch's compliance department: &quot;If an individual is willing to take steps to conceal his activity, it will be very hard for us to detect him.&quot;    Even catching crooks can have pitfalls for compliance officers. Arthur Ainsberg uncovered evidence of insider trading at his firm, Marcus Schloss andamp; Co., in 1986. His investigation eventually helped the government obtain guilty pleas from the so-called Yuppie Five. Schloss itself was fined and censured by the SEC. But Mr. Ainsberg may have fared just as badly. When he later circulated his name on Wall Street looking for a new job, he didn't get a single offer.    Firms have developed several elaborate computer procedures to help compliance officers detect instances of unusual or insider trading. At most major firms, computers print out all trading in stocks that the firm's research analysts aren't recommending, all trading in the few days before any takeover, and all trading in stocks where the securities firm is quietly working on a deal that hasn't yet been announced.    At one major investment bank, however, trades of stocks involved in pending deals can amount to 100 pages of computer printouts a day. &quot;Now, which ones do you investigate?&quot; plaintively asks the firm's compliance director.    The Business Week case, in which brokers and clients at several firms traded in stocks about to be mentioned in the magazine, illustrates several shortcomings in Wall Street's detection system.    The traders got early word about the articles from workers in two of the plants where Business Week is published. For all of Wall Street's computer power, none of the firms involved thought to match the trading of suddenly successful clients and brokers against the stocks mentioned in the magazine. Compliance officers say there wasn't a clear smoking gun to tip them off: The trading was reasonably light, was sometimes unprofitable and in many cases was included with other transactions. According to people familiar with the trading, one employee at R.R. Donnelley andamp; Sons, which prints Business Week, earned only $2,400 on his trades -- not a figure that would arouse suspicion. The employee has since been fired.    Moreover, people in Merrill Lynch's New London, Conn., office knew that broker William Dillon was having unusual success trading in stocks mentioned in Business Week, according to a person familiar with the office. But no one in the office reported Mr. Dillon to superiors. As soon as newspaper reports alerted Merrill's compliance people to the possibility of illegal trading, it took the company's computers only about three hours to implicate Mr. Dillon, who was then questioned and fired. He recently pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud in connection with the Business Week case.    Most firms argue that they do a reasonably good job collaring those whose misdeeds are obvious. One firm says that it had no trouble this summer spotting a client who bought 500 of his company's shares in his own name the day before positive news about the company was announced. The brokerage firm turned the client's name over to the SEC.    But it is the creative insider traders -- those who make telephone calls from pay phones and who spread their trading over different accounts, firms and countries -- who are most difficult to apprehend, compliance officers say.    Despite the problems of policing insider trading, there remains a belief in Washington and elsewhere that securities firms could do a better job of it. &quot;Wall Street's surveillance systems look good on paper, but they really fall down in the execution,&quot; says one Congressional investigator. Congress's insider trading bill, among other things, would call on firms to devote more resources to detecting crimes.    &quot;The member firms are upset with these proposals,&quot; says Salomon's Mr. Pessin. But, after 17 years on the beat, he understands why regulators are up in arms. &quot;It's the money,&quot; he says. &quot;Because of all the money, strange things take place.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>