<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881017-0062 </DOCNO><HL> The Markets -- A Year Later --- Taking Stock: Changes Since Crash Can't Prevent a Repeat But Might Soften One --- New Circuit Breakers Are Set, Speculative Excess Abates; Yet Many Reforms Lag --- A Game With Inherent Risks </HL><AUTHOR> George Anders and Scott McMurray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> STK SCR CMD NDX FIN BNK MON </IN><G> SEC FED EXE </G><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   Nearly a year after Black Monday, defenses against another stock-market meltdown are about to be ratified by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Yet most experts say these safeguards would only make another crash more manageable. They wouldn't necessarily prevent one from happening.    &quot;Markets always have crises,&quot; says John J. Phelan Jr., chairman of the New York Stock Exchange. As he looks at market jolts over the years -- from the silver bust of 1980 to the stock shock after President Eisenhower's heart attacks -- Mr. Phelan comes to one simple conclusion: &quot;We can't rule out another sharp market break someday.&quot;    But now if one occurs, it's likely to be a stop-and-go affair, with trading halts along the way. Financial markets have revved up their trading and payment systems to handle the strains better. And just as coastal residents learn to live with hurricanes, most full-time investors feel they can endure occasional batterings. That, of course, is little solace to small investors traumatized by the events of a year ago.    In January, the Brady task force that investigated the crash strongly urged five major reforms in the securities industry. One is the so-called circuit-breaker system of trading halts in a wildly falling market. Stock and futures exchanges agreed this summer on a coordinated set of circuit breakers, and their plans are expected to get SEC and other approvals any day now.    All four of the other task-force proposals have been bogged down by feuds within the industry, by inertia or by a cool Washington response. The Federal Reserve Board quickly rejected the idea of serving as an intermarket regulator, instead becoming part of a White House working group on markets that has only powers of persuasion. Plans to harmonize margin (credit) requirements for stocks, options and futures never found a consensus in the securities business. And progress has been fitful on the two other proposals: disclosing the names of ultimate buyers and sellers of securities, and improving the clearing, or settlement, of trades.    One task-force member, Dreyfus Corp. Chairman Howard Stein, argues that the securities markets themselves have sorted out some of last year's problems, as prices have shrunk to more sensible levels and speculative excesses have ebbed. Still, he calls the Fed's spurning of a broader role disappointing and says that whatever its wishes, the Fed may be looked to for leadership if a new crisis should flare.    Individual investors, meantime, are voting with their feet. Though they still account for about 60% of U.S. stockholdings, they are dropping out of daily trading, leaving that to Wall Street firms and their big institutional clients. According to the Securities Industry Association, individuals accounted for just 26.9% of daily trading in 1988's first eight months.    &quot;It feels like the rules of the market have changed, and I don't know what the new ones are,&quot; says Kathleen Knutson, a Minneapolis social worker who owns 12 stocks as part of a $30,000 investment club. Her own stock-picking &quot;has come to a screeching halt.&quot; As for her investment club, &quot;We've been forcing ourselves to pick new stocks, but it's a struggle.&quot;    Some professionals' chief concern is how the U.S. financial system would handle the aftershocks of any radical price drop. Last Oct. 20 was in some ways a more frightening day than the prior day's plunge; on that Tuesday, markets nearly shut down as investors, both big and small, had no idea where prices stood or whether their orders were being executed. Huge credit squeezes emerged in the securities industry, leading to the Fed's public assurances of adequate liquidity.    &quot;There have been a lot of good intentions but not much action&quot; in trying to ensure against such paralysis during any future market free fall, says Richard Zecker, president of Chase Manhattan Corp.'s money-management unit. In particular, he complains that stock, options and futures markets still each have different clearing and margin systems, a situation that can pose big problems in keeping track of gains and losses the day after a crash.    &quot;The whole clearing area needs work and strengthening,&quot; acknowledges the stock exchange's Mr. Phelan. But this is a messy technical issue that gets little attention from most market participants.    In one notable change, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the leading market for stock-index futures, now pays out cash on certain large profits during the day. Because many traders use index futures to hedge against a market drop, the Merc's new practice means some trading capital is freed faster than before. On Oct. 20 last year, Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. and Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. were owed a total of $1.5 billion by the Merc's clearing arm early in the day but didn't get it till after trading had halted.    In addition, the Merc and the Options Clearing Corp. have proposed a cross-margining system for certain trades. It is aimed at freeing up trading capital by reducing margin payments on offsetting futures and options trades that actually reduce a firm's market risk.    But other worries persist about credit amid any future stock-price blowout. Richard Ketchum, head of market regulation at the SEC, says his biggest concern is that securities firms &quot;wouldn't have short-term liquidity because of banks cutting off credit.&quot; PaineWebber Group Inc. has issued $1 billion of commercial paper, in part so it has emergency cash available without being at the mercy of bank lenders.    On the floor of the New York Stock Exchange last fall, some market makers, or specialists, found themselves woefully short of capital after their own trading losses Oct. 19. Since then, the Big Board has encouraged ailing specialist firms to merge with large Wall Street firms and has raised the capital requirements for all specialists. But Mr. Phelan concedes that a further increase in specialist capital is needed; the exchange has proposed a doubling of current levels in two years.    Some market professionals also wonder whether the Fed's much-praised pledge to provide liquidity could have been made late on Oct. 19 instead of the next morning. That might have helped markets regain their footing faster. But Fed officials defend their timing, and Treasury Undersecretary George Gould agrees: &quot;The Fed reacted very decisively last time,&quot; he says. &quot;Looking back, it's hard to find significant regulatory failures.&quot;    Among professionals, there is near unanimity that the stock market currently looks less vulnerable than a year ago, if only because stock prices are down 20% from the August 1987 peak. The Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index now sells at about 13 times per-share earnings, compared with a lofty P-E ratio of 22 before last October's crash. The average dividend yield has risen to 3.7%, from a skimpy 2.8% a year ago. &quot;The market has made its own corrections,&quot; says Dreyfus's Mr. Stein.    What's more, he notes, investors have mostly sworn off certain tactics that fed into the Oct. 19 madness. Individuals have scaled back on risky options strategies. Takeover speculators aren't borrowing nearly so much money through margin accounts, which magnified their profits in the bull market but forced them to dump stock Oct. 19 amid ruinous margin calls. George Kellner, a major New York takeover speculator, says he is using margin on just 70% of his stock positions now, compared with 100% last year.    In the biggest change, pension funds have largely deserted portfolio insurance as a way to hedge their stockholdings. This technique, which requires selling stock-index futures in a falling market, was widely blamed for part of Oct. 19's selling pressure. Now last year's biggest portfolio-insurance provider, Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Co., says it has just $1.5 billion in such accounts, down 92% from $19 billion a year earlier.    Yet when asked whether a crash could happen again, David Ruder, chairman of the SEC, gives an outright &quot;yes.&quot; One isn't highly probable, he says, and in any case he would rather call it &quot;a compressed large downward move in stock prices.&quot; But Mr. Ruder is worried about the amount of money concentrated in the hands of institutional investors who believe they can get out &quot;before everybody else does.&quot; Should they reach a &quot;consensus decision to sell,&quot; he says, look out.    Other market experts say a financial scare in Japan, a shakeout in the junk-bond business or even a severe U.S. recession could hammer the stock market someday. Robert Kirby, chairman of Capital Guardian Trust Co. and a member of the presidential task force that studied the crash, says he is most nervous about lofty stock prices in Tokyo, where price-earnings ratios are more than quadruple those in the U.S. Mr. Kirby says he sees the potential for a &quot;truly spooky cascade effect&quot; if Japanese prices tumbled and Tokyo investors dumped U.S. securities to raise cash to bolster their home market.    If U.S. stocks do tank again someday, major markets' order systems should be better equipped to handle the torrent of trades. Last Oct. 19, the Big Board's computerized system was backed up as much as 45 minutes with the huge volume of 600 million shares. Now, with new software, Big Board officials think they could calmly handle one-day volume as high as 800 million.    The over-the-counter markets have made even bigger changes. All market makers in major stocks are required to be part of a computer-to-computer trading system. That reduces the burden on phone links; on Black Monday some brokers simply couldn't -- or didn't want to -- handle the crush of phone calls from clients and other traders.    Regulators' main hope, though, is the series of circuit breakers devised after a great deal of dickering this year. These measures range from priority handling of individuals' trades on the New York Stock Exchange if the Dow Jones Industrial Average drops 25 points or more to a two-hour trading halt if the Dow is off 400.    &quot;The solution is to slow the process down,&quot; says Mr. Phelan. In particular, he wants to give slow-moving buyers extra time to step in and respond to any rushed selling.    The circuit breakers also signal an outbreak of peace between the New York Stock Exchange and Chicago futures markets. The mid-1980s boom in stock-index futures never sat well with stock-market traditionalists, and in the aftermath of the crash, the two financial communities tried to blame each other for some of the markets' mayhem. &quot;What's important is that we're talking at the administrative and systems level&quot; now, says Thomas Donovan, the Chicago Board of Trade president and a frequent Big Board critic.    In fact, one of the quickest post-crash reforms was to install special phone links between New York, Chicago and Washington market overseers. This arrangement, which the Big Board calls the &quot;hoot and holler&quot; line, is meant to make sure that in a crisis, markets can be in instant contact without the risk of busy signals or switchboard snafus.    The basic notion of circuit breakers isn't a universal hit, though. A recent survey of 101 money managers found that only one-third favored trading halts outright. Pre-set limits on price moves could turn into a &quot;self-fulfilling prophecy&quot; that triggers panic, argues Edward Zinbarg, a Prudential Insurance Co. executive vice president.    Many professional investors feel that the inevitability of occasional blowouts is an acceptable price to pay for markets' generally strong performance. &quot;People have all re-learned that markets go down as well as up,&quot; Chase's Mr. Zecker says. &quot;Hopefully, the next crash will be 50 years from now, when we're all gone.&quot;    But David Hale, an economist at Kemper Financial Services, can't help wondering whether the wait might be shorter. Current conditions remind him of the 1890s, when, as today, the U.S. was a big importer of foreign capital, with a weak dollar and a trade deficit. Three times in the 1890s, U.S. markets plunged as foreigners got nervous about the dollar and pulled back on their U.S. investments.    &quot;That sort of boom and bust seems to be a recurring feature of financial markets,&quot; Mr. Hale says.    ---   Thomas E. Ricks, Alan Murray, William Power and Sonja Steptoe contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>