<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881111-0139 </DOCNO><HL> The Pragmatist: Appointment of Baker May Signal a New Era In U.S. Foreign Policy --- Next Secretary of State Is Seen As Likely to Compromise To Achieve Policy Goals --- But the Far Right May Object </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger and John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST LATAM FREST FORGN </CO><G> EXE CNG DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Even as foreign leaders rushed this week to praise the continuity in George Bush's election, the president-elect himself began signaling some important foreign-policy changes.    Within hours of his election, George Bush indicated that he wants a more productive relationship with Congress on foreign policy by appointing the pragmatic, politically popular James A. Baker III as his secretary of state. Mr. Baker is more inclined to coopt Congress than to confront it, as President Reagan often did.    Rather than simply continue Mr. Reagan's vain efforts to overthrow Nicaragua's leftist government, Mr. Baker will launch a serious diplomatic effort to find stability in Central America, Bush advisers suggest. In an effort to defuse another dispute with Congress, he may look for ways to end a disagreement with the Soviets about how to interpret the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.    Overall, Mr. Bush's foreign policy will reflect more continuity than change, but his advisers already are signaling that there will be important differences in both style and substance. &quot;There will definitely be a disposition to work with the Congress, while in the Reagan administration there was an inclination to try to run over it,&quot; says Brent Scowcroft, one of Mr. Bush's senior foreign-policy aides and a leading candidate for national-security adviser.    A retired Air Force general, Mr. Scowcroft served as national-security adviser in President Ford's administration, when George Bush was the director of the Central Intelligence Agency.    Any shifts toward moderation are sure to set off alarm bells on the Republican right, already suspicious of Mr. Bush and his quick choice of Mr. Baker, whom some regard as too willing to compromise comservative principles. Nevertheless, Mr. Bush's advisers are convinced that without greater bipartisan support than Mr. Reagan enjoyed, their policies are doomed to failure. If the new president doesn't stand up to the GOP's extreme right, says Mr. Scowcroft, &quot;he's going to have a terrible administration.&quot;    Mr. Baker's long friendship with Mr. Bush, his popularity on Capitol Hill and his close contacts with foreign leaders when he was Treasury secretary and White House chief of staff guarantee him undisputed leadership of the new administration's foreign-policy team. Not since Harry Truman and Dean Acheson have a president and a secretary of state enjoyed such an intimate friendship, says one of Mr. Baker's senior aides, and not since Henry Kissinger has a secretary of state had such power.    Both Mr. Baker and departing Secretary of State George P. Shultz are considered foreign-policy pragmatists. They share other similarities: They are both Princeton graduates, former Treasury secretaries and GOP moderates. But Mr. Baker and Mr. Bush, both Texans, are much closer than Mr. Reagan and Mr. Shultz. While Mr. Shultz can be stubborn, moralistic and aloof, Mr. Baker is more easygoing, an affable salesman in public but a wily operator in private.    The Bush-Baker team faces a daunting task. In Mikhail Gorbachev, the new administration confronts a Soviet leader whose political and image-making skills match Mr. Baker's. Mr. Gorbachev's talk of reform at home and peacemaking abroad have increased his popularity worldwide, although the Bush administration will press him early and often to put his promises into action, says Dennis Ross, the Bush campaign's foreign-policy adviser, who is expected to play an important role in the new administration.    For example, says Mr. Ross, the administration will challenge Mr. Gorbachev to offer specific proposals to halt the proliferation of chemical weapons and ballistic missiles by such Soviet clients as Libya, North Korea, and Syria. Mr. Ross also says the Bush administration will push Mr. Gorbachev to back up his promises to assume a less threatening military posture by cutting defense spending and building fewer offensive weapons. &quot;If there isn't a change in their defense commitments, it will raise serious questions about their intentions,&quot; Mr. Ross says.    Mr. Gorbachev's popularity also will make managing the Western alliance more difficult for the new U.S. administration. Already, West Germany and other allies have begun to expand trade and lending to Moscow, and to press for less stringent restrictions on exports of Western technology. The Bush administration probably won't repeat Mr. Reagan's 1982 mistake of trying to bully the allies into curbing their trade with the East, but it will try to retain limits on Western economic assistance to Mr. Gorbachev while the Soviet leader hasn't reduced military spending.    Mr. Ross says the U.S. takes a dim view of providing Moscow with credits not tied to specific projects. &quot;You subsidize their military if you do that, and you allow Mr. Gorbachev to avoid making hard choices,&quot; he says.    A Ph.D. in Soviet studies who also is a Mideast expert, Mr. Ross has served at the State and Defense Departments and on President Reagan's National Security Council staff.    Bush advisers suggest that the new administration will try to resist being drawn more deeply into the Middle East, a graveyard of past U.S. peace initiatives. This month's Israeli election and the expected convening of the Palestine National Council this weekend aren't likely to produce significant movement toward a peace settlement. The Bush administration will be reluctant to launch a new initiative without evidence that both the Israelis and the Palestinians finally are prepared to negotiate with one another. Similarly, Mr. Bush, mindful of the Iran-Contra affair, is expected to remain cautious about negotiating with Iran and with Lebanese terrorists who are holding Americans hostage.    Though Mr. Baker isn't an economist like his predecessor, Mr. Shultz, his aides say he will attempt to integrate economic, foreign and defense policy better than the Reagan administration did, and to make economics a more important component of national-security policy.    As Treasury secretary, Mr. Baker pressed Japan to help stabilize the dollar by bolstering its own domestic economy. As secretary of state, he is expected to ask Japan to play a role in world affairs that is commensurate with its economic strength-more foreign aid and greater efforts to help solve the Third World debt crisis.    The growing public concern about America's ability to compete in international markets highlights the fact that Messrs. Bush and Baker inherit a different set of problems and opportunities from those Mr. Reagan faced in 1980. Mr. Reagan's military buildup and tough negotiating stance have restored confidence in American leadership and contributed to progress in negotiating new arms agreements and an end to some nettlesome regional conflicts.    But in his first term, Mr. Reagan faced a succession of aging, ineffectual Soviet leaders and had the backing of a Republican Senate. Mr. Bush, by contrast, confronts the charismatic Mr. Gorbachev, and Democrats who increased their hold on Congress despite his victory. He also faces a worsening budget squeeze that will make increases in defense spending or foreign aid virtually unthinkable.    Moreover, Mr. Reagan's hard-core conservative constituents will be keeping a close watch on the new administration, and they probably won't like some of what they will see. Mr. Bush and Mr. Baker may not be able to pass two ideological litmus tests: rolling back Communist gains in Nicaragua and elsewhere in the Third World and proceeding as rapidly as possible to deploy Mr. Reagan's cherished Strategic Defense Initiative.    The first test is likely to be Central America. Although Mr. Bush repeatedly has pledged to support the Nicaraguan Contras, his aides acknowledge that without congressional support, U.S. efforts to prevent the spread of communism in Central America are doomed to fail. But the price of winning support from moderate Democrats, who have held the balance of power on Contra aid, is higher than Ronald Reagan was willing to pay.    Mr. Bush's aides now see an opportunity to end the stalemate by proposing a credible diplomatic initiative that they believe could attract Democrats who are uncomfortable choosing between backing the Contras and abandoning U.S. efforts to bring democracy to Nicaragua. Launching a diplomatic effort, Bush advisers believe, is a no-lose proposition: It will win congressional support for Contra aid and finally test the Sandinistas' willingness to negotiate.    &quot;If the Bush administration enters into good-faith negotiations and if the Sandinistas are unwilling to negotiate, then I think the burden of proof could shift,&quot; says Rep. Jim Slattery, a Kansas Democrat. &quot;It would be easier for the next administration to get more Contra assistance.&quot;    But convincing a skeptical Congress that Mr. Bush is serious about negotiating with the Sandinistas after eight years as Mr. Reagan's vice president won't be easy. The new administration is expected to replace Elliott Abrams, the combative assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, with a less ideological official. Moderate Democrats are insisting on a high-level meeting with Sandinista officials as evidence of Mr. Bush's sincerity.    Going the diplomatic route raises the possibility that if the Sandinistas respond to a U.S. initiative, Washington may have to accept a deal that would leave the Marxists in power, something that is anathema to the Republican right.    Some of Mr. Bush's advisers also believe moderate legislators, including the &quot;defense Democrats,&quot; would be receptive to an effort to discuss with the Soviets how the 1972 ABM Treaty applies to tests of Mr. Reagan's proposed &quot;Star Wars&quot; missile-defense system. The Kremlin, as well as many in Congress, contend that the treaty sharply restricts the development of space-based missile defenses, but the Reagan administration rejects this narrow interpretation of the treaty. Many conservatives, including Vice President-elect Dan Quayle, fear that an attempt to clarify the ABM treaty would lead to tighter restrictions on U.S. space-based missile defenses without constraining similar Soviet defense efforts.    For two years, Mr. Reagan's senior arms-control adviser, Paul Nitze, has argued for talks with the Soviets. The Reagan administration has clung instead to a controversial &quot;broad interpretation&quot; of the 1972 treaty that the Soviets reject and that Sen. Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services Committee, warned was provoking a &quot;constitutional confrontation of profound dimensions.&quot;    Mr. Baker has compiled an impressive resume partly by focusing on a limited number of realistic goals. As White House chief of staff, in 1981, for example, he rejected then-Secretary of State Alexander Haig's demands that the U.S. &quot;go to the source&quot; of leftist troublemaking in Central America because he feared that would detract attention from Mr. Reagan's domestic agenda.    Few secretaries of state have the luxury of setting their priorities in so rational a fashion. Instead, they spend much of their time fighting brush fires, and although Mr. Baker inherits a world in which a number of major crises appear to be cooling off, plenty of hot spots remain.    Mr. Bush and his aides say they still expect the Soviets to honor their agreement to withdraw all their troops from Afghanistan by Feb. 15, three weeks after Inauguration Day. But if they balk, as some Soviet officials recently hinted they might, Afghanistan could pose the new administration's first major foreign-policy test and cast a pall over U.S.-Soviet relations. &quot;If they don't get out of Afghanistan, it undercuts Mr. Gorbachev's whole agenda,&quot; says Mr. Ross, the Bush campaign adviser.    In Eastern Europe, and particularly in Poland, Mr. Gorbachev's reforms have unleashed new drives for greater economic and political freedom. Should violence erupt, prompting a Soviet crackdown, Moscow's new detente with the West could end abruptly.    In the Middle East, the nearly one-year-old Palestinian uprising in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza is still going strong and could erupt, adding to pressure on the new administration to fashion a new Mideast peace initiative. Nine Americans remain hostage in Lebanon, and although fighting between Iran and Iraq has ended, at least temporarily, U.S.-Iranian relations haven't improved.    Closer to home, a Liberal Party victory in the Nov. 21 Canadian election would doom the new U.S.-Canadian free-trade agreement and could fuel new protectionist sentiments in Congress. </TEXT></DOC>