<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0155 </DOCNO><HL> Whose Life Is It Anyway?---By Robert K. Oldham</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Drug developers quite rightly face two primary concerns: safety and efficacy.    The standard approach to drug development, which calls for extended periods of laboratory testing followed by clinical trials, often takes many years and can cost more than $100 million per drug. This process is reasonable and appropriate in the vast majority of cases, which involve drugs that are being developed for basically healthy patients with illnesses that aren't life-threatening or can be treated with already available medication. Many sedatives, antibiotics and blood-pressure medications fall into this category.    But patients with cancer, AIDS and other life-threatening illnesses deserve more flexibility and greater opportunities to try out experimental medication. While these patients and their physicians usually are willing to take risks, all too often they are denied the chance.    Take, for example, the federal &quot;war on cancer,&quot; in which many hundreds of thousands of chemicals have been screened and tested for anti-cancer activity and 20 billion of taxpayer dollars has been spent since 1971. Some progress in cancer treatment has been made. Today, about 40 drugs are approved for use. (Of these 40, only 10 are considered moderately to highly effective.) About 50% of all cancer patients are curable today (mainly by surgery), although the common cancers -- lung, breast, colon, prostate, ovarian and uterine -- remain incurable when beyond the surgeon's reach. Although progress has been made in less-frequent forms of cancer, according to a recent analysis by the General Accounting Office, little progress has been documented in the treatment of the 12 most common cancers.    The current research-regulatory alliance in cancer consists of the National Cancer Institute, the pharmaceutical industry, some 20 federally supported cancer centers, and the Food and Drug Administration. A variety of agencies also provide private and philanthropic support for research programs, with the American Cancer Society the most prominent. This alliance has established a process that tests only a few drugs on patients each year.    Through the funding mechanisms of the National Cancer Institute and the pharmaceutical industry, only a limited number of institutions are allowed to conduct the early-phase tests with experimental agents. Moreover, the best and most exciting drug treatments are restricted to a small number of patients. By selecting patients very carefully, investigators attempt to maximize the chance for a positive outcome. While there are few data to support the need for this restrictive approach, the strategy remains a dogma of the research-regulatory process.    Cancer patients who don't meet the alliance's strict eligibility requirements have been asking for decades why they can't have greater opportunity to try the best that science has to offer. This question raises other fundamental questions about the traditional approach to the development of drugs for cancer, AIDS and other serious illnesses. Are we doing everything possible to bring drugs to clinical practice as soon as possible? Why do we restrict testing to a few institutions? Why do we protect patients, literally, to the very end? Hasn't the time come to allow patients with serious illnesses greater opportunity sooner, even at somewhat greater risk?    An alternative to the current system would be to divide patients with serious illnesses into two groups. Drugs would be tested in the traditional way in group A patients -- those who fit nicely into narrowly drawn eligibility criteria. These data should maximize the chance of detecting a promising response. Group B patients would be those who do not meet the strict criteria but are seriously ill, no longer respond to conventional therapy and are willing to take a chance on the experimental treatment.    At the same time, the research-regulatory alliance should also allow more institutions to participate. With more qualified investigators simultaneously conducting tests, more patients would have access to experimental drugs, and the possibility of innovative and novel findings might yield new leads -- as well as possibly prolong more lives.    To be maximally effective, this approach would require a diversification of the present system to allow testing outside the current research-regulatory alliance, including private-sector participation.    In the past 15 years the private sector has demonstrated its efficiency -- and in many cases, its superiority -- in providing such traditional public services as postal services, hospital care and education. Cancer research is now part of this movement toward privatization, as illustrated by the biotechnology industry. Private-sector initiatives are not intended to replace government or academic research efforts. Competition, fiduciary responsibility and a patient-centered approach will provide a basis for comparison and accountability. To bring biotherapy (the new technology of using biological substances in cancer treatment) along the traditional drug development pathway would inevitably and unnecessarily delay their availability to cancer patients. Privatization, which would allow the patient to both pay for and possibly benefit from drug research, would provide an additional method of funding and conducting medical research.    Critics of privatization say that offering broader access to experimental technologies to those who can pay for it is morally wrong. They argue that good research cannot be bought (except by government), that it can be obtained only through government labs and leading academic institutions. They contend that physician involvement in the business of medicine is a potential conflict of interest.    This small group of critics, mainly from government and academe, assumes that researchers in the public and nonprofit sector have loftier motives and higher morals, are more trustworthy and are unencumbered by the need to earn profits. But what is the evidence for such a view?    James Buchanan, last year's Nobel Laureate in economics, has proposed that each of us is primarily concerned with our own personal and private interests and cited the actions of those in government to illustrate his thesis. Private-sector researchers use monetary rewards as one measure of their accomplishment. Researchers in government and academia strive for rewards as well. These usually take the form of such nonmonetary currencies as recognition, power, position, ego and professional advancement. But there is no evidence that striving for the rewards of academe is any less corruptive than striving in the private sector.    The potential for conflict of interest exists throughout medicine. Physicians who perform services for fees, refer patients to colleagues, or who use medical goods or services from hospitals or companies in which they have a beneficial interest (monetary or otherwise) are also subject to conflicts of interest. While some critics have urged physicians to denounce all participation in business aspects of medicine, this is neither realistic nor appropriate. As in other human endeavors, those who place personal integrity and quality of service first will demonstrate the value of privatization.    If private-sector approaches to medical research are determined to be technically feasible and clinically efficacious, patients and society will benefit. The current research-regulatory paradigm has tomorrow's patient -- who pays a large price for drugs already on the market -- funding research for yesterday's patient. Patients funding their own research efforts today could generate knowledge that should lead to cost reductions, third-party reimbursement and broader utilization tomorrow.    An April 9 New England Journal of Medicine article on the testing in the private sector of interleukin 2 as a cancer treatment and the subsequent liberalization of interleukin 2 availability by the FDA and the National Cancer Institute illustrates the positive role of private activity in cancer research and treatment. In addition, the FDA's proposed new regulations concerning experimental drugs have prompted many questions.    Should patients who want to fund personal research and who are competent to give informed consent have such an opportunity? Should cancer patients have to wait until they have exhausted all standard therapies and their disease is advanced before experimental options can be tried? Have patients' needs become the forgotten element in cancer research? Is informed consent a function of who pays? In a competitive health-care environment, is it sensible to exclude medical research from competition?    These and other questions deserve to be answered. The research-regulatory alliance may resist change. But the problems of cancer, AIDS and other deadly diseases are too complex, the needs of patients too great, and the opportunity too real to simply do tomorrow what was prudent to have done yesterday. It is possible for physicians and scientists to conduct research on behalf of individual, paying patients in an ethically sound and morally acceptable manner. As David A. Jones, chairman of Humana Corp., has said: &quot;You can't claim the moral high ground by assertion. You only claim that by performance.&quot;    ---   Dr. Oldham is chairman and scientific director of Biotherapeutics Inc., a Franklin, Tenn.-based firm conducting cancer research for patients in the private sector. Louis P. Berneman, president of Biotherapeutics, helped prepare this article. </TEXT></DOC>