<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870402-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Phony Parchment:As Value of DiplomasGrows, More PeopleBuy Bogus Credentials---Most Know Degrees Are FakeBut Some Cite ExperienceIn Life as a Justification---An 'MBA' Mangles the Books---By John R. EmshwillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A Huntington, W.Va., elementary-school teacher says he spent a year writing a dissertation for a Southwestern University doctoral degree. When he was finished, he sent the school three bound copies.    The teacher, Eddie Bowen, could have saved himself the effort. This Southwestern University was a diploma mill, with no real academic requirements. But Mr. Bowen says he &quot;never had any idea it wasn't a legitimate school.&quot; He concedes that he never tried to check the school's legitimacy independently, but he says that he did talk several times by phone to a school official.    As many as 500,000 Americans hold fraudulent degrees, according to a 1985 congressional investigation. Credential Check andamp; Personnel Services Inc. of Michigan, which checks employment applications for clients, says that one in every five resumes it sees lists some kind of bogus academic credential.    Many diploma-mill customers know exactly what they are getting, but Diane Ravitch, a professor of history and education at Teachers College at Columbia University, believes that others may not. As the number of night schools and correspondence classes has risen, she says, the line between real and bogus schools has become &quot;blurrier.&quot;    Some people have doubts about the legitimacy of their schools but argue that they deserve diplomas because of what they have learned on their own. One of them is Frederick Cronin, who bought a doctorate in business management several years ago from Northwestern College of Allied Science, a now-defunct diploma mill. &quot;I thought it would be a neat way to get a quick raise,&quot; says the junior-high-school music teacher from Worcester, Mass. Mr. Cronin, 51, figured that a doctorate would bring him an automatic raise of $1,500 a year. Northwestern was asking $590 for the degree and demanding no work.    Mr. Cronin didn't get the raise because Northwestern wasn't on his school's list of accredited universities. But he says that he doesn't have any qualms about what he did. With a master's degree, additional post-graduate work, 20 years in the Navy and 15 years' teaching, &quot;I felt my life experience was more than enough&quot; to qualify for a doctorate, he says. &quot;I just didn't want to write a thesis.&quot;    The popularity of phony parchment is tied to the demand for degrees in the workplace. In some fields, such as teaching, master's degrees and doctorates can bring automatic pay increases. But many working adults don't have the time or energy to go back to school, and they turn to nontraditional education instead. Often, correspondence classes and credit for &quot;life experience&quot; are involved. And in many cases the schools and the credits are legitimate.    But sometimes they are not. According to the U.S. Department of Education, a diploma mill is &quot;an organization that awards degrees without requiring students to meet educational standards for such degrees. It either receives fees from its so-called students on the basis of fraudulent misrepresentation or makes it possible for the recipients of its degrees to perpetrate a fraud on the public.&quot;    Estimates of the number of diploma mills in the U.S. range from dozens to hundreds. The mills provide credentials in almost every field, from medicine to teaching to business to law enforcement, charging between a few hundred and several thousand dollars, depending on the school and the degree. Some give discounts if more than one degree is purchased at a time. In addition, businesses have sprung up to provide fake diplomas and transcripts from real schools.    Many mills exist only as post-office boxes or in the briefcases of their operators, but some sell school rings, sweatshirts, caps and gowns, and transcripts. Some set up their own accrediting agencies. Several mills even managed to get associate memberships in the American Council on Education, an umbrella group for the country's main-line colleges and education organizations. &quot;That was a point of embarrassment,&quot; says a council official, who adds that membership screening has been tightened since then.    Another favorite tactic is to choose an impressive name or a name that is the same as, or similar to, the name of a well-known school. Diploma mills that have been closed include Southwestern and the Johann Keppler {sic} School of Medicine. Other schools that have been named in federal indictments include the University of England at Oxford, DePaul University, Roosevelt University and Loyola University.    Diploma mills get a big boost from people's willingness to accept a diploma at face value. Everett Schafer, the president of a North Carolina contracting firm, can attest to the unfortunate consequences of not checking. In 1984, he hired as his controller a man who presented two business degrees from what turned out to be a degree mill. Before the controller was fired about a year later, he had mangled the company's financial records so badly that outside auditors had to be hired at a cost of $150,000 to straighten things out. &quot;I don't know if the company will ever recover,&quot; says Mr. Schafer.    Some bogus degree holders escape unnoticed for years. Edwin Seger worked for more than a decade as a psychologist at Alabama's main mental hospital in Tuscaloosa. He was hired partly on the basis of what turned out to be a forged transcript showing that he had a doctorate in psychology from Arizona State University, says William Wasden, a state assistant attorney general.    Mr. Seger's hospital duties included evaluating the mental competence of individuals in criminal cases. Mr. Wasden says that such work was done with other psychologists and that &quot;as best as we can determine Mr. Seger didn't affect the outcomes of any trials.&quot;    Vanity was Mr. Seger's downfall. He decided that he wanted a diploma to go with his fake transcript, Mr. Wasden says, and he bought one from an Oregon printing firm that sold about 2,000 bogus diplomas from more than 300 legitimate schools in the U.S., Canada and England. His name showed up on a customer list when the firm was closed by federal agents.    Mr. Seger pleaded guilty to a charge of theft by deception in connection with more than $380,000 in accumulated state salary, says Mr. Wasden. He was given a two-year suspended sentence and had to forfeit $35,000 in retirement funds. He couldn't be reached for comment.    Some prominent people have gotten suspect degrees. Robert Billings, the headmaster of Riverdale Baptist School in Upper Marlboro, Md., and formerly the executive director of the Moral Majority and a top official in the U.S. Education Department, received a doctoral degree from a Tennessee school that was later closed for failing to meet minimum state educational criteria. He says that he chose the school because he wanted a doctorate and its program was &quot;convenient&quot;: that he write a 50,000-word dissertation. He visited it once, on graduation day, and saw that it was a run-down, dying place. &quot;In hindsight, I would go a different route&quot; for a degree, he says. Asked whether he felt he had deceived anyone with his doctorate, he says, &quot;If I misled anyone, I misled myself.&quot;    Isaac Brooks of Camp Springs, Md., chose to get a doctorate from Southwestern because he felt that he was too busy to go back to college. Now 59, he already had bachelor's and master's degrees in counseling from Bowie State College and had done some work toward a doctorate at the University of Maryland. He sent Southwestern a check for more than $1,000, a resume and a thesis on the ethical questions surrounding the use of behavior-modification techniques in counseling. In return he got a doctorate in counseling psychology in the mail. &quot;I feel very good. I have a diploma,&quot; says Mr. Brooks.    When he is told that his alma mater was closed because it was a diploma mill and that its president has been jailed for fraud, he seems taken aback. &quot;I am surprised and shocked,&quot; he says.    There are ways, though, for consumers to try to verify that U.S. schools are legitimate. Educators and state regulators recommend contacting the state agency -- usually the education department -- that oversees higher education to see what information it has on the school. If the school claims accreditation, they suggest verifying that with the accrediting agency and then checking with the U.S. Department of Education on the legitimacy of the accrediting agency. As for foreign schools, they concede that verifying their legitimacy is much more difficult.    Some progress has been made in closing diploma mills. Dipscam, a federal investigation that began in 1980, has convicted 14 operators and closed some 50 diploma mills, including Southwestern. An additional 15 people are under indictment. The government's cases are based on the theory that the schools are defrauding the public by claiming that their degrees are bona fide.    States, the traditional watchdogs over education, have been trying to crack down. At a 1985 congressional hearing, Joseph Fisch, the executive director of New York's office of professional discipline, told how, in the line of duty, one of his investigators had even had a tooth extracted by a suspected bogus dentist.    States have also enacted or toughened requirements for colleges. While some suspect schools have closed, others have moved. &quot;They are like quicksilver,&quot; says a state regulator.    Regulators in Ohio actually encouraged three schools there to set up shop across the border in Indiana. &quot;That doesn't help Indiana, but it does help us,&quot; says Patricia Skinner, an official with the Ohio Board of Regents.    Religious colleges are particularly difficult to regulate because of the separation between church and state. One such school is Bernadean University, which is part of the Church of Universology. The school, with about 200 correspondence students, operates out of a cramped, one-room office in Van Nuys, Calif. For each course, Joseph Kadans, the soft-spoken 74-year-old who heads the school and the church, assigns a textbook and sends a test. Pass the test, and you pass the course.    In traditional schools with classes, a student &quot;wastes a lot of time listening to professors talk about things he has already studied,&quot; says Mr. Kadans.    Richard Sandberg, the director of program control for the Chicago Transit Authority, is getting a law degree by mail from Bernadean. &quot;Sure, if I was 22 I would try to go to Stanford or the University of Chicago,&quot; says the 45-year-old Mr. Sandberg. Now, he says, he doesn't care whether the school is accredited or not. The college is recognized by the California bar, so its students can sit for the bar exam in that state.    But California has very liberal rules about who can take its bar exam. The state's educational officials have been trying to close the school for years. &quot;Bernadean is a diploma mill,&quot; asserts John Peterson, the director for private post-secondary education in the California education department.    The state has been blocked by a pending federal court suit filed by Mr. Kadans, who claims that as a religious institution Bernadean is exempt from state regulation. He denies that his school is a diploma mill. &quot;We are the same as Stanford or Berkeley,&quot; he says.    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Schools Listed in Federal Indictments&quot; -- WSJ April 3, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>