<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871215-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Center of Strife:As Peace Process Ebbs,A Town in NicaraguaBraces for Rebel Raid---Tensions Rise With RumorsIn Quilali, Where BrotherOften Is Fighting Brother---How Atrocities Become Banal---By Charles McCoyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> QUILALI, Nicaragua  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A chilling message filters down from the mountains into this dusty little town: The Contras will attack within five days. Once again, Vicente Brogamo is preparing for war.    Mr. Brogamo is a gravedigger. On a blistering afternoon, he puts the finishing touches on 11 open graves, laid out in a neat, eerie L-shape, with mounds of dirt piled expectantly beside them. &quot;They won't be empty long,&quot; he says matter-of-factly, leaning on his shovel.    A couple of teen-age Sandinista soldiers drift by, eyeing the graves and sharing a private joke. They chuckle, but Mr. Brogamo's face is as sad as his words: &quot;No sir, they won't be empty long.&quot;    Elsewhere, hopeful talk continues that peace may come to Nicaragua soon. With the peace process bumping along, full of politicking and bluster, the fighting in Nicaragua seems to have become an abstraction for many, in Managua no less than in Washington. At last report, peace negotiations had been postponed again, and Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega was busy assuring everyone that his brother, Defense Minister Humberto Ortega, didn't really mean it when he said over the weekend that the government plans a huge Soviet-supplied military buildup.    But in the besieged Nicaraguan countryside, the war is as real as prefab graves and shattered families. The losers are ordinary people in ordinary towns such as this one, set deep in the rough green mountains where U.S.-backed Contra rebels long have roamed. For five trying days last month, people here were spooked by yet another threat of another Contra attack, due before a cease-fire ended Nov. 7.    Some people here back the Contras, some the Sandinistas; most are in between. Yet as they hunkered down, it became clear that all the people of Quilali, like Nicaragua itself, are wearing out as the war wears on.    &quot;God is punishing us for something,&quot; says Marta Elena Centeno, a worn peasant woman leaning in the doorway of a tilting shack just outside of town. Two of her sons have recently left home, maybe to fight. She isn't sure for which side. &quot;Ten years ago, we were happy people. Now we just struggle and die.&quot;    Fighting in Nicaragua has killed an estimated 45,000 in a population of three million since 1981, a toll proportionally almost as brutal as that of America's own Civil War more than a century ago. In Quilali, about 700 out of the population of 6,000 have been killed. &quot;Campesinos&quot; can't work their fields because of the war, and there isn't enough to eat.    Quilali's experience condemns both the Contra and the Sandinista cause equally. Many here hate the government's military draft and economic policies; scores of Quilali's young fight with the rebels. At dawn last June 25, 200 Contras raided the town, convinced by intelligence reports that their relatives would throw open their doors and let them use their homes for cover. One door opened. Sandinista troops, after their victory, hitched rebel bodies to a gray mule and dragged them around town before burning them not far from the steps of the Catholic church.    These days, the war around Quilali seems to mock the peace process that began this summer. After the government declared a one-month cease-fire starting Oct. 7 in 250 square miles of mountains north of town, fighting slackened but did not stop. Sandinista troops crowded into Quilali, fresh-faced youths in green who gave the town the look of an armed Boy Scout camp.    Meanwhile, the people of Quilali shuffled through life in dull fear that crystallized into terror from time to time, depending on how close the shooting came.    In the hot first days of November, the shooting drew closer.    ---   &quot;They're coming soon,&quot; rasps Genovena Rodriguez, scrubbing a morning's laundry in the river that curls around Quilali on its way toward Honduras, 20 miles north. She means the Contras. Behind her looms El Chipote, which had been the mountain hideout of Augusto Cesar Sandino, who humbled the U.S. Marines in the 1920s and gave his name to the Sandinistas. Lately, the Contras have been up on El Chipote.    The Sandinistas, whose troops are known as &quot;Compas,&quot; or comrades, had declared their cease-fire hoping that the Contras would take amnesty and quit fighting. But of the 5,000 or so Contras operating near Quilali, fewer than 10 gave up. Instead, rebels in the safe zone lolled about in hammocks and fielded airdrops of tons of U.S.-bought supplies. Now, word that the Contras are planning a major attack before Nov. 7 hangs heavy over the dirt streets and bullet-nicked plaster huts.    &quot;I'm an old man and I don't fear death, but I have 13 grandsons,&quot; says Elias Altamirano, a leathery old cowboy, inching his burro through an obstacle course of snuffling pigs and scurrying children near the town square. &quot;Five with the Compas. One dead. Seven with the Contras. Every time there is fighting, my blood is spilled.&quot;    Almost every family in Quilali suffers the same bitter splits. Teresa Peralta is among the 37 people and several chickens jammed into a cinder-block home. Her father, Jose, was the son of one of Sandino's top generals, a great Sandinista hero. But in 1981, at the age of 65, Jose joined the Contras. Why? &quot;I believe it was a sickness of the mind,&quot; Miss Peralta theorizes.    She didn't follow him -- &quot;I'm no traitor,&quot; she says -- but about 15 of her 22 brothers and sisters did. At least two, 15-year-old Candida and 18-year-old Felix, have died fighting the Sandinistas. Her aunt -- Jose's sister -- a jolly matriarch named Catalina Peralta, has lost a son and a nephew. They were fighting the Contras.    Gunfire crackles in the hills, not so distant, and Mrs. Peralta makes a nervous joke: &quot;If the Contras come this week, we can have a family reunion.&quot;    Jose Peralta won't make that party. Last spring, the old man decided he had had enough and headed for the refugee camps in Honduras. Miss Peralta says her father stepped on a Contra mine and died within sight of the border. &quot;This war is a sad and incomprehensible thing,&quot; she muses, blue smoke from clay ovens spiraling up in the courtyard behind her. &quot;I really hope the Contras don't come. I would like to see my brothers, though.&quot;    A moment later, sporadic shooting starts up again.    ---   At night, the rebels move.    Under the sheen of a full moon, corn stalks rustle along the road out of Quilali toward the east. This is a road villagers know never to be on after dark; a reporter finds himself there by accident. A hiss, probably only the wind, but there it is again -- and 12 Contra commandos loom up out of the corn, faces ghostly in the strange light, automatic weapons ready.    &quot;Are you a Communist?&quot; inquires their leader, who goes by the nom de guerre of &quot;Cachito.&quot; His group seems impossibly young, especially the two teen-age girls. The rebels wear crucifixes and cheap plastic beads. They are slipping out of the cease-fire zone, four days before the truce is to end and the Sandinista soldiers are expected to sweep through. &quot;The dogs will come and find nothing -- except a few surprises,&quot; says Cachito, smiling impishly and stroking the barrel of a Russian-made submachine gun.    After a few moments, Cachito offers a friendly lecture about staying off the roads at night. As the band shuffles noiselessly back into the corn stalks, he turns with a final message: &quot;Tell the Compas in Quilali we will be there soon to kill them all.&quot; He flashes a toothy grin, waves and is gone.    Three nights before, near a place in the cease-fire zone called El Barro, Cachito killed a 24-year-old peasant named Evelio Asuncion Rivera. Three shots to the head, according to Mr. Asuncion's family. Carlos Goussen, the top Sandinista political officer in Quilali, thinks it had to be a vendetta. &quot;But really, who can ever know?&quot; he says.    ---   No one seems surprised by the peasant's fate. Atrocities have become banal in Quilali. And they come from both sides.    Another victim was Manuel Quintero. His history has many versions in Quilali, but the truth seems to be that he was a harmless old drunk who stumbled out into the darkness one night. He weaved in front of a Sandinista commander's house, just off the town square. A mine blew off his leg. People say they heard him moaning for three hours before he bled to death, but no one dared come out to help him.    The Sandinista military later informed Mr. Quintero's family that he was a Contra saboteur on a mission to assassinate army officers. &quot;Imagine, we all believed he was just an old man who liked rum,&quot; Daniel Molina, an out-of-work salesman, comments dryly. After pausing, he adds: &quot;It makes for a hard life when you know you can get it from either side, at any moment, for no reason.&quot;    ---   With the cease-fire ticking down, people in Quilali make further adjustments in lives already warped by war. Maria Peralta puts jugs of fresh water in the hand-dug bomb shelter behind the guest house she runs. Elsa Vilchez, who has a farm outside of town, moves into Quilali with her sister. Even if the rebels come, she figures, it is better to be in town behind thick walls than in the country. Besides, two of her sons are with the rebels. &quot;They're good boys,&quot; she says. &quot;They only kill Compas, not campesinos.&quot;    In the town square, people trade rumors and talk of war. All in a group of 15 say they were for the Sandinista revolution when it triumphed in 1979. Few have kind words for it today, and most just seem puzzled by it. &quot;Before the revolution, we never had any money,&quot; says Maria Velspa Rodriguez, a tiny woman of great age. &quot;Now, after the revolution, we never have any money.&quot;    Any chance for peace? &quot;Brother, haven't you heard?&quot; says Alcides Merlo Cruz, a farmer. &quot;The Contras are getting ready to attack.&quot;    When? &quot;Soon, 'hombre.' Soon.&quot;    ---   Accords signed by Central America's presidents last August set Nov. 5 as the date for peace to break out in the region. But on that day, war jitters crescendo in Quilali. A Contra ambush an hour away kills four Compas in the morning; troops from the town fight for hours to get the bodies out. As the exhausted soldiers filter back in, rumors swirl that the Contras are coming tonight, or maybe tomorrow night.    At 8:30 p.m. in the dark street outside Maria Peralta's guest house, an explosion shakes the concrete walls. Pistol shots bore into doorways. Screams echo and fade.    Another explosion, louder, closer. Compa sentries, convinced the rebels are attacking, douse the town's few street lights and spray bullets into the shadows. The people of Quilali huddle on their floors, set for another long, terrible night.    Only, the Contras haven't come. This is the work of a drunk.    He is Francisco Del Tuca, a 26-year-old Sandinista soldier from Managua who ran into the street without pants on and began flinging grenades. Eventually, he was arrested. Nobody got hurt, but many civilians have been killed in Quilali in similar episodes.    &quot;The Compas are more dangerous to us than the Contras,&quot; snarls a disgusted Mrs. Peralta the next morning, as her 10-year-old niece toys with jagged shrapnel that slammed into her wall during the fun. &quot;You see how we live. Panic, then nothing, then panic again. We're sick of this.&quot;    Some Sandinista soldiers have had enough, too. The day before the cease-fire is to end, amid new rumors of imminent attacks, at least 18 Compas simply hitch rides out of town and go home, according to several soldiers. &quot;A lot more think about deserting,&quot; says Juan Carlos Mejillas, a soft-spoken, 18-year-old infantryman. &quot;But if you don't complete your service, you can't work, you can't go to school, you can't live. I've got four more months.&quot; He looks skyward and appears to be praying.    Nov. 7 breaks cloudless. There is some talk that the Contras won't come, after all. &quot;Maybe these rumors were psychological warfare,&quot; says Jimmy Rodriguez, Quilali's Sandinista mayor.    But late that evening, the hushed blackness splits open -- a riot of small-arms fire, the whoosh of rockets and the whump of mortars. Tracer bullets crisscross in hot red webs against the sky. Fires break out on distant hills. A child's wail floats through the night, between gunbursts.    It takes a while to figure out that it is midnight, that the 1,000 or so Sandinista troops around Quilali are announcing the end of the cease-fire. For 20 minutes, they blast and whoop. The Contras, it turns out, have long since slipped away and are miles out of range. But the Sandinistas fire thousands of dollars of ammunition at clouds while the people of Quilali who can barely afford to eat cower beneath their beds. No attack -- not this week, anyway.    At daybreak, hundreds of Sandinista troops, including 15 local militiamen from Quilali, head into what had been the ceasefire zone. The war is officially rolling again, full tilt. Some pass close to the cemetery, where there were 11 empty graves five days before. Now there are 10, one having been occupied by a young Sandinista soldier. In the cool morning, Vicente Brogamo is digging once more. </TEXT></DOC>