<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880613-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: In Praise of the Middle Man </HL><AUTHOR> Richard T. Clawson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In an effort to become lean and mean, some companies have recently restructured by reducing the number of middle managers. The results, in many instances, have been disappointing. The middle line has been weeded out, structures have been flattened, head counts have been decreased. But the cost of doing business has not been appreciably reduced.    In some instances, including two companies for which I worked, costs have actually increased due to middle-management trimming. The initial savings of such trimming must be balanced against whether it creates inefficiency that could send a corporation into a tailspin.    Most current middle managers were originally specialists whose positions grew up with the company's position in the market; when the business expanded, the rewards went to those who were the best at their specialties. As the companies continued to grow, new and sometimes higher levels of management evolved. Specialists became the managers of more and more groups of other specialists. And as the pyramid spiraled upward, it also expanded sideways.    Even though this scheme of promoting from within is as it should be, the nature of the horizontal expansion has created an organizational complex with a life of its own. It is a loosely connected set of specializations that cannot be easily recombined, particularly by the arbitrary elimination of the middle line.    In the large companies where I worked, broadly defined functional units such as &quot;Electronic Engineering&quot; or &quot;Financial Analysis&quot; no longer exist. There are only compartments of specializations. And the larger the company the more narrow the specialization has become in each compartment. There are compartments of Digital Circuit Engineering, Packaging, Stress, Safety, Component, and Research andamp; Development Engineering.    There are specializations of Budget Analysis, Profit Analysis, Capital Investment Analysis, Operations Accounting, General Accounting, and Cost Accounting. Purchasing has become a collection of experts that include Material Analysis, Subcontracts, Electronic Components, Mechanical Components, General Supplies, Machinery and Plant Equipment, and Traffic and Transportation. Personnel has segmented into Human Resource Development and Communications, Salaried Administration, Recruiting and Placement, Organization and Personnel Planning, Safety and Fire Protection, Medical Services, and Security.    All these functions have managers who are experts; they are experts in managing the day-to-day operations of their specialization. They are functional managers for that very reason, not because they are long-range planners, or innovators, or because they can fine-tune their operations better than anyone else.    The next level consists of the middle managers -- those who make broader decisions than do the functional managers. They may, for example, decide which supplier to buy a part from and whether that decision will suit the needs of all the functional managers (balancing the designer's need for the best material with the accountants' demand for the best price). In short, they are the ones who hold the loosely connected pockets of specialization together and move the company forward.    The elimination of the middle manager's position is a common method of restructuring; its result is to elevate the functional manager's reporting level one notch -- to the manager who used to be known as the &quot;boss's boss.&quot; These higher-level managers analyze the operation as a whole and determine how it will perform in the market. They have the heavy responsibility of allocating the company's limited resources.    Elevation to a higher reporting level brings new pressures that the average functional manager wasn't even aware of: He needs to know what his group will look like and be doing six months or a year from now; before, the concern was today, next week, or at most, next month. Budgeting becomes just as important as accomplishing the daily tasks (i.e., completing a design if you're an engineer, or getting specific parts on time if you're a purchasing agent). There are more meetings to attend, more questions to answer, more reports to write. There are decisions to be made: priority decisions, personnel decisions, resource-allocation decisions. Meanwhile, the fine-tuning of the day-to-day operations is expected to continue as usual, without interruption.    Overnight the functional manager discovers that there is a vast difference between proposing a recommended course of action and actually making the risky decision. Just as suddenly, the &quot;boss's boss&quot; discovers that problems that had been handled completely by those below him have been brought to his office. Some of these problems he never knew existed. Since the &quot;boss's boss&quot; is further removed from the operations, that escalation requires more research, more meetings, more time.    In this scenario, cutting out the middle man results in delays, lower-quality decisions, lower morale, increased frustration, and chaos. All of which adds to costs. A company may appear to be lean and mean for the short term, but the hidden costs of the restructuring technique can undermine the cost-cutting.    To expect a functional manager to perform the middle manager's tasks may be unrealistic. The best specialist may not be the best manager when his duties expand beyond fine-tuning the day-to-day operations of a particular specialization. And since the purpose of an organizational structure is to provide the smoothest possible coordination of work, arbitrary adjustment without a thorough understanding of the skills and propensities of the people involved can have detrimental effects on the company's long-term health.    ---   Mr. Clawson is assistant professor of business administration at Whittier College in California. </TEXT></DOC>