<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880926-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Group of Seven Reaffirms Policy Of Stable Dollar --- Vague Communique Fueled Speculation That Rise Might Now Be Tolerated </HL><AUTHOR> Walter S. Mossberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP JAPAN CANDA </CO><IN> BNK MON FRX </IN><G> TRE </G><DATELINE> WEST BERLIN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The seven major industrial powers, trying to keep financial markets calm before the U.S. presidential election, reaffirmed their current policy of stabilizing the dollar. But their joint statement was so much vaguer than previous declarations that it could prompt the very market volatility the governments want to avoid, and tempt markets to push the greenback higher than the governments deem desirable.    By using different, less specific language to describe its dollar policy, the so-called Group of Seven set off speculation at world financial meetings here that it would now tolerate a higher dollar than in the past. U.S. officials, anxious to squash that interpretation, insisted privately that the seven countries, which have been intervening in currency markets all year to keep the dollar from rising or falling too much, hadn't deviated from past policies. The officials said the governments would be continuing to try to keep the dollar within the same ranges in which it has fluctuated for months.    But currency traders this week may be led by the language change to try to push the dollar to new highs and test the governments' will. U.S. officials don't want the dollar to rise much higher for fear it will harm U.S. exports and make imports more attractive. Last week, the dollar closed at 1.8750 marks and 134.38 yen.    In Tokyo Monday, the U.S. currency was trading at about 134.75 yen at midmorning.    Finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven countries, also called the G-7, met over the weekend at a secluded villa here before the opening of the joint annual meeting of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. They emerged with a communique that celebrated the strength of the world economy, the decline of the U.S. trade deficit and of Japan's surplus, and their own recent success in stabilizing the dollar within a secret range of exchange rates against the West German mark and Japanese yen.    The Group of Seven countries are the U.S., Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada.    During the closed meeting, the seven countries were warned by IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus that the reduction of trade imbalances will grind to a halt next year unless further policy changes are made or the dollar is permitted to drop further once a new president takes office. But the analysis, which was also reflected in a public economic forecast the IMF issued, was rejected by most of the seven governments as far too pessimistic. One official said Mr. Camdessus' warning drew &quot;caustic&quot; comments from several countries and predictions that progress on reducing the U.S. trade deficit and Japan's surplus will continue to exceed expectations.    Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, who took office just days before the G-7 meeting, said little during the session, according to officials present. They said Mr. Brady generally deferred to the other U.S. representative to the group, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan. The Treasury secretary was said to have assured the other officials that he would be following the course laid down by his powerful predecessor, James Baker, who had dominated the G-7.    The new secretary is keeping a low public profile at the meetings, his first appearance in a world economic policy forum. At yesterday's closed preliminary session of the fund and bank, the Treasury broke recent precedent by declining to provide a text of Mr. Brady's remarks; all of the major foreign officials' remarks were published, as Mr. Baker's had been in the past.    Mr. Brady's aides apparently hope to focus attention solely on his public speech to the meeting, planned for tomorrow. Officials from Japan reported that Mr. Brady pledged that the U.S. would place the &quot;highest priority&quot; on reducing its budget deficit, as part of the effort to reduce world trade imbalances. But U.S. officials later said that Mr. Brady had only promised that deficit reduction would be one of the highest priorities, not necessarily the first priority.    The G-7 communique said &quot;inflation pressures are being contained,&quot; and implied that further rises in interest rates aren't seen as necessary. But on exchange rates -- the most sensitive subject in such communiques -- the group departed from its past three declarations by dropping specific warnings to currency markets that driving the dollar too low or too high, or engaging in &quot;excessive fluctuation&quot; would be &quot;counterproductive.&quot; That formulation, introduced last December and repeated in April and at the June Toronto economic summit, was the basis for the success this year of the G-7 in keeping the dollar within the unpublished range of &quot;stability.&quot;    Instead, the weekend communique settled for saying simply: &quot;Ministers and governors emphasized their continued interest in stable exchange rates among their currencies. Therefore, they reaffirmed their commitments to pursue policies that will maintain exchange rate stability and to continue to cooperate closely on exchange markets.&quot;    Yesterday, U.S. officials said that, despite the change in language, the seven countries had explicitly agreed to stick with all of their previous secret agreements on the dollar, and would be continuing to intervene in currency markets to try to enforce the same secret range for the greenback they had been enforcing for months. A suggestion at the meeting that the range be changed was understood to have been quickly dropped.    That range is presumed to be between roughly 1.70 German marks and 1.90 German marks and the dollar is currently near the top of the band, being held there by massive government dollar-selling.    Several senior U.S. officials said the language was changed merely to avoid what they said was a &quot;misinterpretation&quot; of their position after the June Toronto summit, the most recent time the more detailed formulation was repeated. At that time, some currency traders and one major newspaper, the New York Times, reported that the G-7 policy had changed and that the group was inviting the dollar to rise. But the U.S. officials said the group in June was merely affirming the existing ranges and wasn't favoring an increase.    Ironically, however, the new language immediately set off its own round of differing interpretations among some officials and at the financial meetings here. They viewed the new language as an invitation to a higher dollar, because it seemed to endorse the current level, which is near the top of the range. Their reasoning was that the current level might be the middle of a new range. Some were wondering if the dollar range had been shifted upward and a few European officials were privately hinting that the U.S. wanted a higher dollar to help Vice President George Bush's election chances.    But the U.S. and some other countries moved to try to squash those interpretations.    In a round of press briefings, several of the finance ministers said the language change wasn't a big deal. A senior U.S. Treasury official told reporters the declaration was &quot;a clear statement of the desirability of the status quo&quot; and that it was &quot;very descriptive of the present situation.&quot; He said &quot;you cannot expect to see the same language go on and on and on.&quot;    West German Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg said &quot;there's no need to repeat each time the formulations about exchange rates.&quot; British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson dismissed the notion that things had changed and called the communique &quot;a strong reaffirmation&quot; of past &quot;accords.&quot;    On other matters, the G-7 communique once again supported the so-called Baker debt strategy, which calls for case-by-case talks between debtor nations and banks and stresses new lending rather than debt relief. A somewhat different proposal, opposed by Mr. Baker, is expected to be floated here this week by Japan, but not formally proposed.    The communique hailed the G-7 process of coordinating economic policies, and the recent round of anti-inflationary interest rate increases by central banks. The group pledged to continue altering policies where needed to reduce the U.S. budget and trade deficits, stimulate domestic demand in Europe and preserve domestic demand growth in Japan. The group called for continuing liberalization of world trade and of financial markets, and called on the newly industrializing countries of Asia to open their markets to foreign goods and let their currencies appreciate.    &quot;The ministers and governors noted with satisfaction,&quot; the declaration said, &quot;that the policies and commitments undertaken in the course of their cooperative efforts are producing results.&quot;    While the seven governments were content for now to pat themselves on the back and leave their basic approach unaltered, the IMF was warning that the global trade-adjustment process will grind to a halt next year unless further changes are made in G-7 economic policies or exchange rates, or both.    In their annual, influential, World Economic Outlook forecast, IMF economists predicted that, based on current policies and exchange rates, the U.S. trade deficit and the Japanese trade surplus would both stop falling in 1989. The IMF forecast the U.S. current account balance -- the broadest measure of trade -- at $128.7 billion for 1989, about the same as the much-reduced $128.9 billion it expects for 1988. Japan's current account surplus, which is expected to fall in 1988 to $78 billion, is forecast to creep back up in 1989 to $80.9 billion.    A top IMF economist, speaking anonyously, told repoers here over the weekend that the IMF asumes that the G-7 will move next year &quot;in a direction that is more sustainable&quot; and added &quot;we know that policies will change and that exchange rates will evolve.&quot;    The G-7 session, and the other IMF and World Bank meetings, are being held under extremely tight security provided by thousands of West German police and troops. A large demonstration was held by left-wing and church groups who argue that the rich countries are extracting too many resources from the poor. Earlier, a German terrorist group claimed responsibility for an attempt on the life of a senior German finance ministry official and a top German IMF official was beaten. Banks have been bombed in West Berlin. </TEXT></DOC>