<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Delayed Future:Upgrading of FactoriesReplaces the ConceptOf Total Automation---Suppliers and Workers FaceTighter Quality Controls;'Just in Time' Inventories---How Unisys and Huffy Do It---By Ralph E. WinterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> UIS HUFCOMPUTERS (EDP)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND) </IN><DATELINE> FLEMINGTON, N.J.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A decade ago, futurists envisioned robots operating factories, with only a few white-coated technicians on hand to tend to any problems.    Unisys Corp.'s factory of the future here isn't quite like that. It does have computerized robots. But instead of white-coated technicians, it has workers like Joan Dudley. The 45-year-old Mrs. Dudley feeds electronic parts to a robot, which inserts electronic chips into 8-by-10-inch circuit boards, and then she checks the robot's work. The job is important because the boards are the brains for the computer terminals and work stations made at the plant.    From Mrs. Dudley at the start of the manufacturing process to 22-year-old, 6-foot-4 Richard Clader who packs the finished machines into corrugated cartons, the 299 production workers here aren't much different from hourly workers at many of the nation's traditional manufacturing plants. But automation of materials handling and other steps have helped raise their efficiency.    The totally mechanized factory, once seen as the only answer to low-wage foreign competition, continues to recede into the next century. But accelerated upgradings of operations like the Unisys plant are helping to restore this country's manufacturing might.    Instead of the futuristic models once envisioned, factories of the 1990s will be more efficient versions of the 1970s models -- partnerships of man and machine. Workers like Mrs. Dudley will remain essential to a plant's operation for a long time to come, contends Ronald A. Sampson, the manager of plant operations here. Complex machinery to replace them would cost too much and wouldn't provide the necessary flexibility.    Plant automation, in fact, is much more complex and costly than was forecast a decade ago. The decision to upgrade plants with available technology follows a pattern set by the Japanese. &quot;In the last five years, there's been a shot of insight into how the Japanese have reduced their costs,&quot; says Leonard G. Friedel, vice president of Boston Consulting Group, which has guided its clients in rejuvenating their plants. &quot;We've learned it doesn't always require massive investment and fully automated production systems.&quot;    Instead, manufacturers from Caterpillar Inc., a maker of heavy equipment, to Huffy Corp., a bicycle maker, are using new production methods, imaginative management, a more cooperative work climate, and some of the latest computer-controlled equipment in their existing plants. The cost is far below that of new automated plants, if indeed the technology exists for total automation.    Caterpillar, of Peoria, Ill., claims its upgrading program has helped trim costs 20% since 1982. The company, which adopted the slogan &quot;Plant With a Future&quot; to underline its belief that older plants can be made competitive for years to come, says the savings result mainly from lower materials and labor costs in manufacturing, fewer defective parts, and better control of inventories.    At Huffy's 32-year-old Celina, Ohio, bicycle factory, 1,700 employees turn out more than 15,000 bicycles a day. Five years ago, it required 2,200 employees to make 10,000 bikes daily.    Visits to Huffy's sprawling factory in western Ohio and to the Unisys plant here in New Jersey illustrate principal elements in upgrading programs. Although workers at the Huffy plant are represented by the United Steelworkers union and the Unisys workers have no union, the two facilities are using similar methods to become more competitive.    At both plants, fresh attention is being paid to blemish-free products and to ensuring a smooth and rapid flow of parts through the plant. Both plants use the popular just-in-time inventory management system, in which suppliers furnish parts and materials precisely when they are needed. Employees get involved in the decisions, making them more willing to continue to change. Officials talk constantly of new goals, in contrast to the old factory maxim &quot;If it ain't broke, don't fix it.&quot;    As a result, Huffy says, the Celina plant has become the most productive bike factory in the world, requiring only 0.7 hour of work to make a bike. That is a quarter to a third of the time needed in the Orient, says Barry J. Ryan, Huffy's vice president for finance. &quot;Rust Belt manufacturing plants can compete,&quot; he says.    Huffy in 1983 closed a brand-new plant in Oklahoma, as imported bikes kept taking a larger share of the market and the automated equipment at the plant didn't live up to expectations, among other things. So Huffy concentrated on improving the Ohio plant.    Huffy says the program has helped it meet the foreign competition. &quot;Our two big advantages over Taiwan bike producers are quality and the ability to respond to the market,&quot; says John L. Mariotti, the president and general manager of Huffy's bicycle unit.    Reducing the number of production workers is secondary in most plant upgrade programs because direct labor usually isn't any more than 10% of the total manufacturing cost. Many plants today buy the most labor-intensive parts abroad.    The Unisys plant buys power-supply units, disk drives, monitors and keyboards from the Far East, holding direct labor costs to a mere 2% of total expenditures. &quot;We put our effort where it will do the most good, on product quality and reducing materials costs,&quot; rather than on eliminating production jobs, says Patrick J. Brassil, vice president and plant general manager.    All this attention directed at quality, materials management and product flow contrasts with the 1960s and 1970s, when industries emphasized new machines that eliminated production jobs.    While those previous investments have helped most U.S. plants make some parts very efficiently, parts now often languish in the warehouse for months before they are retrieved for assembly into a salable product. As a result, inventories are high, and so are the numbers of materials handlers, parts inspectors, supervisors and other employees who don't produce anything. Frequently, workers stand around waiting for materials because of poor scheduling.    Furthermore, traditionally operated plants often lack flexibility to meet shifts in demand quickly, and product quality is frequently mediocre as well. The Japanese were quick to exploit those weaknesses.    Upgrading does require investment, of course. At the Unisys plant, Litton Industries Inc.'s industrial automation unit recently completed installation of a computerized materials-handling system. The system is the major element in an $8 million modernization that doubled the plant's capacity without adding to bricks and mortar, Mr. Brassil says.    The new Litton system keeps track of every item in the plant. At the receiving dock, the parts are loaded onto a conveyor. The conveyor takes the parts directly to the assembler who uses them or to an automated storage area if the assembler already has a full carrier waiting. Even final testing of the finished product is controlled by the system's computers.    Before making hefty investments to upgrade facilities, many companies tackle the Big Three: quality, production and inventory. Consider quality. &quot;At the end of 1983, we sat in this room, looked each other in the eye and said, 'If we don't do something about quality, we'll have to shut the doors,'&quot; says Unisys's Mr. Brassil.    Nearly one in eight of the machines failed to function properly when it reached the customer at the time. Now 99.5% of the machines arrive defect-free, he claims.    At both Huffy and Unisys, quality improvement begins with their suppliers, who now must certify that parts and materials meet specifications. Those who can't or won't are dropped. Besides ensuring better computer terminals or bicycles, this emphasis on certification eliminates inspectors who formerly culled out bad parts.    The Unisys plant has reduced the number of suppliers to 107 from 750 five years ago, enabling it to work more closely with each on quality and delivery. &quot;If we didn't get 99% of our material as acceptable quality, our production system wouldn't work,&quot; Mr. Sampson says.    Even something as basic as good housekeeping can foster quality. Both plants are clean, well-lighted and brightly painted. &quot;You can't have the right mentality about quality if the place where you work is a mess,&quot; says Huffy's Mr. Mariotti.    The computer age has spawned another quality-control tool: statistical-process control to make sure that every step in production is done correctly. Minimum and maximum measurements are prescribed for everything from the tension level of bicycle spokes to the operating temperature of computer terminals. If a part or a process isn't within a given range, a worker either makes a correction or calls for help.    Both plants also expect workers to inspect their own work and to act as a quality control on the person or machine just ahead of them in the production process. Problems are corrected before dozens of defective bikes or terminals are produced.    A visitor gets a first-hand glimpse of the emphasis on quality at the end of the production lines, where the bicycles and computer terminals are tested. Each Unisys terminal and work station is plugged into a computerized test system for 10 to 24 hours of &quot;burn-in&quot; testing to ensure that all circuits work.    At Huffy, &quot;quality associate&quot; Clifford Beougher takes apart a randomly selected blue bike and fills out a three-page report on his findings. &quot;The quality is a lot better than it used to be,&quot; the 20-year veteran says. He has found nothing wrong with this bike. &quot;Most of the time, there are no defects. The company has trained the employees to do a better job,&quot; he says. &quot;And we're more of a team.&quot;    To improve customer service, a major goal is to reduce the time required to deliver new orders. At Flemington five years ago, Unisys products left the plant about 30 days after receipt of an order.    &quot;Our goal is to get the production time on circuit boards down to minutes instead of days,&quot; says Mr. Sampson; that reduction will sharply shorten the current 4.5-day production cycle on complete terminals.    Shorter production cycles also help cut costs by reducing inventories, the third major goal of plant upgrades. Many manufacturers formerly tried to lower costs and guard against shortages by buying in large quantities. Now, however, computerized production planning and electronic communications between customer and supplier eliminate the need for big stockpiles of materials.    Both Unisys and Huffy require suppliers to ship frequently to meet production schedules. Huffy receives steel daily from Armco Inc.'s Middletown, Ohio, plant. About a week after steel comes into the Huffy plant, it goes out as a bicycle. Five years ago, the process took three times that long. &quot;We're relentless in seeking improvement,&quot; Mr. Mariotti says. &quot;Our goal is to have things come in in the morning and go out that evening.&quot;    He measures the inventory cut by the drop in the number of big tubs that are used to store and move parts. Only 700 are needed now, down from about 3,000 five years ago. Back then, he recalls, &quot;you could hardly walk through the aisles because of stacks of parts.&quot;    At the Unisys plant in Flemington, about 200 deliveries arrive daily. Instead of giving suppliers a delivery date, &quot;now in many cases we give them a date to have the product on their dock, in Malaysia or wherever,&quot; Mr. Sampson says. &quot;We take responsibility to arrange shipping to our plant.&quot;    The combination of just-in-time inventory management and a faster process time has allowed Unisys to pare inventories to a 1.3-month supply from seven months in 1981. &quot;And we'll cut it in half again as we get the system fine-tuned,&quot; Mr. Sampson predicts.    Enlisting employees' support also is important in upgrading production. Says Mr. Mariotti: &quot;They must understand their jobs are best protected by their own productivity and product quality.&quot;    Huffy drives home that message by issuing monthly checks separate from the paychecks, with each employee receiving his or her share of a 50-50 split of cost savings. Savings are measured by improvements in the ratio between bikes completed and hours recorded at the plant's time clocks. Usually this check is about 5% to 8% of the basic wage.    Mr. Mariotti says he prefers this so-called gain sharing to profit sharing because it isn't affected by bike prices, &quot;which employees can't do anything about.&quot;    At both plants, a team approach is used for some jobs. For instance, Huffy's Connie Stolenburg, Carolyn Phillips and Craig Myers operate a production cell making the forks that hold the front wheels. Machines shape the parts, weld them together, grind the welds smooth, drill holes and cut threads. The three workers feed the machines, inspect the parts and determine when something is amiss.    They are paid a base rate of $7.65 an hour and can earn more if they exceed a quota. But only perfect forks count, and they must fix any that are defective.    At another cell, eight people assemble bicycle wheels. They switch jobs periodically so they don't get bored. One afternoon, Joann Wilkins is lacing the 36 spokes into each wheel hub. Before the afternoon is over, the 11-year veteran will lace 264 hubs, a task that keeps her moving steadily, but not frantically. &quot;I like working in a group a lot better than doing one job by myself,&quot; she says.    Managers at both plants are becoming adept at mixing people and electronically controlled machines. At Huffy, for instance, an electrostatic painting system applies the basic coat of paint to the bike frames. But experienced workers with hand-held spray guns apply touch-up paint to areas that didn't get a thick enough coat. Robots don't have the judgment to do that. </TEXT></DOC>