<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0136 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:The Mexican Restaurant Khashoggi Couldn't Kill---By Nancy Melich</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Salt Lake City  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Every city has one: the little out-of-the-way cafe where locals go that tourists wish they could find.    La Morena was such a place here until a Saudi Arabian businessman named Adnan Khashoggi came to town and things began to change.    Located in a converted warehouse three blocks west of the city's center, the Mexican restaurant was anything but fancy. The decor was early Formica and late linoleum with dusty crepe paper &quot;pinatas&quot; dangling from the ceiling and red Naugahyde booths hugging salmon-colored concrete walls.    On many nights, the music of Roland Lopez, Carlos Arroyo and his son Carlos Jr. serenaded the beer and enchilada crowd. Sometimes the Latino rhythms would attract people to the tiny dance floor.    No one went to La Morena to be seen. They went for good food and no ferns. It was a place frequented by former Utah Gov. Scott M. Matheson as well as unemployed coal miners, and it was home away from home for local Mexican-Americans.    The restaurant opened in 1966 as the brainchild of the Rev. Gerald Merrill, former pastor of Our Lady of Guadalupe Mission. The popular priest saw it as a way to raise seed money for various educational programs at the Guadalupe Center, the Salt Lake Hispanic community's gathering place.    As the cafe business flourished, so did a school for children of low-income families, daily instruction in &quot;adult survival English,&quot; and numerous volunteer-assisted services, including employment, tax and health-care information. There were also the Mexican fiestas celebrated annually in the asphalt courtyard and the colorful murals created by children to spruce up the building's exterior.    The restaurant, which was part of the Catholic Diocese of Salt Lake City, contributed 30% of the $300,000 annual operating budget of the Guadalupe Center. In addition, the success of the cafe made it possible to open the Pine Canyon Boys Ranch, a home for troubled youths.    For 14 years, Guadalupe Center and La Morena were synonymous with good will and good margaritas, but in 1982 things began to change. The restaurant that had once been among a handful of Mexican restaurants in the city now faced competition from more than 100 similar establishments. There was also a company named Triad America Corp. and a family named Khashoggi buying land in the area to construct a $600 million development project.    The Guadalupe Center property was sold to Triad in 1984, placing the restaurant in jeopardy. While the Catholic Church deliberated over the future of La Morena, Triad Center, two blocks north, opened the first phase of Triad Utah's swank 40-store shopping mall and office complex.    As the time came for demolition of the old warehouse, Triad offered to create a joint venture, Triad/La Morena Investment Corp., and move the restaurant to the new center. The offer was accepted, and in February 1985, the homey landmark moved uptown, so to speak. The old Formica tables were replaced with modern oak and white linen, the dusty pinatas were forsaken for large-leaf plants in brass pots.    Though 29 of the original 30 employees made the move, the ambiance changed. Some old regulars stayed away, but tourists made up the difference. The place was still friendly, however, and the food still good. Familiar faces returned and business flourished.    Then in December 1985, in a move that startled many, Triad laid off 30 full-time employees as rumors of impending doom circulated through the city. In April 1986, more cutbacks occurred and news stories told of creditors suing Triad for being in default on loans. Specialty stores began leaving the center and the foot traffic decreased significantly. By fall, Emanuel Floor, the local manager who for 12 years had headed the Khashoggi investments as president of Triad Utah, resigned, and the company dwindled to 10 employees.    When word came in November that Mr. Khashoggi was a key figure in financing the controversial sale of arms to Iran, the center began wrapping things up. There was scarcely a shop in sight that did not carry a sign proclaiming &quot;Up to 50 percent off&quot; or &quot;New Hours.&quot;    By February of this year only a few retailers remained at Triad: a stationer, a furrier, a Benetton clothing outlet, an exclusive dress shop, and ironically, a book store named The Read Ink. Three restaurants hung on: Charlie Chow, the Devereaux and La Morena.    &quot;Our business started getting slow the minute the stories about Triad's problems appeared in the news,&quot; said Juanita Arroyo, an assistant manager at La Morena. &quot;Every time there was something about Khashoggi, fewer people would come down to the center. We had some customers call and say they had stopped visiting us because they did not want to support a gun runner.&quot;    On Valentine's Day, the restaurant served its last enchilada. The staff was called together and told of the decision.    &quot;If you could have seen the expression on the faces,&quot; said Mrs. Arroyo. &quot;It was like someone had died. We had all been together for so long. One woman had worked for La Morena for 19 years. This hadn't been just a job for us. We were one big family.    &quot;That's not to say we were always happy. We had our ups and downs, but we always pulled together. We were more than a restaurant. We were a place that helped the community and brought people closer together. We all felt awful that what Father Merrill had started nearly 21 years ago was now going to end.&quot;    There was no bitterness on the part of the staff. In fact, Mrs. Arroyo praised the local Triad managers for their fairness, and philosophically stated that it was &quot;just one of those things.&quot;    Members of the community, however, were not always as generous. The sentiment in the shopping malls as well as the unemployment lines was: &quot;The fancy jewelers and furriers will be fine. They'll open up somewhere else. But what happened to La Morena is a crime. It was a Utah landmark that never should have been forced to move in the first place.&quot;    Now it may be moving back to its old warehouse location. Father Merrill, who left the Catholic order some time ago, married and is now a priest of the Episcopal Church, has returned to defend the cause of La Morena.    &quot;It is my understanding that the Catholic Church has no intention of reopening the restaurant,&quot; said Father Merrill, &quot;so we are exploring the possibility of opening the restaurant under new management, the Episcopal Church, at the old site. I think there is a real feeling of support between the two organizations.&quot;    The old warehouse was never torn down and, in fact, said Father Merrill, with a few repairs, it could be as good as new. The property has been inherited by a Denver company that is willing to lease it to the Episcopal Diocese of Utah. Father Merrill said it is hoped that the sinks, stoves and refrigerators now collecting dust at the Triad Center can be purchased and returned to the original La Morena. If all goes well, the restaurant will reopen by summer and any former employee who wants to be rehired will be. The money earned will go to support a hospitality shelter for the homeless.    &quot;We're not sure whether we'll be able to keep the name,&quot; said Father Merrill. &quot;Maybe it would be best if we did have to change it. But the important thing is that the warmth of the Guadalupe Center, which belonged to everyone, will be back.&quot;    ---   Ms. Melich is a journalist based in Salt Lake City. </TEXT></DOC>