<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871124-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   MEESE OFFERED to delay deportation after a second riot by Cuban detainees.    The attorney general offered the moratorium if inmates ended uprisings at a federal penitentiary in Atlanta and a Louisiana detention center. Cuban inmates seized most of the Atlanta prison and took hostages during a lunch break, killing one person, injuring 30 and setting fires. In Louisiana, detention-center inmates threatened to kill 25 hostages and demanded freedom in the U.S. The uprisings occurred after the U.S. said it would deport more than 2,500 of the 125,000 Cubans who entered the U.S. in 1980.    A Cuban government official said the deportees, if returned, would be treated leniently by Havana. The official said previous deportees have been freed.    ---   ARMS NEGOTIATORS REPORTED progress but no final accord in Geneva.    Secretary of State Shultz and Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze described as &quot;constructive&quot; a full day of talks on a treaty banning superpower arsenals of intermediate-range missiles. They also appointed two teams of negotiators, one to work on treaty details, the other on human rights and other issues, in advance of next month's summit. A final round of Shultz-Shevardnadze talks is scheduled for today.    Reagan said he wouldn't sign any arms-control treaty that doesn't provide procedures for verification that U.S. negotiators consider acceptable.    ---   El Salvador's Duarte said Roberto D'Aubuisson has been implicated in the 1980 murder of Archbishop Romero. Duarte said the get-away-car driver was willing to testify against the right-wing political leader. Separately, Salvadoran rebels declared a unilateral cease-fire to celebrate the return of exiled rebel leaders Zamora and Ungo.    Two Contra leaders will defy a ban by Nicaragua's government and fly to Managua today to present a cease-fire proposal to Cardinal Obando, a Contra spokeswoman said. Ortega said rebel leaders Ferrey and Robelo wouldn't be allowed to enter Nicaragua unless they first requested amnesty.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked two freighters bound for Kuwait and Saudi Arabia in the Strait of Hormuz, setting both ablaze and wounding three crewmen, Persian Gulf shipping sources said. Separately, the Pentagon said U.S. forces found and destroyed two more mines in the area of Iran's Farsi Island in the northern gulf.    ---   An earthquake jolted Southern California, toppling telephone poles and traffic lights. The quake, estimated at 6.2 on the Richter scale, was centered in the Imperial Valley, about 100 miles northeast of San Diego. There weren't any immediate reports of serious damage or injuries.    ---   Armed arsonists in Haiti set fire to a large market in Port-au-Prince and clubbed a man to death, Haitian radio reports said. Arsonists shouting &quot;Long live the army&quot; were also reported to have attempted to burn down the new Independent Electoral Council headquarters as Haiti moves toward its first free elections in 30 years Sunday.    ---   Polish unions demanded double pay to help workers deal with even larger impending increases in food, fuel and housing costs. The government-authorized unions made the demand following a meeting on a national referendum, scheduled for Sunday, which seeks approval for economic reforms that include the sharp price increases.    ---   Indian troops ended a 48-hour cease-fire and resumed operations to confiscate arms from Tamil separatist rebels in Sri Lanka. A spokesman in New Delhi said the rebels didn't respond to the truce and ruled out talks with rebel leaders. No fighting has been reported since the cease-fire ended.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir ended a U.S. visit and said Moscow isn't making gains in the Persian Gulf. He said gulf nations instead increasingly depend on U.S. military forces. He added that he is encouraged by the apparent failure of the Arabs and Soviets to organize an international peace conference.    ---   Carlucci was sworn in as the 16th U.S. secretary of defense. He succeeds Weinberger, who resigned earlier this month because of his wife's poor health.    ---   The U.N. opened its Nazi and Japanese war crimes archives under broad new access rules. The archives contain records on 36,000 people, including Austrian President Waldheim, former U.N. secretary-general. Separately, the U.N. said the U.S. will soon pay $90 million in overdue assessments, allowing it to meet December's payroll.    ---   A Philippine communist group claimed responsibility for last month's slayings of three Americans outside the U.S. Clark Air Base. The National Democratic Front, the political arm of the rebels, also vowed to continue its campaign against Americans.    ---   South Korean protesters hurled firebombs at a motorcade carrying ruling-party presidential candidate Roh. No injuries or arrests were reported in the incident in the southern port city of Masan.    ---   Police in Bangladesh broke up an opposition rally in Dhaka and arrested a BBC journalist as the government continued efforts to end a nationwide strike seeking the ouster of President Ershad. The Dhaka rally was called to protest a government ban on national newspapers printing news or photographs of strike violence.    ---   Irish troops and police hunted for a massive Irish Republican Army cache of arms believed to have reached Ireland in the past two years. More than 6,500 were taking part in the hunt for arms believed sent in four boatloads, possibly from Libya. At least 45 people were arrested in the operation. </TEXT></DOC>