<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Flying High: Airline Market Grows Rapidly in Pacific Basin Despite Complex Rules --- Travel Agents' Commissions, Fancy Service Challenge Carriers Entering the Fray --- A Concierge Locates Diapers </HL><AUTHOR> Judith Valente (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST JAPAN AMR DAL NWA AEG TEX </CO><IN> AIR </IN><TEXT>   As first-class passengers on United Airlines flight 801 nibble on beluga caviar and &quot;pate en croute,&quot; flight attendants arrange place settings of fine china, crystal and fresh-cut flowers. A uniformed chef takes orders for the coming six-course dinner. Poached salmon or Japanese &quot;bento&quot; box? French Bordeaux or California Chardonnay?    If that doesn't sound like the typical Chicago-Cleveland airline flight, that's because it isn't. Flight 801 from New York to Tokyo has a taller order. It competes in what is fast becoming the airline industry's most fiercely competitive market: the Pacific.    Spurred by the rapid growth of Asian economies, the Pacific Basin air-transport market already generates $10 billion a year in revenue, and it is the only rapidly growing airline market in the world. On routes to some countries, like South Korea, traffic is increasing at an annual clip of nearly 30%. The Summer Olympics, which will be held in Seoul, will undoubtedly provide a further boost.    But airlines that fly the Pacific compete under a different set of rules. International pricing regulations have spawned a black market in tickets. Travel-agent commissions are so large in the region that Northwest Airlines, a major Pacific carrier, was forced to shell out $278.3 million last year for that expense alone. Fares range up to $6,000.    And more than in any other market, service is a major factor in competition, prompting airlines to offer otherwise unheard-of amenities like private concierge service and lavish gifts. Efforts to pamper the Pacific traveler are so extreme that John E. Stoneman, whose work as president of Revell/Monogram, a Morton Grove, Ill., concern, requires him to fly frequently to the Orient, says that he has been telephoned three times in recent months by airlines seeking feedback on his flight experiences.    The perplexing nature of the Pacific market has baffled some U.S. carriers. At different times, American Airlines, Trans World Airlines and Braniff International have all failed in the market. United Airlines spent 16 years negotiating the right to fly a single route between Tokyo and Seattle. But even after it won the route, it still didn't have the proper landing rights in Japan. Those took another six years to obtain from the Japanese government. Now, it is trying to fight off two U.S. carriers that are attempting to get the Department of Transportation to turn the Seattle route over to them.    &quot;The market is very demanding,&quot; says Donald C. Moonjian, a United vice president. Sidney O. Fattedad, a vice president of Canadian Airlines International, is far more blunt: &quot;The Pacific market could be a graveyard for many airlines in the years to come,&quot; he says.    Even so, carriers are racing to snap up Pacific routes as quickly as they become available. In just the past year, American and Delta Air Lines jumped into the market -- American with flights from Dallas to Tokyo, and Delta with flights from Portland, Ore., to Tokyo and Seoul. Northwest added service to Japan from several cities. Now, the carriers want even more routes. American, for instance, would like to go to Hong Kong, Singapore and Taipei.    The biggest plunge was United's decision to buy Pan American's Pacific routes in 1985 for $750 million. The price was 22 times greater than Pan Am's annual Pacific earnings. But United executives were emboldened by the growth forecasts for the region.    Those forecasts have since reached the desks of other airline executives and, if anything, have got even better. The economies of Asian countries are expected to grow an average of 4.9% annually over the next five years, or about twice the rate forecast for the U.S. Likewise, airlines project that travel to and from the Pacific will increase as much as 10% annually in the same period, compared with the 4% growth forecast for travel to Europe and 6% growth in the domestic market.    Airline executives were also cheered recently when the South Korean government lowered the age restrictions on leisure travel outside the country from 55 years of age to 45. And Japan, eager to get new U.S. routes for its carriers, has grown more willing to open its market to the U.S. It has also started a program costing 10 billion yen, or $77.6 million, to promote tourism to the U.S.    But it isn't easy to master a market in which 60% of the passengers are foreign, long flight distances pose logistical nightmares, and ancient customs affect traveling patterns.    Take United's early Pacific experience. Even though it had inherited Pan Am's route network and experienced personnel, United's flights were still late 70% of the time at first, and one out of 10 flights was canceled. It has taken nearly two years for United to get its operations running to the point at which 80% of its flights arrive within 30 minutes of their scheduled time and cancellations are rare.    &quot;Maintenance operations in the Pacific are extremely complex,&quot; says United's Mr. Moonjian. &quot;You can have a plane with a mechanical problem in Seoul, and the closest {replacement} airplane is in Bangkok, thousands of miles away. It just takes away all the flexibility you have.&quot;    Marketing also proved tricky. An elaborate presentation introducing United's expanded service to a group of Japanese businessmen fell flat when one of them pointed out that an ad showing a map of Japan didn't include the country's northern-most island.    United had to learn the complex pricing game quickly. In much of the Pacific, ticket prices are set by international tariff agreements. To some extent, that shields airlines from the fare wars that have slashed many European ticket prices. But because ticket discounting is a way to gain market share, the airlines find ways around the pricing restrictions.    In countries such as Hong Kong, where competition is particularly fierce, airlines publish one price for fares, then allow travel agents to sell the tickets for a much lower &quot;street fare.&quot; The commissions that the airlines pay to travel agents are 15% to 20% higher than normal rates, to entice agents to sell more tickets. Northwest paid about 30% of its total 1986 revenue from Pacific flights for commissions. United paid almost as much.    Instead of discounting fares outright, airlines also subsidize tour packages with a few free nights in a hotel or a free car rental. Northwest says that just such agreements have helped it to maintain its 29% market share in the North Pacific despite increased competition. &quot;But it's taken us 40 years to build these relationships,&quot; said Allen Johnson, a Northwest vice president.    To the extent that fares are regulated, service has become the focus of competition. For the U.S. carriers, that has mostly meant catching up with Asian airlines. Singapore Airlines, with the world's most modern aircraft fleet, consistently ranks high on surveys of business fliers -- especially its cabin service, which is run by female flight attendants under age 35 dressed in colorful, tight-waisted native gowns.    But even U.S. carriers -- used to serving mostly TV dinners -- have learned how to lay on a fancy spread. United recently spent $6.2 million on china plates, fancier menus and color-coordinated blankets, pillows and napkins. American countered by placing two stand-up bars aboard its Pacific aircraft, serving a six-course meal in first class and offering as many business as coach seats.    United hired interpreters for its flights; Delta hired Japanese-speaking flight attendants. United's latest effort is a program for first-class ticket holders. Its concierges are instructed to &quot;perform any reasonable request&quot; for such passengers. Thus, John Rentrow, a concierge at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport, recalls crawling along the floor of an airport store late one night, searching bottom shelves for disposable diapers for an Australian couple with twins. Ellen S. Kirchberg, another concierge, called dozens of rare-book stores in the Chicago area for a Korean passenger seeking hard-to-find maps of the Far East for his private collection.    To foster good will, United even started a cultural exchange program, spending $1.7 million to bring Chinese children and Australian aborigine dancers to the U.S. But closing the culture gap isn't easy. In one early faux pas, United made its concierges wear white carnations, unaware that the flowers are a bad-luck symbol to Orientals. Now the concierges wear red carnations in their lapels.    Cultural differences are a continual source of problems for carriers. In one glaring example of the culture gap, United upset the Australians -- and nearly got sued for libel -- after it unwittingly headlined a story about &quot;Crocodile Dundee&quot; star Paul Hogan in its in-flight magazine with an Australian colloquialism for homosexual activity.    Airlines that don't grasp local customs can also lose money. In Japan, many Japanese still follow an ancient custom of marrying only on designated lucky days. Thus, airlines that fly from Tokyo to Honolulu are filled with newlyweds bound for their honeymoon on certain days of the month. But at other times, the Hawaii-bound planes are nearly empty.    Northwest and United suffered losses on those routes until they found a solution. Now, they offer special tour packages for non-honeymooning passengers traveling on non-lucky days.    Resolving the restrictions placed on carriers by bilateral agreements has proved more difficult. For 35 years, bilateral accords kept U.S. carriers out of all but two Japanese cities, even though Japan Air Lines flies to more than half-a-dozen U.S. cities. Just this past year, Continental Airlines' plan to use larger planes on its route from Honolulu to Sydney provoked an angry confrontation with the Australian government, which feared increased competition for its national carrier, Qantas. To satisfy the government, Continental cut back on some of its other flights.    Pacific countries are worried about competition because most of their carriers are government-owned. By guarding their turf, foreign carriers have been able to wrest a 59% share of the Pacific passenger market, which in 1960 was 70% controlled by U.S. airlines.    For that reason, some of the U.S. carriers have tapped into the region's $2 billion-a-year cargo market. Northwest's cargo operation accounts for one-fourth of its Pacific revenue. United has also begun flying vast loads of cargo in the holds of its commercial aircraft to increase profits.    Despite the overall complexities of the market, U.S. airline officials seem undaunted. Just look at China, they say, a colossal untapped market because of its huge population and vast geography. &quot;In most respects,&quot; says Wesley G. Kaldahl, American's senior vice president, &quot;the Pacific market is a slumbering giant at the very break of an exciting new dawn.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>