<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880303-0104 </DOCNO><HL> With Primaries Nigh, A Condo Commando Marshals Her Forces --- In Northeast Dade County, The Wise Candidate Pays Heed to Annie Ackerman </HL><AUTHOR> Sydney P. Freedberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> NORTH MIAMI BEACH, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Eighty-year-old Albert Gore Sr., retired senator from Tennessee, shuffles past Annie Ackerman's oxygen tank and settles into a folding chair by her bedside. He hands Mrs. Ackerman, who is 74, a newspaper clipping about her and suggests she frame it -- with compliments of his boy, who is running for president.    Mrs. Ackerman is an 85-pound great-grandmother whose oxygen tank, at five feet, is taller than she is. A cancer patient for seven years, she now leaves her bed only to go somewhere in her wheelchair. But Mr. Gore knows what he is doing in courting her.    Mrs. Ackerman can deliver a chunk of the &quot;condo vote,&quot; a bloc much coveted by presidential contenders in the Florida primary on Super Tuesday next week. Working the phones or dispatching lieutenants to solve condo problems, she is a retirement-community version of a political boss, what is known locally as a condo commando. In fact, she is the queen of the condo commandos. &quot;Annie has been wooed by more Democrats running for president than any other woman in America,&quot; says Rep. William Lehman, who has been re-elected under her banner seven times, always in a breeze.    The group living of Florida condos -- land-based cruise ships, people call them -- spells power for the commandos. They can give favored candidates access to pools, clubhouses, orchestra halls and banquet rooms, all filled with people almost sure to vote. &quot;People living in condominiums are looking for new friends and new activities,&quot; says Mrs. Ackerman, glancing up from &quot;Wheel of Fortune.&quot; She herself is a mah-jongg buff and onetime dancer in the condo chorus line. &quot;It's natural for them to join groups,&quot; she adds, &quot;and once they join groups, it's natural for them to cling together and vote together.&quot;    Her power base is the Point East condominiums, 17 white boxes overlooking Biscayne Bay, whose 1,401 registered voters make up the whole of Dade County's 113th precinct. With her bedside phone, Mrs. Ackerman can mobilize &quot;Annie's army,&quot; a small group of her pals who help out with various tasks year-round, like driving widows to the supermarket, raising money for Israel or arranging race-track outings. Mrs. Ackerman doesn't have a title, but she has the sanction of the condo association's head, 81-year-old Ernest Samuels.    In the political season, Annie's army shifts its mission. Her people register voters and help campaigns with bagels-and-lox breakfasts, kaffeeklatsches, &quot;pool walks,&quot; &quot;bingo walks&quot; and other meet-the-candidate events. They're free, and enthusiastic retirees, for whom the events are social as well as civic, may show up 45 minutes early -- on &quot;condo time.&quot; Mrs. Ackerman doesn't have patronage jobs to hand out, but her network of friends can manage small favors: help with a Medicare form, for instance, or a parking space closer to an elevator.    Election day itself she plans like a military operation. One afternoon, Mrs. Ackerman sits in her king-size bed mapping strategy with her nuts-and-bolts person, Mollye Lovinger Fox, a 4-foot-10-inch New Yorker who once climbed to a condo roof to talk down a suicidal retiree. Mrs. Fox says she will assign captains to each building and lieutenants at four spots leading to the condo office, where the polls are. They may try to get a bullhorn, in case some people still aren't sufficiently urged to vote. Every so often on election day someone will call Mrs. Ackerman and say who has voted and who hasn't. Laggards may receive a friendly knock on the door.    As they head for the polls, people will have in hand &quot;palm cards,&quot; provided by Mrs. Ackerman's friends, that list all her choices. &quot;We'll even breathe for the people,&quot; she says.    She expects a turnout of 90%. That wouldn't be unusual for Florida retirees with more than enough time to go to the polls. One Dade County election official, sent to a Miami Beach polling place to clear up some confusion that was delaying the voting, was told by an elderly gentleman, &quot;I intended to spend the whole day here, so don't make me vote any faster.&quot;    From the Point East condominiums, Mrs. Ackerman's power radiates outward. Friends at other condos copy her palm card. She leads or used to lead many clubs -- the Democratic Club of North Dade, Concerned Citizens of Northeast Dade -- and still has influence in them. With other commandos in northeast Dade County, she can forge a voting bloc of more than 40,000 condo-dwellers.    &quot;Annie wields more power than any one private citizen in the state of Florida,&quot; says the state Democratic Party chairman, Charles Whitehead. Recognizing it, Florida's legislature has just renamed a 30-block stretch of Biscayne Boulevard after her. Now, Mrs. Ackerman says, &quot;My daughter's going around calling me 'my mother, the boulevard.'&quot;    Mrs. Ackerman often backs incumbents and front-runners. She has already taken a straw poll to see which way the wind is blowing at Point East. When she finally gets behind a candidate, the person is almost sure to carry the condo overwhelmingly. &quot;Honey,&quot; she tells a reporter, a tad blunt and testy, &quot;the Chicago wards were sweet by comparison.&quot;    She would know about that. Before retiring to Florida in 1969 with her late husband, Irving, Mrs. Ackerman was a ward organizer in the Daley machine. Applying her block and precinct methods here, she more or less invented condo politics. She started by giving book reviews to discussion groups, then quickly moved on with Mrs. Fox to solving local problems. By banding together, Point East helped pass state condo legislation and win new streets, traffic signs, a bus route and designation of the condo as a precinct by itself. By the mid-1970s, Mrs. Ackerman was a political force.    Since then, the number of condo commandos has grown steadily. Here in South Florida, the voters are mostly middle-class Northeasterners and the organizations Democratic. Republican operations prevail in wealthier areas around Palm Beach. Gray power is also growing along the state's west coast, where a lot of conservative Midwesterners have settled.    The biggest battleground is a 40-mile stretch of condos in Dade and Broward counties, where about 175,000 Democratic ballots are expected to be cast on Tuesday, mostly by Jewish retirees. Dropping in to campaign, Gov. Michael Dukakis's 79-year-old father-in-law, Harry Ellis Dickson, a violinist and associate conductor of the Boston Pops orchestra, makes a point of telling condo dwellers how he hopes to preside at a White House Seder next Passover. And using the Yiddish word &quot;nachus&quot; (joy in someone's achievements), he wins points with the rhyming slogan &quot;Nachus for Dukakis.&quot;    The senior Mr. Gore can't match that, but he chats with condo commandos about his son's record on Israel and a grandson's trip to the Dead Sea. And now joining the dueling dads is a motivated mom, Rep. Richard Gephardt's 80-year-old mother, Loreen. She tells a group in Miami Beach that her son is a good boy -- he always used to have the table set when she got home from work.    Mrs. Ackerman listens to surrogates, though she is a lot more impressed if the candidate himself comes. She cares greatly about &quot;local&quot; issues, like long-term health care and Social Security. One evening, reviewing former House Speaker Tip O'Neill's autobiography for a discussion group, her feather boa draped over her wheelchair, she declares: &quot;Tip O'Neill understood that politics doesn't start in Washington, it starts in your own back yard. If the politicians do in your community what needs to be done, then you should vote for them.&quot;    So who is her man on Super Tuesday? She hasn't issued her endorsement yet. If Mario Cuomo were in the race, she would back him. For a while she favored Joseph Biden, whom she met twice. &quot;Joe Biden presented himself very well,&quot; she says. &quot;And on top of that, he's handsome. And on top of that, he's cute.&quot;    He isn't in the race now either, of course. But a few days ago Gov. Dukakis won a condo straw poll Mrs. Ackerman commissioned, and she made sure the results were made known. Earlier, his wife, Kitty, daughter of the Boston Pops violinist, came to see Mrs. Ackerman and made a very good impression. &quot;Kitty's a doll,&quot; Mrs. Ackerman says. It's beginning to look as if come Super Tuesday, Gov. Dukakis will be on the Point East condo commando's palm card. </TEXT></DOC>