<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Day Care for Infants Is ChallengedBy Research on Psychological Risks---By Thomas E. RicksStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   As more working parents entrust their infants to day care, some researchers are warning that day care at too early an age may psychologically harm a child.    Such findings have broad implications in the U.S., where half the nation's 6.1 million mothers of infants and toddlers now work. And the studies have touched off a fierce debate among child-development specialists, prompting accusations of male chauvinism and right-wing politicking against a leading critic ofinfant day care.    The controversy focuses on children less than 18 months old who are left in day care 20 hours a week or more. For children at that most formative age, day care can increase insecurity, the researchers say.    The challenge to infant day care is being led by Jay Belsky, a Pennsylvania State University psychologist who has followed the research for ten years -- and who helped forge the academic consensus in the 1970s that day care generally benefits a child.    In 1977, when Prof. Belsky first examined the day-care research, he found little evidence of negative effects. But in recent years he has changed his mind. He first presented his revised view at an American Academy of Pediatrics meeting in October 1985 and has gone on to propound it in articles and seminars.    Prof. Belsky says research indicates that infant day care undermines a child's &quot;sense of trust, of security, of order in the world.&quot; He says he isn't sure how that happens, but he suggests a number of possibilities, including the stress a child undergoes as a result of daily separation from the mother and the insufficient attention given by parents when infants spend a large amount of time in day care.    Prof. Belsky says he began rethinking his position as he studied evidence of increased insecurity among infants in full-time day care, which he defines as 20 hours or more a week.    In a 1984 study, for example, 31% of a group of 107 toddlers were judged insecure by researchers. But when the group was narrowed to those who had been in day care more than 20 hours a week as infants, the rate of insecurity nearly doubled, to 61.5%.    Moreover, in a 1982 study, preschool children who had been in group day care since infancy were described by the personnel who watched over them as &quot;more anxious, aggressive, and hyperactive&quot; than their peers, Prof. Belsky says. A study of middle-class children in 1981 found that those who had begun day care before turning 18 months old were more likely to cry and misbehave at ages nine and 10.    Prof. Belsky's stand is particularly controversial because of his past support for day care. As part of the academic establishment, a decade ago he helped shape the view that day care doesn't hurt a child's emotional development and that it probably aids a child's social and intellectual growth -- a view still held by many, if not most, development specialists.    &quot;I am definitely challenging the conventional wisdom within the scientific community,&quot; Prof. Belsky says. Yet, while conceding his view is in the minority &quot;in published and public academia,&quot; he says it may be the view of a silent majority of specialists. &quot;There are a lot of people out there who don't open their mouths because they know how vehement the reaction can be.&quot;    Prof. Belsky's views do find some public support outside academia. Isabel Paret, a Princeton, N.J., child psychoanalyst, says her work has led her to believe &quot;there's no question that infants don't do well in day care, no matter how much modern families would like to think they do.&quot; She says her main problem is with group day care for infants. The younger a child is, she says, the more that child needs a solid one-to-one relationship with an adult to develop properly.    Many child-development professionals, however, strongly reject the Belsky camp's viewpoint.    &quot;I think it's bunkum,&quot; says Tiffany Field, a professor of pediatrics and psychology at the University of Miami's Mailman Center for Child Development. She says Mr. Belsky and his allies are either relying on bad research or misreading good research.    Responding to Prof. Belsky, four child-development specialists from Yale, Harvard, the University of Virginia and University of California at Los Angeles recently argued that continuity and quality are the most important aspects of infant day care, not the age at which day care begins.    Rather than delaying day care, it might even be better for children to begin at an early age, the article said. The report, published in the professional newsletter &quot;Zero to Three,&quot; cited a 1973 study that found that children who began day care at an average age of 9.5 months were less tense and more sociable than those who began at an average age of three years. Similarly, a 1985 study found that children who entered day care when younger than 15 months touched the adults who cared for them and laughed more with them than did children who began day care at a later age.    Some of Prof. Belsky's critics reject his concerns over infant day care as pandering to the current mood of political conservativism in the U.S. Sandra Scarr, a University of Virginia psychologist, says Prof. Belsky's views are part of a broader &quot;backlash against the women's movement.&quot;    Prof. Scarr's comment underscores how day care and women in the work force are inextricably linked. It's hard to discuss the first without touching on the second, she says, and suggests Mr. Belsky has simply hit on a new way to launch an old attack. &quot;The advice for women has always been to get out of the work force,&quot; she says. &quot;This is just another way of saying the same thing.&quot;    Prof. Belsky dismisses the charges of political motivation. &quot;I've gotten smeared,&quot; he says. &quot;I have no reputation for being a politically minded ideologue.&quot;    Other child-development professionals say Prof. Belsky may be blaming infant day care for pre-existing problems. Craig Ramey, a University of North Carolina psychologist, says infant day care appears to be neutral in its effect, and that a baby could be insecure both going into day care and coming out. &quot;To conclude that (insecurity) is a consequence of day care, one must rule out other factors,&quot; he says.    Both sides agree that more research is needed before the debate can be resolved. Moreover, the most significant impact of day care on infants may be in how it affects them years later when they become parents themselves, says Edward Zigler, director of Yale's Bush Center in Child Development and Social Policy.    &quot;We aren't going to know the answers to these questions until these babies grow up and raise children of their own,&quot; Prof. Zigler says. &quot;Only then will we see how the bonding process has been affected.&quot;    In the interim, a consensus on the effects of infant day care may emerge among practitioners, if not among researchers. Cynthia Dember, a clinical psychologist in Cincinnati, says her experience suggests a common-sensical approach. &quot;I basically am a supporter of day care,&quot; she says, noting that it's hard to single out infant day care as the cause of a given child's problems. Nonetheless, she adds, &quot;For some kids, it's probably exactly the right thing. For some kids, it's OK. And for some kids, even good day care isn't very good.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>