<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890726-0100 </DOCNO><DD> = 890726 </DD><AN> 890726-0100. </AN><HL> What's Really Squeezing the Middle Class? </HL><DD> 07/26/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   Earlier this month, the Journal brought together four economists to discuss whether income in America is becoming more unequal: Barry Bluestone, professor of political economy at the University of Massachusetts; Frank Levy, professor at the University of Maryland's School of Public Affairs; Fabian Linden, executive director of the Consumer Research Center of the Conference Board; and Richard Vedder, professor at Ohio University.    ---   WSJ: What is happening to income in America?    Bluestone: We see the following trends beginning in the early 1970s: first, stagnation if not an absolute decline in hourly wages, weekly earnings and average annual earnings; second, growing inequality in earnings, particularly among men; third, a growing proportion of the labor force earning lower wages, at least among full-time workers. There seems to have been very little reversal in any of those trends since the economic recovery beginning in 1983.    Levy: There's been a trend toward greater inequality in men's earnings in most of the post-World War II period -- it grows faster sometimes than other times, and that trend certainly has been there in the past decade. There is no particular trend one way or another in women's earnings.    If you look at family incomes, from the end of the Second World War to the late 1960s, family incomes grew moderately more equal. They grew sharply less equal in the early 1980s. Historically, inequality grows when you go into a recession and declines when you come out. But inequality today is greater than it was at the bottom of the recession.    When incomes are growing fast, inequality has less meaning because the poor are getting richer and the rich are getting richer even faster -- but everybody's better off. Because of the general stagnation of earnings this decade, that's not the case now. A relative decline means an absolute decline. The sharpest example is that if you look at workers in their late 20s and early 30s with a high school education, in the early 1970s they were averaging $22,000-$23,000 in today's dollars and today they are making $18,500.    And the last point is that there have been sharp changes in the kinds of families at the bottom of the distribution. In the 1960s, the bottom fifth of families contained maybe one-sixth of all kids; today it's one-quarter.    Linden: I don't think there's much debate that income has been growing much less rapidly than in the 1960s. But why is this going on? My view is that there have been monumental social and demographic changes in the country.    But it remains a fact that per-capita disposable income rose by a total of 82% between 1960 and 1987 -- and by 13% between 1980 and 1987. Per-capita disposable personal income rose by an annual rate of 1.8% from 1980 through 1987. At that rate, the standard of living of the average American doubles in 35 years. That's been our past trend, it is our current trend. When we survey young workers, they say they are doing considerably better than their parents were at their age. And they're right: On average, today's young have an income that is in real terms 50% higher than their parents' at the same age.    Vedder: From 1947 to 1967 economic growth reduced poverty; from 1967 to 1987 we see little if any decline in poverty even though there has been some economic growth. Why has economic growth not resulted in the continuation of the reduction in poverty? A decreasing proportion of the poor are working poor. Of the 7 million families that are poor, half don't contain a wage earner. Public policies are leading people to take options that consign them to poverty.    WSJ: Let's begin by considering individual earnings from labor. What's happening, and why?    Levy: Low wages among young high school graduates come from weak manufacturing employment. Manufacturing got clobbered in the recession, and then got the short end of the stick in the recovery because of the high dollar. Put aside the question of good jobs and bad jobs. Suppose you had a group of women and a large number went into secretarial positions. Suddenly you abolish half of those jobs. Women's average wages would fall, even if those vanished jobs weren't good jobs. In the '80s, a lot of young men without college educations had to scramble for any kind of job because the factories weren't hiring.    Bluestone: As it turns out, and I'm one of the proponents of the de-industrialization thesis, the shift in employment from goods production to services does not by itself explain the growth in inequality, because inequality is growing in all sectors. I think something is happening to educational criteria.    I went to a public high school in Detroit, and graduated in 1962. About half my class went on to college, half didn't. At my 10th and 20th class reunions, those who went on to college were making somewhat more than those who had not, but the gap wasn't enormous -- we were in Detroit, remember. But when the class of 1980 meets for its anniversary, I predict the gap will have grown enormously.    In goods production, college graduates earned 2.1 times as much as high school drop-outs in 1963. Today they earn 2.4 times as much. But the service economy is putting more and more of a premium on advanced education. So while college graduates in services earned 2.2 times as much as high school drop-outs in 1963, today they earn 3.5 times as much. There certainly is a relationship between the decline in manufacturing employment and the growth in inequality. But even more powerful, there has been a restructuring within industries.    Linden: But much of this is the impact of the baby boom generation. Within the prime age range of 25 to 54 -- when earnings are at their highest -- the proportion of the category accounted for by the younger, less well-paid cohort of 25- to 34-year-olds was 35% in 1970. In 1985, it was 44%.    Bluestone: But those are the same people who in the previous period of greater equality were even younger -- 16 to 24 -- and so they should have been lowering wage rates even more then.    Linden: But their participation in the labor force was very slight -- most of them were still in school.    Levy: The growth in inequality among younger workers is as important as the growth of inequality between younger and older workers, and between high school and college graduates. Inequality's grown a lot. The economy's in a lot of turbulence.    WSJ: Perhaps as the economy becomes more entrepreneurial -- as foreign competition mounts, as small business proliferates -- the price society is prepared to pay for talent is greater?    Linden: There was a period in which you could earn your bread by the sweat of your brow. Now, as the economy becomes more complex . . .    Bluestone: You have to use something above the brow.    Levy: The economy in the '50s and '60s was certainly not sclerotic, but the inequality in men's earnings was less than it is now. Compared to the early '70s, a larger proportion of men earns over $50,000 (in constant dollars) and a larger proportion earns under $20,000. But a smaller proportion is earning between $20,000 and $50,000. The top has increased because, if you want to put a good face on it, there is more recognition of talent, and if you want to put a bad face on it, because people feel less of a sense of restraint than they used to.    Markets are there all the time. But how much do you allow the full impact of the market to come to bear on wages, and how much do you dampen the market through custom? Certainly in the 1980s, we let more of the market be felt. If the minimum wage erodes through inflation, that's good. If you can get a really big salary by threatening to jump to another firm, even though it's nine times what your colleagues are making, go ahead, that's OK.    If you want to take it one step further, this may ultimately be traceable to the stagnation of earnings. When everybody is getting better off very fast, you may say, well, I've got mine. But when people get a little edgy about the future, there's more of a temptation to play for the short run.    Vedder: We all agree that the growth in earnings from work has slowed down dramatically since the mid-'70s. I won't agree to any specific numbers, because there are complex issues here -- fringe benefits, inflation deflators, the dates you use. But I don't think there's any question that the measures show some increase in inequality over the past 15 years.    Linden: Remember that the period from the end of the war to the 1960s was extraordinary. We had a depression and then a war in the 1930s and '40s, so there was a huge backlog of sophisticated technology that had not been implementedthere was a whole network of growth impetus.    Bluestone: But there's a whole series of institutional factors at work too. At one time in this country, we had more than a third of the labor force in unions -- in manufacturing, as much as 45%. By demanding raises in pennies per hour rather than in percentage terms, by fighting for promotion by seniority rather than pay for knowledge, unions have been a force for greater equality. With the demise of unions, you have a freer market in wages. A freer market has meant greater disparities. In 1988 the average chief executive of a Fortune 500 company earned 93 times as much as the average factory worker and 72 times as much as the average schoolteacher. In 1960, he made 41 times as much as a factory worker and 38 times as much as a teacher.    Levy: The big change was on the demand side. We know that manufacturing is very sensitive to recessions, and we also know that in this last recovery the high dollar was very hard on U.S. manufacturing. So you're suddenly taking a big chunk of the demand for less well-educated labor, and putting it into shock.    Linden: What you're saying is that we are having an economic episode, related to the fortunes of the dollar.    Levy: I would say . . . yes. But how long that episode lasts has a lot to do with public policy.    Linden: But an episode is nothing we have to be too desperately concerned about. It's painful to live through, but it will not continue.    Levy: But from the point of view of a young person, the question is, what are the chances that they're going to out-earn their parents? That depends on something I can't predict very well: productivity growth. A 30-year-old man today is pretty certainly making more than his father did when he was 30. The difference is, that the father saw pretty rapid wage growth for most of his career. For the son it's an open question. If you do simple projections, you will find that for the college-educated son of a college-educated father, the son will top out at about 4,000 or 5,000 constant dollars more than his father -- which isn't outstanding, but isn't bad. But for high school-educated sons of high school-educated fathers, at current projections, the son won't out-earn his father.    WSJ: What about college-educated sons of high school-educated fathers?    Levy: The proportion of high school graduates going on to college has stabilized at 50% since the early 1970s.    Linden: But in the generation of the fathers of the baby-boomers, only 25% went to college. That's one of the reasons that this notion of the baby-boomers not doing as well as their parents is nonsense. Of course, while they're doing better now, this is only a snapshot in time. Will they do better into the future? That's as unpredictable as tomorrow's GNP.    Vedder: From 1929 until 1968 we had an increase in equality combined with economic growth. Since 1968 we've had an increase of inequality along with some slowing of economic growth. But over the long run, that trend will probably reverse itself, even in the absence of public policy. What we should be worrying about are the very poor. We have not been terribly successful in eliminating poverty in the United States. That's where we should focus our attention.    WSJ: How important are racial and regional phenomena?    Vedder: The employment-to-population rate among blacks was higher in 1954 than it was in 1987: 58% vs. 56.8%. For whites, it rose: from 55.2% to 62.3%. I don't think anyone would seriously argue that it's because of increased racial discrimination. Part of the black decline does relate to things like changing skill requirements. But part of it relates to family structure, and to things that affect work effort, like public assistance.    Levy: Of course, for female-headed families earning less than $15,000, 60% are white.    Vedder: Maybe, but among unrelated individuals, inequality for whites has fallen. For blacks, it has risen. If you compare families, the GINI coefficient -- the technical measure of inequality -- has risen 68 basis points for blacks, and 40 for whites. And income disparity among blacks was greater than among whites to begin with.    Bluestone: While this is true among blacks, it's part of a general trend. The white high school graduate or drop-out isn't doing as well as 20 years ago either, in both relative and absolute terms.    Vedder: And for regions, reversing the recent history of the U.S., it's been the relatively high income states that had the highest growth rates in the 1980s.    Bluestone: In the six New England states, the proportion of the work force in low-wage jobs went down between 1979 and 1987. But everywhere else it went up. In the Midwest, it began rising in 1973 and exploded after 1979: from 12% to 15.4% In the South it went from 18% to 20%; in the West, from 12% to 15%.    Levy: But most of that decline is concentrated in the Middle West. If you take out the big industrial states, the high school/college gap in wage rates among young men hasn't changed a whole lot. And there's your story: Heavy industry is falling apart.    Linden: But autos and steel account for just 2% or 3% of total employment. We have lost vastly more industrial jobs in low-paying textile and apparel industries.    Levy: It isn't just autos and steel that are being removed when you take out those states.    Bluestone: And even for people in textiles, those jobs are better than the alternatives -- working as security guards, or janitors, or in warehouses, or frying hamburgers. And the benefits of course were much greater, even in the lower-wage manufacturing industries.    WSJ: Let's go beyond the individual earnings data. What's happening to total family income?    Levy: Income per worker really has slowed down. Family living standards haven't suffered as much, but that's because we now have two-income families with one kid instead of one-income families with three kids. And also because, even as male-earnings inequality has grown, female-income inequality has been unchanged.    Linden: In the lowest quintile of the family income distribution, single-parent families grew between 1970 and 1987 from 33% to 46% of the total family population. Over those 17 years, there was a 10% increase in the number of husband-wife families; while other families increased by 90%.    Of the total increase between 1970 and 1987 in households earning less than $15,000 55% were single individuals, 28% were female-headed families.    In the top quintile of families, there has been an extraordinary growth in the number of working wives. In 1970, some 50% of the families in the top fifth had working wives; in 1987, some 66%. The number of working wives in the top quintile increased by 70%.    How much do these pulls increase inequality? It's difficult to say. But these are not small changes. These are monumental changes because the baby boom was monumental. Just between 1980 and 1987, the total number of persons working went up by 6%.    Vedder: In real terms -- not in nominal terms -- in real terms, payments to individuals by the United States government went up from 152 billion 1982 dollars in 1970 to $405 billion in 1988. That has implications for all kinds of things, including family structure and work effort.    Among low-income Americans, there is a very significant negative tax in the form of new benefits that have appeared since the 1960s: Medicaid, food stamps, WIC benefits, that have impacted adversely on low-income Americans' participation in the labor force. At the upper end of the spectrum, meanwhile, labor force participation is increasing. Why? Partly because you have some impact when you cut the marginal tax rate from 70% to 28%.    Levy: But inequality in family incomes increases faster when you ignore wives' incomes. The two-income family exerts less of an equalizing force than it did 10 years ago, because it's more acceptable for the wives of high-income men to work than it used to be; but even so, if you ignored all wives' incomes, you'd have more, not less, inequality.    Inequality is certainly exacerbated by the growing number of female-headed families. The reason the number is growing is open to question: welfare, changes in the economy, in mores, God knows what.    From about 1967 to about 1974, the number of cases on the welfare rolls doubled. You'd be a fool not to attribute a good part of that doubling to the raising of benefits and the attachment of food stamps and Medicaid to welfare. But since 1975 the cash value of welfare has fallen off substantially-and the number of femaleheaded families continues to grow, just as it had grown in the early '60s before the benefits were raised.    More and more women are divorced or are having kids out of wedlock. How good the welfare programs are may determine how many will be on welfare as opposed to doing something else. But that's it.    ---   Where They Agree:    1.Average earnings per hour have not improved during the '80s, despite the economic recovery.    2.By all the conventional statistical measures of inequality, the inequality of earnings among men has increased during the decade.    3.Inequality of earnings among women has not.    4.The composition of the poor has changed dramatically: The working poor and the elderly poor have declined as a share of the total. In their place is a rising share of female-headed, non-working households -- a majority of them white.    5.Conventional statistical measures also show that inequality of family income has grown, though not so dramatically as inequality of male earnings.    Where They Disagree:    1.Whether the increase in the inequality of male earnings is best explained demographically -- by the changing age structure of the population -- or by the changing nature of the American economy's demand for labor.    2.Whether this increase in earnings inequality is going to be self-correcting.    3.Whether the increase in family inequality can be explained demographically and socially -- the entry of women into the full-time labor force, the baby boom, the new composition of the poor -- or again by labor demand and institutional factors.    ---@ Who's on Bottom... @ The 20% of families who earn the least @ 1970 1987 @ Married couples, wife working 12% 15% @ Married couples, wife not working 55% 39% @ Other families 33% 46% @ ... Who's on Top @ The 20% of families who earn the most @ Married couples, wife working 50% 66% @ Married couples, wife not working 45% 27% @ Other families 5% 7% @ Source: Fabian Linden </TEXT></DOC>