<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880907-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Fragile Freedoms: Slovenes Acquire Taste For the Good Life, But Party May Be Over --- These Yugoslavs' Dalliance With Democratic Values Risks Military Crackdown --- Milan Kucan Takes On Serbia </HL><AUTHOR> Barry Newman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> LJUBLJANA, Yugoslavia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This is the capital of the autonomous republic of Slovenia, Tomorrowland of communism.    The masses drive Mercedeses in Slovenia. They burn cordwood in their Alpine weekend chalets, not because they have to but because it's chic. They live closer to Munich (200 miles northwest) than to Belgrade (300 miles southeast), shop for fashions in Austria and Italy, and speak of Yugoslavia's less-developed south as &quot;total Balkan Asia.&quot; The electronics company in Slovenia has a subsidiary in Switzerland.    With income per head well above Spain's and unemployment well below Japan's, the 1.7 million Slovenes have built themselves the richest communist patch on Earth. Their economic plans make &quot;perestroika&quot; look like feudalism. Their party bosses make Soviet dissidents look like yes men. Their thrust toward real democracy makes Mikhail Gorbachev's &quot;democratization&quot; look like a ruse.    &quot;Here, we want a complete reshuffle from the roots up,&quot; Janez Stanovnik says. He sits under a crystal chandelier in a room fit for a Hapsburg. &quot;We call it the complete abandonment of every dogma. Nothing from Marxist thinking is sacrosanct.&quot;    Mr. Stanovnik, who is 65 years old, has a handlebar mustache that he raised while fighting with Tito's Partisans against the Nazis. He is a Communist. Last spring, after hounding a shoo-in out of the race, he was elected president of Slovenia.    &quot;Democracy can't be just free elections,&quot; he says. &quot;It should be a Jeffersonian democracy -- government of the people, by the people and for the people. We had an Orwellian society, and our youngsters have revolted against its entire structure. I don't know where this will lead, but one thing I'm firm on: The people should be free to shape this new society. We don't think of alternatives. It's the Partisan spirit -- break through, or perish.&quot;    Total Balkan Asia may take Mr. Stanovnik up on that. Communists south of here, sympathetic Croatians excepted, denounce the Slovene Spring as counterrevolution. They say free speech goes too far when it leads to editorial attacks on the Yugoslav army.    The army drew up a list a few months ago of the Slovenes it would like to see behind bars. The press here duly reported that as a coup plot. Then the army went after the journalists. It tried three of them, in secret, for possessing secret papers. In July, it convicted them. Now Slovenes talk of Ljubljana, 1988, as if it were Prague, 1968.    &quot;If the liberals fail now, there is no chance for Yugoslavia in the next 50 years,&quot; says Igor Bavcar, an editor who heads a human-rights committee. &quot;I'm afraid of a Stalinist Putsch.&quot;    From Slovenia to Estonia to Armenia to Tibet, those sentiments resound. On the imperial fringes of China and the Soviet Union, a pinch of democracy added to economic reform has brought old ethnic passions to life. There, democracy translates as autonomy. But let Slovenia be an object lesson: When Jeffersonian democracy is at issue, autonomy doesn't provide crackdown insurance.    While his southern republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan sparred last March, Mr. Gorbachev took a trip to Yugoslavia. He skipped the south, where ethnics feud, too, and made for Slovenia. Politics didn't concern him. Management did. When told that Slovenia sends 80% of its exports west and only 20% east, he was heard to mumble, &quot;Good boys.&quot; Iskra, the electronics company, offered him a red telephone; he chose a white one, and departed seemingly unaware of the ideological storm blowing around him. The Slovenes were bemused.    &quot;When we hear Gorbachev talk of democracy,&quot; says Jurij Gostancic, a TV commentator, &quot;we think, OK, let's see you in a year -- because we know how wonderful it sounds at first, and how messy it gets later on. We are very sympathetic. But we are wiser.&quot;    Flying to Slovenia from the Yugoslav south isn't unlike flying to the Midwest from the Mideast. The dust clears. The Alps rise out of the plain. The religion becomes Roman Catholic, the alphabet Roman, the language Slovene. Byzantine and Ottoman debris yield to local history's own mix of Venetian style and Austro-Hungarian order.    In Ljubljana, a city of 350,000, cafes outside Viennese baroque town houses serve pizzas and steins of beer, while teen-agers on motorbikes tear by like Neapolitans. A million Westerners a year pour into Slovenia, over communism's liveliest frontier. Slovenes in large numbers travel to the West every day. Some commute to work. Nobody needs a visa. At the nearest Austrian-border post, with its duty-free shop and motel, there isn't a soldier in sight.    To the Slovenes, capitalist ways feel familiar by now, and compatible. They understand the market. They want a real one. They want to put more money into private factories, less into houses and cars. They want a free economy -- unfettered foreign investment, fluctuating foreign-exchange rates, a stock exchange and free prices. They know instinctively how a country competes in the outside world.    On all these items, the Slovenes have political allies in the south. On one other item, they don't. &quot;When those politicians start talking about the market,&quot; says a young Slovene manager, &quot;they forget that a market should also exist for politicians.&quot;    Here, people feel as comfortable with democracy as they do with capitalism, for the same reasons. In the eight years since Tito died, women's liberationists, conscientious objectors and peace crusaders have piped up, to no one's dismay. Now, bookshops sell any book and movie houses show any film, including a U.S. cultural export called &quot;Bordello.&quot; The one thing people find mildly special in it all is the spirited support of the Slovene Communist Party.    The party wants to end capital punishment. The party wants direct elections. The party objects to Yugoslavia's catchall law against &quot;hostile propaganda.&quot; And the party -- especially its young leader, Milan Kucan -- is immensely popular.    &quot;Probably he's the most progressive Communist in the world,&quot; says a college student in an avant-garde video shop. It isn't an overstatement. By encouraging, and indirectly financing, the rise of an organized opposition, Mr. Kucan has taken Slovenia as far as a one-party state can go before leaping the chasm into true pluralism.    &quot;The role of the party depends on the strength of its arguments,&quot; says Zivko Pregl, its chief reform theorist, who goes to work tieless and in sneakers. &quot;We're talking about sharing power. We say it's bad that the party dominates decision-making. Groups should gather around programs related to specific problems. The party has no monopoly in the right to be progressive.    &quot;The question of a multiparty system is open in Slovenia,&quot; he says. &quot;We're totally unafraid of the president of the government not being a member of the party. I don't know what this new society will be called -- socialism or not -- and I don't care. Whatever proves useful, we must implement. We give up this competition with capitalism. We just want to live better here.&quot;    But to the Communists of Yugoslavia's south, Mr. Kucan and his theorists sound like they have gone gaga.    &quot;We've got a party here that's prepared to withdraw, to step down,&quot; says Andrej Novak, a Slovene journalist and publisher. &quot;The others say, 'You stupid asses, you're going to lose power, and we're not going to allow it.'&quot;    Serbia, the biggest republic, has taken on the job of snapping Slovenia to its senses. Its party leader, Slobodan Milosevic, is a rabid nationalist with a soft spot for Stalin. He sees Mr. Kucan as his archrival in an intrigue worthy of the Balkans. It has some Yugoslavs worrying that Tito's federation could come unglued.    This calls for details: To keep Serbia weak, Tito split it into three parts. Now Mr. Milosevic wants to put it back together, and he has a chance. Yugoslavia is rewriting its constitution to unify its shattered economy. The Serbs want to do that with a strong central state, presumably run by Serbs. People in Kosovo, its southernmost part, don't like the idea. They have Albanian roots and can't stand Serbs. Slovenes don't like it, either. They fear for their autonomy. So the Serbs are out to neutralize them.    It wouldn't be hard, in the best times, to stir resentment of Slovenia's wealth. In the southern mind, its colonialists steal raw materials and ship back overpriced tape decks. But the free Slovene press has made the job even easier. It has insulted the army.    Among the Yugoslav republics, only Serbia once had its freedom, its king, its martial glory. Today's officers are still mostly Serb, and the army's language Serbo-Croatian. With the politicians at war, the army sees itself as the nation's last cohesive force. To Slovene liberals, the army is reactionary and beyond control. The press here has said so in hundreds of articles. This year, it went over the top.    A youth magazine, Mladina, called the defense minister, Adm. Branko Mamula, a &quot;merchant of death&quot; for selling guns to Ethiopia. Then it said he used army recruits to build himself a villa on the Adriatic. The admiral resigned in May. Then Mladina hit again: It said the army had hatched a plan for mass arrests to end the Slovene &quot;counterrevolution,&quot; and had been narrowly thwarted by the party. &quot;Slovenia,&quot; said Mladina &quot;escaped a military coup by a whisker.&quot;    The party didn't deny it. Mr. Kucan said, &quot;It is in someone's interest to turn things around.&quot; The army, as Western diplomats in Belgrade confirm, was drawing up a little list. &quot;What the hell is that if not plotting?&quot; says Mr. Novak, the Slovene publisher. But an army weekly shot back that Mladina's story was full of &quot;lies, fabrications and libelous insinuations.&quot;    Early in June, military police walked into Mladina's office and found a document about troop movements. Two Mladina writers landed in an army jail. Then Mladina's managing editor was charged, too. That outraged Slovenia. Angry posters went up on the official kiosks. A rally drew 30,000 people. The off-duty soldiers who stroll around Ljubljana in the evening found out about water balloons.    Student radicals and Communist leaders complained in one voice. What rankled them most was the prospect of a secret trial in a land just learning to treasure free speech. They demanded a public hearing, with civilian lawyers, conducted in the Slovene language. The army refused. In late July, its court found the writers guilty.    Now the Slovenes are smoldering. Mr. Kucan says the verdict usurped the republic's &quot;sovereignty.&quot; But if people take to the streets, the army gets a chance to use force; if Mr. Kucan tries to stop the protests, he jeopardizes his support. &quot;Democrats are always on the defensive in a country like this,&quot; Mr. Novak says. &quot;The party doesn't know where it's going -- where we are all going.&quot;    One Mladina writer got five months in prison; two got 18 months. Come autumn, they will appeal. Come autumn, college students will return to a campaign billed as &quot;nonviolent civil pressure.&quot; Come autumn, as Yugoslavia rewrites its constitution, Jeffersonian communists will try putting the army on a civilian leash. But the question is: Come autumn, will it still be spring in Slovenia? </TEXT></DOC>