<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871207-0110 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:ABM, No; SDI, Yes; INF, Maybe---By Jim Courter</HL><DD> 12/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   &quot;Much to the authors' regret,&quot; &quot;The Arms Control Delusion&quot; (Institute for Contemporary Studies, 220 pages, $16.95) is a damning critique of the Reagan administration. Republican Sen. Malcolm Wallop and Hoover Institution scholar Angelo Codevilla take for granted the utopianism of the president's liberal and pacifist critics. Their quarrel is with those they expect to be less subject to intoxication.    The authors believe that a strong Republican administration, formed by a president who called his election an America-wide referendum on arms control, has allowed &quot;the arms control process&quot; to become a respectable substitute for political and military thinking.    For example, they show that it was arms control considerations rather than defense considerations that weighed most heavily on those who planned, delayed, redesigned, built and then largely left undeployed the MX missile. Mr. Reagan's Scowcroft Commission wrote a 26-page report on the strategic purpose of the MX and Midgetman missiles that used the term &quot;arms control&quot; in 62 places.    Why build a bargaining chip with military properties instead of the inverse? Because our security is said to lie in arms control, while weapons -- even our weapons -- are said to be the danger.    Verification problems add to the air of unreality. Somehow, what the Soviets are doing has become less important than whether we can see what they're doing. We show more interest in how many SS-20 launchers there are -- 441 -- than in the fact that they are reloadable, and capable of launching missiles of intercontinental range. Distracted by the fact that satellites can spot a golf ball on a green, we leave unconsidered other facts with serious military consequences: Missiles for reloadable launchers can be mass-produced and stored under large roofs; new mobile launchers holding SS-25 weapons of intercontinental range cannot be targeted by U.S. forces as can fixed silos.    And if we detect a violation, then what? Fred Ikle first asked that question in an article in 1961. The president he now works for has left it unanswered. We have periodic reports on Soviet violations, but after seven years we still lack a policy for addressing them with militarily significant countermeasures. The draft INF treaty, too, is silent on this matter.    Messrs. Codevilla and Wallop mention what Prof. Harold Rood demonstrated at length in his 1980 volume &quot;Kingdoms of the Blind&quot;: The Allies had inspectors ranging freely over German territory in the early 1920s to assure enforcement of the Versailles treaty. They saw much, but their governments did nothing.    The U.S. refusal to respond to treaty violations, according to the authors, is the final proof that arms control is something totally different from what it claims to be. It is not about international law. It is not about controlling Soviet weapons production or Soviet behavior. It is instead a form of unilateral U.S. self-restraint.    Verification problems are but one of the reasons why the authors of &quot;The Arms Control Delusion&quot; would presumably oppose the draft treaty on intermediate range nuclear missiles. But they would be nothing less than alarmed -- as would I -- if this week's summit agreements were to place more legal shackles on defense against intercontinental missiles.    Consider the absolute illogic of our present posture. The U.S. lacks defense against missile attack. The Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty largely prevents us from deploying them. The Soviets are violating this treaty, yet we defer and disrupt tests of strategic defense technologies so as to honor it. Polls show Americans want defenses. Science shows we could have them in the next decade. The treaty allows either party to withdraw after six months' notice.    So will the U.S. withdraw? This administration is not even considering it. In Washington, the debate -- which is now over -- was only about how rigorous U.S. compliance is to be. Even as Mr. Reagan made a pre-summit round of speeches on the importance of the Strategic Defense Initiative, he offered no decision on deployment. SDI remains a perpetual science project rather than a nascent system of defenses. The ABM Treaty, heralded as an arms control &quot;achievement,&quot; ties us to the proposition that safety lies in vulnerability.    Can arms control work at all? The authors seem to think not. We can limit our own behavior, but not the enemy's plans. And verification, a dubious proposition in a police state 11 time zones wide, grows more difficult as weapons get smaller, fully mobile and more sophisticated.    What is apparent and undeniable is the need for strategic defenses. With defenses deployed, any number of troublesome variables are reduced in importance. If we can destroy a missile in flight, we don't need to know exactly where its mobile launcher is. Similarly, the exact strengths of both sides' offensive forces become less significant, and deep reductions might safely be sought under conditions where deployed defenses, not the Kremlin's written promises, are the guarantors of our security.    ---   Rep. Courter (R., N.J.), is a fifth-term member of the House Armed Services Committee and a congressional observer of the Geneva arms talks. </TEXT></DOC>