<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870825-0016 </DOCNO><HL> For Gephardt and Dukakis, the Presidential TrailMay Be Duel Over Similarities, Not Differences---By Albert R. HuntStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> JACKSON, Miss.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Democratic presidential hopeful Richard Gephardt told a breakfast gathering here last week about growing up with his parents, neither of whom finished high school but taught him the lessons of education and hard work.    He then launched into what he considers the country's top issue, the economy, noting that when he travels to places like the Iron Range in northern Minnesota, he sees an America in decline. &quot;We need an economic policy for the country,&quot; declared the Missouri Democrat, stressing his leadership and penchant for efficiency.    A few weeks earlier and 800 miles to the north, another Democratic aspirant, Michael Dukakis, made a similar speech to a Boone, Iowa, luncheon. He spoke of growing up under the influence of his immigrant parents, who became a doctor and a schoolteacher, and how they stressed the importance of education and hard work.    He then turned to &quot;our No. 1 challenge&quot; -- revitalizing the economy -- observing that as he campaigned in areas like Minnesota's Iron Range, he saw an America in despair. &quot;We need a president who not only believes in economic opportunity and good jobs for people, but understands the issues,&quot; declared the Massachusetts governor, citing his leadership record and managerial expertise.    At this very early stage of the presidential-selection process, some analysts see Messrs. Gephardt and Dukakis as the leading Democratic aspirants; two weeks ago, they even staged a one-on-one debate in Iowa. Yet despite some recent clashes over trade and defense positions, their similarities are more striking than their differences.    Indeed, the Democrats this time may avoid the deep divisions that so often have split the party, a prospect that reflects both the current issues and the candidates. &quot;We're seen as a suburbanization of the Democratic politics,&quot; says Kirk O'Donnell, director of the Center for National Policy, a Democratic think tank. &quot;The candidates come out of solid middle-class environments where the focus has been on the process of politics as opposed to the nitty-gritty of urban politics or the courthouses of rural politics.&quot;    This contrasts with recent Democratic contests with civil rights or the Vietnam War as a backdrop: the ideological struggles of George Wallace against everyone else in the late 1960s and early 1970s, George McGovern vs. Henry Jackson in 1972, and Edward Kennedy vs. Jimmy Carter in 1980. The last election pictured a generational and political cultural clash between Walter Mondale and Gary Hart.    Under certain conditions these struggles could re-emerge. A Democratic showdown between Sen. Paul Simon, a self-styled Hubert Humphrey liberal, and Sen. Albert Gore or Sen. Joseph Biden, who are appealing to the baby-boom voters, might take on characteristics of the 1984 contest. If the nomination came down to Rev. Jesse Jackson vs. former Gov. Bruce Babbitt or Sen. Sam Nunn, old ideological wounds would be reopened.    Moreover, campaigns focus on disagreements. &quot;The system forces differences to emerge,&quot; says Democratic pollster Paul Maslin. Often in the heat of a campaign these differences are intensified. But, as pollster Peter Hart says: &quot;It's causes that create movements and real differences. At this stage there are no great causes.&quot;    Messrs. Gephardt and Dukakis and most of their rivals formed their political personae not in the turbulent times of the Cold War or the 1960s but in the 1970s. They are more reformers than liberals.    Both the 46-year-old Midwestern congressman and the 53-year-old New England governor see themselves as effective problem solvers, as political pragmatists who enjoy good relations with labor but appreciate the entrepreneurial spirit, adhere to traditional values, are wary of ideologues and oldfashioned pork-barrel politics, though they aren't above that. At their recent debate, they both were polished performers with an impressive command of issues.    On economic issues, both candidates want to reduce the deficit, reorder spending priorities with more for education and children and less for defense, and hold businesses more accountable without launching a populist-type assault on corporations. Both believe managerial efficiency could shape up the Defense Department -- an opinion few experts share.    Even some differences are exaggerated, such as Dick Gephardt the protectionist against Mike Dukakis the free-trader. Mr. Gephardt certainly is less the free-trader, but even he says unfair trade practices comprise only about 15% of the problem, and trade isn't one of his top three priorities. And Gov. Dukakis thinks some industries need temporary protection from import problems.    Gov. Dukakis is depicted as the liberal in the race and Congressman Gephardt as the favorite of more conservative Southerners. But Gov. Dukakis has been a tight-fisted penny pincher who restored Massachusetts' fiscal health while Rep. Gephardt spearheaded the effort in Congress to allocate considerably more spending on social programs despite the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction measure.    To be sure, the two contenders have their unique problems. Some see Mr. Gephardt as pandering to special interests, especially on trade and agriculture. Mr. Dukakis is faulted for being too liberal on foreign policy. He insists he's no dove but criticizes practically every weapon system and, when asked where he'd commit U.S. forces in the world, falls back on stressing multilateral action.    And both candidates, in not-so-subtle digs at each other, emphasize their own experience. &quot;You can bounce around a little as a legislator. You can't as a chief executive,&quot; says Gov. Dukakis. &quot;If you're the president, you've got to make decisions and stick with them.&quot; Counters Rep. Gephardt: &quot;I have a national perspective, he (Gov. Dukakis) has a regional or state perspective.&quot;    But this is hardly the stuff of a great chasm. Columnist and former political strategist Mark Shields once categorized politicians into two groups: catholics and protestants. It has nothing to do with religion. Political catholics exude passion and intensity; Hubert Humphrey and Jack Kemp, both religious Protestants, would be catholic politicians. Political protestants are more controlled and cool; Edmund Muskie and former conservative GOP Sen. James Buckley, both religious Catholics, would be protestant politicians.    Dick Gephardt is a Baptist married to a Roman Catholic, while Mike Dukakis is a Greek Orthodox with a Jewish wife. As politicians, however, both men are decidedly protestants. </TEXT></DOC>