<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0059 </DOCNO><HL> ---Too Many Snap Decisions?---By Jonathan Dahl and Cynthia F. MitchellStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   As two dozen lawyers wrangled over a small energy company's bankruptcy case last July, Judge LeRoy Smallenberger grew impatient.    Suddenly, the 73-year-old judge excused himself from his Shreveport, La., courtroom. When he returned a few minutes later, he stunned the assembled attorneys by announcing that he was moving up his retirement date and stepping down immediately. &quot;I just got kind of fed up and walked out,&quot; he recalls.    Mr. Smallenberger has since regretted his hasty retreat, but he isn't the only judge in the federal bankruptcy-court system who has become disgruntled. While most federal judges savor their positions, bankruptcy judges are resigning in record numbers, leaving behind a court that must scrape to find replacements.    The court has other problems as well. Its caseload, already the largest of any federal court, surged past 725,000 in the fiscal year ended June 30, more than double its size six years ago. By one estimate, the court's reach extends to more than $100 billion in corporate and individual assets and 35 million creditors. On top of that, critics are charging that the court is sometimes too cozy with law firms; one Chicago bankruptcy judge was even caught letting a firm ghostwrite some opinions.    &quot;No other court touches the nation's economy more, and yet it's the most neglected one of all,&quot; says Hal J. Bonney Jr., a past president of the National Conference of Bankruptcy Judges. Adds Richard W. Brunette Jr., a veteran bankruptcy lawyer in Los Angeles, &quot;You would think with the dollars involved, it would justify a better system.&quot;    Instead, the system is largely in the hands of young and inexperienced judges. Philadelphia's two bankruptcy judges must tackle 7,600 pending cases even though their combined experience on the bench totals less than six months. Some judges say the swelling caseload is straining the court's resources and pressuring them to make too many snap decisions. &quot;I feel like some meatball surgeon out there trying to administer justice,&quot; says Mississippi Bankruptcy Judge David Houston. &quot;You really can't give super-quality care.&quot;    The caseload is creating delays that are unusual even for the legal world. Houston's jammed docket, for example, forced Larry Berry's computer shop out of business. The 40-year-old Texan needed bankruptcy-court approval to spend certain funds but couldn't get a hearing for five months. &quot;By that time, we'd lost so much it didn't matter,&quot; he says.    Congress has tried to patch up the system. It passed a raft of amendments to the Bankruptcy Code in 1984 and recently authorized the addition of 52 judgeships. But bankruptcy lawyers say that too many of the amendments were special-interest provisions. And Congress didn't set aside financing for the new judgeships and probably won't until next year. &quot;I really don't think Congress has helped one bit,&quot; says Vern Countryman, a Harvard Law School professor who specializes in bankruptcy law. &quot;The whole system is getting to be quite a mess.&quot;    The court -- whose functions range from settling individuals' credit-card problems to arranging corporate liquidations -- isn't totally in a shambles. It disposed of more than 350,000 cases in the last fiscal year. But critics say that it can't do an adequate job with so many of its judges leaving. Since 1985, nearly a third of the nation's 232 bankruptcy judges have resigned or retired; only 7% of district- and appeals-court judges have quit or taken senior retirement status in the same period.    What's wrong with the job? Bankruptcy judges complain that it isn't nearly as prestigious as other federal judgeships. Unlike their district- and appeals-court brethren, who serve for life, bankruptcy judges serve 14-year terms. They are paid less money. And they are usually assigned shabby courtrooms or none at all. When Bankruptcy Judge Manuel D. Leal goes to Laredo, Texas, where hundreds of bankruptcy cases are pending, he sets up his courtroom in a jury deliberating room next to two bathrooms. &quot;People have come into my courtroom and all they want to use is the restroom,&quot; he says.    While bankruptcy judges may not get much respect on the bench, they are a hot commodity off it. With the bankruptcy-law business booming, many major law firms will pay former bankruptcy judges more than twice the judgeship's $68,400-a-year salary. A Texas firm offered one judge $250,000 a year, along with a $100,000 signing bonus.    The exodus has caused a revolving-door atmosphere in many cases; in New Mexico, six different judges have presided over a uranium company's case in the past five years. Elsewhere, bankruptcy benches are stacked with rookies. &quot;I still feel like I'm learning on the job,&quot; says Robert Kressel, whose four years on the bench qualify him as the most experienced bankruptcy judge in Minnesota. He admits that a judge with more experience would reach decisions faster and be less likely to make mistakes.    Tennessee Bankruptcy Judge George C. Paine II, who joined the bench in 1981 when he was 35 years old, is equally candid: &quot;I didn't reach my maximum efficiency for three or four years,&quot; he says. &quot;It's crazy to have people dealing with the matters we do at our age and experience level.&quot;    But it's very difficult to fill the bench's frequent vacancies. Even though the openings are advertised in newspapers and law journals, fewer than two dozen people typically apply, according to appeals-court judges, who appoint bankruptcy judges. In Chicago, a recent vacancy that was first announced last January is still unfilled. Some lawyers laugh at the suggestion that they become bankruptcy judges. &quot;Are you serious? There's absolutely no way. A first-year associate at a major firm makes as much,&quot; says Michael L. Cook, the head of the bankruptcy department for a New York law firm.    The court's caseload crunch makes things worse. A decade ago, the court was handling fewer than 200,000 new filings a year. But spiraling consumer debt and the energy and farming recessions have triggered a wave of new cases in the past few years. What's more, the revision of Chapter 11 in 1978 made turning to the court more attractive for large companies like Manville Corp. and Continental Airlines. Under Chapter 11, a company gets a federal court order that frees it from the threat of creditors' lawsuits until it can develop a plan to put its finances in order.    But the court's resources haven't come close to keeping up with its growth, and that is creating huge delays. In the district covering Los Angeles, for example, some bankruptcy-bound companies must wait half a year to get two-day trials. The bankruptcy bench there hasn't had a new judgeship since 1964, even though its caseload has tripled in the past six years alone. In Iowa, a new judge plans to hold court by telephone to catch up with the flood of farm bankruptcy proceedings.    Nowhere is a court more swamped than in Houston, the home of the energy bust and more than 20,000 pending bankruptcy cases. File and work space is so tight that the bankruptcy clerk's office expanded by jamming five desks into the reception area of the Tax Court. Judges from Mississippi and Louisiana fly in to help out. And on busy days, as many as 200 attorneys line the hallways of the federal courthouse's seventh floor, waiting to file bankruptcy cases.    More worrisome, the judges sometimes have to rule on more than 100 motions a day. While many of the matters are routine, Bankruptcy Judge R.F. Wheless Jr. admits that he sometimes can't do the research &quot;to satisfy myself that my legal rulings are on a sound basis.&quot;    For companies and people dealing with bankruptcy courts, the delays are maddening. Michael Naumes, a part owner of an Oregon orchard, has spent more than four years trying to resolve whether he or some banks are entitled to $120,000 from a canning company that filed for bankruptcy protection in 1982. More than three years passed before the dispute went to trial. Then, the 11-day hearing took five months to complete because it was scheduled piecemeal. Another five months passed before the judge finally ruled in favor of the banks. Now, Mr. Naumes is waiting for the results of an appeal. &quot;It's kind of ridiculous,&quot; he says of the bankruptcy court. &quot;It's just a place where attorneys make money. The people it's trying to serve don't get served.&quot;    Meanwhile, the court is facing a problem that has nagged it for years: cronyism. It doesn't pervade the system, but last year the number of formal complaints against bankruptcy judges doubled to 28. Lawyers and former judges point out that the bankruptcy law's specialized nature means that the same lawyers come before the same judges far more frequently than in most other courts. &quot;In a lot of respects, bankruptcy is an insider's game,&quot; says John Ayer, a former Los Angeles bankruptcy judge and now a professor at the University of California-Davis Law School.    International Harvester Co. found out how much of an insider's game it can be last year. The company, now called Navistar International Corp., had a $147 million claim against Wisconsin Steel Co. in a Chapter 11 case in Chicago. &quot;We kept losing in the case and wondering why,&quot; recalls Donald G. Kempf Jr., a lawyer for the company.    As it turned out, the judge in the case, Charles McCormick, had let Wisconsin Steel's law firm write four opinions without letting any other parties know it. The judge admitted this after the law firm, Nachman, Munitz andamp; Sweig, inadvertently disclosed one of the opinions before it was announced. (Judges may let law firms prepare opinions, but they must inform all parties in advance.) Mr. McCormick, who has since retired and couldn't be reached for comment, was removed from the case by a federal district judge and censured by the judicial council of the Seventh Circuit. Allan Sweig, a partner at the firm, declines comment but adds, &quot;I suggest you very carefully check everything you write.&quot;    Further suspicions about the bankruptcy bench were raised this fall. A judge in Houston who presided over Continental Airlines' Chapter 11 case joined the law firm that had represented the airline. The former judge, T. Glover Roberts, maintains that there is no conflict of interest, because he talked to the law firm about the job only after he had finished the case. But attorneys for 450 former airline pilots, who are appealing Continental's reorganization plan, are taking depositions focusing on the move.    &quot;Justice {Oliver Wendell} Holmes said you have to be not only above reproach but look like you're above reproach. That's not always the case with these bankruptcy judges,&quot; says Leon Marcus, a New York attorney who was involved in the Continental Airlines case.    In October, Congress moved to clean up the bench's reputation by adding independent court administrators known as U.S. trustees to more bankruptcy courts. But lawyers say that more conflict-of-interest questions are likely to come up as more bankruptcy judges take plum jobs in private practice.    Few observers are optimistic about the court's other problems. According to the Administrative Offices of the U.S. Courts, only half of the 50 bankruptcy judges whose terms expire by 1988 will return. The agency also predicts that the number of bankruptcy filings will rise 17% in the year ending Sept. 30, 1987.    &quot;There are a lot of people who really need a good bankruptcy court system,&quot; says Mr. Countryman, the Harvard professor. &quot;But the future isn't very encouraging.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>