<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880503-0113 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Gulf Policy Helps Saudis Shed Fear of Iran </HL><AUTHOR> Dilip Hiro </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, Iraq's closest allies on the Arabian Peninsula, are showing signs of growing confidence. Kuwait did this by refusing to negotiate with the hijackers of a Kuwait Airways jetliner, last month and securing the release of its passengers. More significant, however, was Saudi Arabia's decision last week to sever its links with Tehran. Since discretion and low-profile diplomacy have been Riyadh's watchwords in international relations, the action caused a flutter in diplomatic circles.    The Saudi decision was dramatic in another sense, too. As the custodian of Mecca and Medina, the birthplace and burial ground of Prophet Mohammad, Saudi Arabia has the duty to maintain relations with all Moslem countries. Islam requires its adherents to make the pilgrimage to these shrines -- called the hajj -- at least once in their lifetime.    The rioting in Mecca during last year's hajj cost 402 lives, most of them Iranian. Soon after that incident, which the Saudis allege was instigated by the Iranians, Riyadh tried unsuccessfully to get the six-member Gulf Cooperation Council to act in unison and cut ties with Iran.    This time Saudi Arabia has acted alone. Though its action stems specifically from the practicalities of the coming pilgrimage in July, it is intimately tied up with developments in the Gulf War and U.S.-Iran relations.    It took Riyadh several months to get over the shock of the Irangate affair, which came to light in November 1986. Even the arrival of the U.S. naval force to escort the reflagged Kuwaiti tankers last July did not fully convince the Saudis of America's commitment to an anti-Iranian tilt in the Gulf War. It has been their unstated fear that once Washington suffered human casualties in the Gulf it would cut and run -- just as it did in Lebanon in October 1983 -- leaving the Saudis and other Gulf monarchies exposed to the wrath of the vengeful Iranians.    The events of the past fortnight in the Gulf changed that perception. First, the Reagan administration reacted sharply to the damage caused by a mine to one of its warships by knocking out two Iranian oil rigs. Second, it responded to subsequent moves by Tehran with unexpected speed and clout, in the process damaging or sinking a half-dozen Iranian vessels. Third, and most important, the administration's actions received enthusiastic backing from both Congress and public opinion. Riyadh felt reassured of the American resolve to checkmate Iran militarily in the Gulf.    By severing its links with Tehran, Riyadh has endeared itself to Washington at a time when the White House's request for supplies of $850 million in weapons and spare parts to Saudi Arabia is pending before Congress. This step will more than neutralize the ill will the Saudis created in Washington by their acquisition of medium-range missiles from China.    In the ensuing controversy, many commentators overlooked the fact that the 1,600- to 2,000-mile range of the Chinese-made missiles makes Tehran and other Iranian cities vulnerable to Saudi strikes. The current confidence in Riyadh flows partly from this newly acquired capability. Should the Iran-Iraq War expand to include Saudi Arabia, the latter would have the capacity to hit Iranian targets from the safety of launching pads within its own territory.    Another factor contributing to Saudi assurance is the improved performance of its ally, Iraq, in the battlefield, as exemplified by Iraq's recovery of the Fao Peninsula, its first substantial success on land in six years. The situation is by no means all bleak for Iran, however. The Iraqi success was due mainly to the undermanning of the Fao Peninsula by Tehran, which recently has been concentrating its forces in the offensives in the Iraqi north, where it has succeeded in capturing a sizable area of Iraq. Also, Iraq has stopped firing its long-range missiles at Iranian cities. In addition, there has been a respite in the Iraqi attacks on the Iranian tankers in the Gulf for the past several weeks.    The Saudis have been careful not to allow their present buoyant mood to impinge on their Islamic duty to allow Molsems -- of whatever nationality -- to visit the holy shrines in Mecca and Medina. They are prepared to accept Iranian pilgrims according to a quota system they devised two months ago: 1,000 pilgrims per million people. This would mean 45,000 Iranians in comparison with the 155,000 who were allowed in last year. The Saudis seem determined to show Iran and the rest of the Moslem world that they are in charge and will brook no outside interference in this matter.    Not surprisingly, Tehran has rejected the Saudi offer. It probably will couple its vocal protest with a campaign in the Moslem world to place the holy shrines under the custody of an international Islamic body -- a campaign that isn't likely to capture popular imaginations in Moslem countries. Meanwhile, Iran can only feel more isolated than it did last year, particularly in the community of Moslem nations, something that matters a great deal to the clerics in Iran.    In a larger context, however, Tehran, too, has won something substantial in recent weeks. The U.S. attacks on its naval vessels sunk any chance of the United Nations Security Council imposing an arms embargo against Iran. Both the Soviet Union and China condemned the U.S. action, and without their cooperation there can be no military sanctions against Tehran.    ---   Mr. Hiro, a London-based journalist, is author of &quot;Islamic Fundamentalism,&quot; to be published next week by Grafton. </TEXT></DOC>