<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. INTENDS to protect Kuwaiti ships despite Iraq's attack on a frigate.    As the death toll from Sunday's missile strike on the USS Stark rose to 37, Assistant Secretary of State Murphy said the administration would follow through on its agreement with Kuwait to register 11 tankers under the U.S. flag. He said the first of the Kuwaiti tankers would be ready to sail in the Persian Gulf within a few weeks. Meanwhile, the Navy established a board of inquiry to investigate the Iraqi assault. A central purpose will be to learn why the frigate didn't activate its defensive systems to thwart the attack.    The commander of the Navy's Mideast task force said the Stark didn't have clear reason to assume it was under attack until the Iraqi jet fired at least one missile toward the vessel.    ---   The Senate confirmed William Webster as director of the CIA. The FBI chief succeeds William Casey, who died earlier this month. The Senate voted 94-1 to approve Webster, who is expected to try to repair the CIA's ties with lawmakers in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal.    ---   Conservative activist Owen told congressional Iran-Contra panels that Reagan aides gave him a contract to help provide &quot;nonlethal&quot; aid to Nicaragua's rebels. At the same time, he said he continued to work for a covert network shipping arms to the Contras. Owen also said North was in contact with the CIA's Casey.    ---   The House rebuffed Reagan's objections and approved an arms-control proposal to ban tests of anti-satellite weapons. It also cleared a proposal to halt most tests of U.S. nuclear weapons and a provision barring the U.S. from removing its chemical weapons from Europe until at least one NATO country agrees to accept new chemical arms.    ---   Fiji's deposed premier was freed unharmed by his military captors and pledged to regain control of the Suva government from the soldiers who overthrew the ethnic Indian-dominated regime last week. The prime minister's release came as the South Pacific nation's governor-general dissolved Parliament and called for new elections.    ---   President Botha pledged to continue South Africa's crackdown on unrest, saying Pretoria would continue enforcing laws governing where racial groups may live. In a speech opening a session of the new parliament, Botha didn't offer any prospect of easing apartheid, or issue any proposal for negotiations with black leaders.    ---   Soviet leader Gorbachev said Moscow would agree to remove all its medium-range nuclear missiles from Asia if the U.S. withdrew such weapons from Japan, South Korea and the Philippines. Gorbachev's remarks were made at a dinner for Vietnamese leader Nguyen Van Linh, who is in Moscow seeking economic aid for Hanoi.    ---   Britain's Labor Party unveiled a platform for the June 11 general elections calling for a cut in unemployment by generating new public and private-sector jobs. Thatcher's Tory manifesto pledged to cut the basic income tax and continue a denationalization program.    ---   Wilson Goode won the Democratic mayoral primary in Philadelphia, defeating two challengers. Former Mayor Frank Rizzo, who was defeated by Goode in the primary four years ago, easily beat a Republican opponent to take the GOP nomination. The general election will be in November.    ---   A gunman was arrested by police in Lyon, France, after he slipped into St. Joseph's Prison in a bid to assassinate former Gestapo officer Klaus Barbie, who is on trial for crimes against humanity. The 43-year-old man told guards that he was a doctor. A search produced a loaded revolver.    ---   A U.S. judge in San Francisco ordered a trial to determine whether California has underpaid as many as 200,000 current and past employees in jobs performed predominantly by women. The judge said information indicated that some sex-based factors were considered when the state's wage system was established in the 1930s.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres decided to continue to support the country's divided coalition government. The move apparently resulted from the inability of Peres's Labor Party, in a dispute with the Likud bloc over a Mideast peace parley, to gain a parliamentary majority to topple the 32-month-old government and force early elections.    ---   Australia severed diplomatic relations with Libya and ordered the explusion of all Libyan diplomats because of what Prime Minister Hawke called increased covert activities by Tripoli in the South Pacific. Hawke said Libyan diplomats were given 10 days to leave the country.    ---   South Korean prosecutors served summonses on five leaders of the opposition Reunification Democratic Party, which is seeking sweeping political changes. The move, an effort to question the officials about their support for ties with communist North Korea, was viewed as part of President Chun's continuing crackdown on dissent.    ---   Malaysia's prime minister appointed his supporters to cabinet posts in a move that replaced those who opposed his reelection last month as president of the country's most powerful party. The realignment, announced Tuesday, indicated that Mahathir intends to isolate party opponents from the Kuala Lumpur government.    ---   A federal court jury convicted two lovers who fled a federal prison near San Francisco last November on charges stemming from their daylight escape. Each faces as long as 25 years in prison. </TEXT></DOC>