<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880726-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Conventions Still Our Grandest Hurrah </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   For the citizen of the United States, Alexis de Tocqueville wrote a century and a half ago, politics is the &quot;biggest concern and, so to speak, the only pleasure an American knows. . . . Even the women frequently attend public meetings and listen to political harangues as a recreation from their household labors.&quot; What has happened to this traditional, this legendary, national obsession?    I may as well confess that I am one of those Americans who still loves politics. Little seems to me more fun, more compact of humor, hope, anguish and suspense, than a political campaign or a presidential nominating convention. The drama of the roll call abides for me, even when the result is preordained.    I sat transfixed before my television set the other night as the procession of states declared their votes. One rejoiced in the heterogeneous republic now focused for a moment on that single end, the nomination of a presidential candidate. One reveled in the marvelous diversity of types, names, faces, accents, colors, costumes, egos, in the avowals of local pride (&quot;speaking for the great state of . . .&quot;) and in the profusion of local blurbs.    As I was delighting in the lovely pageantry of it all, I turned to my dearest companion, who observed lightly before going to sleep, &quot;It's all fake, isn't it? Everyone knows how it's going to turn out.&quot; Well, yes; but everyone knows how Hamlet is going to turn out, too, and this does not interfere with one's absorption in the play.    I turned next morning to another friend with whom I had gone to Democratic conventions in the past and suggested that she join us the following night to hear the acceptance speeches. She said how sorry she was, but she was going to the theater. The theater? What better theater than a presidential nominating convention!    Of course, conventions, like everything else, ain't what they used to be. There was a time when conventions really decided nominations. The last time that happened was in 1952. In the blessed old days, conventions were rich and uninhibited spectacles. No one attended them with greater relish than H.L. Mencken.    &quot;It is instructive to observe these great men,&quot; Mencken once wrote, &quot;at the solemn business of selecting a First Chief for the greatest free Republic ever seen on earth. One hears, in their speeches, such imbecilities as even a Methodist conference could not match. One sees them at close range, sweating, belching, munching peanuts, chasing fleas. They parade idiotically, carrying dingy flags and macerating one another's corns. They devour hot dogs. They rush out to the speakeasies. They rush back to yell, fume and vote.&quot;    Those were the days. Television, alas, has tamed the convention save in times of extreme stress, as in Chicago in 1968. It has done so by opening up the political process and giving voters new convictions of entitlement. Television has nourished the primaries, thereby transferring the nomination from the delegates in the hall to the voters in the states. The convention, once a forum of decision, is now a ceremony of ratification.    TV, moreover, has disciplined the convention. It has imposed a rigid four-day format on the once sprawling conclaves of American democracy. Within those four days, it has further imposed the clamp of prime time. Convention managers expend less worry on the candidates and platform than they do on the TV clock.    Yet conventions retain a definite utility. Even if they no longer decide the nominations, even if they are usually prim and constrained compared with their gaudy past, they still offer the political parties their only times of communion, their great chance to reaffirm identity.    Delegates assemble from across the country -- these days, from around the world. They resume old friendships and make new ones. They chat in the corridors and the bars. They exchange experiences and ideas. They learn about the concerns and problems of other parts of this multifarious nation. They depart with a feeling that they belong to a larger body dedicated in some sense, however vague, to a common purpose. Our parties are already on the ropes. Without the quadrennial conventions they would be nothing at all.    Why then the current view that politics is boring? There is nothing new, of course, in condescension toward politics: recall Mencken. But Mencken did not find politics boring: only absurd. The charge of boredom is rather novel in relation to the sublime pastime that Tocqueville once regarded as the only pleasure an American knows.    Yet that charge is heard these days on every side. Last spring we went through all that talk about the seven dwarfs, and we can look forward this summer to talk about what bores Gov. Michael Dukakis and Vice President George Bush are.    In fact, all the candidates for the nomination in both parties (Pat Robertson excepted) are arguably better qualified for the White House than the president the republic has endured for the past eight years. And the survivors, Messrs. Dukakis and Bush, are both intelligent fellows with authentic commitments to public service. We will soon see them exposed to what our presidential elections do rather well -- the test of character under pressure.    I have no doubt the voters will find the confrontation increasingly interesting -- even, dare I say, dramatic? -- as the campaign presses on. Disdain is hardly useful when the presidency of the republic is at stake.    &quot;It is the fashion among dillettants and fops (perhaps I myself am not guiltless,),&quot; wrote Walt Whitman a century ago, &quot;to decry the whole formulation of the active politics of America, as beyond redemption, and to be carefully kept away from. See you that you do not fall into this error. America, it may be, is doing very well upon the whole, notwithstanding these antics of the parties and their leaders, these half-brain'd nominees, and many ignorant ballots, and many elected failures and blatherers. It is the dillettants, and all who shirk their duty, who are not doing well. As for you, I advise you to enter more strongly yet into politics. . . . Always inform yourself; always do the best you can; always vote.&quot;    Right on, barbaric yawper over the roofs of the world! Politics after all determines our future and must not be left to chance. The early 19th-century French author and diplomat Joseph De Maistre said that a people gets the government it deserves. But political participation should not be simply a matter of stern duty, a response to the promptings of conscience. Politics is fun -- or so it used to seem to Americans. What more entertaining human spectacle can one imagine than aspiring men and women employing words to vie for power!    A true American genius, Ralph Waldo Emerson said long ago, would see &quot;in the barbarism and materialism of the times, another carnival of the same gods whose picture he so much admires in Homer; then in the middle ages; then in Calvinism. Banks and tariffs, the newspaper and caucus . . . are flat and dull to dull people, but rest on the same foundations of wonder as the town of Troy, and the temple of Delphos.&quot;    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>