<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CHUN FAILED to resolve differences in talks with dissident Kim Young Sam.    While the South Korean president agreed to reopen debate on whether South Korea should elect a president by direct vote or adopt the parliamentary system, Kim rejected deliberations in the National Assembly as fruitless and called for a referendum. Kim also warned Chun to refrain from using military force to quell often violent anti-government protests that have occurred almost daily since June 10. After the meeting, a coalition of religious and opposition groups said it planned to proceed with a &quot;grand march&quot; tomorrow.    The Seoul government lifted its house arrest against leading political dissident Kim Dae Jung, but rejected demands for the restoration of his civil rights.    ---   AN EX-CIA COUNSEL SAID legal concerns altered the Iran-Contra initiative.    In testimony before the congressional inquiry into the affair, Stanley Sporkin described legal analyses within the Reagan administration that indicated the early Iran arms initiative conflicted with provisions of the Arms Export Control Act. The CIA's former chief counsel, currently a federal judge, said the legal concerns forced a revamping in January 1986 of the program, which had involved sales of Israeli stocks of U.S. arms to Tehran.    The House and Senate committees said they expect to begin closed-door questioning of North next week, and that he will begin public testimony July 7.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT SAID religious groups can restrict hiring based on faith.    In a unanimous ruling, the justices upheld a federal law allowing religious organizations engaged in nonprofit activities to limit hiring to people of their own faith. The court ruled that the Constitution isn't violated by exempting such groups from the federal law that bars bias in employment based on religion. The decision gives religious groups the flexibility to establish their own hiring criteria.    The court ruled that the free-speech rights of a worker in Houston were violated when she was fired for expressing hope that Reagan would be killed.    ---   Kidnappers in Lebanon freed the defense minister's son and his driver after a week in captivity, but continued to hold American journalist Charles Glass, who was abducted with them. The release came a day after Syrian occupation forces in Beirut's Moslem sector threatened to take unspecified steps against the suspected kidnappers.    ---   Iran rebuffed a new U.N. cease-fire proposal to end the war with Iraq as three U.S. warships sailed through the Suez Canal en route to the Persian Gulf to escort Kuwaiti tankers. In the gulf, a Turkish vessel was hit by an Iraqi missile and set ablaze. At least seven crew members were injured.    ---   Waldheim arrived in Rome for an audience today with Pope John Paul II amid mounting protests against the Austrian president's alleged complicity in Nazi war crimes. Italian police detained five demonstrators, including a New York rabbi and French Nazi hunter Beate Klarsfeld.    ---   The White House said that while it was disappointed West Germany won't extradite to the U.S. a suspect in a 1985 TWA hijacking, it is satisfied that Mohammed Ali Hamadi will be &quot;prosecuted to the full measure of the law.&quot; Bonn formally rejected the U.S. extradition request, but Hamadi is expected to face charges of air piracy and murder.    ---   A U.S. jury in Minneapolis convicted a prison inmate on two counts of assault with a deadly weapon for biting two guards with the intent of giving them AIDS. Separately, the VA said its doctors are &quot;strongly opposed&quot; to mandatory AIDS testing of patients and health-care workers.    ---   Bombs exploded at 15 offices of Argentine President Alfonsin's Radical Party, hours after courts lifted charges against 48 military officers accused of human-rights abuses during the 1976-83 military rule. Heavy damage was reported at some of the sites. Responsibility wasn't claimed.    ---   Hungary's Central Committee named Karoly Grosz as premier, and appointed the panel's secretary, Janos Berecz, to the ruling Politburo. Both men, considered pragmatists, are viewed as potential successors to veteran leader Janos Kadar. Additional changes in party and government posts are expected, sources in Budapest said.    ---   Reagan is scheduled to undergo a colon examination tomorrow at the White House as a follow-up to his July 1985 cancer surgery. A statement described the regular semiannual checkup as &quot;routine.&quot;    ---   A South African court ordered a white town council in Lawaaikamp to rebuild two black shanty homes, saying they had been demolished illegally. The ruling by the Cape Town court was hailed by civil rights workers as a breakthrough for squatters.    ---   Died: Jackie Gleason, 71, actor and comedian, in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., of cancer. . . . Jacob Sapirstein, 102, founder of American Greetings Corp., in Cleveland. </TEXT></DOC>