<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880818-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Boeing, McDonnell Compete to Sell Jets To Delta in Potential $6 Billion Order </HL><AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> UTX BA MD DAL GE EUROP </CO><IN> AIR ARO </IN><TEXT>   A fierce competition between Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. is raging over a Delta Air Lines jetliner order that aerospace industry executives believe could be valued as high as $6 billion.    If completed in the next few weeks, as some expect, the sale would be another in a series of blockbuster orders this year -- and possibly the biggest aircraft buy ever. The shape of the order also could have a major effect on the future directions at one or both of the nation's two big aircraft makers.    The transaction is expected to include 30 to 40 jumbo jets and 70 to 100 smaller twin-jet models, but analysts said the order would be valued at more than $4.5 billion even if traditionally conservative Delta decides to hold it at the low end of the range. Most of the orders would take the form of options on aircraft, with deliveries spread over the next several years, the industry executives said.    It was considered unlikely, though possible, that Delta would split its order between the two aerospace concerns. Generally, an airline gets better terms when it negotiates with one supplier.    Spokesmen for Seattle-based Boeing and St. Louis-based McDonnell declined to comment. A Delta spokesman would say only that the company's board was briefed recently on &quot;how the selection process is coming.&quot;    In the competition to sell short-range models, both concerns have been talking to Delta about their designs for aircraft powered by the propfan, a fuel-efficient hybrid of conventional turbofan engines and propeller technology. Delta has already expressed interest in McDonnell's version. When the Atlanta-based carrier placed 80 orders and options for the 142-seat MD-88 two years ago, executives said they might eventually replace existing engines on some of those planes with propfans when the new engine design receives government certification for service in the early 1990s.    In fighting for the current order, McDonnell's salesmen have tried to expand Delta's interest by offering the airline a two-step sale of 100 additional MD-88s, in addition to a package of MD-11 jumbo jets, the industry executives said. Delta would fly some of the narrow-body MD-88s as replacement aircraft for aging twin-jet models, while others would be used for an aggressive expansion plan that includes hundreds of additional routes.    In the near term, a portion of the jetliners would be delivered with conventional engines. When the high-tech propfan engine model is ready for service, McDonnell would retrofit Delta's MD-88 fleet with the new engines and deliver any planes remaining in the order with propfan engines installed. Delta would have the option of converting some of its MD-88s to a longer version of the plane, the 165-seat MD-92.    Boeing salesmen, industry executives said, have countered this attractive offer with a proposal that Delta choose their 145-seat 737-400 model, which is available only with conventional engines. But sometime in 1995 or thereafter, when an entirely new propfan-powered plane -- now on the drawing boards -- is in production, Boeing would take the 737s back on generous trade-in terms and replace them with the new jetliners. Boeing, the executives said, is eager for a big 737 order to justify increasing its monthly 737 production rate to 17 from the current 14.    For engines on either the Boeing or McDonnell versions of a propfan, Fairfield, Conn.-based General Electric Co. would probably get Delta's business. Development of the GE propfan, which is fitted on McDonnell's test plane, is estimated to be two years ahead of a competing model under way at the Pratt andamp; Whitney unit of Hartford, Conn.-based United Technologies Corp. Engines for either the 747 or the MD-11 are available from GE, Pratt andamp; Whitney and Rolls-Royce PLC, a London-based maker of aircraft engines.    Currently, only a GE consortium with Snecma, a French aerospace concern, has provided engines for the 737-400, while Pratt alone has produced MD-88 engines.    Airbus Industrie, the European aircraft consortium based in Toulouse, France, was considered an early favorite for cinching the Delta order. But Delta executives were sufficiently concerned about the political aspects of buying from Airbus -- against which the U.S. government has considered trade sanctions -- that they have ruled out the consortium's equipment, industry executives said. Another reason for rejecting Airbus appears to have been timing. Airbus's new A-330/A-340 jumbo jet program still is several years from a maiden flight, while Airbus's smaller A-320 twin-jet is so solidly booked that Delta would have a long wait until deliveries could begin.    In the competition for Delta's business, a Boeing victory might reawaken the aerospace giant's $3 billion propfan development program, which was put on the back burner last year after Boeing failed to receive any orders. Boeing's planned propfan aircraft was known as the 7J7, but it would eventually receive one of Boeing's traditional three-number designations.    Should McDonnell win, that smaller aircraft maker could gain at least a two-year edge over Boeing in the market for the advanced propfan. &quot;It would put everyone on notice that (McDonnell) Douglas has a hot commodity and they are two years ahead of anyone else in the business,&quot; said Paul Nisbet, an aerospace analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities. &quot;That would cause Boeing to finally move on the 7J7 and stop dragging its feet.&quot;    Since McDonnell began marketing its propfan model this spring, its executives have been counting on the order from Delta. When a flight demonstration of a propfan-equipped test aircraft for Delta executives was canceled because of bad weather, &quot;there were a lot of long faces around here,&quot; said an executive at McDonnell's jetliner operations in Long Beach, Calif. The flight took place a few weeks later. &quot;They liked it very much,&quot; the executive said.    McDonnell's new MD-11 program also would get a needed boost from the Delta order. McDonnell executives have said for at least two years that they expect Delta to order the plane, which seats between 276 and 405 passengers, to replace its aging fleet of L-1011 jumbo jets and the DC-10 jumbos acquired in its 1986 purchase of Western Airlines. The MD-11 hasn't sold as well as McDonnell hoped, attracting so far only 40 firm orders and 94 conditional orders. A Delta order would make it the MD-11's first big U.S. customer. The planes would probably fly on long international routes such as Atlanta-Portland-Seoul.    But Boeing, eager to place its 450-seat 747-400 jumbo jet in Delta's fleet for the first time, is aggressively pricing its package, the industry executives said. The Boeing proposal, they said, includes a combination of the 260-seat 767 for domestic and European routes and the 747 for expansion of Delta's routes across the Pacific, which eventually could include a direct Atlanta-Tokyo route.    The sale also would have symbolic meaning to Boeing, which was rebuffed by Delta two years ago in a hotly contested order for $2 billion of twin-jets. Delta chose McDonnell planes amid complaints from the airline's executives that Boeing wasn't fixing problems with its aircraft quickly enough. &quot;You can bet they're sweating like crazy up here over that order,&quot; a Boeing executive said. </TEXT></DOC>