<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881108-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Illusionary Prosperity in Zimbabwe </HL><AUTHOR> Tony Hawkins </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><DATELINE> HARARE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Eight years after independence, Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe is under pressure from both left and right to make tough economic-policy choices. While Zimbabwe, which ranks as one of Sub-Saharan Africa's most prosperous economies, has performed better than most African countries during the 1980s, its economic growth rate of just over 3% has barely kept ahead of population growth while failing to meet the optimistic forecasts made at independence in April 1980.    The reasons include a sluggish world economy and depressed primary product prices, four drought seasons, and regional political and economic uncertainties largely attributable to South Africa's destabilization policies. Given these circumstances, real growth of 3% annually is a solid achievement, but it has depended to an unsustainable degree on high levels of public spending, especially on education and public administration, the source of more than half the post-independence growth, while agriculture and mining between them have accounted for little more than 5% and manufacturing 20%, most of which took place in 1980-81. Excessive levels of public spending have given rise to a budget deficit averaging more than 9% of gross national product in recent years, resulting in a rapidly growing public debt, currently estimated at 75% of GNP.    Although the pace and pattern of growth have been disappointing, there have been notable successes. Perhaps most striking is the growth of school enrollments from 900,000 in 1979 to 2.9 million last year; still more impressive is the expansion of secondary education from a mere 75,000 a decade ago to 650,000 today. Also, peasant farmers have trebled their share of total marketed production from 6% in 1979 to 18%.    External financial management has been sound -- if conservative. Zimbabwe's foreign debt was less than $400 million at independence, and authorities borrowed heavily in 1981-82 to raise import levels and re-equip the infrastructure that had run down because of sanctions and the liberation war in the late 1970s. But Zimbabwe did not overborrow, and its present foreign debt of some $2.5 billion is modest by Third World standards. However, because repayment maturities are bunched during the 1986-1990 period, stringent import and exchange controls have been necessary to finance the debt service burden that peaked last year at about 35% of exports.    The debt squeeze has been exacerbated by the failure of exports to grow at the rate necessary to sustain the 5% target rate of economic growth stipulated in the 1986-90 development plan. Indeed, calculated in Special Drawing Rights, exports last year were about 5% below their 1982 peak. While the current account of the balance of payments has improved dramatically from a deficit of more than $600 million in 1982 to a small surplus of $50 million last year, this has been achieved mainly by curbing imports and putting a ceiling on the profit and dividend remittances of foreign-owned companies.    Import compression has curbed investment: Manufacturing is operating at 75% of capacity because it cannot get the necessary imported inputs; the transport sector is in severe crisis, with half the railway locomotives out of action due to the spares shortage; the situation is even worse in the commuter bus industry.    Although Zimbabwe is committed to the eventual imposition of economic sanctions against South Africa, thousands of black Zimbabweans cross the southern border each month to purchase goods in short supply at home.    Such shortages are not the most serious problem facing President Mugabe. Far more critical, if less immediate, is the rapidly worsening unemployment crisis -- the reverse side to the school-enrollment coin. Unemployment has trebled since 1980 and currently stands at 900,000, or about one quarter of the work force. By conservative estimates, unemployment will double again in the next five years by which time one person in three will be without work. Accordingly, it is essential to step up the rate of economic growth -- with an emphasis on labor-intensive activities in both the formal and informal sectors of the economy.    But this cannot and will not happen without an easing of the balance-of-payments constraint on the one hand and a revival in investment activity on the other. At present, investment is being undermined partly by the foreign-exchange crisis but also by price controls and labor regulations that have deterred entrepreneurs from expanding capacity.    President Mugabe's socialist administration is reluctant to swallow the structural-adjustment pill recommended by the World Bank and IMF not least because the greater recognition of market forces that such a program implies flies in the face of the Zimbabwe government's commitment to more state intervention and control. When other Third World countries -- often reluctantly -- are deregulating, liberalizing and privatizing their economies, Zimbabwe is still going the opposite way, establishing new parastatals and new interlocking, and even duplicative, state organizations to manage the economy.    Despite this, Mr. Mugabe's critics on the left -- students, intellectuals and labor unions -- accuse him of moving too slowly along the road to socialism. But for the business community, at home and abroad, for donors and international bankers, the priority is to bite the bullet of economic reform before the situation deteriorates to the point where even tougher and more unpalatable measures become necessary.    This year the economy is rebounding from 1987's severe drought. Good rains and buoyant prices for tobacco, the country's top export, and base metals will ensure growth of more than 5%, but already there are ominous signs the recovery is losing momentum, primarily because imported inputs aren't available. Zimbabwe needs a range of policy reforms across a broad front, slashing the budget deficit, decontrolling prices and interest rates, liberalizing imports, reducing bureaucratic controls in the labor market and encouraging new investment by private entrepreneurs, foreign as well as domestic.    But there is formidable ideological opposition to such reform, not least because the necessary cuts in public spending would be very unpopular politically. The government faces an uneviable choice: unpopularity now in response to structural-adjustment policies but with the hope that output and employment will grow faster in the 1990s as a result, or the risk of mounting social and political instability as unemployment escalates. History tells us that, ultimately, the left could well both delay and dilute the necessary changes, and like so many other African governments before it, Zimbabwe runs the risk of falling between two stools.    ---   Mr. Hawkins is Professor of Business Studies and Director of the MBA Program at the University of Zimbabwe. </TEXT></DOC>