<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871214-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Labor Lending:How a Union SurvivesIn Banking by PushingServices Over Profits---Amalgamated Bank PitchesFree Checking and ShunsRisk, Then Needles Rivals---Slow Dance in the Conga Line---By Robert L. RoseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Amalgamated Bank of New York introduced a free checking account last fall, it wasn't content to quietly inform its customers. The bank bought an ad opposite the editorial page in the New York Times and asked: &quot;Why is free checking only for those who can afford to pay for it?&quot;    The bank's inclination to tweak its big corporate rivals isn't surprising. Amalgamated is a union bank, founded in 1923 by the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and still owned by the 284,000 members of its successor, the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers.    Heralded as the wave of the future by labor leaders earlier in the century, labor banking was a flop. Out of some 36 labor banks founded in the 1920s, only Amalgamated in New York and Brotherhood Bank andamp; Trust in Kansas City, Kan., survive as labor-owned institutions.    Now, with some labor experts predicting a comeback in union membership and influence, Amalgamated provides one of the oldest examples of a kind of labor-owned business that may multiply. In the past several years, about half a dozen new labor banks have opened, and more are on the way. Like the clothing workers who started Amalgamated, other unions see a chance to own a bank friendly to their members' needs and find new investment outlets for their growing assets.    Amalgamated survived largely because its union owner insisted on conservative banking and professional management. In contrast, the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers set up banks across the country during the 1920s and quickly branched into securities and even Florida land development. Losses piled up, and the union eventually charged four of its officers with mishandling funds. By 1931, the engineers were out of the banking business.    Amalgamated has also benefited from being something of a rogue bank, loudly touting a consumer ethic and often de-emphasizing profits in favor of services. Its free checking account is only the latest evidence: Amalgamated claims to have pioneered the unsecured installment loan in the 1920s, lending money to borrowers with no collateral but a steady job. Three times a survey has named it the top bank for consumers in New York City. &quot;They give me the best treatment,&quot; says Mike Garcia, an officer of the Leather Goods, Plastic and Novelty Workers' Union, who says he banks at Amalgamated because of its labor roots.    Amalgamated has reported 44 consecutive years of profit and has grown to $1.47 billion in assets by serving two overlapping constituencies: middle-class consumers and organized labor. Now, the union-owned bank is exploring other ways to use its labor ties and financial muscle to expand in new areas.    Earlier this year, Amalgamated teamed up with Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. in a proposal to offer a comprehensive money-management program for the AFL-CIO's 14.5 million members. On a smaller but no less innovative scale, Amalgamated is helping three New York locals of the Bridge, Structural and Ornamental Iron Workers union use some of their pension money to finance below-market, no-points home mortgages for their members. The bank is considering expanding the service to other unions, many of which have retirement trust funds under Amalgamated's care.    The recent mini-resurgence of labor banking is led by unions in the construction trades. Massachusetts members of the carpenters' union opened a Boston bank in September, and California carpenters plan to open a separate institution next year. Two-year-old Union Savings Bank in Albuquerque, N.M., another construction-trades bank, uses its $10 million in assets for loans to small businesses and other customers.    &quot;I think there's been a realization that we should be generating jobs with our own money wherever possible,&quot; says Anthony Ramos, the retired former leader of the California State Council of Carpenters.    Amalgamated's loud voice on consumer issues is partly a marketing ploy to set itself apart from the pack. As other banks cater to big depositors and raise fees for small accounts, Amalgamated promotes treats for the little guy, such as its free checking and low-interest personal loans.    Highly conscious of its labor roots, Amalgamated also likes to take shots at the establishment banks. In one of its radio commercials, a stuffy banker tells a customer he needs a password to sit down. &quot;The name of any Ivy League school will do,&quot; says the banker. &quot;P.S. 188?&quot; asks the customer, naming the public school he attended. In other ads, comedians Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara imitate rank-and-filers with names like Rocco and Blanche, and pitch &quot;America's Labor Bank.&quot;    &quot;If we give {the industry} an uncomfortable feeling for a couple of hours, it will be worth it,&quot; concludes Edward M. Katz, Amalgamated's president and chief executive.    The bank's five-story brick headquarters, which it shares with its union owner, overlooks New York's Union Square, the site of labor and political rallies earlier in the century. Back in the old days, Amalgamated's services even included a travel agency and foreign-exchange desk for the immigrant population that dominated the clothing workers' union. Today, customers in open shirts and work boots outnumber those in business suits. Proclaims a plaque on the lobby wall: &quot;New York's First Labor Bank, dedicated to the service and advancement of the labor movement.&quot;    Mr. Katz, too, is quick to prove his allegiance. After ushering a visitor into his office, he flips open his suit jacket and proudly shows the union label. A soft-spoken man of 66 who started as a part-timer at the bank in 1946, Mr. Katz raises his voice when he talks about how small depositors have fared under banking deregulation. Not too well, he believes. &quot;When you have a special industry using Uncle Sam as an umbrella in times of difficulty, don't you owe something to the public?&quot; he asks. &quot;What would be so wrong with having an account on which you don't make money?&quot;    Amalgamated, though, is bucking a strong trend. A national survey conducted by the Consumer Federation of America and others found that fees for routine banking services are rising sharply for most depositors.    In some ways, Amalgamated has a lot less to offer those customers than its competitors. Small by big-bank standards, it doesn't generally offer credit cards or home mortgages. With only three branches and two newly opened automated teller machines, it lacks what many consumers want most: convenience. And in the ranks of big-league banks, Amalgamated is an also-ran, shunning such trends as interstate expansion and the hot competition for corporate loans.    &quot;I'm not conscious of their presence&quot; as a competitor, says Richard Ravitch, the chairman and chief executive of Bowery Savings Bank, which has about four times the assets and eight times the branches of Amalgamated. Contends another New York banking official: &quot;If they were the best, they'd be bigger.&quot;    But what Amalgamated does have, it pushes hard, especially its reputation as a low-cost consumer bank. Last year, when an annual survey by New York State Sen. Franz S. Leichter dropped Amalgamated to No. 11 from No. 1 as the least expensive bank for New York City consumers, Amalgamated officials phoned the legislator and angrily complained. (The bank is back up to No. 2 this year.) In 1985, the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York challenged Amalgamated's boast of having the lowest auto-loan rates of any bank in the city. But the bank quickly backed up the claim, the bureau says.    Amalgamated says its current 9.2% interest rate on new auto loans is still the best in the city. According to the Bank Rate Monitor, seven of the largest bank and thrift institutions in the New York City area charge an average of nearly 12.5%. On the deposit side, the bank's 6.25% annual yield on money-market accounts is a third of a point higher than the average paid by 10 big institutions tracked by the Monitor.    Amalgamated also pays interest and charges no fees on savings accounts with a $5 minimum. And it is not unusual for the bank to get thank-you notes from longtime customers surprised to find the bank honored their checks -- and charged no penalty -- on their overdrawn accounts.    Customers' main complaint centers on what bank employees call &quot;the conga line&quot; that often slowly snakes its way to 23 tellers in the lobby of the main office. Still, other factors outweigh the long waits, depositors say. Edward Soorko, for example, says he moved his account to Amalgamated after Citibank bounced a check for his son's tuition -- even though he covered the check with a deposit the same day.    Charles Nabelle, a dapper 82-year-old customer in a white hat and sports coat, walks 13 blocks to get to Amalgamated's Union Square office. There are plenty of closer banks, but he says he chose Amalgamated because he likes the personal attention he gets there. After cashing a $40 check, Mr. Nabelle offers a short lecture on the importance of shopping for bank services. &quot;A poor sucker will go for Chase Manhattan as opposed to Amalgamated because Chase or Citibank is an important bank,&quot; he says. &quot;That is unfortunate.&quot;    And perhaps costly. Sen. Leichter's latest survey found that a typical bank customer with $600 in checking and $1,000 in savings would earn $105 in a year at Amalgamated and lose $100 at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. Amalgamated, says Glenn von Nostitz, the legislative aide who oversees the survey, shows &quot;you can give people a break and still make money.&quot;    Not surprisingly, Amalgamated has kept a close relationship with organized labor. Unions account for up to two-thirds of its $1.1 billion in deposits, and its trust department holds an additional $3.2 billion in pension and health-and-welfare funds. Amalgamated manages $1.6 billion of the trust funds, shunning stocks and corporate bonds in favor of safer government securities.    In 1973, Amalgamated officials worked over a weekend to fill out hundreds of bail checks to keep striking Philadelphia teachers out of jail. Nine years later, when the National Football League Players Association ran out of money during its strike, it turned to Amalgamated for a $200,000 loan. The players' union didn't have an account with the bank at the time, but &quot;we did after that,&quot; says Ed Garvey, then the union's executive director.    Although neither the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers union nor the bank likes to admit it, the goal of giving consumers and unions a break often conflicts with the goal of making money. But Mr. Katz has the luxury of working for owners who aren't constantly pressing for higher profits. &quot;You make a little less,&quot; concedes Jack Sheinkman, the president of the union and chairman of the bank. &quot;Despite that, we've done very well in terms of our return on equity and on capital,&quot; which exceed the average for banks Amalgamated's size.    That attitude makes it easier for the bankers to concentrate on another priority of the union -- financial safety. The bank has few corporate customers and, as a matter of policy, turns down offers to participate with other banks in corporate lending. &quot;I don't want to rely on my big brothers&quot; to determine if a loan is safe, says Mr. Katz. Nor does he like to gamble on investments. Mr. Katz prefers buying U.S. government securities, and the shorter the maturity the better. &quot;All the money's tied up in cash,&quot; jokes Howard Lee, the executive vice president and cashier.    The result is steady, if not spectacular, profits. Last year, Amalgamated earned $12.2 million, sending $7 million of that in dividends to its union owners. Government bank examiners often do double takes when they pore over Amalgamated's books. Bad loans charged off in 1986: $195,000 out of $313.5 million, far below the average for banks its size. Auto loans delinquent 30 days or more at the end of November: 11 out of 13,044.    Says William A. Goldberg, who runs the bank's personal-loan department: &quot;We're here for the average guy -- so long as we are reasonably assured he'll pay us back.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>