<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870824-0007 </DOCNO><HL> ...and a Bipartisan Foreign Policy---By David Boren</HL><DD> 08/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The television crews have packed up and left, the special lighting has been taken down, the witness table has been removed and quiet stateliness once again has settled into the old Senate Caucus Room.    As the regular soap operas return to daytime television and coffee-shop talk turns to other subjects, will we have learned anything of lasting benefit from the months of sound and fury over the Iran-Contra affair?    A shocking picture has emerged of American foreign policy in alarming disarray. While the principal officers in our government were kept in the dark, their valuable expertise ignored, major decisions were made by private individuals, alleged profiteers, foreign nationals, and naive amateurs. Power was in essence stolen from the American people, as major decisions were made by non-elected bureaucrats instead of by the president whom the people had chosen to make those crucial judgments.    Congress itself came in for some justifiable criticism for failing to legislate clearly and for failing to understand that American foreign policy must have a higher level of consistency if it is to have credibility with the rest of the world.    When Congress reconvenes next month a torrent of recommendations is likely in reaction to these discoveries, including the re-drafting of laws and the establishment of new procedures for supervising covert actions in both branches of government. Some of these proposals will have merit and some will be adopted.    But these recommendations are likely to address, as did the hearings, only the symptoms of the underlying disease -- a disease that is destroying our country's ability to conduct foreign policy.    If the country is to benefit from the lessons of the hearings, we must address the fundamental problem of how we conduct our foreign policy: the collapse of a bipartisan partnership between the White House and Congress. This problem cannot be solved by merely writing more rules and regulations to deal with its symptoms. It will take more to rebuild the trust that must be restored between the two branches of government.    In parliamentary governments, there is no separation of powers when it comes to foreign policy. The prime minister and members of the cabinet who carry out foreign policy are also members of Parliament. Our system of checks and balances divides authority between the president as commander in chief and Congress, which must declare wars and appropriate funds to carry out foreign-policy directives. Under our system, unity in foreign policy can come only if those leading both branches understand their respective roles and work to achieve bipartisanship as such leaders as Dwight Eisenhower, Sam Rayburn and Arthur Vandenberg did.    The erosion of the concept of bipartisanship in foreign policy began during the Vietnam War. For two decades we have been in a cycle of escalating distrust between the executive and legislative branches.    The rest of the world has observed our disunity. Presidents can initiate policy actions, but they cannot sustain them without congressional support. The resulting &quot;start and stop&quot; foreign policy lacks consistency and is devoid of credibility. This paralyzing division within our own government has demoralized our allies and emboldened our enemies.    Recently, the president and the Senate Intelligence Committee reached a broad agreement in several key areas related to national-security oversight. This spirit of partnership in a highly sensitive area is a concrete demonstration of the desire of both the president and members of Congress for greater cooperation.    The willingness of House Speaker Jim Wright (D., Texas) and other congressional leaders to work to find common ground with the president on Central American policy is another encouraging sign.    If the gridlock continues despite these encouraging signs, however, it will cause us to miss opportunities for meaningful arms control, enhanced economic stability, and a consensus Central American policy that might stand a chance of surviving beyond January 1989, when a new president takes the oath of office.    It is critical to end the war between the two ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. The decisions the president and Congress make as the Iran-Contra hearings come to a close will have a profound influence on the future of the U.S. for decades to come. As I listened to the hearings, I said sadly to myself, &quot;How could we have become so divided when all of us in both branches of government are supposed to be serving the same cause and the same people?&quot;    The whole nation has now seen the effects of this debilitating division. We cannot afford to fritter away our limited influence in world affairs. It is time for all of us, Democrats and Republicans alike, to band together and insist that &quot;politics must stop at the water's edge.&quot; In foreign policy, America must once again speak to the rest of the world with a single voice.    ---   Sen. Boren (D., Okla.) is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee and a member of the Senate Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition.    (See related story: &quot;Toward Effective, Lawful Covert Actions...&quot; -- WSJ Aug. 24, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>