<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890824-0028 </DOCNO><DD> = 890824 </DD><AN> 890824-0028. </AN><HL> To Understand@  The Economy,@  Ignore Traders@  ----@  By Robert I. Webb </HL><DD> 08/24/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   When asked to explain why bond values rise or fall on any particular day, bond traders will often explain the market by offering their interpretations of the day's economic data. In contrast to investors, who make decisions based on the perceived underlying value of a security in the belief that price will eventually converge to true value, traders are primarily interested in anticipating short-term changes in price independent of the underlying value.    Bond traders care mostly about how new information will affect interest rates. Whether the traders' collective understanding of this new information is right or wrong doesn't really matter to them. Traders do not need to anticipate correctly what the economy is going to do over the next year -- they just need to know what their fellow-traders are doing that very second. If all the other market participants are reacting to the release of unexpected economic data in a certain way, then any individual trader must incorporate their behavior into his own decision-making process no matter how irrational it may seem to him to be.    But when traders' opinions on the workings of the economy are taken seriously by policymakers and the financial press, dangerous things can happen. Frankly, the bond traders' opinions have little or no value, except as insights into their curious macroeconomic beliefs and consequently as information about their likely behavior. There are several reasons for this.    First, the indicator that traders used last month as the key to all understanding is often as forgotten as bell-bottoms the next. Not long ago, the weekly money supply numbers were closely followed by traders. If M-1 did something unexpected, bond prices rallied or broke. But who cares about M-1 now? Not bond traders. During the last few years, the weekly release of money supply data has been a non-event. Sometimes traders jump when the durable goods orders numbers are released, sometimes they don't. If these numbers were once considered important, why are they ignored today? If these numbers never should have mattered, why were they once closely followed? During the past year and a half, bonds have supposedly traded off of changes in the price of: crude oil, stocks, the yen, soybeans and the CRB index futures contract, among others. There is always a plausible explanation for the linkage. It might be thought that changes in the price of some commodity, oil for example, or soybeans are proxies for inflation. Higher commodity prices are then treated as a warning that bond prices will soon tumble -- because traders still confuse changes in relative prices, which are not inflationary, with changes in absolute prices, which are.    Second, traders are no more consistent about the meaning of these numbers than they are about which numbers to follow. The monthly trade deficit number is still closely watched by traders. However, the meaning they attach to it has completely reversed itself. It used to be thought that a larger than expected trade deficit number was good for the bond market -- because slower export growth suggested that the economy was cooling. A weaker economy, in turn, meant lower interest rates and higher bond prices.    But now the opposite conclusion is just as often reached. A larger than expected trade deficit is now held to be bad for bonds because it implies an excess supply of dollars which should cause the price of the dollar to fall. A decline in the foreign-exchange value of the dollar causes a decline in the demand for dollar-denominated bonds by foreigners which, in turn, precipitates a fall in bond prices.    At other times, traders say they believe that a rise in interest rates -- which depresses bond prices -- might strengthen the dollar, by making investment in the U.S. more attractive to foreigners. And so, bonds could go down when the dollar is going up, too.    Third, even when consistent, traders can be wrong. Many of the macroeconomic beliefs of bond traders are discredited Keynesian notions. For instance, the idea that employment beyond some full employment level is inflationary is widely accepted among bond traders despite the lack of any real evidence for this proposition. In fact, this idea is simply another example of the confusion between changes in relative and absolute prices.    To the extent that there is a relationship between the strength of the economy and interest rates, the unemployment rate is probably a poor guide, especially when the incentives to participate in the labor force change due to tax rate cuts. During the Reagan years, there were many months where the unemployment rate did not move much but large numbers of new jobs were nevertheless created.    Fourth, the economic data released in most economic reports cover short periods of time, are preliminary, and often subject to substantial revision. Yet, more attention is typically paid to preliminary numbers than to the presumably more accurate revised numbers even when the revisions have been substantial.    Wrong macroeconomic beliefs don't prevent traders from making money -- John Maynard Keynes, after all, was a successful trader. He observed: &quot;Thus, the professional investor is forced to concern himself with the anticipation of impending changes, in the news or in the atmosphere, of the kind by which experience shows that the mass psychology of the market is most influenced. . . . The social object of skilled investment should be to defeat the dark forces of time and ignorance which envelop our future. The actual, private object of the most skilled investment today is 'to beat the gun,' as the Americans so well express it, to outwit the crowd, and to pass the bad or depreciating, half-crown to the other fellow.&quot;    ---   Mr. Webb, a former trader, is an associate professor of finance at the McIntire School of Commerce of the University of Virginia. </TEXT></DOC>