<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0087 </DOCNO><HL> Pivotal People:In the Computer Age,Certain Workers AreStill Vital to Success---Steelmaker, Pattern Cutter,Brewmaster andamp; Gas DrillerAll Have a Certain Knack---Shop Floor, not Board Room---By Seth H. LuboveStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG) </IN><DATELINE> ASHLAND, Ky.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Molten iron gushes from an opening at the base of one of Armco Inc.'s two massive blast furnaces here. John H. Scheel tracks the flaming red-orange liquid as it flows down a brick-lined path to a torpedo tank car, which carries it to the basic-oxygen furnace to be converted into steel.    &quot;A cast in a blast furnace is like a religious experience,&quot; declares Mr. Scheel, watching the iron with pride. As the plant's senior blast-furnace engineer, he must ensure that the raw materials -- iron ore, limestone and coke -- ultimately combine in the 25-story furnace at 3,700 degrees, where they are converted into iron, the basic ingredient of steel. Largely because of Mr. Scheel's efforts, the furnace's fuel costs have dropped 17% since 1982, while the cost of a ton of iron has fallen by more than one-fourth.    He is a pivotal worker. Even in an age of impersonal silicon chips and robotic arms, which have come to symbolize modern manufacturing, certain people with particular skills spell the success -- or failure -- of their employers, and not just in the steel industry.    As technology advances, the number of such vitally important workers dwindles. And the significance of such people often is overlooked. Neither executives nor artisans, pivotal personnel are more apt to be seen pacing a shop floor than a board room. Their knowledge often reflects experience, not education. Books don't necessarily impart the knack that makes for their success.    &quot;At any company, people will say that the chief executive and his management team are the most important, and they're important for some critical decisions,&quot; says Tsun-yan Hsieh, who has studied the role of pivotal jobs for McKinsey andamp; Co., the management-consulting firm. &quot;But once those decisions are made, the crucial part of accomplishing a project comes with the pivotal jobs.&quot;    They are a diverse lot: the steel-furnace engineer, mixing quality metal; the pattern maker at an apparel firm, converting rough designers' sketches into salable garments; the brewmaster, assuring that each brand of beer has its distinctive taste, and the chief gas-exploration driller, whose own internal divining rod determines where millions are spent seeking natural gas.    The Steelmaker   Armed with a shovel, John Scheel is banging away at a gummed-up ore dumper at the Armco sinter plant, which processes iron ore. The air is thick with fine red ore dust, and clouds of it swirl up each time he whacks the dumper. Soon he will be covered in the dust, which he will blow out of his nose for days because he won't wear a face mask.    This is an unlikely place for a 32-year-old, who, in addition to an engineering degree has an M.B.A. in finance and international business and fancies himself an amateur poet. &quot;With his background and ability, John could be working in several places other than a steel mill,&quot; says Glenn D. Easterling, one of Mr. Scheel's supervisors. &quot;He's not a normal steel man.&quot;    But his single-minded devotion to the blast furnace, named Amanda, enables him to make a difference in basic industry. Photographs of Amanda adorn the walls of his apartment and the local restaurant and bar he owns a stake in.    Some of that attachment goes back to 1963, when Mr. Scheel's father brought the family along for the summer while he helped build the furnace. Mr. Scheel's life revolves around its 24-hour cycle. He works at least 12-hour days but can often be found at the furnace at odd hours of the night; he was there at 2 a.m. last Christmas, for instance.    He likens his work to &quot;being an orchestra conductor.&quot; He is engrossed with the computer system he created, monitoring the complex chemical makeup of iron coming from the blast furnace. Then he is on the phone tracking down a late coal shipment. (&quot;Grace, Grace, Grace,&quot; he intones to a supplier on the other end of the phone line in Lexington, Ky. &quot;This is really no way to treat a good customer.&quot;)    &quot;The process runs you, you don't run the process,&quot; he tells a visitor during a tour. &quot;When the furnace has to cast, it's got to cast. When you have trouble, you have to fix it right then.&quot;    Suddenly, there is trouble in the boiler house, where the great thrusts of air are generated to power the blast furnace. Mr. Scheel is told Amanda has been decreasing &quot;the wind,&quot; thereby lowering production. He suspects the problem is a worn tuyere, one of several nozzles through which air is forced into the furnace. He hurries to the furnace. He confirms on a computer terminal that some iron has dripped onto a tuyere, causing a leak. He dispatches several workers to change it.    That Mr. Scheel could identify the worn tuyere before it became a serious problem reflects his abilities; he devised the computer warning system that pinpoints a leaking tuyere before the damage is even visible.    Mr. Scheel also integrates technology into the mill, a crucial mission in a domestic industry that must modernize to survive. Besides the computer-monitoring system, he has developed a way to accurately measure and regulate the amount of coal slurry going into the furnace. The company has since patented the process and sells it to other steelmakers.    &quot;Now everybody understands that you've got to run it like a Porsche instead of an old beat-up Chevy,&quot; he says. Although such efforts are important to the survival of the mill, they also can generate enemies among workers who fear that Mr. Scheel is putting them out of a job.    As a result, Mr. Scheel, who is paid about $40,000 a year, also must be part psychologist, coaxing workers to accept new technologies. &quot;The whole trick is to make better quality, more production and make it cheaper,&quot; he tells them. &quot;The fellows are hardheaded sometimes because they're afraid for their jobs. That's really sad,&quot; he says, &quot;but in the long run if you don't make a profit, then there's no jobs at all.&quot;    The Pattern Cutter   The pattern room in Winer Industries Inc.'s Paterson, N.J., building is cramped and frenetic. Workers breeze through pushing mannequins and carrying garments. Racks of clothing are in perpetual motion. No one sits -- except a cluster of women behind sewing machines. Hunched over her workbench is Brenda Hester Small, the head pattern maker for the women's clothing division.    The Oscar de la Rentas, Calvin Kleins and Carolina Herreras may reap the fame and fortune of the fashion world, but it is the anonymous pattern maker such as Mrs. Small who translates designers' concepts into reality and fiscal reason. Working from a designer's rough sketch, the cutter must turn the drawing into a three-dimensional garment, which then goes to full production.    The job straddles the gap between art and manufacturing. While sticking to the designer's intent, the pattern maker must be mindful of production costs, which climb sharply as the design becomes more complex. Mrs. Small recently told a designer, for example, that a double-needle stitch on a shirt would be too expensive, and she recommended instead a less expensive way of stitching.    The post also is impervious to computerization. Machines can't be programmed to sense the hang and balance of a dress, or to ensure that a blouse won't be too revealing. &quot;You have to interpret what the designer wants,&quot; says Mrs. Small, 27. &quot;That's why this would be hard to computerize. It isn't always cut and dried.&quot;    Charles F. Sortino, who heads his own New York pattern-making company and who trained Mrs. Small, says the job requires a knack for &quot;making the patterns fit while still keeping the style. If you don't have both, it won't sell.&quot;    Subject to fashion's ever-changing whims, the job also is subject to constant deadline pressure. Mrs. Small tells a visitor that she is still recovering from a week of designing more than 100 patterns for buyers at Sears, Roebuck and J.C. Penney, the company's two biggest customers. &quot;'As soon as possible' means nothing to me because everything is A.S.A.P.,&quot; she says.    Despite its strains, Mrs. Small loves her job, which she says pays in the mid $40,000 range. She recognized her affinity for such work as a child cutting out paper dolls. Growing up in New York City in the borough of Queens, she attended the High School of Fashion Industries and the Fashion Institute of Technology and worked at several apparel firms before joining Winer Industries in 1983.    She says her ultimate satisfaction is in seeing one of her garments on a store rack. &quot;There's the result of all my hard work, and people are buying it.&quot;    Take the designer's sketch for a polyester pleated blouse she is working on. She outlines half of the back of the blouse on a piece of soft paper, draping it over a life-size mannequin to check for proper proportions. She repeats the process for the front, which is slightly shorter than the back to account for a dropped shoulder, and for the left sleeve. Mrs. Small drapes the paper cutout on the mannequin and marks where the pleats appear best -- usually over the apex of the bust.    Although she confesses that her own eclectic tastes don't include polyester blouses (she is wearing a Western-cut, tie-died silk dress adorned with brass studs), &quot;it still must look fabulous.&quot;    Mrs. Small transfers the paper pattern to a piece of muslin, which will allow the first chance to view the design in three dimensions. She drapes the muslin over the mannequin, checking for the placement of the pleats and the proper hang. Once everything checks out, she transfers the paper pattern to hard cardboard, which is sent to the pattern cutters who make a sample garment in the actual material. With the buyer's approval, the garment will go into full production.    The Brewmaster   It is only mid-morning, but Michael N. Carota has already downed more than a bottle of beer. At any other company, Mr. Carota's boss would probably have him in an alcohol-abuse program. But he is the brewmaster at Pittsburgh Brewing Co., and he regularly is quaffing beers when most people are having their second cup of coffee.    In the age of the megabrewery, Mr. Carota is an anachronism. At such places, the brewmaster, if there is one at all, is more of a brewing manager who rarely departs from recipes sent from headquarters. &quot;They're like a cook at McDonald's; they know that the burger has to be flipped every 30 seconds,&quot; says Joseph L. Owades, the director of the Center for Brewing Studies in San Francisco.    But in small breweries such as this one, Mr. Carota is pivotal, controlling everything from secret beer recipes (which he commits to memory) to the yeast strains used in fermentation. His salary exceeds $30,000. The brewmaster can make or break a brewery. &quot;Every brewery that has made bad beer has gone out of business,&quot; says Mr. Owades.    Producing only one million barrels a year, Pittsburgh Brewing, which is a unit of Swan Brewing Co. of Australia isn't going to challenge giant Anheuser-Busch Cos. Still, Mr. Carota's job is becoming more complex as the brewery expands its line to 18 brands, including several beers (Samuel Adams Boston Lager, Pennsylvania Pilsner, Thirteen Colony Amber, Old Heurich) brewed under contract for other companies.    With that many beers to produce, he doesn't allow much to chance. Mr. Carota spends much of his time checking the brew at the various stages of production, from where corn is boiled to the 31,000-gallon aging tanks where the beer awaits packaging. The job of brewing actually starts long before that when Mr. Carota selects the raw materials: barley malt, corn and hops.    No stereotypical red-cheeked, barrel-chested pub-meister, the 33-year-old Mr. Carota wears pinstriped suits to work, styles his hair and goes skiing on most winter weekends. He graduated from St. Vincent College in Latrobe, Pa., but ended up in the beer business after working summers at Latrobe Brewing Co., the maker of Rolling Rock beer.    On one recent Thursday, at the usual 11 a.m. tasting (which Mr. Carota calls &quot;fun time&quot;), he brings a glass of beer to his nose, sniffs it, checks for a full foamy head, then takes a gulp. The process is quick and mechanical; he holds the beer as long as it takes him to detect signs of sulfur, oxidation or flatness -- indications of a bad brew -- and bitterness and tartness. &quot;Now that was good,&quot; he declares after swilling some of Pittsburgh Brewing's Iron City beer, a working-class favorite in mill towns ringing Pittsburgh. With that approval, the beer is ready for packaging.    He attributes his tasting skills to experience gained from trial and error. &quot;Brewing is really an unknown science,&quot; he contends, checking the temperature chart on a stainless-steel fermenting tank. &quot;You must wear many hats. You're not only making a beer, but also running a plant. You're part scientist and part chef. You also have to be an accountant, because you're here to make money.&quot;    The Gas Driller   With just a ninth-grade education, Richard Mann is an unlikely choice to head up the drilling operations for Allegheny andamp; Western Energy Corp., West Virginia's largest gas company. But what he lacks in educational credentials, Mr. Mann has acquired during a career of seven-day workweeks spent &quot;punching holes&quot; in the rugged backwoods of Appalachia's gas fields.    At an average cost of more than $250,000 per well and with the prospect of several million dollars in profit if successful, the Charleston, W.Va., company wouldn't even consider drilling a well without Mr. Mann's approval. &quot;He makes a hell of a difference,&quot; says Anthony F. Altmann, its president. &quot;Without him, we wouldn't be where we are today.&quot;    The 59-year-old Mr. Mann devotes most of his waking hours to his work. His second home is the back room of his field office, where he rises most mornings before 5 without an alarm clock. Nightfall often finds him at a distant well, and he simply nods off in the cab of his pickup truck. &quot;I've spent many a night in the Ford Hotel,&quot; he muses while driving through the muddy underbrush of a well access road.    His job is complex and affords little room for mistakes. At times, Mr. Mann needs the analytical ability to decipher complex sonic drill logs. Other moments call for backslapping cajolery of state environmental inspectors who have the power to shut down a rig for any infraction.    Yet for all the technical intricacies of the job, Mr. Mann has little use for professional engineers and geologists. And he thinks the professionals reciprocate his hostility, viewing him &quot;like a mule with a bastard calf,&quot; he says. &quot;But I can keep up with them, even though I may not use big, long sophisticated words.&quot;    Born and raised on an Illinois farm, Mr. Mann dropped out of school when he was 15 and ended up in Texas, where he roughnecked on a rig near Amarillo for $1.58 an hour. It has been a life unforgiving of error. The tip of his left middle finger was pinched off while he was unloading drill pipe. He has broken his right wrist twice. But the second time, in 1962, the doctor treating him lent Mr. Mann money enough to buy his first rig.    Two drilling companies, several thousand gas wells and 25 years later, Mr. Mann oversees the drilling of 140 to 150 wells a year for Allegheny andamp; Western. And last year he was paid $120,000 in salary and bonuses for his efforts.    Often, his most critical decision is where to sink a well. Geological maps may indicate that there are gas reserves underground, but the gas is worthless unless the well site is accessible. Thus, Mr. Mann's choice is affected by whether the local topography will permit road construction. If the potential well is on the side of a mountain, he checks for springs; disrupting the flow of water with a well can result in costly erosion and rock slides.    Blowouts are feared by all drillers. One morning last October, news came to Mr. Mann over his two-way radio that one of his rigs was on fire. The pressure of the gas had sent the flames licking 75 feet into the air. The first reaction of the rig's roughnecks was to stuff a bentonite compound down the drilling hole, but the pressure of the gas spit the compound back out. Having experienced such fires before, Mr. Mann knew he had to close the blowout preventer, a wellhead valve that pinches off the gas pressure. After he had closed it, the fire quickly extinguished itself.    Unlike those pivotal employees whose work is crucial but not spectacularly well paid, Mr. Mann has become a millionaire. He got $643,000 for selling 25,000 of his Allegheny andamp; Western shares. (He opens his wallet to proudly show off the photocopied check.) And he says he invests more than $100,000 of his own money each year in the limited partnerships that sponsor his wells.    &quot;I've not only got a job, I want to do it well. It's in my interest,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>