<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880216-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: What to Do When Your Own Lobby Is Against You </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS BNK </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   When E. James Morton, chief executive of John Hancock Financial Services, testified recently before the Senate Banking Committee in favor of the &quot;D'Amato-Cranston&quot; banking-reform bill, he had some impressive backing. The bill was written by the Financial Services Council, an 18-company group that includes not only John Hancock but American Express, Citicorp, Ford Motor, J.P. Morgan, Merrill Lynch, Sears, Roebuck and 11 other stalwarts.    But lined up on the other side were some very influential trade associations, such as the American Bankers Association, the Securities Industry Association and Mr. Morton's own American Council of Life Insurance. In short, 18 of America's financial giants had been forced to form a new lobby to push for legislation their own trade associations oppose.    &quot;I'm not shooting at them,&quot; says Mr. Morton as he reflects on this political anomaly in his office atop Boston's Hancock Tower. &quot;Those associations are formed pretty much on a product-line basis and they're trying to protect their product area. There are many issues where they do speak for us. But on many, including this one, they don't. Yet sometimes it makes us wonder why we are paying dues to an organization that lobbies against us.&quot;    Of course, this is yet another manifestation of the increased complexity of Washington's huge legislative mill, where some 3,100 organizations employing 80,000 lobbyists try to bring their influence to bear on senators and representatives. Given that huge army, and the many thousands of things it tries to write into legislation, the mathematical probability is fairly high that some companies at some times -- and individuals as well, for that matter -- will be paying people to lobby against them.    In no arena is that more likely to be true than in the committee hearings where banking-deregulation bills are once more facing deadline pressure. The moratorium imposed by Sen. Proxmire last summer on further &quot;non-bank banks&quot; expires at the end of this month and the senator had hoped to have more comprehensive legislation to put in its place, defining more clearly who can own banks and what banks can and cannot do. But Mr. Proxmire may have been over-optimistic, given the number of institutions that feel their interests to be affected by whatever legislation finally emerges.    The Financial Services Council bill, which Sens. D'Amato and Cranston introduced in the Senate and Rep. Doug Barnard (D., Ga.) sponsored in the House, is a model of simplicity. Titled the &quot;Depository Institution Affiliation Act&quot; it allows any company, financial or nonfinancial, to become a Depository Institution Holding Company, enabling it to affiliate with any federally insured bank or thrift institution. In other words, ownership would be deregulated, but functions would continue to be regulated as they are now, with banks supervised by the current list of oversight agencies and thrifts retaining the overseers who wrestle with their problems now, etc.    Mr. Morton thought he detected some sympathy from Sen. Proxmire and his Republican colleague, Jake Garn, for this simple way of meeting the March 1 deadline. If not sympathy, he at least detected some exasperation among the senators with the narrow arguments the opposing trade associations were bringing up. The difficulties of writing a bill that would please everyone were evident years ago, which is one reason Congress stood by for so long and allowed the financial-services industry, in crude and complex ways, to engage in de facto deregulation.    Congress and trade associations function in similar ways. They count votes. The giants of the financial-services industry may swing a lot of weight in the world's money markets, but in their own trade associations their votes count for no more than that of the smallest bank, securities firm or insurance company. The small firms are the ones that feel most threatened by deregulation, fearing as they do that it might bring new competition into their communities. They are inclined to cast their votes for the status quo, and that vote frequently translates into a majority vote within trade associations. The smaller firms also very often outweigh their giant brethren in local-level political influence. A congressman is far more likely to listen to a banker from his district than to a lobbyist for Citicorp.    John Hancock over the past 20 years has expanded on its life-insurance base to become a diversified financial-services firm. In addition to insurance, it has mutual funds, employee-benefit services, venture capital and securities operations, leasing services and, since 1985, a bank. Taking advantage of the narrow legal definition of what constitutes a bank -- the acceptance of demand deposits and issuance of commercial loans -- it set up its own non-bank &quot;consumer&quot; bank in North Hampton, N.H., to offer broad retail banking services, such as consumer loans, to its insurance customers. It just barely made it under the wire before Sen. Proxmire's moratorium but still faces considerable limitation on what it can do.    The D'Amato-Cranston bill is of special importance because John Hancock is a mutual company. That is to say, it is owned by its life-insurance policyholders and does not have stockholders. Therefore, any legislation requiring a parent holding company would be of no use to John Hancock, because, since it has no stock, it cannot have a parent. It can only be a parent. About half the life-insurance industry has the same problem. Converting a mutual company to a stock company presents complex difficulties, given the long-term nature of life-insurance contracts. The other, stockholder-owned, half of the life-insurance industry is of course in no hurry to see deregulatory legislation that would help the mutual companies solve their special problem.    &quot;We have managed to do just about everything we wanted to do,&quot; says Mr. Morton. &quot;But we've had to walk our way around all this. We've got a lot of lawyers trying to keep us out of trouble because of this maze of regulations and laws. We've got to deal with the bank holding company act, the Glass-Steagall act and other things as well as all this state regulation, the blue sky laws. So we just think it is important to rationalize the system.&quot;    In his speeches, Mr. Morton cites the example of John Hancock's 1983 attempt to acquire an Ohio savings and loan company, Buckeye Financial. Given the problems Ohio's savings industry had been having about that time, a good case could be made that having Buckeye Financial in stronger hands would have been a benefit to its depositors. But, for some reason, the state of Pennsylvania decided to bar John Hancock from doing business in the state if it completed the purchase. Given the vagaries of state insurance regulation, Mr. Morton would like to see insurance put on the same basis as banks, with a national charter available to those companies that wanted to substitute national for state regulation.    But Hancock, for the time being, would settle for D'Amato-Cranston. Its best chance lies in the possibility that everyone in Congress is getting tired of hearing about who gets what protection in the financial-services industry. </TEXT></DOC>