<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0162 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Opera: Sausage and Sekt: Halftime at the 'Ring' </HL><AUTHOR> Manuela Hoelterhoff </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Bayreuth, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tchaikovsky witnessed fights over sausages, beer and bread when he attended the world premiere of Richard Wagner's &quot;Ring&quot; cycle at the Festspielhaus here in 1876. Only with the greatest cunning did this hungry but nonviolent Russian secure enough food to stick with Brunnhilde through the end of &quot;Gotterdammerung.&quot;    In Bayreuth 1988, nobody goes hungry, except maybe Siegmund, whose dinner is a chunk of black bread in Harry Kupfer's new staging of the &quot;Ring.&quot; Here at the Festspielhaus, the world's Wagner shrine, they have found the antidote for the master's long operas -- long intermissions and long buffets. In a ritual I never grow tired of seeing, the blond young man lifts the cover off the tureen and the mere glimpse of those fat, white, green-flecked weisswurst ready to bust their skins revives everybody on line like the unveiling of the Holy Grail in the master's &quot;Parsifal.&quot;    Soon you are ready for new deeds as Brunnhilde demands (&quot;zu neuen Taten!&quot;), after further sorties to other buffets with more bratwurst (these are fried), roast beef, ham and smoked salmon sandwiches, lobster soup -- the lot of it washed down with beer and champagne (called sekt here, by tradition and Common Market law), and followed by cake slices you need both hands to lift. Whipped cream? Ja, bitte. For Bayreuth's straight-backed wooden seats, a bit of extra personal upholstery never hurts.    Eventually, a small band emerges on the theater's stately loggia and blows leitmotives from the opera of the evening. It is time to go inside. This is a sad moment for the locals who have hiked up the hill to the theater with their small dogs (mostly dachshunds) just to watch the intermission. It is also a sad moment for the Suche Karte people. Suche Karte people often have traveled greater distances without a ticket but with hopeful requests for one hanging from their necks or pinned to their chests. Day after day, I watched the same doleful English woman return unhappily to her camper. What a pity she did not come to the first cycle a few weeks ago when she could have kept company with another camper, ex-Bayreuth great Rene Kollo, who, according to a strange newspaper report, said he was hanging about in case someone got sick and he could sing.    When Wagner planned the first festival and the building of the theater, he hoped to give some tickets away to impoverished pilgrims. But this was a dream that did not come true for the Suche Karte people. The kaiser himself attended the 1876 opening (it is not known whether he joined the food fight), and some 30 years later, young Alban Berg already was writing caustic letters about overdressed, overfed people sullying the master's shrine. His reverential mood, he said, was ruined by the sight of the composer's son, Siegfried, shoving down filet mignon a la Parsifal with rice and vegetables.    The master himself, oh irony, was a vegetarian in his later years, an animal rights activist and ardent anti-vivisectionist who loved his dogs almost as much as his wife, the beak-nosed Cosima (known as Cosima I of Bayreuth when she ruled the family theater with an increasingly palsied hand after the master's death in 1883).    Wagner surely would like the new book that caught my eye at Gondroms bookstore in downtown Bayreuth. It illustrates Tristan's early years as a cat and how he came to swear undying love for Isolde Puss. The Wagner hagiography will not stop growing. I counted 85 volumes at Gondrom's before departing with a furiously funny attack on Wagner written 50 years ago by a German judge, Ernst von Pidde, &quot;The Ring des Nibelungen in the Light of the German Penal Code.&quot; The affronts to moral decency, never mind the law, are so enormous, Pidde writes (incest! murder! manslaughter! pyromania! theft! Even, and this really upset him, animal cruelty: killing a peacefully sleeping dragon), that only two Rhinemaidens out of the entire bunch of characters, tall and small, would escape long prison sentences in the just Germany of Pidde's day.    Pidde hoped to get the Fuhrer to ban these operas for the sake of Germany's young. Vain hope, Pidde. Adolf rose in the morning, humming the &quot;Ride of the Valkyries.&quot; He loved Bayreuth and Winifred Wagner, Siegfried's wife, who ran the festival during the Nazi era. Wolf, as she called Hitler, often visited her at Wahnfried (Frenzy's Rest), Wagner's handsome Renaissance-style villa on the Richard Wagner Strasse in Bayreuth.    You too can visit Wahnfried today. Badly bombed during the war, the house now is a badly run Wagner museum belonging to the city. The garden setting is lovely, with the tombs of the master and Cosima and his dog Buss conveniently behind the house and invariably covered with bouquets by the 40,000 devotees who pass through every year.    But the once-lavish drawing room where Wagner gathered guests around the piano is now a prosaic, tattily decorated listening room with chairs and loudspeakers, leading off from a foyer with cheap imitation marble columns. Considering the gold flowing into this town, it might do a little better by its patron saint.    Downstairs, there is a display of dioramas of past productions, the poor lighting and unintelligible arrangement of which makes it useless as a study of changing design styles that have so often traumatized Bayreuth's audience. You get but a general notion of the momentous changes from the picturesquely painted flats of Wagner's time, through to the three-dimensional pictorialism of Preetorius in the Nazi era, and finally, the arrival of the abstract, outer-space look with Wagner's grandson Wieland in the 1950s.    Fascinating, though, are the historical sections upstairs in which vitrines and walls are jam-packed with letters, photographs, designs (a mind-boggling expansion of the Festspielhaus aborted by the Hitlerdammerung), costumes, helmets and wooden horses. The size of a Dalmatiner, these horses were ridden by teen-age boys dressed up as Valkyries to give an illusion of distance in the first production of the &quot;Ring.&quot;    The favorite of many visitors is a vitrine with a list that shows how long various conductors needed to get through &quot;Parsifal,&quot; the master's last and lengthy work about an abusive religious fraternity. Pierre Boulez wins handily, coming in an hour and nine minutes faster than the slowest of the slowpokes, Arturo Toscanini. But maybe the list needs updating. In the dining room of my hotel in nearby hustling, bustling Pegnitz, I fell into conversation with a tired-looking man who was throwing small portions of stuffed pigeon, a local delicacy, to his dachshund, Senta. He said he had just heard &quot;Parsifal&quot; conducted so reverentially by James Levine he had expected to stay seated until Good Friday. </TEXT></DOC>