<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871125-0033 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND SOVIETS REACHED agreement on a nuclear arms treaty.    Secretary of State Shultz, at the end of two days of meetings in Geneva with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, said the two had reached &quot;complete agreement on all of the outstanding INF issues.&quot; Shultz said that only language details remain to be worked out on the historic treaty banning superpower arsenals of intermediate-range nuclear missiles. The agreement clears the way for next month's summit between Reagan and Gorbachev.    The president predicted Senate ratification of the treaty. He also said he would not trade his space-based weapons program to win a strategic arms pact with the Soviets.    ---   AN OFFER BY MEESE FAILED to quell rebellions by Cuban detainees.    Tense standoffs involving more than 100 hostages continued at detention centers in Atlanta and Louisiana after detainees rejected the attorney general's offer of a case-by-case deportation review in return for ending rebellions. In Atlanta, two hostages were freed and 125 prisoners were evacuated, but an inmate was killed in rioting. The facilities were seized after the U.S. said it would deport more than 2,500 of the 125,000 Cubans who entered the U.S. in 1980.    In Washington, a Cuban diplomat said any detainees sent back to their homeland by the U.S. wouldn't be subject to reprisals by Havana.    ---   A judge in El Salvador began proceedings to strip D'Aubuisson of legislative immunity so he can be charged in connection with the 1980 assassination of Archbishop Romero. The right-wing political leader denied being in San Salvador during the killing. Separately, the suspected triggerman in the slaying was arrested in Miami.    Two Contra leaders failed in their attempt to travel to Managua to deliver a cease-fire proposal to Cardinal Obando. The State Department said the Nicaraguan rebel leaders were prevented from boarding jetliners in Costa Rica after Managua had informed airlines that the two would not be allowed to enter Nicaragua.    ---   Beijing named Li Peng, a 59-year-old Soviet-trained engineer, as acting premier. The appointment is the final step in a major leadership shuffle by China's Communist Party. Li, who is expected to be confirmed as premier early next year, succeeds Zhao Ziyang, who was elevated to party general secretary this month.    ---   Manila said communist rebels stormed a military camp in a remote area of the Philippine island of Samar. The military said 18 rebels, 10 civilians and one government soldier were killed in the fighting. Separately, suspected communist assassins ambushed and killed a university official as he sat in his car at a Manila intersection.    ---   Indian troops trapped a large number of Tamil separatist rebels in a marshy area in eastern Sri Lanka as heavy fighting resumed following a 48-hour cease-fire that ended Monday. Residents of the area, 15 miles north of Batticaloa, said hundreds of Indian troops backed by helicopter gunships are engaged in the fighting.    ---   South African police killed three suspected guerrillas in a Durban raid, and a woman was killed in a Natal township as talks aimed at ending black factional violence in the province began. Clashes between the United Democratic Front and the Zulu Inkatha group have killed 170 in the past year.    ---   Gunmen in Haiti rampaged through the capital of Port-au-Prince for the second straight day, killing a street vendor and smashing windows. The violence has been blamed on supporters of the former Duvalier dictatorship attempting to intimidate voters as Haiti's first free elections in 30 years, scheduled for Sunday, approach.    ---   An Iranian frigate blocked an Italian warship in the Persian Gulf, but moved after gun sights were locked onto it. Shipping sources said it was the third confrontation this week between Iranian and foreign warships. Separately, Iran and Iraq each claimed it inflicted heavy casualties on the other's troops in northern Iraq fighting.    ---   Clashes in Bangladesh left an opposition leader dead and more than 50 people injured as government supporters and opponents fought for more than two hours in Kaliakor, a city 20 miles northwest of Dhaka. A bomb also killed a ruling-party member and injured 80 in a northwestern village.    ---   Polisario guerrillas declared a unilateral cease-fire in fighting with Moroccan troops in the Western Sahara. The guerrillas said the truce was declared to ensure the safety of a U.N. fact-finding mission that is touring the area. Polisario has been fighting Morocco for control of the area since 1976.    ---   Mandatory AIDS testing would yield too many false results and is not a good allocation of medical resources, the head of the American Medical Association told the president's AIDS commission. The AMA chairman said the group also opposes mandatory testing because of &quot;the possibility of destroying someone's life&quot; with false results.    ---   Chad said its troops killed five Libyan troops in fighting along the Sudanese border this week, the first clash between the two countries since a Sept. 11 truce. Separately, Britain accused Libya of sending four shiploads of arms to the Irish Republican Army, but Ireland said a search has produced no evidence of such shipments. </TEXT></DOC>