<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870617-0082 </DOCNO><HL> Medicare HMOs: Not in Perfect Health---By Ruth R. Pitlick</HL><DD> 06/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Last month, the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) announced it was canceling its TEFRA risk contract with International Medical Centers Inc. (IMC), effective July 31. To many people this announcement was probably just so much alphabet soup. But for the 900,000 Medicare beneficiaries now participating in the option that lets them enroll in a health-maintenance organization, the impact is substantial.    The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 (TEFRA) allowed participating HMOs to enroll Medicare beneficiaries and be paid a fixed dollar amount per month for each enrollee. After an initial demonstration period, this program went into operation in February 1985. The theory was that beneficiaries would receive &quot;one stop&quot; medical care while Medicare would save 5% over the cost of the traditional fee-for-service system.    The theory was sound. There are many fine HMOs that provide quality health care to their members at a reasonable cost. In addition, HMOs have the potential of eliminating paper work and allowing Medicare beneficiaries the continuity of care they do not always find in the fee-for-service system. Theory, however, is only theory. Something went wrong.    In April Sen. John Heinz of Pennsylvania, the ranking Republican member of the Senate Special Committee on Aging, issued a report on the problems in the Medicare HMO program. Some of its findings are highlighted here.    To begin, a substantial number of HMOs are losing money under their Medicare contracts. HMOs traditionally save on costs, since many participants are basically healthy and use their HMO very little. The elderly, however, as one would expect, are high users. Statistically, the last year of life is the most expensive, with costs that can run into the thousands of dollars. The industry has complained that the fees it receives for care of the elderly are too low. This may well be true. If the amount paid per beneficiary is increased, however, the savings to the Medicare system will be negated.    But that is not the only problem. Clearly, there are HMOs that are not operating honestly. In preparing the report, Sen. Heinz's committee staff talked with dozens of advocates for senior citizens, state and federal regulators, medical providers and Medicare beneficiaries. They heard numerous stories detailing unscrupulous marketing practices, routine misrepresentation of plan benefits by marketing representatives, and denial of needed services. Some of the cases reviewed through HCFA documentation and personal phone conversations were heartbreaking. The effect on beneficiaries has, in many cases, been devastating. While only a handful of HMOs generated complaints, they served about 30% of program beneficiaries.    In April, a federal grand jury in Miami brought a five-count indictment against the president of IMC, at the time the largest Medicare HMO. The indictment was the result of an investigation by the Justice Department, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Florida and the Labor Department. Allegations of bribery dating back to 1981 and obstruction of justice were among the charges. At the time of the indictment, HCFA's files already contained numerous allegations dating back a number of years of poor care, bad management, marketing abuses, failure to promptly pay claims and inadequate capitalization.    This type of alleged abuse needs to be more aggressively and quickly addressed. Leaving the HMO industry to police itself is like letting the fox guard the chicken coop. Perhaps HCFA's delay in canceling IMC's contract was due to inadequate supervision. As of last October, less than 35 employees monitored the Medicare-HMO program, which cost $1 billion in 1985, the latest figure available to the committee.    Many questions about the Medicare-HMO program still need to be answered. Will all the bad actors be eliminated? Can HMOs provide quality medical care to Medicare beneficiaries on a cost-effective basis? How much money is the program really costing the taxpayer?    HCFA paid IMC an average $30 million a month for medical services that were supposed to be provided to Medicare enrollees. In addition, IMC owes many thousands of dollars to many Florida out-of-plan medical providers. Is HCFA responsible for those leftover bills in addition to the money it has already expended on IMC?    IMC, unfortunately, is not the only problem HMO. In March the Watts Health Foundation/United Health Plan, an HMO in Los Angeles, filed for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11. Thousands of Medicare, Medicaid and commercial enrollees have been left at risk. There have been recent reports that beneficiaries belonging to Watts are unable to obtain medical appointments without being billed directly. In documents filed with the state of California, Watts indicated that it had been losing substantial amounts of money since January 1986. Did HCFA know of these losses and if not, why not?    It is time for HCFA, Congress and the HMO industry to re-evaluate their roles in the Medicare-HMO program. Citizens must demand that the program be run in a manner that will provide quality and cost-effective health care or we will soon find out that the experience of IMC was only the beginning. Senior citizens and all taxpayers deserve no less.    ---   Ms. Pitlick, currently a health policy consultant, was a research associate on the Senate Special Committee on Aging, June 1986-April 1987. In that capacity, she oversaw the Medicare-HMO program. </TEXT></DOC>