<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870413-0047 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ MET with U.S. arms advisers to prepare for talks today in Moscow.    The secretary of state, en route to the Soviet Union, held talks in Helsinki, Finland, with about a dozen American arms-control advisers to ready a response to new Soviet proposals on nuclear arms. Shultz, who is to hold three days of talks in Moscow, is to meet today with Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, and probably will meet with Gorbachev tomorrow. In a speech Friday in Prague, the Soviet leader for the first time accepted the concept of simultaneous, but separate, talks on short-range nuclear arms in Europe while a pact on midrange forces is being discussed.    Soviet officials indicated that the Kremlin would reject any effort by Shultz to focus this week's negotiations on a U.S.-Soviet dispute over spying.    ---   Japan's ruling party suffered a surprising number of defeats in local elections, strengthening opposition to Prime Minister Nakasone and increasing doubt that he will be able to enact the sort of economic measures the U.S. has sought. The results were viewed as a protest against Nakasone's proposed sales tax.    ---   Inquiries are being conducted by independent counsel Walsh and congressional investigators to determine why FBI agents took months to disclose documents about U.S. arms sales to Iran. Sources said the probes began last week after FBI Director Webster told a Senate panel about data found in FBI files.    ---   A Soviet research module docked with the orbiting space station Mir after two spacewalking cosmonauts removed an &quot;extraneous object&quot; jamming the docking system, the official Tass news agency reported. Two previous docking attempts this week threatened Soviet plans to convert Mir into the first permanently manned space lab.    NASA signed an agreement to transfer to General Dynamics Corp.'s space systems division the commercial operations of the Atlas/Centaur rocket. The accord marked the first such transfer to a private firm.    ---   South Korea's Chun dropped plans for revising the nation's constitution this year, saying conflict between the ruling and opposition parties made an accord impossible. Chun said he will step down as president as scheduled when his term ends in February 1988; his successor will be chosen under the current electoral-college system.    ---   South African President Botha said there never would be black majority rule in the country or a black head of state. He compared scrapping residential race segregation laws to suicide. Meanwhile, clergy and politicians said they would defy new government regulations that prohibit public protest against imprisonment without charge.    ---   Iraqi warplanes fired a missile into a Cypriot tanker in the Persian Gulf, crippling the vessel as it carried one million barrels of Iranian crude oil, marine salvage executives said. The tanker's engine room reportedly was destroyed, but the 28 crew members were said to be unhurt.    ---   Pope John Paul II ended his two-week, three-nation tour of South America, departing for Rome after an outdoor Palm Sunday Mass in Argentina. The Mass, attended by about a million people, apparently marked the first time since the 14th century that a pope has celebrated the start of Holy Week outside the Vatican.    ---   Jewish settlers rampaged through a Palestinian town in the occupied West Bank and the Israeli army bulldozed an Arab-owned citrus grove after a firebomb killed a Jewish woman. In Lebanon, two explosives-laden cars were detonated by remote control in East Beirut, injuring at least 13 people in the mostly Christian sector.    ---   A surrogate mother is expected to resume visits this week to the daughter she bore under a $10,000 contract. The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled Friday that Mary Beth Whitehead can spend two hours a week with the one-year-old girl, known as Baby M, pending the appeal of a ruling granting custody to the biological father.    ---   Fiji's prime minister conceded defeat to a leftist coalition in parliamentary elections that were expected to have a significant effect throughout the South Pacific. The leftist alliance had pledged to ban U.S. nuclear warships from its territory.    ---   Philippine President Aquino traveled into the northern strongholds of deposed leader Marcos and, in San Fernando, prayed for peace and nonviolence in the congressional campaign that claimed at least six lives last week. In Manila, communist rebels said they would strike against U.S. military and civilian personnel aiding the government.    ---   The Justice Department reported that crimes committed in the U.S. last year fell 2% to the lowest level since 1973. The annual survey found a sharp decline in deadly assaults and a new high in the number of people reporting violent crimes.    ---   Larry Mize won the Masters golf championship at the Augusta, Ga., National Golf Club on the second sudden-death hole.    ---   Died: Erskine Caldwell, 83, writer, Saturday, near Phoenix, Ariz., of lung cancer. . . . Primo Levi, 68, Italian author, Saturday, in Turin. . . . William H. Morton, 77, former president of American Express Co., Saturday, in Hanover, N.H. . . . Horst Dassler, 51, chairman of Adidas Co., Friday, in Erlangen, West Germany, of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>