<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870403-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Technology:Satellites Are Growing SharperAt Spotting Mineral Deposits---By James P. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   NEW DEVELOPMENTS in data processing and sensor technology are making the satellite an increasingly valuable tool for earthbound prospectors seeking clues to mineral deposits.    Early survey satellites served commercial geologists mostly as platforms for aerial photography, helping them find faults and fissures in the earth where minerals might occur. But through design improvements, the current mapping satellites can detect promising mineral classes on the earth's surface. And, in the next stage, an ultrasensitive device developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration promises to allow space-based &quot;fingerprinting&quot; of specific minerals.    The U.S. remote-sensing effort currently relies on two Landsat satellites that were launched by the government in 1982 and 1984. They have been using complex scanners to electronically record duplicate images of the earth below at seven different wavelengths, including two of special interest to mineral-hunting geologists. By stripping away certain light frequencies from the images and enhancing others, analysts can uncover the characteristic reflection signatures of mineral classes often found near valuable ores.    EXPLORATION COMPANIES, with the help of high-powered computers and an array of specialized new software, have been steadily sharpening their skill at processing such data. And, because of the improved analytic capability, &quot;We're looking at areas a second or third time,&quot; says Floyd F. Sabins Jr., who heads Chevron Corp.'s remote-sensing research.    &quot;We kind of mix and match&quot; different wavelength images to highlight iron oxides, certain clays, and other indicators of the possible presence of gold, says an exploration official at Homestake Mining Co., San Francisco. &quot;We use (satellite images) to get us in the neighborhood,&quot; he says. The findings are then field-checked with more conventional techniques.    Although computer manipulation of the images can provide a wealth of information for prospectors, there's plenty of room for refinements. Currently, only mineral classes, not specific rock types, can be distinguished from space. Using a basketball analogy, Robert K. Vincent, the president of GeoSpectra Corp., a Michigan company that processes and analyzes remote-sensing data for exploration companies, says, &quot;It's like looking for members of the New York Knicks by finding everybody over 6-foot-10.&quot;    THE LACK OF PRECISION stems from the relatively wide wavelengths the satellites monitor, and the gaps between them. To resolve the problem, scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Lab in Pasadena, Calif., have developed an airborne sensing device that measures 224 very narrow wavelengths in a continuous range.    The Avaris, or Airborne Visible and Infrared Imaging Spectrometer, which JPL researcher Michael Abrams calls &quot;a once-in-a-lifetime leap forward&quot; in the remote-sensing field, will permit specific minerals to be spotted from the sky. But Mr. Abrams warns that sifting the mass of data it produces will strain the limits of current supercomputers. Recent advances in a tiny infrared sensor known as an area array made the instrument possible, he adds.    Carried aloft in a NASA U-2 airplane, Avaris was successfully tested for the first time last month, and lab officials hope to install a similar spectrometer on the as-yet unfunded space platform being considered for the mid-1990s. Until then, the device will record swatches of the earth from the high-altitude, U-2 spy plane. Data from those flights is expected to be used primarily by the scientific community, not commercial users, according to the lab.    EYE-IN-THE-SKY prospectors can't directly analyze terrain where a lot of vegetation is present. But researchers in the field of geobotany are learning to wring clues to hidden deposits by examining the infrared patterns of plants as seen from a satellite. Subtle wavelength shifts show variations in chlorophyll or water content that can indicate high underground concentrations of minerals such as copper or zinc.    Such studies haven't yet seen significant commercial application in searching for ores. But GeoSpectra's Mr. Vincent says his company has successfully spotted clues to oil and gas fields by detecting tiny changes in vegetation on the ground above them. Although advancing technology continues to improve satellite exploration, depressed metals markets have limited adoption of the new techniques largely to gold and petroleum companies. &quot;The only show in town now is gold,&quot; says Gregory Lipton, head of remote sensing for Utah International Inc. The San Francisco mining concern has recently stepped up its use of satellite reconnaissance and is preparing to explore a dozen South American sites identified from space, he says.    Funding difficulties cloud the future of the U.S. survey satellite program, whose data is also used by cartographers, crop forecasters, foresters and oceanographers. Though the two Landsats were put up by the government, in 1985 operating rights passed to a private joint venture, Earth Observation Satellite Co., operated by units of General Motors Corp. and General Electric Co. The venture was to receive $250 million from the government to subsidize new satellite construction over the next several years, but federal officials, with an eye toward budget-cutting, have balked at doling out the full amount. Negotiations are still under way. </TEXT></DOC>