<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Khrushchev's Ghost Could Haunt Gorbachev---By William H. Stewart</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   In September 1959, Nikita Khrushchev arrived in Washington, turning his attention, as Mikhail Gorbachev is doing today, away for the moment from his program of domestic revitalization. It was a historic trip; Khrushchev was the first Soviet or Russian leader to visit the U.S.    He stayed two weeks, holding talks with President Eisenhower and touring the country coast to coast. There was no treaty to sign, but the trip concluded with an optimistic tone -- the &quot;spirit of Camp David,&quot; it was called. There was hope for improved superpower relations and that the still unsettled postwar German question, which Khrushchev recently had exacerbated, might be resolved.    Khrushchev, who was ousted in 1964 and fell into disrepute, was the last Soviet leader to undertake significant domestic reform (discounting Yuri Andropov's brief rule). Mr. Gorbachev recently praised some of Khrushchev's initial accomplishments but also indicated he is well aware of the man's many failures.    Khrushchev rose to power following Joseph Stalin's death in 1953 and inherited a society beset with problems. He eased the government's rigid control over the population, permitting freer policy debates among the leadership, allowing criticism in the press, relaxing some censorship in the arts and encouraging citizens to participate in local affairs.    He spoke of satisfying the consumer and raising the standard of living, and he promised to end the housing shortage. At great risk, he confronted the Stalinist legacy of terror, denouncing his predecessor as a murderer.    But Khrushchev's economic program was unworkable. It was overambitious and ill-conceived. To build his authority among the leadership, he offered grandiose promises of economic gains in the near term and claimed they could be accomplished without significant cuts in heavy industry or the military.    He was a bold and impetuous leader, and portrayed the situation as a near crisis and himself as the only leader capable of attaining the results the nation needed.    Khrushchev at first directed his energies toward increasing agricultural output. But later, the Seven-Year Plan in 1959 called for raising the level of industrial and agricultural output to the level of the U.S. by 1970, improving industrial technology, modernizing the military, building housing, hospitals and schools, proceeding with a space program and developing Siberian resources.    Khrushchev saw party activism as a key to bringing his ambitions to fruition, particularly in the rural sector. Rather than offer workers increased material incentives, he mobilized local party officials to coax farmers and workers to produce more. Farms were pressured to turn a profit within the existing inadequate price structure through greater output.    As his power grew, Khrushchev acted increasingly in a high-handed manner, pushing his programs through the leadership and adopting policies that alienated most of the vested interests. He engaged in wholesale and frequent reorganization of the bureaucracy, changing its structure several times and readily replacing or transferring numerous officials.    By the early 1960s, it was clear his program was not working. Agriculture, which had experienced growth from 1953 to 1958, was stagnating. The rate of industrial growth had slowed and the bureaucracy was disrupted and alienated. State wholesale prices for most agricultural products were still below the cost of production despite some price increases; and the price increases that were instituted, once translated into higher consumer prices, sparked demonstrations in several cities.    Khrushchev was trying to do too much, too fast with too few resources.    Mr. Gorbachev has a calmer nature and is politically more astute. He is outlining a more comprehensive, coherent and rational economic program. He appears sensitive to the key political necessity of building a consensus among the leadership as much as possible and not moving, or allowing himself to be pulled, too far out in front of that consensus.    Yet Mr. Gorbachev's proposed reforms carry serious risks for him. They are not popular with the conservative interests and, equally important, they tamper with some of the basic tenets of the Soviet regime's relationship with its population.    In June, when he outlined his basic economic reform package, he spoke of radically reforming the notoriously unrealistic price system. He implied he may consider a plan to reduce or remove certain of the $116.8 billion in annual government subsidies, an expenditure that keeps the cost of living extremely low.    The average family's rent and utilities account for less than 3% of its household budget. Letters to the editor already have appeared expressing concern that if prices rise, wages will not follow proportionately and the standard of living will fall for the average family.    Mr. Gorbachev has spoken of the need to adjust the traditional wage structure to provide a material incentive for greater productivity and higher quality. This is a delicate issue. Wage-leveling has protected less productive workers for years by ensuring that the range in pay is narrow despite one's productivity or workmanship. It will require a big adjustment for the Soviet worker to accept a concept whereby his pay is tied to job performance.    Additionally, the labor force will need to be reallocated for greater efficiency. The expected coming layoffs will force countless families through difficult transition periods, only to be compounded should they be forced to accept lower-paying jobs or to relocate.    Mr. Gorbachev has said perestroika &quot;might be unpleasant.&quot; But he must be cautious not to trigger a backlash among a disgruntled citizenry. It would be a backlash that disaffected conservative bureaucrats would exploit to form a strong opposition.    Khrushchev suffered setbacks in foreign policy and took dangerous risks. Domestically, his economic plan was not viable and his methods were erratic. He lost the confidence of the leadership and its faith in him as a leader. His hold on power slipped away.    Mr. Gorbachev's tactics in implementing his reforms increasingly will become as important as the reforms themselves. He clearly must exert pressure to get his reforms accepted, but an approach that is overly forceful and overly ambitious could prove dangerously counterproductive.    ---   Mr. Stewart, who holds a master's degree in Soviet studies from Columbia, is an editor at the Dow Jones News Service. </TEXT></DOC>