<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870618-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Demand for Oil Is Lower Than Expected---OPEC Is Likely to KeepPrices at $18 a Barrel---By James Tanner and Youssef M. IbrahimStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   World-wide demand for crude oil is rising more slowly than was expected only a couple of months ago, suggesting stable prices for the rest of the year.    That is the common assessment of industry executives, analysts and leading members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. As a result, OPEC is expected at its meeting this month in Vienna, Austria, to institute only a planned, modest rise in output while leaving its official price unchanged at around $18 a barrel.    Forecasts generally project demand for OPEC oil averaging around 17.5 million barrels a day for the third quarter, then rising beyond 18 million barrels a day for the final months of the year. That would represent an increase from the current estimated production of around 17 million barrels a day.    But these estimates of the call for OPEC oil have been reduced in recent days, mainly because world-wide demand is falling short of earlier projections of a 1% increase this year. There are other factors, too, such as non-OPEC production and the level of world oil inventories, both of which will have an impact on OPEC production in the second half.    OPEC sources said the cartel's own cautious outlook for oil demand isn't necessarily pessimistic. They reckon that real consumption of OPEC oil has risen about 200,000 to 300,000 barrels a day from a year ago. Demand was inflated last year, they say, by about 600,000 barrels a day that oil purchasers were pouring into storage. With oil companies drawing down inventories this year instead of building them up, rising consumption isn't fully reflected in total demand, OPEC sources said.    As a result, a majority view in OPEC leans to the notion that the group should allow its oil production to rise to 16.6 million barrels a day from 15.8 million barrels a day when it meets June 25. This increase was already agreed upon last December, to be followed by another rise to more than 18 million barrels a day in October.    &quot;The feeling is that we shouldn't announce any increase now (for October). The time isn't ripe,&quot; said a senior OPEC official who asked not to be identified.    OPEC sources said they felt that while a further increase in output could still take place in October, it is best for OPEC to leave oil markets wondering instead of announcing news of increased supplies that might depress oil prices.    Algeria and Iran, OPEC sources said, will probably argue against any increase at all, even for the third quarter, pushing the view that OPEC should continue to hold down its ceiling at the present level of about 15.8 million barrels a day to get higher oil prices.    But Saudi Arabia and others have already said they would like to go ahead with the scheduled increases. Most OPEC sources think prices will continue to hover around the $18-a-barrel level presently attained.    Although $18 a barrel is the base around which OPEC prices are fixed, quotes for oil world-wide range between $16 and $20 a barrel, compared with the 1986 average of slightly more than $14. With supply and demand roughly in balance at the moment, prices have been firming in recent weeks. On the spot market, prices for some crudes have surged beyond $20 a barrel recently and crept slightly higher yesterday.    There is some debate over whether world oil inventories are still too high. But there isn't any doubt that there have been heavy draw-downs from storage since last December, when the surplus in inventories was estimated at as much as 300 million barrels. Edward N. Krapels, president of Energy Security Analysis Inc., which tracks world-wide movements of oil, reports that inventories have been reduced by more than 200 million barrels so far this year.    &quot;We've probably seen the worst of this year's oil markets in the first half&quot; because of &quot;the pretty orderly liquidation&quot; of excess above-ground supplies, noted Ted Eck, chief economist of Amoco Corp. He said, nonetheless, the question of &quot;whether there are any more inventories for sale&quot; is still one of two &quot;wild cards&quot; facing OPEC at its Vienna meeting. The other, he said, is oil demand.    Until recently, most oil economists were forecasting that world oil demand would rise 1% this year to more than 47.8 million barrels a day from 47.4 million barrels. But so far, demand has been relatively flat, with refiners using oil from their inventories rather than buying it. Also, as oil prices have climbed this year, natural gas has recaptured some of the markets lost last year to residual fuel oil.    As a result, oil economists suddenly are changing their forecasts of world oil demand for the year. Planners at one major U.S. oil company have just reduced their forecasted increase for the year by 50%. They now expect 1987 world oil demand to average 47.6 million barrels a day. That would be up 200,000 barrels a day from the 1986 daily average, compared with the 400,000-barrel-a-day increase they had been expecting.    More than half the demand in the noncommunist world is supplied by non-OPEC producers. Additionally, there are imports from the communist bloc, chiefly the Soviet Union. Non-OPEC output, which averaged more than 26 million barrels a day last year, may rise this year, but only slightly.    Some additional non-OPEC oil coming into the market is being largely offset by the continuing decline in U.S. production. Current U.S. output is around 8.4 million barrels a day, compared with 8.8 million a year earlier. For all of 1987, U.S. production is expected to average only 8.2 million barrels a day.    Industry analysts calculate that non-OPEC supplies should leave room for OPEC production of between 17 million and 18 million barrels a day for the third quarter and slightly more for the fourth quarter, when winter demand becomes a factor. That would easily accommodate OPEC's previously agreed official production quotas of 16.6 million barrels a day for the third quarter and 18.3 million for the fourth.    But there is considerable &quot;overage&quot; in OPEC production because some countries, particularly Iraq, ignore their individual quotas. Though the OPEC ceiling for the first half has been 15.8 million barrels a day, total output has recently edged up to 17 million barrels a day. John H. Lichtblau, president of the Petroleum Industry Research Foundation, estimates that if OPEC does set a quota of 18.3 million barrels a day for the fourth quarter, actual output might reach 19.5 million barrels a day later this year. &quot;If OPEC produces at that rate, there could be a problem,&quot; he said.    Some other industry specialists suggest that oil prices, which have increased more than $4 a barrel largely because of OPEC's past discipline, could soften this summer or later this year at the indicated higher production rates. &quot;There won't be a lot of room for cheating on OPEC production quotas,&quot; said an economist with one major oil company. &quot;It's a fragile (supply-demand) balance, and prices could tumble back down to the mid-teens,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>