<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Islam on the Move -- Mosque and State:Coexistence of IslamAnd Secular AuthorityGets Trial in Indonesia---Biggest Moslem Land BoostsWorship, Bars Politics;So Far, the Deal Works---Coming of Age in East Java---By James P. SterbaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   JAKARTA, Indonesia -- Sandwiched between Pierre Cardin sport shirts and Ralph Lauren toiletries at the Sarinah Department Store in downtown Jakarta is a happy little place called the Moslem Corner. Sales girls, some wearing makeup, giggle while offering lace shawls, religious cassettes and other Islamic paraphernalia to passers-by. Visa and American Express cards gladly accepted.    &quot;But I'm Catholic,&quot; says an Australian browser. &quot;No problem,&quot; the clerk replies, offering a souvenir shirt with a &quot;Moslem Corner&quot; label.    Islam is different in the world's largest Moslem nation, Indonesia. It has a sense of humor. It doesn't seem so stern and insistent. It is more tolerant than Islam elsewhere.    Patrols don't roust amorous young couples out of park bushes here as they do in neighboring Malaysia, where government-sanctioned Islamic zealotry is part of its goal of lifting Moslem ethnic Malays to the economic level of ethnic Chinese.    Nor are Islamic militants at war with the government here, as in the southern Philippines, where they have been battling Catholic interlopers for 350 years.    The Moslem fundamentalists of Indonesia have already fought their wars. And they have lost, first to Dutch colonialists and then to successive regimes of nationalists who have beaten down, co-opted, divided, arrested, jailed and sometimes executed them, in the belief that forming an Islamic state would destroy the Indonesia painfully fused from a melange of ethnic, cultural and religious groups.    In effect, says Jusuf Wanandi, the director of Jakarta's Center for Strategic and International Studies, the campaign against politicized Islam has ended in a deal: Moslems agreed that theirs would be social-religious organizations instead of political ones, and &quot;what they got in return was the government, military, and intelligence apparatus off their backs.&quot;    As the government sees it, by encouraging Islamic spiritual values within a nationalist outlook, Indonesia may be pioneering Islam's role in the 21st century as a modern, progressive religion instead of one always reaching for the past.    The government-approved Moslem leaders here profess to like the arrangement too. Instead of always contesting for political power (and losing), they say, Islam now is free to do what it had neglected here for years -- grass-roots propagation.    By all appearances, it is doing that in a big way. What happens at noon on Fridays in the villages of central and east Java amazes some anthropologists: Freshly scrubbed children and young adults don clean shirts and sarongs, drape prayer rugs over their shoulders and walk or bike to small, unpretentious mosques. Most of the elders stay home to tend their houses or rice fields.    In the cities too, young people are flocking to prayer. Congregations in Jakarta, the capital, are about 80% teen-agers and young adults, many of them from the middle class and well-educated.    Why? The answer may be simply that the Suharto government requires two hours of religious instruction a week for all students from kindergarten through college. Moslems learn Islam, Catholics Catholicism, and so on. It is the government's way of encouraging morality and showing that while it isn't an Islamic state, it isn't a secular one, either.    But scholars say the causes are much deeper. Contrasts of wealth and poverty are increasingly sharp in Indonesia, and middle-class children are developing a social consciousness akin to that of young Americans of the 1960s. Islam offers an umbrella for them to protest corruption, a government top-heavy with generals, a pervasive intelligence apparatus and policies that stifle dissent.    Moreover, in Indonesia as well as in Malaysia, a wave of Western influences, capital, culture and values has caused a backlash, not unlike China's distress over &quot;spiritual pollution.&quot; Amid drugs, pollution, pornography, greed and lawlessness, young Indonesians -- especially those who have studied abroad -- find much in Western society that is sick and disturbing.    Returning from the culture shock of education in the U.S. or Europe, students feel like misfits. Writes M. Nasir Tamara, a journalist who has studied the phenomenon: &quot;Frustrated, they have turned to Islam, not so much for economic reasons as to search for an answer to the emptiness in their souls, to the alienation from their own society.&quot;    Islam seems to them an indigenous religion rather than something imported from the capitalist West or communist East. It makes them feel &quot;comfortable,&quot; the youngsters say, even &quot;happy.&quot; It offers a feeling of identity and peace -- a feeling many young adults remember their villages providing before modernization marched in. They remember the coziness and family security, not the poverty.    Thus is a new generation of Indonesian Moslems growing up devout -- nearly five centuries after Mohammed's message reached a place already saturated with Hindu gods, Buddhist spirits and animist ghosts.    Islam, with its string of losing struggles for political power here, never overcame the fact that Hindus and Buddhists got a six-century head start and mysticism even more of one. It has remained a veneer despite all its attempts to impose its will through rebellion and the ballot box. Indonesia has never been dominated by Islam in the manner of Saudi Arabia or Iran, though it has three times as many Moslems as either of those countries.    And it isn't like them in another way. While the Middle Eastern nations aren't exactly homogeneous, they are like clones compared with Indonesia's diversity: some 300 ethnic and tribal groups speaking 150 languages and dialects, containing not only the Moslems but also seven million Christians, three million Hindus, Buddhists, animists and all sort of combinations of the above. This mixture is sprinkled across 6,000 of the country's 13,667 islands, some the size of France, others the size of Manhattan apartments. Out of the country's population of 168 million -- the fifth largest in the world -- 147 million are professed Moslems, primarily Sunnis.    Indonesia's post-colonial struggle against Islamic fundamentalism began as World War II was ending, when a nationalist leader named Sukarno introduced an ideology called Pancasila. A vague monotheistic and humanitarian creed, it had nothing special for Islam. Moslems wanted a constitution requiring members of their faith to practice Islamic law. They lost. The nationalists proclaimed independence.    Between 1948 and 1953, Moslem rebels proclaimed Islamic states in West Java, South Sulawesi and North Sumatra. Intermittent shooting wars against them didn't cease until 1959. Many of today's Indonesian leaders fought in those wars, and they have kept a close eye on Moslem leaders ever since.    &quot;Would somebody please tell me what all this blather is about an Islamic state?&quot; That would be a blasphemous question in parts of the Islamic world, but not here. The man who asks it is Munawir Sjadzali, Indonesia's minister of religious affairs. Over tea in his living room in a Jakarta suburb, he talks not personal opinion but government policy: Islamic spiritual, moral and social values -- no problem. Islamic rule -- no way.    &quot;When I was young,&quot; he said, &quot;I was attracted to the idea of an Islamic state. I did my thesis on it. I entered the library with a blank mind. I came out with a conclusion: You can find a code of political ethics in Islamic teachings and history, but you can't find a political system. You show me a so-called Islamic state and I'll show you something else.&quot;    In the midst of the global Islamic resurgence three years ago, the Suharto regime officially de-Islamized politics. The government brutally put down a riot fueled by Moslem leaders, then ordered all organizations to swear allegiance to the state ideology. Now the government builds mosques and provides funds for Moslem schools and organizations, but it brooks no political ambitions.    Critics say it exaggerates the threats of both militant Islam and remnant communism to justify harsh curbs on dissent. &quot;The most votes Moslem parties ever got was about 45% in the 1955 election,&quot; says Slamet Bratanata, a one-time mining minister. &quot;Indonesia has too many 'statistic Moslems.' By way of the ballot box, they would never get an Islamic state.&quot;    But Abdulrahman Wahid, the director of the country's most powerful Moslem organization, Nadhatul Ulama, says he likes the setup that leaves Islam free to pursue anything except power. &quot;We can have a bigger role in the future because when someone speaks for Islam now, he isn't taken to be threatening the ruling party's existence,&quot; he says. &quot;We don't present ourselves as an alternative institution.&quot; Not at the moment, anyway.    Islam is especially important these days, Mr. Wahid figures: &quot;The younger generation is trapped between the need to preserve traditional values of family and Islam and the attraction of the materialist life of the West. Our job is to prepare our members for an era of industry in a modern world without losing our religious values.&quot;    The values, he adds, are more important than the institutions. &quot;We're trying to connect the tradition of Islamic heritage with the future. Indonesia is the first test case of real reconciliation between Islam and a national ideology.&quot;    This is the kind of stuff the Indonesian government doesn't mind hearing. Mr. Wahid is a charming, erudite scholar who studied at Al Azhar in Cairo and at the University of Baghdad. And he has access to President Suharto -- which makes militants charge that he isn't his own man.    He stresses &quot;rational thinking&quot; for a modern world and emphasizes in speeches the need to address problems of development, legal services and social justice. These might well be the issues of a political opposition, but in Indonesia today, they are to be discussed solely for the propagation of the faith.    Malaysia tries to build bridges to the Middle East to deepen Moslem-world connections, but Indonesia doesn't. Envoys of Libya or the Palestine Liberation Organization aren't welcomed here. Jakarta says undergraduates can study at Moslem institutions in the Middle East, on their own, but not graduate Moslem scholars. They must go to Western universities like the University of Chicago, where, it is felt, the best Islam studies are today.    &quot;We are in need of thinking Moslems,&quot; says Harun Nasution, a 67-year-old Moslem scholar at the government-sponsored Institute for Islamic Studies. &quot;We send students to Al Azhar and to Mecca, and they come back with a lot of memorizations. They don't understand society or real life. Our students have to learn rational thinking in order to have Islam accepted by today's intellectuals. It's already accepted by the common people. We are trying to make Islam acceptable to the ruling class.&quot; He adds:    &quot;We don't want to reject the past, but rather to orient to the future. Indonesia is more free than other Moslem countries to do this. They continue to look back to a golden age. We didn't have any golden age.&quot;    Indeed, Indonesia is the only Moslem-majority country that fought a revolutionary war for its independent nationhood. It has paid dues, and most older Indonesians remember them.    Most Islamic countries either remain rooted in agrarianism or else tried to modernize simply by pumping oil. As Texans say, you don't have to be smart to get rich by pumping oil, and you don't have to learn much, either. With its huge poor population, Indonesia has had to struggle slowly to modernize. The Suharto government isn't ashamed of the results.    The question is, Has it given Islam enough space, or is its lid on political expression like a cap on the dormant volcanoes forming the spine of this archipelago? Will pressure build and eventually explode? It's hard to say.    &quot;You always find that when the &quot;ulemas&quot; {Moslem teachers} withdraw from the state and go back to socializing approaches, the Islamization of society has come back to haunt,&quot; says Taufik Abdullah, a scholar at the Indonesian Institute of Sciences.    That is what happened in 1965. Before its abortive coup that year, the Indonesian Communist Party, known as PKI, was the largest outside the old Sino-Soviet bloc.    &quot;In '64 and '65, you'd have to say you were living in a Communist country here,&quot; says a Western diplomat who lived here then. &quot;This place had the look, the feel, the smell of a Communist state. Yet four days after {the coup attempt}, Moslem students were burning down the PKI headquarters.&quot;    Mr. Abdullah was a student leader in those days. &quot;Red flags were flying everywhere,&quot; he says. &quot;But we knew that it was only a facade and that Moslems would put it down.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>