<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Labor's Turn?Unions May Be PoisedTo End Long Decline,Recover Some Clout---Corporate Cost-Cutting AidsTheir Organizing Drives;Worker Shortages Noted---A New Recession Could Hurt---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   After a long dry spell, bubbly is flowing again at union halls.    When 2,200 workers at Arcata Graphics Co.'s plant in Kingsport, Tenn., voted in a union last May, labor officials popped the cork on a bottle of sparkling white wine -- for good reason. Not only was Arcata the biggest private-sector union victory in four years, but since 1979 three different unions had failed in attempts to organize the printing company.    As the handful of union vice presidents and organizers celebrated in a cramped Atlanta AFL-CIO office, they raised their plastic glasses in a toast: &quot;To more and better things to come.&quot;    Arcata could be a glimpse of what lies ahead. Signs are emerging that the long free fall in the influence and prestige of organized labor is ending and that unions may be nearing a resurgence.    After a 20% plunge in union ranks since 1979, some labor officials expect 1987 to be the first year in this decade that membership won't drop. Worker appeals for organizing help are the highest in years, union officials say. Air-traffic controllers, whose 1981 firing by the Reagan administration became a symbol of labor's fall from grace, have recently unionized again. And according to numerous public-opinion surveys, labor's image is on the upswing.    &quot;Labor is gaining momentum,&quot; says Stephen J. Cabot, a management attorney in Philadelphia. This year &quot;could be a real turning point.&quot; Charles McDonald, the AFL-CIO's director of organizing, sees &quot;some encouraging signs.&quot;    Favoring a resurgence are several economic and demographic forces. Corporate cost-cutting has rattled many workers; a recent survey by Management Science Associates Inc., a consulting firm, shows them more receptive to unions than at any time since 1979. In addition, labor shortages in certain markets have emboldened workers, who no longer fear losing their jobs. And both women and minority-group members, who are expected to continue entering the work force at a high rate, tend to favor unions, labor analysts say.    The apparent turn in labor's fortunes could bolster its clout in next year's presidential elections. In fact, a bevy of labor-backed bills -- one observer calls it the biggest labor agenda in 50 years -- is awaiting action in Congress. Increased union strength also could defuse certain anti-labor initiatives by management, such as two-tier wage settlements. Already, unions have become more aggressive in areas once limited to management, such as attempting corporate takeovers.    Top union leaders, though privately optimistic, remain cautious about touting a comeback. Unions' decline in recent years has been precipitous. Membership is down to 17.5% of the work force from 24% in 1979, largely because of the slump in manufacturing jobs. During the recessions of the early 1980s, concessionary bargaining became common and the public's confidence in labor plummeted.    AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland refuses to make any projections about labor's future. Union officials remain wary partly because a new economic downturn could halt any rebound. Another stumbling block could be the concentration of economic growth in the service sector of the economy, a tough area to organize because of its lack of much union history, its high turnover and its increasing use of part-timers. In the early 1980s, for example, efforts to organize fast-food restaurants in Detroit failed, largely because of the turnover among hamburger flippers.    Unions are also having a tough time landing first-time contracts. The AFL-CIO estimates that even after winning a certification election, unions are unable to sign contracts a third of the time -- almost double the rate eight years ago. After the Service Employees International Union won a 1981 election at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in New Orleans, it took the union five years to negotiate its first contract. By then, most of the original workers had left the hotel, and the union was decertified within seven months.    Finally, unions contend that the National Labor Relations Board has become less friendly than it was in the 1970s, and they complain about long delays in getting decisions. According to the House Employment and Housing Subcommittee, the backlog of NLRB cases, though down from two years ago, is still almost double 1979 levels. An NLRB spokesman attributes many of the delays to the high turnover of board members in recent years.    Some unions simply avoid the NLRB. They organize workers by pressuring companies and sometimes by embarrassing them through picketing and public appeals. Last year, 87% of the United Food and Commercial Workers' 82,000 new members were involved in elections that circumvented the NLRB.    Despite the obstacles, some positive signs for organized labor have surfaced, not the least of which has been its better image. A Gallup poll last December showed a slight rise from a year earlier in the public's confidence in unions. A recent poll commissioned by the United Auto Workers found that 47% of those surveyed blamed auto executives for the industry's problems, while only 28% blamed the unions. When that question was asked in 1984, opinion was almost evenly divided.    &quot;Labor is {viewed as} an underdog now,&quot; says Daniel Mitchell, a labor professor at the University of California at Los Angeles.    Add to that a growing disaffection among American workers -- mainly because of the corporate cost-cutting of recent years -- and unions have ripe pickings, say labor experts and management consultants. The Management Science Associates survey of 220,000 workers found them especially worried about job security -- a big issue in the current negotiations in the auto industry. That, coupled with worry about the trend of tying pay to productivity and a rising dissatisfaction with immediate supervisors, contributed to the firm's finding that companies have become more vulnerable to unions' organizing efforts.    Some companies are so concerned about growing worker malaise that representatives of 20 major corporations known as the Inner Circle Group -- including such big employers as AMR Corp.'s American Airlines and MCI Communications Corp. -- are meeting regularly to discuss ways of improving employee morale.    &quot;The issues are there if unions want to organize,&quot; says James C. Velghe, the president of Management Science. &quot;It's a disheartening trend. We don't see it getting better in the short term.&quot;    Indeed, union after union says inquiries from unorganized workers are at the highest rate in years. A Communications Workers official says inquiries have tripled in the past six months. The Steelworkers say that in the Southeast -- traditionally unfriendly territory for unions -- worker requests for organizing help are up fivefold from two years ago.    The unionization of Arcata Graphics in Tennessee exemplifies this turnaround. The printing company rid itself of its unions after a long, violent strike in the early 1960s, and subsequent attempts to organize it failed miserably. But corporate cost-cutting changed the game.    Pressed by intense competition, Arcata last March laid off more than 200 workers, many of them with high seniority. The remaining employees, outraged, called in the Aluminum, Brick and Glassworkers union to help organize the plant. Within two months, the workers had voted in the union by a 2-to-1 margin.    &quot;I never thought I'd want to work for a union,&quot; says Jerry Brickey, a machinist who crossed the picket line during the big strike. But &quot;when you work by the side of somebody and they're never late and you see them get laid off, that's just not right.&quot; Arcata declines comment; it is in contract negotiations.    Also likely to help unions are current and impending labor shortages. In Massachusetts, where the labor market is so tight that Burger King restaurants put job-application forms on placemats, unions say workers are more willing to take risks. At the Jewish Nursing Home of Western Massachusetts, which the United Food and Commercial Workers is trying to organize, workers aren't afraid to endorse the union publicly. Marilyn Carter, who has worked there for five years as a housekeeper and often hears radio ads for nursing-home jobs, says they have &quot;made me a little braver&quot; in supporting the union.    Nursing, which is short of trained practitioners, has been a gold mine for organized labor. Some hospital staffs are depleted. Last month, about 800 nurses and other professionals voted in a union at the Edward W. Sparrow Hospital in Lansing, Mich. Their main complaint: overwork. Unions as diverse as the UAW and the Teamsters are trying to organize nurses.    &quot;Never before has the climate been so ripe&quot; for organizing health-care workers, says K. Bruce Stickler, outside labor counsel to the American Hospital Association.    Labor shortages also may reduce the number of two-tier wage settlements, says Richard Belous, a labor economist at the Conference Board, a business-research group. Such wage structures have been a nightmare for unions; they can be very divisive because new hires are paid less than senior workers. Last year, the number of two-tier contracts dropped about 10% from 1985, Mr. Belous says.    Giant Foods Inc. recently closed the gap between its two wage scales. Many of its supermarkets are in the Washington, D.C., area, where unemployment is only 3.4%, and labor shortages &quot;loosened our purse strings,&quot; admits Roger D. Olson, the vice president for labor relations. He says that lower-paid workers can go &quot;right down the street to the next retail outlet and get a job.&quot;    Labor shortages may grow in the years ahead. As the baby boom bottoms out, the work force will expand much more slowly in the 1990s than in the 1970s. A recent Hudson Institute report suggests that this, coupled with a smaller reservoir of adequately educated workers, could lead to shortages in certain job markets.    At the same time, an expected influx of women and minorities could also benefit organized labor. According to the Hudson Institute's Workforce 2000 report, women and minorities will be the largest groups of new entrants into the work force between now and the end of the century. Both groups tend to support unions more than other labor categories, according to experts. A 1984 AFL-CIO study found that unions won 50% of campaigns where women made up 75% of the work force, and only 40% when women were less than 50%.    Last year, while total union membership dropped, the number of women union members increased by 70,000. Although the Bureau of Labor Statistics warns that that small increase may be statistically insignificant, the number of female union members has jumped 470,000 since 1977.    Finally, the leveling-off of the decline in manufacturing employment -- in July, manufacturing jobs increased by 70,000 -- has helped labor. The Clothing and Textile Workers union expects its membership to stay at about 284,000 this year, mostly because of more textile and apparel jobs.    Encouraged by optimistic signs, unions are trying to push the potential recovery along. They are beefing up organizing staffs and expanding into new areas. The Steelworkers organized middle managers at Boston's City Hall earlier this year. Such efforts have helped raise the ailing union's membership by 40,000 so far this year.    Unions' organizing tactics are becoming more sophisticated. More unions are using surveys before undertaking expensive campaigns. A recent survey in an unnamed Southern town discouraged the Clothing and Textile Workers from trying to organize a textile mill there, saving it time and money. &quot;We're playing the game a lot smarter,&quot; says Jack Sheinkman, the union's president.    As unions pick up steam, some are getting more assertive. Several, including the Steelworkers and Clothing and Textile Workers, say they would consider a hostile takeover effort similar to the United Airlines pilots' bid for the Allegis Corp. unit. Unions such as the Steelworkers are hiring investment bankers for projects ranging from examining an employer's balance sheet to buying a company.    Labor is also flexing its political muscles. Now that the Democrats control Congress, unions are pushing an armful of legislation. Included are a bill that would require advance notification of plant closings and one that would outlaw &quot;double-breasting,&quot; in which unionized construction firms transfer work to nonunion subsidiaries. &quot;Without much attention, a new agenda has entered into the center ring: a whole slew of bills being pushed by labor,&quot; says conservative political analyst Kevin Phillips.    Democratic presidential aspirants are courting the labor vote -- despite Walter Mondale's 1984 defeat, when organized labor's endorsement hung like an millstone around his neck. And unions also seem to be gaining broad support on some issues -- such as trade restrictions, even though they could raise consumer prices.    Admittedly, a revitalized labor movement may look very different from the old one. Cooperation could replace confrontation. The number of unions is expected to decline as more unions merge. White-collar members may outnumber blue collars. And increasingly sophisticated unions may play an even bigger role in corporate mergers and restructurings.    Whatever the final shape of a revived labor movement, Mr. Phillips says unions &quot;appear to be catching a new political and economic wave in this country.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>