<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871102-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Lax Laboratories:The Pap Test MissesMuch Cervical CancerThrough Labs' Errors---Cut-Rate 'Pap Mills' ProcessSlides Using ScreenersWith Incentives to Rush---Misplaced Sense of Security?---By Walt BogdanichStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ACYTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   The Pap smear. Over the past three decades, it has sharply reduced deaths from cervical cancer. Women and physicians trust it, so much so that the Pap smear has become one of the most common laboratory tests in America.    It is also one of the most inaccurate. No one knows how many women die because a lab botches the analysis or a doctor takes an inadequate specimen. The test, as it is being done today, fails to detect roughly one in every four cases of cancer or precursor cell abnormalities.    Linda MacNeil was one victim. A Florida store manager, Mrs. MacNeil suspected cervical cancer after experiencing bleeding, but a Pap-test report reassured her. Four months later, another test found cancer. Mrs. MacNeil died at age 36.    Cindy Gray's Pap smear wasn't analyzed in a laboratory at all but in the home of a lab employee, in violation of a federal regulation. There was no supervision and no pathologist to consult. Although the test reported no malignancy, the North Carolina mother of three was found soon after to have cervical cancer. She died at 34.    Barbara Arbuckle, of Seattle, was luckier: She is still alive. The 25-year-old woman received negative Pap-test reports, from two different labs, in the months before finding out she had invasive cervical cancer.    To find out why the Pap test falls so short of its promise, this newspaper visited labs, inspected records and interviewed doctors, lab workers and government officials. What emerges is a picture of a Pap-screening industry kept afloat by overworked, undersupervised, poorly paid technicians. It is an industry that often ignores what few laws exist to protect women from slipshod testing.    Across the nation, high-volume, cut-rate laboratories, sometimes called Pap factories or Pap mills, allow technicians to analyze up to four times as many specimens per year as medical experts recommend for accuracy. Many of them pay screeners on a piecework basis that encourages them to rush the analysis.    Some technicians work two or more jobs, earning as little as 45 cents to do the key analysis on a test that may cost the patient $35. In some cases, they say they are penalized if they resist the pressure to screen more slides in a day.    &quot;I think women would be horrified to learn what's happening out there,&quot; says Dwight Golann, former chief of consumer protection for the Massachusetts attorney general's office.    Women and their doctors might be surprised to learn that labs often let employees take slides home to screen. &quot;That borders on fraud,&quot; says Myron R. Melamed, a physician at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.    Pap mills prosper by underbidding competing labs, charging as little as $1.50 per test. They are sought out by some gynecologists, who profit by marking up lab fees on patient bills.    But their bargain rates also appeal to budget-conscious administrators of group health plans and government-funded clinics. Thus, at a time when pressures are great to restrain medical expenses, problems with Pap-testing accuracy exemplify the possible trade-off in quality of care.    The consequences of faulty testing pose disturbing questions for the medical establishment. An estimated 60,000 women this year are expected to develop cancer of the cervix. If caught early, the disease is nearly always curable. Yet it kills about 7,000 American women a year.    &quot;It is time for the medical community to acknowledge the failures of cervical cancer screening in the U.S.,&quot; says Robert Hasselbrack, a pathologist who runs a clinical laboratory in Seattle. Another physician, San Francisco pathologist Eileen King, complains: &quot;Women have been told for many years that a Pap smear will tell them when they have cancer and when they don't. That is a big falsity.&quot;    Heightening the urgency is the fact that some doctors now believe cervical cancer develops faster than previously believed. Also, they see it turning up in more young women.    Citing an &quot;alarming number&quot; of cervical-cancer cases in women with recent negative Pap smears, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has criticized the American Cancer Society for advising women that they need a Pap test only every three years after two consecutive negative annual tests.    &quot;Nothing merits total faith, but nobody can doubt its {the Pap test's} value,&quot; says Robert Hutter, a physician who is a past president of the society. Still, the society is considering recommending that women take the test more frequently.    Leading cancer specialists say about half the Pap-test failures result because physicians take inadequate cell samples. But efforts to better educate doctors in taking specimens have been &quot;spectacularly unsuccessful,&quot; says the obstetrician and gynecologist association.    Labs could help by rejecting inadequate slides sent to them. But &quot;even good labs&quot; are reluctant to do so, for fear of losing business, says Dr. S.B. Gusberg, another past president of the American Cancer Society.    The Pap test is named for George Papanicolaou, who developed it in the 1920s. To prepare a specimen for the test, a doctor smears cells from the female genital tract onto a glass slide, in some cases two slides. Most aren't analyzed by a doctor but by a cytotechnologist, who ordinarily is a college graduate with a year of special training. Unlike some kinds of medical tests, Pap smears aren't checked by chemical or mechanical means but depend on human visual examination of the specimen.    A slide may contain hundreds of individual cells, each of which should be studied under a microscope. It is tedious work and, if done properly, time-consuming. Louise Newton, an Albany, N.Y., &quot;cytotech,&quot; likens the job to examining wall after wall of flowered wallpaper.    &quot;Imagine trying to look at every flower and see how buggy you get,&quot; she says. &quot;Tired eyes make mistakes.&quot;    Accordingly, the American Society of Cytology recommends that no full-time cytotech examine slides from more than 12,000 patients a year. A 1980 conference of cancer specialists convened by the National Cancer Institute also supported this limit. But it is flagrantly ignored.    An analysis by this newspaper of government data found that more than half of the Pap smears sent to New York state-regulated labs are screened in places where technicians exceed the recommended workload. Kyto Diagnostics Inc. of New City, N.Y., a large private lab run by a prominent cytopathologist, Ralph Richart, reported average workloads of 35,000 cases per screener last year-nearly three times what the cytology society thinks is safe. Most of his screeners aren't even full-timers.    Dr. Richart and other critics of workload limits say some cytotechs can accurately screen more than others. They argue that those who make excessive errors will be caught if a lab randomly rescreens at least 10% of negative slides.    Other medical experts disagree. Because only a small percentage of slides are likely to be positive, they say, and because everyone makes some errors, finding a problem employee might take years using a random 10% rescreen. &quot;It's a seriously flawed quality-control technique,&quot; concludes Robert R. Rickert, vice chairman of lab accreditation for the College of American Pathologists.    Even as Pap-smear volume is rising, the number of qualified screeners is shrinking. Fewer people are choosing the field, and many are leaving it for better pay. Nearly half the schools that train cytotechs have closed in recent years; hospitals no longer find them economic to run.    &quot;It is approaching a crisis,&quot; says San Francisco's Dr. King, who is studying the problem on behalf of California pathologists. Nearly 50% of advertised positions for cytotechs in California remain unfilled, she has found. Paul Krieger, director of anatomic pathology for MetPath Inc., a laboratory unit of Corning Glass Works, says that if the American Cancer Society decides to recommend more frequent Pap testing, &quot;I don't know how we or anyone else is going to handle it.&quot;    To cope with the labor squeeze and to lower their costs, labs are turning increasingly to piecework, promising cytotechs that the more slides they screen, the more they will earn. Nowhere else in laboratory medicine is this method of payment so prevalent. &quot;It's very bad practice. It makes quality control difficult,&quot; says Dr. Melamed of Sloan-Kettering.    Some big commercial labs pay almost exclusively by piecework, avoiding many employee costs. Even labs with salaried cytotechs, such as MetPath, usually let them do extras on a piecework basis.    Karen Sanford, a cytotech in Stockton, Calif., left a high-pressure piecework lab in the Los Angeles area after learning from a patient's doctor that she had failed to catch some abnormalities. &quot;It really freaks you out,&quot; she says. &quot;What do you say? It happened to me twice. That's when I decided to get out of there.&quot;    Not everyone is so conscientious. A particularly dangerous, yet very common, practice among cytotechs is to piggyback Pap-smear screening jobs, doing the maximum allowed at one lab, then meeting another lab's quota later in the day.    &quot;Over 50% of the people I know have two jobs. Some have three or four,&quot; says Jason Betterton, a cytotech in Sylmar, Calif. Ms. Sanford tells of a technician who screens at three labs, working from 1 a.m. until late the next afternoon.    Labs frequently let workers leave for the day as soon as they reach their quotas -- another incentive to screen slides as rapidly as possible. Lon Barr, a cytotech in Poway, Calif., says that when he joined a San Diego Pap lab he was &quot;astonished&quot; to see workers screen 100 slides in 3 1/2 hours, then leave. &quot;It was inconceivable that someone could screen that fast,&quot; he says.    Dr. Hasselbrack, the Seattle lab owner, says that in Pap mills, screeners lose sight of the fact that &quot;you are looking at somebody's life, and if you make a mistake, it may be all over.&quot;    Piecework pay scales also encourage overwork. At 50 cents a slide, one who stuck to the cytology society's workload limit would earn only $6,000 a year.    Only one state, California, even attempts to prevent workload abuses. Its law states that &quot;no cytotechnologist shall be required to examine more than 75 one-slide gynecologic cases, or 50 two-slide gynecologic cases per day.&quot;    But labs often violate or skirt this law. Start with the biggest Pap lab in the country, Cancer Screening Services, of North Hollywood. Almost a million Pap cases were processed last year by this unit of American Cytogenetics Inc. (which a West Coast business magazine in 1985 dubbed California's hottest stock).    Cancer Screening's full-time employees are required to do 100 slides a day, says Shahla B. Sadeghi, medical director. It has mostly one-slide cases. Reminded of the state's legal limit, Dr. Sadeghi says: &quot;It's not really a law -- they just suggest it. . . . They know it's not possible.&quot; She adds, &quot;Every year we have passed the {state} inspection.&quot;    At Central Diagnostic Laboratory in Tarzana, Calif., says former employee Betty Jo Thompson, &quot;there was no such thing as you couldn't do your 100 cases.&quot; Moreover, screeners were expected to do extras at $1 a slide, she says. California law lets workers analyze an unlimited number of Pap smears a day if they &quot;volunteer,&quot; but Mrs. Thompson says that when she resisted doing extras, the lab cut her salary.    Cyrus Milani, a Central Diagnostic medical director, says workers are sometimes required to do 100 cases daily. He declines to be interviewed further, except to state that the lab does quality work. Another company official denies that the lab violates any laws.    At Yosemite Pathology in Modesto, &quot;100 slides is what we consider the minimum,&quot; says spokesman Robert Colletti. He doesn't feel he is violating the law because &quot;everybody interprets it differently.&quot;    Stephanie Harner, past president of the California Association of Cytotechnologists, says she has complained repeatedly to state health officials about pressures on cytotechs to exceed quotas, but &quot;got mostly a non-response.&quot; Kenneth Kizer, director of California's health department, denies that his office has received complaints from cytotechs. He promises to investigate.    The federal government doesn't care about workload or piecework issues. It does prohibit labs under its jurisdiction from letting &quot;kitchen cytologists&quot; analyze Pap tests at home, but many do so anyhow. At the home, pathologists aren't available for consultation, and no one checks how carefully slides are examined. &quot;Cytology is done in so many nooks and crannies -- places we don't even know of,&quot; says Susan Yokota, a cytotech.    Cancer Screening Service, for example, is federally certified as an interstate lab, yet it concedes that workers in the past took slides home. The company says that happened only a few times and is no longer permitted. A Tulsa, Okla., laboratory permitted home screening of smears from government-financed clinics until a Journal reporter began inquiring about the practice.    The only equipment needed for Pap screening is a microscope. But as one lab worker points out, &quot;It's not something to do after a day's work in between washing dishes, with kids screaming for attention.&quot;    Patients believe the government is watching over Pap testing, says Lawrence Bergner, a physician at the National Cancer Institute, &quot;but it ain't so.&quot; The government sets some standards for interstate and Medicare-certified labs, but the Pap test is the only common lab procedure for which federally licensed labs needn't undergo periodic proficiency tests.    As for the states, only one, New York, requires screeners to pass such tests.    Doctors seeking quality work often turn to professional groups that evaluate and accredit labs. However, the largest group overseeing commercial labs, the College of American Pathologists, doesn't set any overall workload limit. The American Society of Cytology, which does, has certified only about 40 of the more than 1,000 labs analyzing Pap smears nationwide. Many of the largest labs have never sought accreditation.    With weak laws and scant professional oversight, there is little to protect women from the kinds of misfortunes suffered by Mrs. MacNeil, Mrs. Gray and Ms. Arbuckle. In all three instances, their Pap slides were misread, according to testimony in lawsuits filed in their state courts. Ms. Arbuckle's suit is pending; survivors of the other two women received large monetary settlements.    It often is impossible, however, to determine what went wrong -- whether the specimen was misread by the lab or whether, perhaps, it was poorly taken by the doctor. Pap slides are often kept only as long as the law requires. In states without laboratory laws -- which is nearly half of them -- a lab needn't keep slides at all unless it operates in interstate commerce or is Medicare-certified. In that case, it must keep them two years.    Patricia Ashton, a cytotech and consultant to a major national laboratory, says that her lab's lawyers instruct workers to &quot;get rid of slides as soon as possible&quot; to limit liability. &quot;I don't think its medically ethical,&quot; she says.    Even if a suspect slide exists, retrieving it can be a problem. A now-defunct Boston laboratory called Elm Medical Lab, after having failed to detect a woman's cervical cancer, covered up the error by substituting a negative Pap slide for a positive one in her file, according to evidence presented by the Massachusetts attorney general in a state court. A jury last year found the lab had violated state consumer-protection laws; the case is on appeal.    Mr. Golann, who handled the state's case, also presented evidence that slides were improperly prepared at the lab; that one screener spent just seconds on each specimen; that slides were examined at home; and that the lab had failed to find the abnormal cells on 10 of the first 12 positive slides checked by investigators in a rescreening.    The dimensions of some abuses have been stunning. A Mansfield, Ohio, lab in the late 1970s was discovered to have sent out nearly 6,000 erroneous Pap-test reports. A world-wide alert located many, but not all, of the women affected. And this past September, health authorities in Britain issued an international alert for 911 women who had Pap smears misdiagnosed by a leading pathologist there.    Bad lab work is currently a paramount concern for Planned Parenthood Federation of America, which last year took 1.4 million Pap smears through affiliated offices and clinics. Early this year, Planned Parenthood warned affiliates of &quot;a rapid rise in the number and cost of claims&quot; due to laboratory errors, specifically Pap smears.    A few years ago, it tried to catch a lab it suspected of misreading Pap slides. Twice it sent the lab, which it won't name, slides from women known to have cervical cancer or its precursors, and twice the lab failed to report abnormalities. When Planned Parenthood tried to retrieve the specimens, one set was said to be lost and the other came back smashed. It was as if &quot;they beat them up with a hammer,&quot; recalls Louise Tyrer, a physician who is vice president for medical affairs.    With complaints about lab work pouring in, Planned Parenthood has begun trying to identify problem Pap labs. One lab that has come to its attention is International Cancer Screening Laboratories in San Antonio, Texas. Among the largest in the nation, ICSL processes about a half-million slides annually from 49 states. In 1985, it was banned from operating in New York after failing the state's proficiency test in cancer screening.    ICSL, operating out of a modern building on the outskirts of San Antonio, employs 42 screeners full or part time. It pays the part-timers 50 cents a slide and gives salaried employees 45 cents for each slide they screen after meeting the daily quota.    One screener is recorded as having analyzed 4,710 slides in June. That is a rate more than four times what the American Society of Cytology considers the maximum safe workload. Even if he worked all 30 days in June, the screener would have to have done 157 slides a day.    At such rates, &quot;I wouldn't expect a cytotech to screen effectively or reliably,&quot; says George H. Anderson, a physician at the Cancer Control Agency of Vancouver, British Columbia, which has a highly regarded Pap screening program. Says Dr. Hutter of the American Cancer Society: &quot;If such things are happening, then I would say that's terrible.&quot;    ICSL's president, Robert Boughton Jr., says that his lab's work &quot;is the best humanly possible,&quot; and that he spends more money than other labs do on quality control. He also says the especially prolific screener's error rate is well within acceptable ranges.    But in a business where one mistake can have tragic consequences, the technician, who declined to be interviewed, last year made at least 93 errors -- 41 of them &quot;major,&quot; lab records show. And those are just the ones uncovered in a routine rescreening of 18% to 20% of his negative slides. No one knows his actual error total.    Mr. Boughton attacks workload limits as the creation of physicians who &quot;sit up in their ivory tower with a bottle of wine&quot; and issue pronouncements. Lending authority to his attacks on workload limits is a Ph.D. degree he says he earned in biology from the University of Mexico in Monterrey &quot;in 1981 or 1982.&quot; He is identified in state and federal regulatory records as having a doctorate.    The University of Mexico, however, doesn't have a branch in Monterrey. And no record of Mr. Boughton's Ph.D. could be found at two other universities in that city. Mr. Boughton declines to provide a copy of the diploma, saying, &quot;I am telling you that I have it, and that is all I have to say.&quot;    Present and past screeners, who ask not to be identified, say that despite ICSL's huge volume, its medical director works only part time. They also say that 10% or more of the slides sent to the lab are broken in transit. &quot;You could easily miss an abnormality on the broken spot,&quot; says one ICSL cytotechnician.    Mr. Boughton says the breakage rate is &quot;5% to 7% at the most.&quot; He says that while his medical director holds another job with a state mental hospital, she puts in nearly full-time hours at ICSL. He also makes no secret of the fact that he continues to operate in New York state, even though it banned his lab in 1985 after it failed the cancer-screening proficiency test. &quot;Who's going to stop me?&quot; he asks.    A spokesman for the state, Mary Anne Gardineer, says, &quot;If we can verify that {ICSL} is accepting samples from New York state, we will stop them.&quot;    Amid growing criticism of laboratory work, the American Society for Cytotechnologists is pressing for tough government workload limits -- even though they would reduce many screeners' pay. &quot;Just as the public needs protection from fatigued truck drivers,&quot; the society says, &quot;it needs protection against life-threatening mistakes in the laboratory by overburdened personnel.&quot;    Meanwhile, the society has begun a campaign to urge women to ask their doctors where their Pap smears are analyzed. At the very least, women should be told that their Pap test may fail to detect abnormalities, many health experts say. This way, women may be less likely to skip their next gynecologic exam.    The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, citing studies of hundreds of women, puts the Pap test's &quot;false-negative&quot; rate -- the failure to reveal or report abnormalities -- at 20% to 40%.    The Pap test's reliability compares unfavorably with that of other lab tests. Drug tests, for example, have been criticized as being inaccurate. But labs measured in a nationwide proficiency test last year had a much lower false-negative rate of about 5%. Even under the best of circumstances, says Dr. Anderson of Vancouver, a Pap test will have a false-negative rate of at least 10%.    To help bring error rates down, San Francisco's Dr. King argues for better pay and working conditions for cytotechs. &quot;The field has become unattractive to intelligent, dedicated people of the kind we have always had,&quot; she says.    Above all, people in the field don't want Pap testing to remain laboratory medicine's errant stepchild. They prefer to think of it as a test so important that a commemorative stamp was issued in its name in 1978. At the White House ceremony marking the event, Postmaster General William Bolger said of Dr. Papanicolaou: &quot;He wanted to eradicate those awful words so many doctors have quietly voiced: 'If only we had known sooner.'&quot;    Mrs. Gray, the North Carolina woman who got a negative Pap-test report before finding she had cervical cancer, felt the tragic sting of that lament. After the cancer had spread through her body, she underwent several operations, chemotherapy and radiation. As part of a lawsuit, Mrs. Gray gave a videotaped deposition from her sickbed, describing in detail the agony of her struggle for life. The deposition ended with her vow: &quot;I made some plans to beat this thing.&quot;    Two months later, Cindy Gray died. </TEXT></DOC>