<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Politics '88 (A Special Report)---The Way It Was:Could Next Year's ConventionsBecome Brokered Affairs?---By Albert R. Hunt</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In 1924, as the Democrats struggled past 100 ballots still unable to nominate a presidential candidate, H.L. Mencken filed a story for the Baltimore Sun: &quot;Everything is uncertain in this convention but one thing: John W. Davis will never be nominated.&quot;    Moments later, the weary Democrats nominated Mr. Davis on the 103rd ballot. The irrepressible Mr. Mencken snapped: &quot;I wonder if those idiots in Baltimore will know enough to strike out the negative?&quot;    There may not be any delegates or reporters at next summer's conventions who participated in that 1924 marathon at Madison Square Garden. But the dream of a multiballot, brokered convention lives: a convention run not for the benefit of television, with preordained prime time scheduling, but one decided by back room wheeling and dealing and with the outcome in suspense.    It probably won't happen. Control of the nominating process has shifted from politicians to voters and, coupled with the influence of television, this militates against wide-open conventions. &quot;When the voters assert themselves, any convention would be very reluctant to deny that person the nomination unless there's an overriding reason,&quot; notes Mark Siegel, former executive director of the Democratic National Committee and a major player in party politics. Ed Rollins, who ran Ronald Reagan's re-election campaign in 1984 and is a top adviser to Congressman Jack Kemp this time, agrees but adds: &quot;I'm starting to think it's more possible that the Democrats could have a brokered convention.&quot;    In the early days of political conventions -- the Democrats' first presidential nominating convention was in 1832, the Republicans' in 1856 -- multiballot, brokered sessions were the norm. In the 22 conventions from 1912 to 1952, five Democratic gatherings and four Republican ones went beyond the first ballot; most of those that didn't involved the renomination of an incumbent president. But every one of the 16 Republican and Democratic conventions since 1952 has been settled on the first ballot.    A major factor has been the &quot;reforms&quot; that have resulted in the election of most delegates before the conventions. These days, there are very few uncommitted delegates that any brokers or bosses can control. And if only two or three candidates make it to the convention, odds are that one will be close enough to 50% to make it over the top before the balloting begins. (The Democrats used to require a two-thirds margin for nomination but in 1936 switched to a simple majority.)    Moreover, most modern day politicians fear that an open convention with a string of ballots and back room deals would look awful on television, which dominates most convention considerations.    Still, a number of political insiders think it is at least possible that 1988 could see a return to the more unpredictable, open conventions. This is especially true for the Democrats, who lack any well-known front-runner and divide up their delegates on the basis of proportional representation rather than by winner-take-all.    The presence of Jesse Jackson heightens the prospects for an open convention; the civil rights leader commands an intensely loyal following, mostly among black voters. No matter how he fares in the initial contests, two things seem certain: He'll go to Atlanta with a healthy number of delegates but not enough to be nominated.    A possible scenario goes something like this: Senator Paul Simon or Congressman Richard Gephardt wins the initial Iowa caucuses, then Gov. Michael Dukakis wins the New Hampshire primary. Three weeks later, Mr. Jackson wins the most delegates in the Southern-dominated Super Tuesday primaries but native son Albert Gore of Tennessee does well too. Three or four Democrats would slug it out for the next four months with nobody coming to Atlanta with more than 40% of the delegates.    A brokered convention is less likely on the Republican side as a good slice of GOP delegates are chosen on a winner-take-all basis, reducing the chances that more than a few candidates survive the early contests. If they do, however, the June 7 winner-take-all California primary offers a prize of 175 delegates, or more than 15% of the number required to win the nomination.    Pat Robertson, Mr. Rollins notes, provides a &quot;new element&quot; for the GOP this time. Like Mr. Jackson, the former TV evangelist has a faithful flock of followers that will enable him to stay in the contest until the New Orleans convention, even if he hasn't won any major primary victories.    Thus, it's possible that Mr. Robertson could come to the GOP convention with 200 to 250 delegates won in caucus contests and in selected Bible Belt states. If two of the front-runners -- Vice President Bush, Sen. Robert Dole and Rep. Kemp -- split most of the rest, it might mean that no one comes to New Orleans with more than 1,000 votes of the 1,139 needed, and the Republicans could have their first multiballot convention since 1948.    The odds are against any of this. Even if the front-runner doesn't come to either convention with a majority of delegates, he'll probably be close enough to bargain himself over the top before the opening gavel comes down.    But Mr. Mencken's journalistic successors had better be prepared if the script isn't so neat. &quot;For the first time, you journalists might have to do a little work,&quot; says Vermont C. Royster, who covered his first convention for The Wall Street Journal in 1936 and as Washington bureau chief directed the paper's coverage at that last GOP multiballoted convention in 1948. &quot;But,&quot; he adds, &quot;for a journalist, it'll be a lot more fun.&quot;    ---   Mr. Hunt is The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>