<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870814-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Cigarette Ad Ban Would Puff Up Industry Profits---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 08/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Almost every day we get another sign that cigarette smoking is on the way down. Down, not out.    It takes a lot to end an addiction. Consider cocaine. The health effects of cocaine are known to everyone, all of the advertising is staunchly anti, the market price is stratospheric, and yet some people go on using it. Cigarettes will be around for a while, no matter what anyone does.    The tobacco companies obviously know what's coming. For several years they have been diversifying furiously into such health-giving things as wine, cookies and potato chips. The smoking cars on commuter trains grew emptier and emptier, until some railroads abolished them. As cigarette companies limit ad budgets, many billboards now promote soap, soup and candy, not tobacco.    Now that cigarettes are on the run, the anti-smoking forces feel they have the tactic to finish them off: Ban all cigarette advertising. Congress in its wisdom banned all cigarette ads on radio and television in 1970. Since then, many newspapers, including this one, have rejected cigarette ads. The anti-smoking groups would prohibit all such ads, and a bill has been introduced in Congress to accomplish just that.    Up to now the legislation hasn't gotten very far. It may be that the lawmakers have simply been too busy, starring on television in the Iran-Contra hearings or dithering with the debt limit. Or it may be that even some of the anti-smokers realize that an ad ban would be a small bonanza for the tobacco industry.    That's a conclusion that Mark L. Mitchell and J. Harold Robbins, two Clemson University professors, reached in a new study, &quot;Finessing the Political System: The Cigarette Advertising Ban&quot; (Clemson Working Paper No. 37).    The Clemson economists took a close look at what happened to the industry in 1970, when cigarette ads disappeared from radio and television. The American Cancer Society and other organizations hoped that demand for the product would diminish because of the ad ban, with resulting gains for the public's health.    As the authors note, many studies have found that cigarette advertising doesn't increase total cigarette demand. &quot;Rather,&quot; they write, &quot;advertising spurs interbrand competition and is integral in introducing new brands.&quot;    No cigarette is good for you, but the radio-TV ad ban made it somewhat more difficult to introduce low tar and nicotine cigarettes that might have been less bad for consumers.    The Clemson professors cite one study that reached such a conclusion. The same study found that the ad ban increased consumption because of the reduced number of anti-smoking messages on the air. Under the Fairness Doctrine, now revoked, the Federal Trade Commission had held that stations carrying cigarette ads had to carry anti-smoking messages as well.    Anti-smoking groups in the late 1960s were pressing for a full ad ban. But a lot of congressmen come from tobacco-growing states, so, after a great deal of legislative tussling, the lawmakers settled for a radio-TV ban.    Whatever the ban did to, or for, consumption, it did impede competition, making it harder to introduce new brands and solidifying the positions of existing brands. Keeping the market as it was buffered companies against demand and cost changes. The ban held down ad costs.    To get a measurement of the impact of the ban on companies, the Clemson economists examined the performance of the stocks of R.J. Reynolds, American Tobacco, Philip Morris and Ligget andamp; Myers. These four firms, together with Brown andamp; Williamson and Lorillard, accounted for 75% to 80% of industry sales. Bandamp;W was excluded because it is owned by a British company, which has little stock traded in the U.S. Lorillard was omitted because it was purchased by Loews in 1968, not long before the ad ban was imposed.    The econometric study focused on the period from July 1968, when the FTC and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare called for an ad ban, and December 1970, when the Federal Communications Commission ruled that the ad ban made the Fairness Doctrine irrelevant. Briefly, the study showed that the cigarette industry achieved &quot;positive abnormal returns&quot; during the period over which the ad ban evolved.    The ban increased the wealth of the tobacco companies. The chief reasons it did so, the authors say, was that it lessened entry to the industry and made the Fairness Doctrine inoperable.    There is no intention here to demean the motives of those who seek a full ad ban. The Canadian government plans to ban all tobacco advertising by Jan. 1, 1989, and officials are firmly convinced the move will curb smoking with consequent health benefits. Public opinion polls show that more than 60% of Canadians favor banning all cigarette advertising, which makes the move politically safe even if it doesn't guarantee its success.    Whether ads are banned or not, moreover, they are likely to decrease in quantity as the industry declines. Wharton Econometrics, a consulting firm, keeps tabs on how industries are doing, and lately tobacco products haven't been doing well. Tobacco products is one of the few major industries that isn't even up to its 1977 level. Its index number for this year (on a basis of 1977 equals 100) is estimated at 93.8, down from 96.5 in 1986.    Consumers are smarter than they're often given credit for. They read newspapers and magazines, and they know the evidence against tobacco is piling up. Even if they aren't impressed, a lot of their friends are. Smoking is to some extent a social habit, and smokers are finding fewer friends to socialize with.    As a nonsmoker I'm happy there are areas in planes, trains and restaurants without smoke, although nonsmoking hotel rooms may be carrying a good thing a little far.    Opponents of a full ad ban revive the argument about free speech, but I can't get exercised about that. There is the usual argument that Congress subsidizes tobacco growing, so how can it ban ads for the product? There are good economic arguments for not subsidizing tobacco farmers, but they apply to other agricultural products too.    The most disheartening thing about the ad ban idea is that proponents expect it to achieve more than it possibly can. But if Congress decides to go ahead with it, maybe it's just as well. A declining industry would get one last blast of monopoly profits. As an old fan of the American Tobacco's &quot;Your Hit Parade&quot; on radio and TV, I wouldn't want to deny it that. </TEXT></DOC>