<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Employers Win Supreme Court Ruling In Florida Pension Case Tied to Sex Bias </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR FORGN T.BNS TAXES </CO><IN> FND BNK FIN </IN><G> SUP JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court, sparing employers from having to pay hundreds of millions of dollars in back retirement benefits, ruled that court decisions barring sex bias in pension benefits aren't retroactive.    The high court ruled, 5-4, that employers aren't obliged to pay differences between pension benefits that were disbursed to men and women before a July 1983 Supreme Court decision banning such discrimination. The court rejected the view of a federal appeals court in Atlanta that employers became liable for sex-based differences in pension benefits as of a 1978 Supreme Court ruling.    While the decision is a victory for employers and for pension-plan administrators, it is a defeat for women's groups that say retroactive payments are necessary to eliminate the effects of years of discrimination in pension benefits. Women's groups maintain that sex bias generally works against women. But it sometimes can put men at a disadvantage, as with the plan addressed by yesterday's ruling.    The court, in a decision written by Justice Anthony Kennedy, ruled in favor of Florida and hundreds of local governments in that state, all participants in Florida's retirement plan for public employees. The Florida plan was sued by male retirees who received lower monthly pension benefits as a result of sex-based actuarial tables.    Estimates of the cost of correcting benefits retroactively in Florida alone, if the male retirees had won, range from $43.6 million to $140.7 million. And the amounts would have multiplied substantially if other employers around the country had to make retroactive payments.    The legal dispute turns on the traditional use of actuarial tables that assumed women would live longer than men.    In 1978, the high court ruled that federal law bars an employer from requiring women to make larger contributions into pension funds than men. At the time, the practice wasn't unusual, as actuarial tables projected that women would receive benefits longer than men.    In 1983, the high court ruled that federal law also bars pension plans from paying women lower monthly benefits than men. Again, such discrimination had been a common practice as women were expected to collect benefits for a longer period.    After the 1983 decision, most employers and insurers switched pension funds to sex-blind actuarial tables. The disparity in benefits continued for people who retired before that decision, however.    In the Florida case, some pension-benefit options were based on the projected total value of an annuity at the time it was purchased. The value of annuities was lower for men, who had shorter life expectancies than women, and men thus were paid less each month.    Yesterday, the Supreme Court rejected arguments that workers who retired before the 1983 ruling were entitled to retroactive benefits for the period from 1978 to 1983, or to have their future pension benefits adjusted upward to eliminate sex-based discrimination. The high court said making such adjustments in payments would jeopardize the viability of many pension plans.    Justice Harry Blackmun, joined by Justices William Brennan and Thurgood Marshall, dissented. They urged retroactive benefits to employees who retired after the 1978 decision. Justice John Stevens also dissented, saying that even those who retired before 1978 should have their current benefits adjusted upward.    Foreign Bank Records   The high court ruled 8-1 that a person who is the target of a grand jury probe may be required to authorize foreign banks to disclose records of his accounts. In a decision written by Justice Blackmun, the court said that ordering a grand jury target to tell his foreign banks to cooperate with the investigation doesn't violate his Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination. If the Justice Department had lost the case, it would have suffered a major blow in a variety of investigations. Justice Stevens dissented.    The justices ruled against a man, never identified, who was the target of a tax-fraud probe by a federal grand jury in Houston. In 1984, a federal judge in Houston said the grand jury couldn't force the man to have Bermuda and Cayman Islands banks release his account records. A federal appeals court in New Orleans reversed that ruling in 1985 and ordered the man to have his bank records opened. In 1986, the man refused and was ordered jailed for contempt of court, but that order was stayed during the appeal.    Corporate Records   The justices ruled, 5-4, that an individual who has custody of a company's records can't invoke his own Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination to fight a subpoena for the company's files. In an opinion written by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, the court ordered a Mississippi man and two machine-sale companies he controls to comply with a grand jury subpoena for the companies' records.    Justice Kennedy dissented, joined by Justices Brennan, Marshall and Antonin Scalia. They argued that the subpoena of the company's records would require the individual to incriminate himself.    Grand Jury Abuse   The justices ruled 8-1, in an opinion written by Justice Kennedy, that federal judges can't dismiss indictments because of misconduct by prosecutors that didn't prejudice the grand jurors.    The high court upheld the ruling of a federal appeals court in Denver reinstating an indictment charging the Bank of Nova Scotia and other defendants with an illegal tax-shelter scheme. Ten indictments issued in 1982 by a federal grand jury were dismissed in 1984 by a federal judge in Denver who charged misconduct by federal prosecutors. The appeals court reinstated all 26 counts.    Justice Marshall dissented.    Texas Death Penalty   The justices, 6-3, upheld the death penalty in Texas, rejecting arguments that could have affected the sentences of the more than 260 inmates on death row. The case involved a dispute over whether a jury was properly instructed in the sentencing phase of a trial to consider all evidence that may have worked in the defendant's favor and against a death sentence.    The court's majority was split into two pluralities as to the reasons for upholding the instructions to the jury: a four-justice opinion written by Justice Byron White, and a two-person opinion written by Justice Sandra O'Connor. Justice Stevens dissented, joined by Justices Brennan and Marshall.    Suing Local Officials   The high court, 7-2, struck down some aspects of a Wisconsin law that required individuals to give state and local officials 120 days' advance notice before filing lawsuits against them in state court. The high court said, in an opinion written by Justice Brennan, that when the law is applied to suits for damages filed in state court under federal civil rights law, it is unconstitutional.    Justice O'Connor dissented, joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist. </TEXT></DOC>