<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880405-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Southern Exposure: Moscow Is Increasing Visibility and Influence In Latin Democracies --- Diplomatic Drive Paves Way For More Business Deals, Poses Challenges for U.S. --- The Bolivian Generation Gap </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST LATAM </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The new Soviet ambassador to Bolivia, Tajir Durdiev, isn't a chip off the old East bloc.    His predecessor, a dour and reserved diplomat, didn't even speak Spanish. By contrast, Mr. Durdiev is fluent in Spanish and promotes Moscow's image in the extroverted Mikhail Gorbachev style. Last fall he entertained lavishly at the university at Sucre and offered 30 four-year scholarships there for study in Moscow. At La Paz social functions he mixes easily; determined to deliver the message that Russia is America's equal, he always inserts himself next to the U.S. ambassador when media pictures are taken.    Mr. Durdiev is part of a new Soviet diplomatic offensive that is greatly raising Moscow's influence among the new democracies in Latin America. The drive is paving the way for broader commercial relations and is increasing diplomatic competition for the U.S. in its own hemisphere.    The Soviets are &quot;carefully working all sides of the street to show the U.S.S.R.'s new and oh-so-reasonable face,&quot; a U.S. ambassador in Latin America told the State Department in a classified cable. The cable warned of the Soviets' new &quot;smoothly calculated activism.&quot; Mr. Gorbachev is expected to visit Latin America this year, a trip that will further increase Soviet visibility. To help offset the Gorbachev trip, Secretary of State George Shultz is considering a tour of the region.    Although Moscow can't afford the aid that many Latin American countries need, it deftly packages and publicizes the assistance it can provide. In Peru, to help reduce an $800 million debt to Moscow, the Soviets are offering to order 80 fishing and commercial vessels from Peruvian shipyards and negotiating to buy personal computers assembled there.    In Brazil last November, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze scored public-relations points by attending a soccer game. Then he signed the first Soviet-Brazilian cultural exchange and an economic cooperation agreement. He signed similar pacts in Uruguay. Earlier, in 1986, Moscow signed its first major fishing agreement with Argentina.    Ironically, the Soviet efforts have been aided by the wave of democracy that has swept across the region. New civilian governments in Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay show their independence from the right-wing military regimes they replaced -- as well as from the U.S. -- by encouraging relations with the Soviet bloc. Argentina's President Raul Alfonsin visited Moscow in January 1986, and Uruguay's president plans a visit this year. Such contacts also provide a way for these governments to throw a political bone to their own nations' left wings.    &quot;There's almost a competition among Latin American leaders over who will be invited to Moscow,&quot; says Ilya Prizel, a University of Maryland professor who studies Soviet activity in the Third World. &quot;It's an assertion of independence from the United States, and that's good domestic politics.&quot;    Moscow's activities reflect a new attitude toward Third World states. During the Brezhnev era the Kremlin believed that its interests were best served by supporting Marxist-Leninist regimes. By the 1980s, some Soviet theoreticians began suggesting that Moscow should turn its attention to geopolitically more important nations. They pointed out that client countries such as Angola, Mozambique, Cambodia, Nicaragua and even Cuba were economic disaster areas that drained Soviet resources without spreading Marxist gospel.    The Kremlin continues to support its clients -- indeed, the price has gone up, as some of them battle U.S.-backed insurgents -- but Mr. Gorbachev is trying to broaden Soviet influence in other ways. As part of his campaign to strengthen the Soviet economy, he wants to lower global tensions and build relations with industrialized nations that can become trading partners and sellers of high technology.    &quot;There's no question that the chief emphasis in their diplomacy is opening up ties with capitalist-oriented Third World nations around the world,&quot; says Francis Fukayama of the Rand Corp. Elliott Abrams, assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, says, &quot;The Soviets are putting more resources into getting their message across in Latin America, and they're getting better at it.&quot;    The message is that Moscow under Mr. Gorbachev is in the business of building mutually beneficial commercial ties rather than fomenting revolution. The Soviets avoid giving the message an anti-U.S. slant, conceding that they won't replace America in its own back yard. Yet the Kremlin believes it can score diplomatic gains in debt-ridden Latin America.    The Reagan administration, despite its cheerleading for the hemisphere's new democracies, remains obsessed with Central America. South American nations, with only $173 million in U.S. economic assistance last year, get a slim 3% of total U.S. foreign economic aid. And trade frictions are a growing irritant. The U.S. is embroiled in a complaint against Brazil over licensing of computer software and with Argentina over air-courier rights. A U.S. trade official predicts a rash of disputes with Latin nations concerning pharmaceutical patent rights.    Moscow, too, has its problems in Latin America. It doesn't have much to sell that Latin nations want. It bought $385 million of Argentina's exports -- mostly grain -- during the first half of last year but sold Argentina only $28 million of products. And the poor quality of its equipment hurts sales opportunities. A Soviet-built tin mill and a metals-processing plant in Bolivia have never performed satisfactorily.    U.S. officials, nonetheless, believe that Moscow's offers to jointly build huge projects, such as dams and hydroelectric plants, and its willingness to barter will become increasingly attractive to Latin nations short of hard currency and trying to dig themselves out of debt. &quot;In a country with economic problems like Bolivia's,&quot; says a State Department official, &quot;projects presented with the right smile and enthusiasm that create lots of jobs are tough for politicians to turn down.&quot;    Brazil is the richest Latin prize for the Kremlin because of its potential industrial and technical strength and its influence over its neighbors. In late 1985, Brazil's new civilian government acted to end years of limited relations with Moscow. Now the Soviets are offering to sell Brazil a launching vehicle to put a Brazilian satellite in space. They also have agreed to a joint venture to produce ferromanganese -- used in making hard steel -- with half the production delivered to the Soviet Union for 12 years as repayment for its investment. Moscow has expressed willingness to cooperate in other areas, including energy and fishing.    The Soviets, according to U.S. officials, are negotiating to buy optical fibers from Brazil and have expressed strong interest in computers and computer software. The technology isn't up to that in the U.S., but it is useful to the technically backward Soviet civilian economy, and Brazil ignores U.S. efforts to limit the flow of technology to East bloc countries. Some U.S. officials fear that Moscow may someday use Brazil to buy technology it can't purchase elsewhere, much as it once bought Argentine grain to thwart a U.S. grain embargo.    &quot;Brazil's a little short of the technology right now,&quot; a U.S. analyst says, &quot;but they'll get there and get there soon.&quot;    The Russians also are increasing their influence by offering scholarships. The number they offered in Latin America jumped to nearly 10,000 last year from 2,900 in 1978, say U.S. officials. U.S. scholarships were offered to about 7,000 Latin students last year; the figure has declined over the past five years, in part because of the high cost of a U.S. education, according to the private, nonprofit Institute of International Education.    Moscow also offers more long-term scholarships. In Bolivia, according to a senior U.S. official, the Soviets offer numerous long-term medical scholarships; the U.S. has curtailed medical training for foreign students. Frustrated U.S. officials say the Soviets understand that doctors, as members of a small educated elite, have broad influence in Latin America. Doctors have been presidents of Brazil and Chile.    &quot;There's a generation gap in Bolivia,&quot; says one American there. &quot;Doctors over 45 maintain their U.S. ties, but their younger colleagues have been trained in the East bloc. I've been told by some {older} doctors that they feel isolated and discriminated against on medical boards. Some complain that the only time they are allowed to schedule surgery is at 2 a.m.&quot;    Actions by the U.S. are antagonizing some neighbors. Agricultural subsidies -- designed to help American farmers compete with subsidized grain shipments from Europe -- are hurting grain sales by Argentina, the world's leading non-subsidized grain exporter. The program also covers soybean sales in the Middle East, where Argentina is a major seller.    Nobody expects the Soviets to eclipse the U.S. in its own sphere of influence. But, with the aggressive Mr. Gorbachev calling the Kremlin's signals, the U.S. clearly faces new challenges.    &quot;I don't think we're fully aware of the new strategy and tactics that the Soviet Union is using,&quot; says Howard Wiarda, a Latin America expert at Philadelphia's Policy Research Institute. &quot;We're not quite ready to face the fact that they are a rising presence in Latin America. We haven't come to grips with that yet.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>