<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0015 </DOCNO><HL> House Aides Fault SEC, Big Board On Foreign Insider-Trading Inquiries --- Textron, IBM, Sperry Issues Cited; Yearlong Delays At Exchange Are Noted </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas E. Ricks (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN LATAM EUROP </CO><IN> STK SCR BNK </IN><G> CNG SEC </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congressional subcommittee aides reviewing the Securities and Exchange Commission's pursuit of foreign-based insider trading disclosed the existence of investigations into suspicious transactions in securities of Textron Inc., Sperry Corp., International Business Machines Corp. and other companies.    Staff members of Rep. Doug Barnard's (D., Ga.) subcommittee on commerce, consumer and monetary affairs, which is holding a hearing on foreign insider trading tomorrow, were broadly critical of not only the SEC but also of delays by stock exchanges in referring suspicious trading to the SEC.    Most notably, they said, the New York Stock Exchange takes an average of about one year to notify the SEC and has taken as long as 28 months. The aides said the commission often decides not to pursue cases that are more than six months old. A Big Board spokeswoman didn't dispute those figures, but said the exchange independently investigates a great deal of trading and that it currently is trying to speed the referral process.    The subcommittee staffers portrayed an SEC that is unequipped to pursue much of the suspicious trading that occurs and is frequently stymied by uncooperative foreign authorities.    The congressional aides, in discussing several previously unreported inquiries, said the SEC:   --Believes insider trading in IBM put options occurred through three French banks just before the computer giant announced in 1986 unexpectedly low foreign orders and shipments. But the agency has been stymied by the banks' refusal to cooperate.    --Found &quot;conclusive indications&quot; of insider trading through seven Swiss banks in the stock of Sheller-Globe Corp. just before it was acquired by General Felt Industries Inc. in February 1986. But the commission didn't request information from the Swiss government because, according to an SEC staff attorney, it didn't want &quot;to wear out its welcome&quot; with the Swiss.    --Identified two Middle Eastern investors that the SEC believes to have traded on inside information in Textron the day before Chicago Pacific Corp. made a $1.56 billion hostile bid for it in October 1984, but hasn't been able to act against them.    --Examined but didn't pursue suspicious trading in Sperry stock and options originating in Switzerland, Luxembourg, Monaco and the Netherlands Antilles before the May 1986 announcement of Burroughs Corp.'s $4.44 billion takeover bid. (The combined concern is now known as Unisys Corp.)    Subcommittee aides also disclosed similar cases of suspicious trading involving three smaller concerns: Viceroy Resource Corp., American Petrofina Inc. and Imre Corp.    The subcommittee aides, who have spent more than eight months poring over SEC files of recent investigations of foreign-based suspicious trading, described the agency's resources as &quot;totally inadequate&quot; for the job it faces. In a statement, Rep. Barnard said the SEC's &quot;handful of well-publicized achievements&quot; in this area &quot;is no substitute for a systematic, carefully managed, and adequately financed effort.&quot;    The subcommittee aides disclosed the investigations in using them as examples of the difficulties the SEC has faced in pursuing insider trading in recent years.    Of 609 instances of suspected insider trading referred by the stock exchanges to the SEC during 1986 and 1987, they said, about 225 involved foreign trading. And of that 225, they said, the SEC didn't pursue 168. The aides calculated that the trades the SEC chose not to investigate had potential profits totaling at least $38.1 million.    The aides said they were told by an SEC official that the agency takes no action on suspicious trading emanating from certain countries, such as Panama, Luxembourg and Liechtenstein. The SEC has no agreements with such countries and in the past has had problems obtaining information because of bank secrecy and other laws.    Gary Lynch, the SEC's enforcement chief, disputed the assertion that the SEC doesn't pursue trading from certain countries, and noted that Panamanian companies have been involved in several SEC actions. More generally, he said that while it is obviously more difficult to gather information outside the U.S. than inside it, &quot;you'll find we do very well&quot; in comparison with other government agencies.    &quot;We've been very aggressive, and have made remarkable strides in the last several years,&quot; Mr. Lynch said. &quot;This is an area where we think we have done a lot and have nothing to apologize for.&quot;    Mr. Lynch declined to discuss the details of any case.    Two of the referrals the SEC declined to pursue, the aides said, involve trading in Imre and American Petrofina. In 1985, a Swedish investment banking concern bought about 10% of the common stock of Imre, a small, Seattle-based biotechnology company. The National Association of Securities Dealers referred to the SEC suspicious trades originating in Sweden and Britain involving potential profit of about $135,000.    Similarly, the aides said, a Belgian trader bought 22,800 shares in American Petrofina in the two weeks before the announcement of &quot;good earnings,&quot; accruing a potential profit of almost $50,000. In referring the case to the SEC, they said, the American Stock Exchange noted that the company is controlled by Brussels-based Petrofina S.A.    The aides gave no specific reason why the SEC didn't pursue these two cases.    Even when the SEC does choose to investigate a case, the aides said, it often is blocked by a lack of cooperation from foreign authorities. They said the agency's enforcement division examined suspicious trading with total potential profit of more than $1 million in the May 1986 takeover of Sperry by Burroughs.    Last October, they said, enforcement staffers wrote in an internal memorandum that they wouldn't pursue the trading emanating from Monaco, Luxembourg or the Netherlands Antilles, but did want to request assistance from Switzerland. However, the aides said, the commission decided not to make that request and is preparing to close the investigation.    The aides said that, in another instance, the SEC investigated the apparent manipulation of Viceroy Resource stock, but declined to pursue the matter when the trading was traced to two accounts with addresses in Liechtenstein.    But, the aides argued, the SEC is caught in a bind: It can't pursue trading in some countries with which it doesn't have agreements, and is reluctant to make too many requests of authorities in counties with which it does have understandings.    Thus, they said, in looking into pre-announcement trading in General Felt's $482 million acquisition of Sheller-Globe in February 1986, the SEC identified suspicious trading through seven Swiss banks of 17,000 shares of Sheller-Globe, with a potential profit of $150,000. They said SEC staff lawyers drafted a request stating not only that the trading met the specific criteria elaborated in the Swiss-U.S. agreement, but that it also showed conclusive indications that the trading may have violated U.S. laws.    But, the aides said, they were told by the staff attorney handling the matter that the request wasn't sent because the SEC didn't want &quot;to wear out its welcome&quot; with the Swiss.    Even when the SEC pursues a case and gets cooperation of a sort, they said, the matter can drag on for years. They said that in the agency's continuing investigation of alleged massive insider trading through the Swiss brokerage firm Ellis AG, Swiss authorities denied the SEC's first two requests for information, made in 1984 and 1985. When the Swiss approved the third, their response was delayed for a year by defendants' appeals.    The Ellis matter also is being examined by the other congressional subcommittee looking at the SEC's pursuit of insider trading, the House oversight and investigations panel. That subcommittee, headed by Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.), plans hearings later this year to use the Ellis situation as a case study of how alleged inside traders can hide behind a foreign entity.    Owners of Ellis have repeatedly denied that the firm has ever been involved in insider trading.    Aides on the monetary affairs subcommittee also argued that the SEC's informal information-sharing arrangements with some countries don't always work. They said, for example, that the SEC traced suspicious trading in 2,505 IBM put options in October 1986 to three French banks, but that French authorities haven't responded to the SEC's July 1987 request because the banks won't cooperate.    The holder of a put option has the right to sell a fixed number of shares at a fixed price within a specified time.    And when the SEC receives cooperation and identifies apparent violators, the aides said, it isn't always able to prosecute the case. They said, for example, that in the SEC's continuing investigation of trading related to Chicago Pacific's 1984 bid for Textron, the commission identified two traders who flew from the Mideast to Europe, opened accounts, and bought 124,750 Textron shares the day before Chicago Pacific launched its bid, which ultimately proved unsuccessful. They sold much of that stake immediately after the announcement.    The aides said the SEC has frozen the profits of one of the two traders, but hasn't been able to take any additional action against them because neither they nor their other assets are reachable by the SEC.    Finally, the aides criticized the slowness with which exchanges refer suspicious trading to the SEC. They said the average time for a referral is more than eight months, and that the SEC chooses not to pursue many reports because the trail is cold by the time they learn of it. </TEXT></DOC>