<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890829-0098 </DOCNO><DD> = 890829 </DD><AN> 890829-0098. </AN><HL> Catching Up:@  Feeling New Pressure,@  Chicago Merc Stiffens@  Disciplinary Stance@  ---@  After Futures Indictments,@  It Zeroes In on 2 Members@  It Accuses of Fixing Trades@  ---@  Big Profits on Black Monday@  ----@  By Jeff Bailey@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/29/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> SLH AXP </CO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With his longish blond hair and a dark tan, Albert &quot;Bud&quot; Furman III seems more suited to a surfboard than his regular spot on the floor of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Those who know the 38-year-old trader say he sometimes even talks of a trade as if it were a wave: &quot;It was so mammoth and so there.&quot;    Never was it so there for Mr. Furman as during the week of the October 1987 stock-market crash. While many investors were losing their shirts, Mr. Furman was racking up profits of more than $1 million by trading in Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock index futures.    Today, however, those trades are threatening to destroy Mr. Furman's career. Disciplinary officials at the exchange now believe the trades were part of a scheme to steal money from futures customers. The exchange itself has been stung by an ongoing federal investigation of its trading pits, and has been hard-pressed to prove to outsiders -- including investors, Congress and the Bush administration -- that it is capable of policing itself. So, say people familiar with the case, the exchange may well make an example of Mr. Furman and others involved in the suspect trades.    Following a hearing that began yesterday, these sources say Mr. Furman could be stripped of his livelihood. They expect the Merc to fine him as much as $500,000 and ban him from trading -- &quot;the death penalty,&quot; as one lawyer in the case puts it. They also say Patrick J. Shannon, the other main target of the case, is likely to receive similar penalties. Says one exchange official sympathetic to the traders' plight: &quot;The timing couldn't be worse. We're going to show how tough we are.&quot;    Before a broader federal probe of futures pit trading was disclosed here last Jan. 19, the case involving Messrs. Furman and Shannon appeared headed for an uneventful settlement. But then politics came into play. The Merc, which won't comment on the case, has since: brought additional charges; moved the case from a routine disciplinary committee up to the exchange's board, the only body that can vote to expel members; and made clear to the traders involved that the penalties imposed will be much tougher than initially thought.    Last month, Leo Melamed, who heads the Merc's executive committee, waved a clenched fist during a news conference and vowed to &quot;instill the fear of God&quot; in any traders who might think of stealing. The Furman/Shannon case is one step toward that end.    The case also is an opportunity for the Merc to at least temporarily upstage U.S. Attorney Anton R. Valukas, the aggressive prosecutor overseeing the government's probe of pit trading. Although Mr. Valukas has already brought indictments against 46 Chicago traders in that separate investigation, the total amount of money that customers allegedly lost in those cases doesn't add up to the amount involved in the Furman/Shannon case alone, attorneys say.    In Mr. Furman and Mr. Shannon, the Merc can also boast of catching big-name, well-connected traders. Known by his trading badge &quot;JOK,&quot; the 33-year-old Mr. Shannon is already a Merc legend of sorts. In one now-famous trade, unrelated to the Merc's investigation, he mistakenly sold a big stock-index position instead of buying, just before the market plunged. The lucky error netted him and his customer nearly $1 million, which they split.    Mr. Shannon is a member of one of Chicago's most prominent Southside Irish families. His grandfather was accountant and financial adviser to the late mayor Richard J. Daley. In the Sandamp;P pit during the market crash, Mr. Shannon brokered big orders for E.F. Hutton, now part of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.    Mr. Furman is one of the Merc's most successful &quot;locals,&quot; meaning those who trade for themselves rather than for customers. Locals operate like middlemen, buying contracts from one trader and then trying to sell them at a higher price to another.    The Shannon and Furman families go way back. The Shannon accounting firm for decades did work for the Furman Funeral Home, owned by Mr. Furman's father. (Mr. Shannon and Mr. Furman both refused to comment on the charges against them.)    During October 1987, they worked in the Sandamp;P pit, the nation's second largest arena (after the New York Stock Exchange) for speculating on stock prices. The Sandamp;P's 500 stock index futures contract is based on the prices of 500 commonly traded stocks. The index contract closed yesterday at the Merc at 353.20. A single Sandamp;P contract is worth 500 times the index, or $176,600 at yesterday's close.    Trading records and internal Merc charges obtained by this newspaper, as well as interviews with some people involved in the case, show how the traders allegedly ran roughshod over the industry's vaunted &quot;open-outcry&quot; system, which is designed to protect outside investors and give all pit traders an equal crack at trades.    Essentially, the two men are accused of stealing customer funds by prearranging a series of trades -- circumventing open outcry -- that gave Mr. Furman automatic profits. Some of the money ended up in the hands of Mr. Shannon's brother and some in the hands of another trader Mr. Shannon may have owed money to, according to Merc allegations.    In all of the transactions, the traders took advantage of the knowledge that a profitable spread existed in the price at which some customers were willing to buy and others were willing to sell, according to the Merc's internal charges. If one customer wanted to buy a contract at an index level of 208 and another wanted to sell at 206, the traders would capture the two-point spread by doing two trades and intentionally giving the middleman's profit to Mr. Furman. These spreads can be large and therefore lucrative in the hectic trading of a fast market -- and were especially so the week of the stock-market crash.    The exchange alleges that trading documents were even altered. For instance, in one episode the morning of Oct. 19, 1987, another broker's trading card was allegedly changed to redirect a big trade with Mr. Shannon to Mr. Furman. The trade netted Mr. Furman $77,500. He then traded away $50,000 of that -- part to Mr. Shannon's brother and part to another Merc trader. The Merc called these &quot;alleged money transfer trades.&quot;    The broker whose trading card was changed, John L. Oberman, participated in many of the questionable transactions cited by the Merc's disciplinary case. Mr. Oberman heads one of the exchange's most successful broker groups, Oberman Mininni andamp; Associates. But while his trading cards show he was involved in the suspect trades, it isn't clear whether he benefited from them, and the Merc hasn't charged him with any wrongdoing. Mr. Oberman wouldn't comment.    Another example of a questionable Furman/Shannon transaction cited by the Merc came on Oct. 20, 1987. On that day, Mr. Shannon walked across the pit to ask a broker with Refco Inc., one of the world's biggest commodity firms, to &quot;redirect&quot; a trade to Mr. Furman, according to testimony given to the Merc. Mr. Shannon bought a like number of contracts at a higher price from Mr. Furman, who wound up making $75,000 on these and related transactions.    Trades that are intentionally &quot;redirected&quot; outside of open outcry are illegal. The Refco broker wasn't charged with wrongdoing. But Mr. Shannon was charged by the Merc with withholding an order and prearranged trading. Mr. Furman was charged with making prearranged trades.    Mr. Furman and Mr. Shannon are both aware of the exchange's plan to make examples of them. Normally, traders facing disciplinary action make settlement proposals directly to the Merc's compliance department. But in this high-stakes case, lawyers for the traders have bypassed the staff to negotiate directly with the Merc's influential outside counsel, Jerrold Salzman. Mr. Salzman won't comment on the case, but says it isn't uncommon for traders' lawyers to contact him.    Eight days before the exchange and the public learned of the government's broader investigation of the trading pits last January, the Merc accepted a $252,500 settlement offer from Mr. Furman. He paid a $125,000 fine, made restitution to E.F. Hutton customers of $127,500 and accepted a three-month suspension. The exchange agreed to reduce the number of charges against Mr. Furman to four counts of prearranged trading from a total of nine major counts of misconduct. And the trader agreed to cooperate with the exchange's continuing investigation.    But it quickly became apparent that federal prosecutors were looking at the exchange's disciplinary cases, and that cooperating with the Merc was likely to involve self-incrimination in any subsequent federal case, a person familiar with the Merc case says. Mr. Furman stopped talking. Mr. Shannon, then facing 12 major Merc charges of misconduct, canceled a meeting with exchange investigators scheduled for May 3, according to Merc documents. (A person familiar with the federal investigation says the Merc case is, in fact, being reviewed by an assistant to U.S. Attorney Valukas.)    On May 10, a Merc body, known as the probable-cause committee, broadened the case to include more trades, and leveled additional charges against Mr. Shannon and Mr. Furman. The committee notified Mr. Furman that he also will be charged with failure to cooperate, a major violation of exchange rules.    The Merc regularly builds prearrangedtrading cases without eyewitnesses, relying solely on trading records. The standard of proof in Merc disciplinary hearings is the &quot;weight of the evidence,&quot; not the more difficult &quot;beyond a reasonable doubt&quot; that criminal proceedings require. Traders who are the targets of disciplinary action can appeal to the industry's primary regulator, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and then to the federal courts.    But few cases, about a quarter, even get to the stage of a full-blown hearing at the Merc; the rest are mostly settled, for a fine and sometimes a suspension, with no admission of guilt. Fellow members, who sit on disciplinary committees or the Merc board, judge the accused. When it's all over, a brief account of the charges and penalties is posted for members and made available to news organizations.    The big firms, whose Sandamp;P orders helped enrich Mr. Furman, aren't talking. Shearson Lehman Hutton won't comment on Mr. Shannon. Salomon Brothers, which uses Mr. Oberman to broker Sandamp;P trades, also won't comment.    Mr. Oberman was found guilty in late 1985 by the Merc of prearranged trading on some large Salomon Brothers orders in the Sandamp;P pit, according to files at the CFTC. He was fined $15,000 and suspended for 15 days. Matthew Wolf, a Salomon employee, was fined $5,000 and suspended for five days for &quot;possible participation in the prearrangement&quot; of those trades. The 26-year-old Mr. Wolf is currently Salomon's vice president in charge of Sandamp;P operations at the Merc and the man who gives Mr. Oberman trade for the firm. He won't comment, either. </TEXT></DOC>