<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880122-0092 </DOCNO><HL> A Freer Opposition, Thanks to Contras </HL><AUTHOR> David Asman </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> MANAGUA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A blistering, late-morning sun heightens tensions as the largest anti-government demonstration since the Sandinistas took power in 1979 is about to begin. Everyone is nervous about whether government goons (known as turbistas) will be sent in to cause trouble.    Leaders of the demonstration argue with each other over the march route, since the crowd of at least 20,000 is about five times larger than expected. There will be room for only a few thousand at the parade route's destination: the grave of Pedro Joaquin Chamorro, whose murder 10 years to the day -- Jan. 10 -- sparked the revolution against the Somoza regime.    At the grave, leaders of the Coordinadora -- a coalition of opposition political parties, private-sector organizations and the two non-Sandinista unions -- deliver passionate anti-government speeches. Posters depict Nicaraguans breaking Sandinista handcuffs and snapping AK-47 rifles in two. But the turbistas never appear.    Laura Alvarez, a demonstrator who came by bus from the nearby city of Masaya, is asked whether she is hopeful that the government's tolerance of this demonstration means things are changing for the better. &quot;Possibly. But this is a public event that the whole world can see, and the government knows that. They will probably send us a private message to let us know when this liberty is finished.&quot;    That message may have come last Saturday. On the very day that Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega signed an agreement in Costa Rica pledging a more open society, seven opposition leaders were jailed without charges for having spoken to Contra leaders in Guatemala. They were soon released, but the government's message to the dissidents in Managua was clear: Believe what we do, not what we say. Don't push us too far.    Still, according to many leaders in the opposition, there is far more freedom today in Nicaragua -- at least for those with high visibility -- than there was two or three years ago. Rather than leading to a tighter restriction of civil liberties, as is commonly believed and feared in the U.S., the Contra war effort is in some cases causing a relaxation of the Sandinista rule. Why? &quot;It's simple,&quot; says Ramiro Gurdian, vice president of COSEP, a coalition of business organizations that oppose the government. &quot;We used to be public enemy number one. Now that the Contras are taking so much of the government's attention, we are only public enemy number two.&quot;    Mr. Gurdian, by far the most optimistic of the opposition leaders, maintains that the biggest battle for liberty already has been won. &quot;The Sandinistas have failed in their attempt to turn Nicaragua into another Cuba,&quot; he says. Mr. Gurdian's examples of how the Sandinistas failed are repeated by most Nicaraguan dissidents:   First, they failed in their attempt to destroy the Roman Catholic Church and replace it with the &quot;Iglesia Popular&quot; (Popular Church). The Iglesia Popular has become a pathetic caricature, attended only by Sandinistas and leftists from the U.S. and Europe.    Second, they failed to control the population with neighborhood CDS (Committees in Defense of Sandinistas) groups, patterned after similar groups in Cuba. Nicaraguans' discontent with the economic and political situation is now much stronger than their fear of the CDS. At an outdoor dinner party I attended in a home next door to a CDS member, loud criticisms were offered of government policy. Three years ago in the same house, residents would barely whisper criticism far less abusive of the government.    Last, the so-called mixed economy is also dead. With inflation at an annual rate of 2,000% and climbing every day, no one makes any money except in the black market, where the exchange rate is more than 40,000 cordobas to the dollar, compared with the official rate of 70 to 1.    &quot;Add to all this the costs and losses due to the war,&quot; says Mr. Gurdian, &quot;and you see why I am optimistic that something must change within a year.&quot;    What worries many here, however, is that unless military pressure against the Sandinistas continues, that change will be for the worst. &quot;In Communist countries they have no inflation, only waiting lines,&quot; says one former businessman. &quot;But here we have both -- the worst of capitalism and of communism. And this can't go on much longer.&quot;    Emilio Alvarez, an ophthalmologist who was jailed by the Somoza regime and is now an opposition leader, says the Sandinistas are caught in a dilemma. &quot;Since they aren't getting enough of a financial bailout from the Soviets, they are wondering if it's possible to separate a pair of twins -- economic control and political control,&quot; he says. &quot;The big question for them is how not to lose political power -- which they will never give up -- while improving the economy. They just can't come up with an answer.&quot;    The main source of unity in Nicaragua is without question the Roman Catholic Church, headed by Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo. Cardinal Obando and most of his aides are from peasant families and were ardent foes of the Somoza regime -- unlike the situation in revolutionary Cuba, where Fidel Castro was able to stir up feelings against a practically all-white clergy that was identified with the hated Batista regime. &quot;The church has become the center for all classes and races,&quot; says Dr. Alvarez.    While Cardinal Obando is not political in the same sense as the radical priests who serve in the government, he certainly gives counsel to individuals in politics. He apparently was the force behind bringing together the various groups and individuals in the Coordinadora. Until November, sniping and rivalries had made such coordination among the opposition impossible. Recently, the cardinal shuffled between Managua, San Jose, Guatemala City, Santo Domingo and other Latin American cities in his role as mediator of the committee that tried to forge some agreement between the Contras and the Sandinistas.    In an interview here that took place shortly before the meeting of Central American presidents last Friday, the cardinal said his personal opinion was that the negotiations between the Contras and the Sandinistas were going nowhere because the Sandinistas were not negotiating seriously. Perhaps now that Mr. Ortega has announced he will lift the state of emergency and call for a general amnesty, the cardinal thinks differently. But he also said in the interview that he thought it would be a mistake to prolong the negotiating process indefinitely like the Contadora process -- especially in light of the Sandinistas' reluctance to negotiate seriously.    This is an attitude shared not only by critics of the Sandinistas in Managua, but also by politicians in other Central American countries. Miguel Angel Rodriguez, leading member of Costa Rica's opposition Social Christian Party, maintains that the Arias peace plan is being used by the Sandinistas to buy time for further military expansion. &quot;The Sandinistas are using negotiations as a military tactic,&quot; Mr. Rodriguez said in an interview in San Jose a week before the presidents' meeting. &quot;They have no intention of keeping their political promises.&quot;    Mr. Rodriguez contends that not everyone in President Arias's Liberation Party is sanguine about the president's peace plan. &quot;This is not Liberation's peace plan; it is Arias's,&quot; says Mr. Rodriguez. Word in San Jose is that Foreign Minister Rodrigo Madrigal Nieto is unhappy with the plan.    Most surprising, however, are the views of Fernando Volio, a member of Liberation and president of Costa Rica's legislative assembly, a position approved by President Arias. Mr. Volio does not support extending deadlines or indulging in fine points. &quot;We want peace,&quot; Mr. Volio says, &quot;but a peace based on liberty, justice and democracy. This is not what the Sandinistas have in mind.&quot;    He recalls a conversation with Sandinista Vice President Sergio Ramirez at a time when the regime had &quot;permitted&quot; a few political parties to register and one newspaper to reopen. Says Mr. Volio: &quot;I told Sergio: You say you permitted these openings. But that's not what a democracy is. It's not at the discretion of the rulers to permit those they like to open at a particular moment. These are rights which, like others such as private property, must be guaranteed regardless of the whims of particular rulers. It was clear from that conversation with Sergio that the Sandinistas have no intention of guaranteeing these rights.&quot;    Mr. Volio was just warming up. &quot;I want the peace plan to succeed,&quot; he says. &quot;But with wide open eyes. The Sandinistas are just buying time to be stronger as a dictatorship. . . . Without military pressure, the Sandinistas will never change. And this is one weakness of the peace plan. Reagan is right. Without the Contras, the Sandinistas will grow stronger.&quot;    While Mr. Volio is not as visible as Mr. Arias, he certainly is available for interviews. And he most certainly is a Central American leader. Yet U.S. senators and representatives continue to travel to Central America and report that no Central American leader supports military pressure against the Sandinistas. In fact, Central American leaders and the Nicaraguan people themselves have learned through hard experience what the Sandinistas are and what it will take to change them. The Contras have opened the door for liberty within Nicaragua. And the Nicaraguan people, as well as many Central Americans, are afraid that door is about to be slammed shut yet again.    ---   Mr. Asman edits the Journal's Americas column. A related editorial appears nearby.    {See related story: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): A Contra Sellout?&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 22, 1988}</TEXT></DOC>