<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Torn Pakistan:Buffer AgainstSoviet Threat---By Theodore L. Eliot Jr.</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   On the eve of the seventh anniversary of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the neighboring nation of Pakistan is increasingly burdened with problems relating to its security and stability. The U.S. interest in assisting Pakistan has never been greater. Next year Congress will make key decisions on the size of the aid program to Pakistan. A wrong step could have adverse consequences for both regional and global security.    Pakistan is a poor, largely illiterate country, deeply divided into four major ethnic groups. The gap in living standards between the landowning elite and the upper reaches of the civil and military services on the one hand and the mass of Pakistanis on the other is wide. Education standards are low, and graduates of universities have inflated ideas about their competence and are frustrated by usually being unable to find skilled enough jobs.    The government of President Zia-ul-Haq has ended martial law and has reestablished a limited measure of political liberty. Its opposition, sparked by his predecessor's daughter Benazir Bhutto, is pushing hard for new, free elections. The seeds of a more democratic system are being sowed, but the political, economic and social climate of the country are such that these seeds need careful nurturing.    Pakistan has been achieving steady economic growth. But it is facing new problems as a result of the decline in remittances from Pakistanis working in those Arab countries that have seen their economies damaged by declining oil prices. Bureaucratic restrictions also continue to limit opportunities for private investment, although there has been some recent improvement in the investment climate.    Meanwhile, the 40-year-old hostility between India and Pakistan continues unabated, with the level of mutual suspicion and distrust a cause of despair for Americans who believe both countries would benefit from concentrating on other, more constructive matters. Pakistan has achieved a reasonably good relationship with its western neighbor, Iran, but has to be concerned about possible post-Khomeini instability.    On top of all its other problems, Pakistan is bearing the major burden of the war in Afghanistan. No end to the conflict is in sight. The military situation is stalemated, with neither the resistance nor the Soviets able to gain a decisive edge. The current United Nations-sponsored diplomatic effort still seems stalemated on the continuing Soviet refusal to set a reasonably brief timetable for withdrawal of troops. The Afghan resistance is divided, and neither the Soviets nor the Pakistanis are able to perceive what kind of a regime might succeed the present Soviet puppet government in Kabul. Meanwhile, Pakistan shoulders the major burden of sustaining some three million Afghan refugees on its soil. Almost all military supplies for the resistance travel through Pakistan.    Soviet pressures on Pakistan to cease aiding the resistance are increasing. Cross-border incursions and air attacks have been stepped up. There have been numerous bomb explosions in Peshawar, the capital of the Northwest Frontier Province and the headquarters of Afghan resistance groups. Many observers believe these bombs, which have caused many casualties, have been set off at Soviet instigation. They have, to some degree, achieved a Soviet purpose because they have instigated some anti-Afghan rioting.    These Soviet pressures are clearly designed to weaken support in Pakistan for the resistance -- support that is its very lifeblood. The government of President Zia-ul-Haq and Prime Minister Junejo remains steadfast, convinced that it is not in Pakistan's interest to have the Soviets consolidate their control of Afghanistan. Even opposition leader Benazir Bhutto has not urged a softer Pakistani stance.    Nevertheless, Soviet pressures are having some effect. Many Pakistanis are nervous about greater assistance to the resistance, fearing Soviet reprisals. Others, feeling the pressures and burdens of the Afghan refugees, suggest starting direct talks with the Kabul regime. Although small and currently not an important factor in Pakistani politics, there are also leftist groups calling for an end to support for the resistance.    The implications of this situation for U.S. policy are clear. A Soviet victory in Afghanistan would create new opportunities for Moscow to threaten Pakistan and the oil-rich Persian Gulf region. Vital U.S. security and economic interests compel the U.S. to continue to give assistance to both the Afghan resistance and to Pakistan. A Pakistan lacking U.S. support and faced with the Red Army on its western border and a hostile India to the east would be sorely tempted to seek an accommodation with the Soviets that would end support for the Afghan struggle.    The Reagan administration is proposing a six-year, $4.02 billion aid program for Pakistan that would begin on Oct. 1, 1987. Slightly more than half the total, $2.28 billion, would be economic aid. The remainder would be military assistance. U.S. aid is contingent on Pakistan's continuing to forswear the development of nuclear weapons. The U.S. also refuses to take sides in the Indo-Pakistan quarrel, while not giving either country a veto on U.S. relations with the other. American aid also implicitly encourages further steps in Pakistan in the direction of a more open political system.    Congress should approve the new aid package. A steadfast U.S. commitment to Pakistan and to the Afghan resistance is the best means of thwarting Soviet expansionism in that part of the world.    ---   Mr. Eliot, executive director of The Asia Foundation's Center for Asian Pacific Affairs, served as U.S. ambassador to Afghanistan from 1973 to 1978. He returned last month from a trip to Pakistan. </TEXT></DOC>