<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870602-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Notable andamp; Quotable</HL><DD> 06/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   From a statement to the House Sciences and Technology Committee last month by Frederick Seitz, former president of the American Physical Society (APS) and the National Academy of Sciences:    A distinguished roster of American scientists has prepared a report on Missile Defense for the Council of the APS. The report has been presented to the public as an important contribution to the national debate over the best means of ensuring the survival of the American nation.    In my view, however, this report is not worthy of serious consideration in that vital debate. This may seem like an unduly severe indictment of a document bearing the seal of approval of one of the nation's most distinguished scientific bodies. Yet I know of no other way to describe a nominally serious study, replete with equations, which nonetheless contains numerous errors, inconsistencies and unrealistic assumptions.    The mistakes in the report are not small. They are major errors, by factors of as much as 100-fold. Furthermore, these errors and inaccuracies are, as far as we can tell, always in one direction -- such as to make the plan for defending the American people -- indeed the people of the free world -- against a Soviet nuclear attack seem more difficult than it really is.    I make this judgment on the report of the APS panel from the perspective of more than half a century of membership in the American Physical Society, and past service as a president of the Society and member of its Governing Council. I know of no precedent, in my long association with the American Physical Society, for the issuance of so seriously flawed a document as this, under the aegis of that Council. . . .    What we seem to see at work here is a lowering of the standards of one of our most respected scientific organizations, in regard to an important defense program that happens to be unpopular with a number of American physicists. Such a degradation of the standards of a distinguished scientific body is a very serious matter, with ominous implications for the health of the American scientific community and the welfare of our nation.    The Executive Summary of the APS report, which purports to be an accurate summary of this report's findings, is inconsistent with the body of the report in numerous respects. Furthermore, the inconsistencies are always in a direction that makes the Executive Summary more negative and pessimistic than the technical analysis in the report itself would warrant.    A public statement released by the Council goes beyond even the Executive Summary of the report in expressing still more negative and pessimistic statements about the prospects for defending the American people from Soviet missile attacks. In fact, the Council's statement abandons all pretense of being based on scientific factors; it explicitly states that its comments go beyond the limits of the technical report of its panel. I cannot help but conclude that these actions by the Council of the American Physical Society represent a political as well as a scientific declaration. . . .    Personally, I believe that scientific societies and academies serve the fields of science and the nation best when they do all they can to avoid taking political positions on national issues. Scientists in our open countries should treasure the freedoms they have and devote their societies to purely scientific affairs. There are other avenues for expressing political views. </TEXT></DOC>