<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871019-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Arab and Israeli Officials Tell ShultzU.S. Should Stage Counterattack on Iran---By John WalcottStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FRESTTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)PETROLEUM (PET)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> JERUSALEM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   While the Reagan administration debated how to respond to an Iranian missile attack, Secretary of State George Shultz found America's feuding friends in the Middle East in rare agreement that the U.S. should retaliate.    Arab and Israeli officials both argue that not responding forcefully would be riskier than mounting a retaliatory attack to destroy Iran's Chinese-made Silkworm missiles. On Friday, one such missile struck a U.S.-flagged oil tanker off Kuwait. The officials told Mr. Shultz, here on a four-day Mideast tour, that failing to act now would undercut America's shaky credibility in the region, invite further Iranian aggression, and strengthen the Soviet Union's hand in Mideast diplomacy.    Feelings among moderate Arab states are consistent with their long-held fears of an Iranian victory against Iraq. But a significant shift in Israeli policy appears to be developing amid growing fears that an Iranian victory could fuel a dangerous new surge of Moslem fundamentalism.    &quot;If Iran is not stopped, it will emerge as the imperial power in the gulf,&quot; said one Israeli diplomat here. &quot;If the United States does not respond, the consequences are going to be very heavy in the gulf, the Arab world, in Iran, and in the Soviet Union.&quot;    The moderate Arab states, which have been reticent about openly confronting Iran, were also emphatic. After meeting Saturday in Jeddah with Saudi Arabia's King Fahd, Mr. Shultz took the unusual step of telling reporters that the Saudis had expressed their outrage at recent Iranian actions. The Saudis, the secretary said, &quot;see Iran as a country which is stepping way outside the bounds of acceptable behavior.&quot; A senior official traveling with Mr. Shultz said that in the Saudis' view &quot;almost nothing&quot; the U.S. did to retaliate against Iran would be excessive.    The government-controlled Kuwait Times declared in an editorial Saturday that, &quot;As long as the attacked ships flew other countries' flags, the U.S. had a pretext to exercise restraint in its retaliatory moves. That is not the case now.&quot;    In Israel, the mood represents more of a change. Any thaw in relations between Jerusalem and Baghdad is likely to occur at a glacial pace, if it happens at all. The Israelis still deeply distrust the regime of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. However, a longstanding consensus -- that Iraq is more dangerous than Iran -- has dissolved, as has the much disputed notion that Israeli or American actions can strengthen pragmatic forces in Iran and temper the Ayatollah Khomeini's policies.    &quot;There are no moderates in Iran,&quot; says an Israeli diplomat intimately involved in formulating Persian Gulf policies.    Indeed, one Iranian who earlier had been labeled a moderate by some Israeli officials, Hojatolislam Mahadi Karubi, was the spiritual leader of the armed Iranian pilgrims who rioted in the Saudi holy city of Mecca last July. Recently, Israeli intelligence also has linked Mr. Karubi to one of Iran's foremost patrons of terrorism, Interior Minister Mohammed Mohtashami-Por, Israeli officials asserted.    With hopes of influencing Iranian moderates dashed, some Israeli political leaders are even signaling a cautious interest in improving relations with Iraq, long one of the Jewish state's bitterest enemies.    &quot;If the Iraqis are ready to have some rapprochement, I think they will find some interest here,&quot; said a senior member of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's conservative Likud coalition who requested anonymity.    Iraq never signed a cease-fire or armistice with Israel after the Jewish state's 1948 war of independence. But the Israeli political leader said that, if Iraq were to speak publicly on the need to end Arab-Israeli hostilities and stop terrorism, Israel would consider exchanging intelligence on Iranian-backed terrorist groups, guaranteeing the security of a pipeline for Iraqi oil to the Jordanian port of Aqaba, and even eventually opening diplomatic relations with Baghdad.    &quot;There is an important shift in Israeli thinking under way,&quot; said one American official who accompanied Mr. Shultz to the Middle East.    A number of recent developments, including the Iran-Contra scandal, have prompted such rethinking. In recent months, officials here said, Iranian militants have begun appearing in force for the first time in Beirut and near the Israeli border in southern Lebanon. The Iranians, according to Israeli officials, have been buying land and buildings, establishing new Shiite Moslem community centers, and even offering accelerated religious training to Lebanese Shiites who want to become imams, or spiritual leaders.    Israeli officials are also concerned that an Iranian victory over Iraq could give a boost to the large, if less potent, fundamentalist movement in Egypt.    In addition, Israeli officials said the Iranians have built a global terrorist network that is far superior to that of either Libya's Moammar Gadhafi or the notorious Palestinian terrorist, Abu Nidal. &quot;They're very active all over the world,&quot; said an Israeli expert on Iran. &quot;They're more organized than the Libyans, they have larger communities of expatriates to draw upon, they are more loyal to the government than the Libyans, and their organization is more sophisticated.&quot;    Although intelligence also suggests that the Iranians played a role in some terrorist incidents in France, they appear so far to be organizing, not carrying out, terrorist operations, said one knowledgeable Israeli analyst. But the Iranian terror apparatus already appears well established in Hamburg, West Germany, London and Paris, as well as in Belgium and Italy and throughout Moslem sections of Africa, Israeli officials said.    The change in thinking about Iran also reflects personnel shifts made in the wake of the Iran-Contra affair. Some Israeli officials -- including David Kimche, the former director general of the foreign ministry, and Amiram Nir, the prime minister's terrorism adviser -- who wanted to bolster moderates in Iran have been removed from the scene, although Mr. Nir retains his title.    Despite the changes, the Israelis remain deeply distrustful of Iraq. They worry that if the war with Iran ends, Iraqi President Hussein might throw his military forces into an attempt to liquidate Israel. Officials in the Israeli foreign ministry are suspicious that Iraqi hints of flexibility toward Israel are simply a ploy to muster American support concocted by Deputy Foreign Minister Nizar Hamdoon, until recently Iraq's highly regarded ambassador to the U.S.    &quot;The line that Mr. Hamdoon put out has not been corroborated by his superiors,&quot; said an Israeli official. President Hussein's public statements on Israel and on the Arab-Israeli conflict, he added, &quot;have been pretty discouraging. It's been the old classical attitude toward Israel.&quot; Added a prominent member of the Israeli parliament, the Knesset: &quot;It's not that we haven't looked for a new attitude; we just didn't see it.&quot;    One Israeli diplomat reflected the competing concerns. &quot;If we look behind the horizon, Iran may be the greater threat,&quot; he said. &quot;But we must not forget the Iraqi threat.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>