<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0038 </DOCNO><HL> )HL    TECHNOLOGY:Idea of Magnetic RefrigeratorIs Coming In From the Cold---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   COOLING LEFTOVERS and freezing ice cubes by magnetism seems like something from a Star Trek movie. But in recent months it's a possibility that has begun to loom large in the minds of engineers at a Hughes Aircraft Co. laboratory in El Segundo, Calif.    For several years, the Hughes engineers have been developing a refrigerator in which magnetic materials replace the gases used in refrigerators today. The magnetic refrigerator is the only machine that can plunge temperatures to within a fraction of a degree of absolute zero, minus 273 degrees Celsius. While such temperatures obviously aren't needed in home use, magnetic refrigeration has a variety of rather esoteric scientific and military uses, such as sensors that are kept supercold and thus supersensitive to infrared waves.    Earlier this year, however, the future of the magnetic refrigerator suddenly took on a new dimension. The refrigerator's key elements are superconducting electromagnets that produce powerful magnetic fields because they are wound with wires that conduct electricity without any loss of energy or production of heat. At the moment, such powerful magnets must be bathed in very expensive liquid helium at a frigid four degrees above absolute zero.    IN JANUARY, SCIENTISTS around the world announced the discovery of materials that are superconducting at temperatures at least 77 degrees above absolute zero, where cheap nitrogen becomes a liquid. There are even hints the new materials might be superconductors at ordinary room temperature. If the materials can be made into wires -- a big if, scientists say -- the economics of the magnetic refrigerator would change drastically.    &quot;If these new materials could be used to make superconducting magnets at higher temperatures (than liquid helium), magnetic refrigeration would compete with other refrigeration systems,&quot; says Frithjof Mastrup, chief scientist at Hughes's electro-optical and data systems group where the refrigerator is being developed. In fact, he adds, &quot;if room temperature superconductors are developed, magnetic refrigeration may become the preferred method of cooling.&quot; For example, a magnetic refrigerator would be cheaper and simpler, with fewer moving parts, than a gas refrigerator.    The magnetic refrigerator is based on a phenomenon discovered in the late 1920s. When certain magnetic materials enter a powerful magnetic field, they eject heat. When the materials are taken out of the magnetic field, they absorb heat. The solid materials, in other words, do what a gas does in a refrigerator although by a different principle. But the phenomenon has been of little practical use in refrigeration, partly because of the cost of the superconducting magnets and partly for lack of the right kind of materials.    Hughes engineers, armed with new space-age materials, began working on ways to apply magnetism to refrigeration about four years ago, Mr. Mastrup says. The company long has built cryogenic refrigerators for military and space sensors.    THESE CRYOGENIC gas refrigerators, however, have an unavoidable limit. The moment a normally gaseous element cools to below its boiling point, it becomes a liquid and can't be used as a refrigerant. Helium has the lowest boiling point of all the elements -- four degrees above absolute zero. This, for all practical purposes, is about as cold as a gas refrigerator can get.    The magnetic refrigerator doesn't have such a limit. Its cooling ability depends on the special materials being alternately magnetized and demagnitized rather than the expansion and compression of gas. Scientists have used the magneto-caloric effect to reach temperatures close to absolute zero, but it has involved only one cycle of magnetization-demagnetization, Mr. Mastrup says. &quot;Our goal is to make the process continuous,&quot; he explains.    To pull this trick off, the Hughes engineers use tiny, crystalline wafers of a material containing gadolinium, an element that is very magnetic at low temperatures. The wafers are attached to the rim of a wheel, and as they rotate into the field of a powerful superconducting magnet, they suddenly become magnetized and give off their heat, which is pulled out of the refrigerator. As the cooled wafers rotate out of the magnetic field, they revert to their normal nonmagnetic state, absorb heat and thus achieve refrigeration. Rotating back into the magnetic field, the warmed wafers discharge their heat, starting the cycle over again.    AS SIMPLE AS IT SOUNDS, developing the refrigerator is no easy task. The components have to withstand high pressures created by the powerful superconducting magnets. Moreover, Mr. Mastrup notes, &quot;We have to build it at room temperatures, but it has to operate at near absolute zero; and you know what happens when metals are cooled. They shrink.&quot; Thus, working out the tolerances of the parts has required much ingenuity.    The Hughes engineers are guarded about the immediate uses of magnetic refrigerators, explainable perhaps by the company's recent $4.9 million Air Force contract to develop two of the refrigerators for the Star Wars program.    Magnetic refrigerators could be used to cool superconducting magnets of magnetically levitated trains, which explains why the Japanese also are hard at work on magnetic refrigeration.    Meanwhile, says Mr. Mastrup, with the possibility of cheaper, high-temperature superconducting magnets on the horizon, &quot;we certainly have our eyes on possible commercial applications.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>