<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0123 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Father Jerzy's Story: Solidarity Forever---By K.E. Grubbs Jr.</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   As Pope John Paul II travels this week through his homeland, one of the most poignant stops on his itinerary, reluctantly granted by the Polish military government, is the grave of Father Jerzy Popieluszko. Two weeks ago, Sen. Edward Kennedy made a pilgrimage to the same site. And during his tour of Eastern Europe last winter, Deputy Secretary of State John Whitehead made a point of visiting the hallowed place. Thus, the martyrdom of Father Popieluszko has become a symbol, for the world as well as for the Poles, of opposition to communist rule.    Jerzy Popieluszko took up the cause of Poland's Solidarity movement during the martial-law years. On Oct. 19, 1984, four police thugs killed him. The ringleader of the assassins was a young man named Grzegorz Piotrowski, a zealot for the Jaruzelski regime who had hounded the popular priest before brutally taking his life.    &quot;The Priest and the Policeman: The Courageous Life and Cruel Murder of Father Jerzy Popieluszko&quot; (Summit Books, 251 pages, $17.95) tells the story of the lives of these two very different men. John Moody, who covered Poland for Time magazine, and Roger Boyes, who has covered Eastern Europe for the Times of London, have turned these starkly contrasting biographies into a gripping narrative in which a dedicated moral hero is ruthlessly stalked by a banal and evil villain.    Their research is thorough and they add drama to an intrinsically exciting story by couching it in a fast, condensed newsweekly style. But if the two authors come out of the world of bread-and-butter reporting, they have not fallen into the trap of false objectivity in this book. Mr. Popieluszko and Mr. Piotrowski are the main characters, opposite but never equal in the moral weight they are given.    The young and physically weak Alfons Popieluszko (he changed his name to Jerzy in seminary when he learned Alfons meant &quot;pimp&quot; in Warsaw slang) emerged from the cornfields of eastern Poland and joined the army. There he refused an order to remove a cross from his neck and took some rough physical punishment for his disobedience. Next he went to the seminary, where he committed himself to the spirit of resistance exemplified by the late Stefan Cardinal Wyszynski, primate of Poland. He strove to be placed in a parish that could best use his energies, and eventually discovered the cause of Solidarity.    As the movement grew in vigor and boldness, Mr. Popieluszko's sermons included more and more barbs against the Jaruzelski regime. His popularity grew, and he installed loudspeakers so the overflow crowds he drew could hear him speak. In those crowds, he began to notice the presence of mysterious notetakers.    Mr. Piotrowski's path was more orthodox. By the time he was matched against Mr. Popieluszko, he was a full-blown product of arid Marxist intellectualism trained to practice &quot;sophisticated&quot; admiration of the Soviet Union. His training led him to commit murder, but the power he served could not protect him completely from the consequences of his acts.    Public revulsion and pressure from Poles and the rest of the world persuaded the Polish government to bring Mr. Piotrowski and his accomplices to trial. The ultimate verdict was guilty, but the trial itself was often a farcical inversion of justice in which Mr. Popieluszko often seemed to be the unnamed defendant.    Presiding over a panel of five judges, Artur Kujawa helped the Interior Ministry's Gen. Zenon Platek, who was arrested separately from the other four, keep his lies straight. The arrogant Mr. Platek, who knew about and evidently even helped orchestrate the murder, was set free while the others were sentenced to prison.    By admitting as evidence a police file on Popieluszko's rebellious activities, Judge Kujawa helped the prosecution set up a scenario in which Mr. Popieluszko was presented as courting his own justifiable slaying.    From this shabby display of bogus justice there does emerge, in addition to Mr. Popieluszko himself, a heroic figure. Edwarde Wende, representing Mr. Popieluszko's bodyguard and driver, gave what the authors call one of the most eloquent summations in Polish judicial history. Mr. Wende, who has often defended non-communists against the state, stared directly at the judges as he said, &quot;The defendants should know that the bench representing the people should be much longer. It stretches to millions of Polish hearts and homes. They did not know that there are some people who cannot be killed -- people whose graves are lit eternally. They should have known that.&quot;    Then, noting Mr. Popieluszko's opposition to the death penalty, Mr. Wende asked that Mr. Piotrowski not be hanged, a plea that helped influence the court to sentence the unremorseful killer to 25 years in prison. The night of the verdict, Mr. Piotrowski's secret-police colleagues went to a fancy restaurant in Lodz and celebrated his escaping the noose, some of them firing their guns into the ceiling. That spirit, unfortunately, remains alive in Poland, too.    ---   Mr. Grubbs is editorial and commentary director of the Orange County (Calif.) Register. </TEXT></DOC>