<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870805-0001 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. InvestigatingPossible SmugglingOf Parts to Poland---By Marcus BrauchliStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPCOMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> STOCKHOLM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   U.S. and Swedish authorities are investigating the possibility that a ring of Polish-born businessmen smuggled state-of-the-art electronic parts from the U.S. to their homeland through Sweden.    The investigation follows by two months the censure of Japan's Toshiba Corp. and Norway's Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk for having illegally exported sophisticated, militarily sensitive machine tools to the Soviet Union.    Ingmar Gilldahl, a state prosecutor in Solentuna, just outside of Stockholm, said police have seized documents from a company near there that may indicate that it illegally transshipped advanced electronic parts to Poland for years.    He said the company was run by two Polish-born brothers. In accordance with Swedish law, Mr. Gilldahl wouldn't identify the brothers or the company under investigation. But he said one of the brothers was arrested May 13 in California on federal charges stemming from an attempt to export from the U.S. computer microprocessors without proper documentation.    A spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office in Los Angeles confirmed that two Polish-born residents of Sweden were arrested May 13 at Los Angeles International Airport as they tried to board a flight to Stockholm. She said the two, Marek Cieslak, a citizen of Poland, and Andrzej Schmidt, a Canadian citizen, were arrested when U.S. Customs inspectors discovered $46,000 of computer microprocessors in their carry-on baggage. It is apparently Mr. Cieslak's company that is under investigation in Sweden.    The arrests have triggered a federal investigation in the U.S. On May 29, Messrs. Cieslak and Schmidt were indicted on a total of 12 counts alleging that the parts were illegally obtained and weren't licensed for export. Both men have pleaded innocent to the charges, and a court date for the pair will be set Aug. 24.    According to the indictment, Mr. Cieslak and Mr. Schmidt bought the microprocessors from a Torrance, Calif., concern, Leo Electronic Corp., as representatives of electronics companies in Sweden. Mr. Cieslak is the owner of MC Electronics AB of Jaerfaella and Mr. Schmidt works for ATC Electronic Service AB of Enskede, according to the U.S. indictment. Neither company is listed in the Stockholm telephone directory, and company officials couldn't be reached for comment.    The indictment charges that the pair failed to obtain necessary U.S. Commerce Department approval to ship the parts to Sweden or Poland. Because the microprocessors have a wide range of commercial and military applications, the indictment said, the Commerce Department would have refused to allow the devices to be shipped to Poland. Exports of strategically important products from the U.S. to the Soviet bloc are restricted by the Paris-based Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls.    U.S. and Swedish officials said they believe other people may have known about or been involved in the shipments. The spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney in California declined to indicate who else is under investigation.    But in Sweden, Annbrit Bergendahl, the head of the Swedish Customs Service's high-technology export-control unit, said customs officials are examining company records confiscated by police to determine whether the men under arrest in California as well as a brother -- in Sweden -- of one of the two arrested men, broke a law barring the re-export of high-technology equipment to the Eastern bloc. Swedish authorities also are trying to determine whether the Polish brothers evaded customs duties.    She said Swedish investigators probably would collaborate with U.S. officials in their investigation. &quot;When we suspect there is something wrong, we talk to each other,&quot; said Mrs. Bergendahl. A spokesman for the U.S. Embassy in Stockholm declined to comment on the case.    The investigations into the possible smuggling of computer parts are the first since the U.S. earlier this year lifted certain restraints on exports to Sweden. On a visit to Stockholm in May, the late U.S. Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige disclosed that the U.S. would allow Sweden to receive certain U.S. high-technology exports without U.S. government approval.    The change marked a significant improvement in U.S.-Sweden trade relations, which had been strained a year earlier when the U.S. Commerce Department imposed a $440,000 fine on ASEA AB, a giant Swedish engineering company, for selling U.S.-made computers to the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia from 1980 to 1983. It was the largest civil penalty imposed on a non-U.S. company for violating U.S. laws controlling exports of goods to potential adversaries. </TEXT></DOC>