<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871029-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Many Signs Indicate ChoiceWill Be Federal JudgeKennedy of California---By Stephen Wermiel and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan plans to announce today his choice for a new Supreme Court nominee and many signs point to Anthony Kennedy, a federal appeals court judge in Sacramento, Calif.    White House officials said that as President Reagan made his final deliberations, the choices were narrowed to three: Mr. Kennedy and two other federal appeals court judges, Ralph Winter of New Haven, Conn., and Douglas Ginsburg of Washington, D.C.    President Reagan has scheduled a final meeting this morning with White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker and Attorney General Edwin Meese, and sources at both the Justice Department and the White House said the name most often mentioned was Judge Kennedy's.    Although Senate Democrats aren't fully familiar with his record, initial readings suggest Judge Kennedy would be a far less controversial nominee than Judge Robert Bork, whose nomination was defeated by the Senate last week on a 58-42 vote.    The timetable for Senate action on the nomination is unclear. It is conceivable that the Senate Judiciary Committee could hold hearings in mid-December, although the full Senate is tentatively scheduled to adjourn Nov. 21. It is unlikely that the full Senate would act on the nomination before January. By the time the nominee took his place on the bench, he would have missed his chance to participate in about two-thirds of the cases for the term.    Judge Kennedy, 51 years old, was appointed to the federal appeals court in San Francisco by President Ford in 1976. A graduate of Harvard Law School, he practiced law in Sacramento for a number of years before being appointed to the appeals court. He also has been teaching constitutional law at the University of the Pacific's McGeorge School of Law for nearly two decades and is considered one of the school's most popular professors.    He has a reputation as a conservative, but hasn't been identified with major right-wing ideological battles or with conservative politics. Unlike Judge Bork, he hasn't written any law review articles, and his speeches as a judge aren't widely circulated.    Judge Kennedy's ties to the Reagan administration are long established. He helped draft a tax-reduction referendum for Mr. Reagan when Mr. Reagan was governor of California. The unsuccessful Proposition One was a predecessor to Proposition 13, which helped launch tax-reduction efforts throughout the U.S.    He also has had strong support from Richard Willard, assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department's civil division, and several other persons with ties to the administration who were law clerks for the judge.    Nevertheless, some conservatives in the Justice Department would prefer either Judge Ginsburg or Judge Winter, and their arguments may affect the advice Mr. Meese offers the president.    The selection process on this nominee has differed markedly from the choice of Judge Bork. Mr. Baker made a point of seriously consulting with Senate Democrats in an effort to determine which potential nominees would encounter resistance and which ones would be likely to be confirmed. Senate Democrats and Republicans told Mr. Baker in separate meetings this week that Judge Kennedy looked like a confirmable choice.    Judge Winter, 52, also has strong support within the administration, but he evokes mixed reactions. Some conservatives think he would be too moderate, citing his close ties to liberal Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall. Some moderates in the administration favor Judge Winter as more compassionate and open-minded than Judge Bork, but they fear his selection might be too risky because some law review articles he has written on civil rights have provoked dispute. He was appointed to the federal appeals court in New York by President Reagan in 1982 and is a former Yale Law School professor.    Judge Ginsburg, 41, is an advocate of increased economic analysis in law to measure a variety of issues in cost-benefit terms. Appointed to the federal appeals court here last year by President Reagan, he is a former Harvard Law School professor and has served in the Reagan administration as chief of the Justice Department's Antitrust Division and as an administrator of the Office of Management and Budget. </TEXT></DOC>