<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Rates Are Falling, Deductions Are Fading,And Without a Plan, Your Taxes May Rise---By Robert L. Rose</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES </IN><TEXT>   Here's a new rule for tax planning in 1987: Forget the old rules.    In this year of transition under the new tax law, rates are lower than in 1986 but not as low as promised for 1988. Many deductions ended Jan. 1, but others are being phased out over a period of years.    There are new distinctions to learn, such as deductible and non-deductible interest. There are more forms to fill out: for tax withholding, for Social Security numbers for children, for taxes for children.    Old tactics to cut taxes, such as shifting income to children, could lead to higher taxes. But some steps, such as deferring salary or taking long-term capital gains, can still whittle taxes in 1987.    The changes in the law affect different people in different ways. That makes it hard for tax specialists to come up with new advice, if not new words to express their frustration. &quot;It's so hair-pullingly complex,&quot; complains Stephan R. Leimberg, professor of taxation and estate planning at American College in Bryn Mawr, Pa.    Mr. Leimberg says audiences he lectures across the country are confused. The audiences are made up of tax lawyers and tax accountants.    This confusion won't quickly go away, but individuals can take steps now to ease the transition blues.    With 1986 returns due April 15, many taxpayers don't want to worry about 1987 or 1988. But they should take the time now to make projections of income, deductions and taxes for those two years.    Though a longer-term view is always useful, tax advisers say it's almost essential now -- with marginal tax rates bouncing around as they are in 1986, 1987 and 1988 -- to see the effect of tax-planning moves.    The marginal rate, or the rate at which the last dollar of income is taxed, is one concept that remains as important as ever. Starting this year, there are five marginal rates, or brackets, down from 15 for 1986.    In 1988 and beyond, there are supposed to be two: 15% and 28%. But Richard A. Helfand, a partner at Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. in Chicago, warns that many individuals' marginal rates &quot;will be very different&quot; from those highly publicized numbers. Actual rates next year go as high as 33% at certain income levels before dropping back to 28%.    And in some situations, Mr. Helfand and others point out, extra income could result in effective marginal rates far above 33%. For example, an owner of loss-producing rental real estate who gets extra income not only would face a tax liability on that extra income but could lose the $25,000 deduction for rental losses as a result of that income. The effective marginal tax rate in such a case could approach 50%.    Because rates for most people are again heading lower in 1988, a major tactic that worked last year promises to be popular again this year: deferring income. The highest of the five brackets in this transition year is 38.5%. In that bracket, an extra $10,000 in 1987 income means $3,850 more in taxes. In a 28% bracket in 1988, that $10,000 would face tax of $2,800. Deferral thus saves $1,050.    Taxpayers who wish -- and can afford -- to defer large amounts of earnings should consider doing so early in the year. They should also do so carefully. The Internal Revenue Service says it is taking a close look at 1986 deferral arrangements, and it's likely to do the same with this year's arrangements.    Richard H. Lager, national director of tax practice for accountants Grant Thornton in Washington, says deferral agreements must be made with an employer before the employee has earned the income. And although the IRS says such agreements must be for legitimate business reasons, Mr. Lager says one good reason is simply for the employer to have access to the increased cash flow.    Investment income also can be deferred. Buy a 12-month Treasury bill today, and you pay taxes on the discount, or interest, in the year of its maturity -- 1988. Taxes also can be deferred on U.S. savings bonds, but the bonds must be held for five years to get the best interest rate. T-bills and savings bonds have another benefit: They aren't taxed by the states.    Deferring income could lose much of its appeal in 1988, and not only because tax rates will be as low as they're due to go under this tax overhaul; there's also widespread skepticism that rates will remain at those levels for long.    &quot;Sooner rather than later,&quot; Milwaukee-based money manager James R. Arnold wrote in a recent newsletter, &quot;the wastrels in Washington will be back to doing a number on us, and tax rates will go back up, without reinstatement of any deductions, of course.&quot;    Accelerating deductions also can pay off. Falling tax rates mean deductions are worth less this year than they were last year but more than they will be next year. So despite fears to the contrary, charities are likely to see another burst of generosity at year's end, at least from taxpayers who itemize deductions. Those who don't itemize can no longer deduct charitable contributions. State treasuries also could benefit late in the year from prepayments of taxes due in 1988.    But some deductions, such as those for sales taxes, aren't around to be accelerated any more. And deducting other items won't be as easy. Unreimbursed medical expenses can't be deducted until they reach 7.5% of adjusted gross income. For last year, it was 5%. For miscellaneous itemized deductions, the floor is 2% of adjusted gross income. Last year, there wasn't a floor.    For those subject to the alternative minimum tax, deferring income and accelerating deductions could be precisely the wrong steps to take. Because this tax allows no break for some items that are normally deductible, bringing these deductions forward would mean losing them. And because the alternative minimum tax rate is 21%, compared with the 38.5% top rate for this year, deferring income away from 1987 could mean losing out on a lower rate.    Some major items, such as tax-shelter losses and consumer interest, are no longer deductible under the alternative minimum tax. In addition, the difference between the top regular tax rate and the alternative minimum rate narrows from 30 percentage points in 1986 to 17.5 points this year and seven points in 1988. The result is that more people will be affected by the alternative minimum tax -- which must be paid if it produces a larger tax liability than the regular tax does.    For those with heavy tax-shelter losses or a large number of deductions that aren't allowed under the alternative minimum tax, multiyear tax projections should be made using both the regular and the alternative minimum tax calculations.    The results can be unsettling. One New York doctor who never had had to worry about the alternative minimum tax found that his 1987 tax bill could go up $60,000 with the disallowance of shelter losses under that tax.    &quot;Most people don't understand it,&quot; Joel S. Isaacson of accountants Weber Lipshie andamp; Co. says of the new law. &quot;But when they see the bottom line, they get shocked.&quot;    While less shocking than the doctor's expected tab, a change that will hit even more taxpayers is the phasing out of consumer-interest deductions by 1991.    Tax specialists say borrowers should at least consider paying off consumer debt and switching to housing-backed loans, which remain fully deductible for principal and second residences.    But neither this nor any other new strategy should be accepted blindly. To begin with, interest deductions are generally permitted on loans for only as much as the cost of the home plus improvements, unless the loans are for educational or medical purposes. Thus, individuals who want to take full advantage of the law must carefully track and document their home improvements.    And though the deductibility of interest on housing-backed loans makes home-equity credit lines the latest rage, Rick Bobrow, a partner at accountants Ernst andamp; Whinney in Washington, warns that they typically carry variable interest rates. If rates rise, so do the loan payments.    &quot;The new tax law has put us into a kind of posture where people are going out and hocking their homes,&quot; Mr. Leimberg of American College says. &quot;Can you imagine, if the economy turns down, how many homes are going to be lost in this country?&quot;    Those who don't turn to housing-backed loans face difficult choices. If it made sense to borrow last year, when consumer interest expense was fully deductible, does it make sense this year, when only 65% can be written off? What about 1988, when only 40% is deductible?    The answer depends on the individual, but Mr. Lager of Grant Thornton says one thing is certain: &quot;The cost of borrowing just went up.&quot; Not only is some interest expense not deductible, but the remaining deduction is worth less under the lower tax rates.    The purpose of many tax-law changes is to make people concentrate on the economic rather than the tax aspects of investments. Starting in 1988, long-term capital gains are to be taxed at the same rate as other income. Investors, the thinking goes, will be concerned with total return, whether it comes from interest, dividends or capital appreciation.    But investors shouldn't forget about timing their capital transactions just yet. In this transition year, long-term gains are taxed at a maximum of 28%. For those who will be in the 33% bracket next year, taking long-term gains this year rather than next can still shave five percentage points off their tax liability.    And because short-term gains taken in 1987 can be taxed as high as 38.5%, holding the investment for more than six months to qualify for long-term treatment can save 10.5 points.    Tax overhaul has led to other twists of strategy, too. For example, the ending of the tax break for long-term gains and the lower overall tax rates make dividend-paying stocks more attractive.    But the new law also taxes investment income of children under the age of 14 at the parents' rate once that &quot;unearned&quot; income exceeds $1,000. In addition to recommending municipal bonds, some advisers suggest that children hold non-dividend-paying growth stocks, or mutual funds that invest in such stocks. Not only are there no dividends to tax, but any gains can be taken after the child reaches 14 and is no longer taxed at the parents' presumably higher rate.    As many are already finding out, though, keeping up with this tax overhaul can baffle even sophisticated investors.    One morning early in January, Ralph Lands stopped by the midtown Manhattan office of his financial planner, Mr. Isaacson of Weber Lipshie. Coffee cup in one hand and chin in the other, the Long Island resident listened as Mr. Isaacson briefed him on the outlook for 1987 and beyond.    They reviewed changes in the law and their implications for tax, investment and estate planning. Among many other things, they decided to look for sound real estate partnerships generating &quot;passive income&quot; to offset Mr. Lands's tax-shelter losses. They agreed to warn Mr. Lands's stockbroker not to buy municipal bonds subject to alternative minimum tax. And they decided to contact a lawyer about updating Mr. Lands's will.    After an hour and a half, Mr. Lands closed his folder and headed back to work -- but not before lamenting the latest changes in the tax law.    &quot;I think they've complicated it,&quot; he concluded.    ---   Mr. Rose is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Chicago bureau.    ---   Things to Do in 1987   1.All employees must file new W-4 withholding allowances statements with their employers by Oct. 1. Otherwise, employers must allow a single employee just one exemption and a married employee only two, until a new W-4 is filed.    2.Parents must get Social Security numbers for all children age five and older and include the names and numbers on 1987 tax returns filed in 1988. Failure to report a correct number calls for a $5 penalty.    ---   Help From the IRS   The Internal Revenue Service offers a variety of free publications. Listed below are those that touch on at least some aspect of the recent tax-law change. To find out where to obtain a copy, call 1-800-424-FORM. The IRS publication number is in parentheses.    Available Now   --Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax (505)    -- Depreciation (534)   --Highlights of 1986 Tax Changes (553)    -- Investment Credit (572)   --Pension and Annuity Income (575)    -- Individual Retirement Arrangements (590)   --Tax Calendars for 1987 (509)    -- Is My Withholding Correct? (919)   Available after April 15   --Explanation of Tax Reform Act for Individuals (920)    -- Explanation of Tax Reform Act for Businesses (921)</TEXT></DOC>