<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Trade Strategies:Most U.S. Firms SeekExtra Profits in Japan,At the Expense of Sales---But Campbell Soup Uses RiseIn Yen to Cut Its Prices;Teradyne Is Blending In---No Help for the Trade Deficit---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN CPB TER DDMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Campbell Soup Co. ships more soup to Albuquerque than to all Japan.    But thanks to the 89% rise of the Japanese yen against the U.S. dollar over the past two years, that could change. The Camden, N.J., company has been able to cut its soup prices below those of Japanese competitors -- increasing its sales and market share. &quot;We have a great opportunity to make Campbell's part of the Japanese consciousness,&quot; says James T. Conte, the managing director of Campbell Japan Inc.    The opportunity stemming from the high yen is one of the best offered to American companies in Japan in years. American companies, which formerly would barely break even or lose money in trying to compete against Japanese products here, now can cut prices to attract Japanese consumers and still keep profit margins healthy.    Even if the American companies leave their prices unchanged the current exchange rate sends additional dollars back home without further ado. Going for profits rather than market share seems to be the more popular alternative. &quot;Many companies see the high yen as an opportunity to regain profitability rather than expand market share,&quot; says Yoshihisa Murasawa, a consultant at Booz Allen andamp; Hamilton Inc. in Tokyo.    With either strategy, it can be argued, the hundreds of major American companies in Japan are winning. But if they opt for higher profits, they aren't doing much to reduce the huge U.S. trade deficit with Japan. The deficit, which topped $58.6 billion last year, has sparked trade friction between the countries, and protectionists in Congress see it as a measure of Japan's unwillingness to open its markets.    Japanese officials lay some of the blame on U.S. companies' preference for profits over market share. The Ministry of International Trade and Industry has compiled figures that show American microchip makers, which complain that the Japanese won't let them into the market, increased their average price of digital integrated circuits 66% since last August.    Total U.S. exports to Japan, in dollar terms, rose less than 5% in 1986, not including one-time gold shipments that made the U.S. performance look much better than it really was. By contrast, exports from Europe climbed 55%, according to the Japanese government.    Some Japanese trade officials taunt U.S. trade negotiators by calling American companies greedy and lazy. And as the U.S. negotiators try to push Japan to lower barriers that do exist and to cool tempers of politicians back home, they feel, with considerable frustration, that they aren't getting much help from U.S. companies here. Bruce Smart, the Commerce Department's top trade official, says U.S. companies &quot;have to get off their duffs and put up a lot of front-end money and effort.&quot;    However, some U.S. companies are cutting prices in Japan. For Campbell Soup, the reductions have meant expanding its distribution and going for long-term growth in market share. For Teradyne Inc., a Boston-based maker of electronic test equipment, cutting prices deeply has enabled it, despite a depressed market for its products, to stick to its long-term goal of becoming more like a Japanese company.    In contrast, Du Pont Co. has steadfastly refused to trim prices. Yet the chemicals giant has found that the profit-boosting high yen lets it spend more money on such things as a downtown-Tokyo office tower bearing its oval trademark, and it hopes thereby to get the higher visibility that it deems necessary to succeed in Japan.    Campbell Soup   Campbell Soup began making a major effort in Japan in 1983. Having just extricated itself from an unsatisfactory joint venture with a Japanese concern, it hired Mr. Conte, a former marketing consultant with a Ph.D. in Japanese history. He immediately began calling on store managers, urging them to give shelf space in their cramped stores for the seven varieties of soup, including &quot;corn potage,&quot; made exclusively for Japan.    &quot;They had never seen anyone like me before. They acted like I was a Martian,&quot; Mr. Conte says. Fluent in Japanese, he drank with them after work and listened to their comments.    Even though Campbell had made numerous changes in the product for the Japanese market, such as shiny top lids on the cans to appeal to picky Japanese housewives and expiration codes readable in Japanese, it was a hard sell.    But with the groundwork laid, the rise in the yen and the price cut that it permitted paid off. &quot;Lowering the price in itself wouldn't have been enough,&quot; Mr. Conte says. &quot;All the rest of the stuff had to be there, too.&quot;    Campbell dropped the store price for a can of soup 16%, to 185 yen from 220 yen, and kept retailers' profit margins the same. So, Mr. Conte could tell the shopkeepers who had shunned his soups that the lower price in yen would increase volume and that they would make a lot more money. In a major coup, he signed on two of the largest grocery chains in Japan. Now, almost twice as many stores handle the soup as did two years ago.    A little math shows that exchange-rate shift increased Campbell's profits, too, though the company won't discuss specific earnings. When the U.S. dollar was worth 240 yen in 1985, a can of Campbell's soup was selling for the equivalent of 91 cents a can. Now, even after a price cut in yen, it sells for more than $1.30 a can, up almost 50%. Campbell says it is plowing the extra profit back into its Japanese operations to double its sales staff and to offer special deals to entice other retailers.    &quot;I don't see a lot of American importers taking advantage of the high yen, and I don't know why,&quot; Mr. Conte says.    Some simply can't because they don't control the distribution and pricing of their own product. Others believe that reducing prices or expanding distribution would lower the product's exclusive image -- and profit margins -- in Japan.    Of course, the high yen has some drawbacks. It has raised the cost of keeping Americans in Japan. &quot;The bean counters back at headquarters are much happier in general, but they are also wondering why salaries jumped 40% last year,&quot; an American executive here says.    The high yen also has battered the Japanese economy, causing many Japanese companies to slash capital spending, some of which might have gone for U.S. products. &quot;They complained prices were too high when the yen was low,&quot; an American computer executive says. &quot;Now, they say they haven't enough money.&quot; U.S. business people also find that tough Japanese competitors, scrambling for slices of a shrinking pie, are getting even tougher.    Teradyne's Gains   &quot;We aren't normally a company that wheels and deals on price,&quot; says Richard Dyke, the director of Asian operations for Teradyne, a test-equipment maker. Nevertheless, cutting prices to fully reflect the high yen gave the company a fighting chance to sell machines used in making semiconductors. But Japanese semiconductor companies, plagued by overcapacity, have reduced capital expenditures about 75% from their 1985 peak. In addition, Teradyne faces competitors owned by chip makers.    But despite the depressed market, the company's bookings rose, and it gained about three percentage points of market share from its Japanese competitors. &quot;In terms of share, it is the most we have ever grown,&quot; says Mr. Dyke, a former Ohio State University professor of Japanese studies who led the negotiations to establish the Honda Motor Co. plant in Ohio.    &quot;I don't even want to think about what happens when the yen rate goes back down,&quot; he adds. &quot;It would be a disaster.&quot;    With the high yen enabling Teradyne to keep its current momentum, Mr. Dyke has been trying to make it a chameleon that looks and acts like a Japanese company. &quot;It's possible to build relationships, but you can't do it overnight,&quot; says Mr. Dyke, who, like Campbell's Mr. Conte, speaks Japanese. In fact, Teradyne has only 10 Americans on a staff that has doubled in the past year to 160 people, and eight of the Americans speak Japanese well enough to conduct most of their business in it.    The &quot;Japanization&quot; is paying off. Teradyne has spent four years cultivating its ties with Mitsubishi Electric Corp., one of Japan's major semiconductor makers. With Mitsubishi's help, it designed a system to check computer-chip memories.    In another case, Teradyne developed for Sony Corp. a machine that tests a solid-state image sensor used by Sony in its tiny eight-millimeter videocamera. The market is still small, but because the imaging device could be used in photocopying and facsimile machines, industrial robots and even toys, sales could grow into billions of dollars. &quot;We are testing it only because we are in Japan. If we were just a U.S. manufacturer, we would have been left out forever because by the time it got to the U.S. it would be too late,&quot; Mr. Dyke says.    Du Pont's Strategy   Du Pont, however, is one of the companies that doesn't want to lower its prices to reflect the higher yen. &quot;Our salesmen hear it every day,&quot; says Thomas F. Jordan, the vice president for strategic planning at Du Pont Japan Ltd., the Wilmington, Del., chemical giant's Japanese subsidiary.    It isn't greed, company executives say. &quot;If we lowered prices 20% across the board, we wouldn't be getting any more business right now,&quot; Mr. Jordan says. Jerald A. Blumberg, the Japanese unit's president, tells customers: &quot;You have to allow us to make a profit. What makes you think we were doing all right at 250 yen to the dollar?&quot;    Du Pont's Japanese profits are up significantly -- how much, it won't say. But it is spreading a lot of the money around Japan to build its image. It wants its stature here to reflect its status as one of the world's largest multinationals. &quot;Unless you have the presence, you will not be part of the network,&quot; Mr. Blumberg says. Unfortunately, many Japanese still mistake the company for the French maker of fancy cigarette lighters, S.T. DuPont.    Soon, a 20-story office tower will serve as Du Pont's headquarters. The company spent $85 million on a 200,000-square-foot technical center outside Tokyo. Its stock is now traded on the Tokyo exchange. And it is recruiting graduates fresh out of Japanese colleges. It is already rated by seniors in technical colleges as among the top 50 companies, foreign or domestic, that they would like to work for. (Topping the list is International Business Machines Corp.'s Japanese affiliate, which made similar efforts years ago.) Mr. Blumberg says success in Japan requires &quot;a lot more than price, and we have been slow to realize that.&quot;    Du Pont's efforts aren't just for show. The technical center, for example, will be used to advance the company's push into specially designed uses of its chemicals and polymers for its customers. Du Pont recently aided in the design of such diverse products as a nylon-resin engine cover for Nissan Motor Co., a hand-held calculator case for Casio Computer Co. and umbrella ribs that were to be made from its polymers. And as Japan moves more manufacturing offshore, having a design staff in Japan, where decisions are made, is becoming crucial.    &quot;Whether a car is built in a Japanese company's Kentucky plant, or in England or in Japan, our Japanese operations will have a hand in it,&quot; Mr. Blumberg says, adding: &quot;We only wish that we had moved like this 10 or 15 years ago.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>