<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A SOVIET OFFICIAL SAID the U.S. is attempting to scuttle an arms pact.    Kremlin arms-control official Viktor Karpov said U.S. demands over short-range nuclear missiles and concern over Moscow's conventional forces may be aimed at blocking a U.S.-Soviet agreement on the elimination of medium-range weapons from Europe. Karpov said a U.S. proposal made at the Geneva arms talks included a plan to convert U.S. midrange weapons into shorter-range arms rather than destroy them.    White House Chief of Staff Baker said in an ABC-TV interview that &quot;it would be likely&quot; that Gorbachev and Reagan will hold another summit.    ---   AQUINO ORDERED the Philippine military to crush the opposition.    Speaking from a bomb-damaged grandstand at the Philippines Military Academy, Aquino said her peace policy had failed and she directed the armed forces to &quot;end all threats to freedom&quot; by the country's communist rebels and rightist plotters. At least 350 people have been killed since a 60-day truce with the communist insurgents ended Feb. 8, including four people in last week's bomb explosion at the academy.    The Philippine president, in her commencement address at the academy, complained that the U.S. was giving advice instead of the aid it pledged.    ---   CONCERN MOUNTED over the cost of a prescription drug for AIDS.    The FDA gave approval Friday to Burroughs-Wellcome Co. to market the drug, AZT, for the treatment of AIDS and its related pneumonia. The drug's price -- $8,300 a year wholesale and $10,000 retail -- has alarmed physicians and consumer advocates, and unanswered questions about insurance and other coverage have prompted some to say the drug is beyond the reach of many AIDS patients.    In a six-month controlled trial last year, azidothymidine prolonged survival for AIDS patients. The drug's major side effects include severe anemia.    ---   Howard Baker said that he didn't expect any &quot;new, devastating development&quot; in the Iran-Contra affair, and that he was convinced Reagan &quot;is telling the truth&quot; about his knowledge of the initiative. Meanwhile, Contra leader Alfonso Robelo said North arranged for two Nicaraguan exile groups to receive about $100,000 in private funds.    ---   A Pentagon official denied that a planned military exercise in Central America in May was timed to coincide with what U.S. officials have called a spring offensive by anti-government rebels in Nicaragua. The maneuvers would involve sending thousands of U.S. troops to Honduras and other places in the region, military officials said.    ---   Weinberger warned Tehran that despite Iran's installation of new missile batteries along the Persian Gulf, the U.S. was prepared to use force to keep the waterway open. The defense secretary, in an NBC-TV interview, said the Pentagon was assessing whether more ships should be sent to join a Navy battle group in the region.    Iraqi President Hussein said Baghdad had foiled Iran's pledge of a decisive victory in the Persian Gulf war, but that Iraqi casualty figures during the past year were high. He said a peace treaty is the only way to end the six-year-old conflict.    ---   Italian authorities expressed concern about a new wave of internationally coordinated guerrilla attacks following Friday's murder of an air force general in Rome. The Interior Ministry said police had uncovered Italian links to terrorist groups in France and West Germany, and that the assassination may have been ordered from abroad.    ---   Former President Carter met twice with Syrian President Assad, a day after he urged officials in Damascus to use their influence to help free eight Americans held hostage in Lebanon. Carter, on a five-nation tour of North Africa and the Mideast, said the discussions with Assad were &quot;broad-ranging,&quot; but he refused to elaborate.    ---   Anglican Archbishop Tutu said he had urged black anti-apartheid leaders to halt their armed struggle against South Africa. Tutu, who spent the weekend in Zambia for talks with Oliver Tambo and other leaders of the African National Congress, held out little hope of a cease-fire. Pretoria has refused to hold talks with the ANC.    ---   Congress cleared a five-year, $88 billion highway bill and sent it to the White House, where Reagan has vowed to veto it as too costly. The Senate voted Friday to allow states to raise the speed limit to 65 mph from 55 mph on most rural interstate highways.    ---   NASA officials are expected to approve a launch-pad test firing of the space shuttle Discovery's main engines before it is cleared for blastoff next February, space agency sources said. The test would delay the shuttle flight by at least a month.    ---   Yugoslavia's prime minister said the Belgrade government would use &quot;all means&quot; available, including the army, to defend the country's political system. The comments by Branko Mikulic were his first regarding a recent wave of labor strikes and rising political dissent within the country.    ---   Chad's government said its troops captured Libya's air base of Ouadi Doum in northern Chad. Western intelligence sources said the air base was Libya's most important military installation in Chad.    ---   Died: Robert Preston, 68, actor, Saturday, in Santa Barbara, Calif., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>