<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880906-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Candidates Head Into Crucial Fall Campaign With Labor Day Rhetoric and Sharpened Barbs </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman and James M. Perry (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis, struggling to regain the initiative from his Republican rival, sharpened his economic message with a populist-style attack on Vice President George Bush.    Appearing before the traditional Labor Day rally in Hart Square here, Mr. Dukakis, who pledged to bring &quot;prosperity . . . to every home in every neighborhood in America,&quot; assailed Mr. Bush's proposal to cut the capital-gains tax rate to 15% from 28%. The Republican nominee, he charged, &quot;wants to give those who make $200,000 a year or more a tax break of $30,000. That's enough to send your son or daughter to Michigan State for four years.&quot;    More than 2,000 miles away in San Diego, the GOP nominee painted a much rosier picture of the economy while taking some sharp shots at his rival also. In a speech at the San Diego harbor, Mr. Bush said that with Labor Day as the traditional start of the fall campaign &quot;what better place to go than to the docks of the great city to make the point that eight years ago America's ships came in and now we're about to set sail for new ports of opportunity and progress.&quot;    The vice president said that along with jobs, the other campaign issue was peace, which is &quot;breaking out all over&quot; because of the strength and resolve of the Reagan administration. Mr. Dukakis, he charged, wouldn't be &quot;comfortable in a great Navy town like this. I would not be surprised if he thinks a naval exercise is something you find in Jane Fonda's workout book.&quot;    But if, as these Labor Day salvos suggest, the presidential campaign debate is short on lofty substance, it'll be long on harsh, even mean, tactics and rhetoric. Both sides anticipate a close election -- though the Bush camp privately is now convinced they enjoy a decided advantage -- and they're both zeroing in on the same critical states and swing voters.    But ever since the Republican convention last month, the vice president clearly has set the agenda for this campaign, and Democrats fear that if Mr. Dukakis doesn't turn that situation around in the next week or so, the Republicans may hold the upper hand in November.    The notions that dominate the official opening of the nine-week race are: that Mr. Dukakis and his campaign organization have been overrated until recent weeks and that time after time the Bush strategists have outmaneuvered their Democratic rivals. And, furthermore, that the vice president may have been underrated as a candidate; he has regained his confidence, which appeared wobbly even while winning the GOP nomination, and seems to have accomplished the task of emerging from President Reagan's shadow.    The contrast between the two men in recent days has been telling. Mr. Dukakis usually appears serious, even grim, rarely smiling and never changing. In comparison, Mr. Bush -- guided day by day, even hour by hour, by the findings of campaign pollster Robert Teeter -- is never quite the same figure and thus is proving a very elusive target for the Democrats.    For instance, one day last week in North Carolina he lashed out at Mr. Dukakis's jail furlough program and his veto, 11 years ago, of legislation requiring school teachers to lead their pupils in the pledge of allegiance to the flag.    &quot;I can't understand the type of thinking that lets first degree murderers who haven't even served enough time to be eligible for parole out on parole so they can rape and plunder again and then isn't willing to let the teachers lead the kids in the pledge of allegiance,&quot; Mr. Bush said. The shirt-sleeved Southern crowd, with conservative Sen. Jesse Helms looking on approvingly, loved this political red meat.    Switch to the Maritime Center in Norwalk, Conn., two days later. The men in the crowd are wearing blue blazers and Topsiders. Some of the women are wearing straw hats.    This is a different George Bush -- and he dishes out canapes.    &quot;I do consider myself a Teddy Roosevelt Republican,&quot; declared the man who 48 hours earlier was a Jesse Helms Republican. &quot;I'm also an Izaak Walton man. You know, he said, 'God does not deduct from man's time on Earth the time he spends fishing,' and that's good news for me.&quot; Folks in this polite crowd nod in solemn benediction.    The Bush campaign keeps the candidate tightly controlled and severely limits any opportunity for spontaneity or press questioning. This so far is a very successful effort to prevent the candidate from making one of what used to be his celebrated impromptu gaffes. Yesterday, for instance, the GOP nominee's availability to the press consisted of four photo opportunities listed in a press bulletin. But the day was full of good television shots in San Diego and later in Disneyland, where the vice president bade farewell to some departing Olympic athletes.    The generally smooth-running Bush campaign did run into some vociferous and creative Dukakis-backing hecklers as the candidate toured a fish company. &quot;Bush is fishy,&quot; was one chant. And the vice president's small crowds yesterday were in contrast to the huge crowds President Reagan drew four years ago when he kicked off his campaign in California.    But the key to derailing the GOP drive probably is whether the Dukakis campaign can be revitalized after a dreadful couple of weeks. One sign of their problems was the return, announced Friday, of John Sasso, the longtime Dukakis senior adviser who 11 months ago was dismissed from the campaign after he leaked a videotape suggesting that rival Democratic presidential aspirant Sen. Joseph Biden had lifted campaign speeches from British Labour Party leader Neil Kinnock.    Mr. Sasso's return as vice chairman of the campaign is expected to give a sharper edge, even a bite, to a candidate whose style has more nearly matched that of a faculty commons room than a street fight. Top Democrats hope that Mr. Dukakis's responses to the Bush ripostes will be sharper, swifter, more political, and less pedantic than over the past few weeks. (Privately, some top Republican strategists insist Mr. Sasso's value is overrated, and as the campaign gets rougher, they may even try to make an issue of him.)    Some of the Sasso approach was evident yesterday as the Democratic nominee adopted a sharper and more populist bent. &quot;I want to build an America where our kids can go to college and afford a new home, where our parents can get decent health care in their old age and enjoy a secure retirement, and where every American family is a full shareholder in the American dream.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis mocked Mr. Bush's comment last week that the 0.2-point rise in the unemployment rate to 5.6% in August was &quot;statistically irrelevant.&quot;    He also ridiculed Republican vice presidential nominee Sen. Dan Quayle, especially the idea that he's qualified to head the nation's anti-drug program, as promised by Mr. Bush. And at the same Detroit rally, AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland lashed out at Sen. Quayle, calling him a &quot;fawning tool of privilege.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis's main message in this swing through the industrial heartland -- Philadelphia, Detroit, St. Louis and Chicago -- was jobs and economic development. But he touched only lightly on national security, which is regarded as the Massachusetts governor's principal policy weakness. Yesterday he made passing references to the need for stronger efforts against international drug dealers and terrorists, and dealt mainly in generalities in foreign policy. The campaign will air its initial round of national commercials this week and will seek to aggressively attack the Republicans on such issues as jobs, drugs and education.    The vice president is expected to continue assailing his Democratic rival as a far-out liberal on taxes and spending and as a naive left-winger on foreign policy. GOP strategists think this message will not only ensure their Southern base but help considerably among blue-collar voters in the key industrial Midwestern states of Ohio, Illinois and Michigan. These strategists figure that 20% of Ronald Reagan's vote in 1984 came from sometime Democratic voters and, according to one senior Republican adviser, &quot;we can win if we pick up half that vote.&quot;    At the same time, Mr. Bush will try to move to the center -- away from the Reagan record -- on such issues as the environment and education in the hopes of attracting more baby boomers, particularly in California.    The Dukakis campaign basically is eyeing the same targets and is counting heavily on the Democratic vice presidential choice, Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, to wipe out Mr. Bush's current lead in Texas -- the home state of both Messrs. Bush and Bentsen.    One crucial element may be debates between the candidates. Both camps continued to haggle over the number, the timing and the ground rules. But there probably will be two Bush-Dukakis debates and one Quayle-Bentsen encounter. </TEXT></DOC>