<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880202-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Anger in Paradise: Park Service Proposal Sparks Bitter Backlash Along Delaware River --- To Preserve Pristine Setting, Plan Would Stress Zoning Instead of Land Purchase --- Eel Fisherman's Family Feud </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Machalaba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> REL CON </IN><DATELINE> NARROWSBURG, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   From the muddy river bank, Floyd Campfield gazes past the stones he piled last summer into a V-shaped, four-foot-high wall that nearly fills a section of the upper Delaware River. On fall nights, he moors his rowboat to the wooden trap at the wall's apex and listens to the splashing of eels in the rushing waters.    A breeze rustles the river-bank grasses as he scans the landscape. Over the steep hillside on the opposite bank, a winter sunset back-lights bare branches of oak, maple and hickory, dotted with the green of hemlock trees. But in the birch-fringed meadow behind him, a presence weighs on the eel fisherman. A real-estate developer has bought 49 acres and plans to fill it with new housing. &quot;It would ruin the river,&quot; Mr. Campfield says. &quot;It would be New York City on the Delaware.&quot;    The fate of this unspoiled setting, and millions of acres like it nationwide, hangs on a nearly 10-year struggle between the National Park Service and residents along 73 miles of this 300-foot-wide river. The area is the site of a federal experiment in preserving endangered natural areas.    The rural tranquillity of more than a dozen towns along this northernmost section of the Delaware, from Hancock to Port Jervis, already has been shattered by a bitter backlash at the Park Service efforts. Fearing the federal government would usurp their property rights, residents have sprayed Park Service trucks with swastikas. Angry groups have disrupted public hearings with cowbells and tambourines. And Glenn Pontier, the editor of this town's weekly River Reporter and a supporter of the Park Service, suspects residents of setting a blaze that destroyed his home in 1986.    At risk is a river meandering through a deep, wooded valley between New York and Pennsylvania that has changed little in centuries. Home to bass, shad and trout, the upper Delaware is one of the last free-flowing, unpolluted rivers in the East. Its water is so clear that canoeists can see rocks and eelgrass 10 feet below the surface. Although it lies in the path of a building boom spreading from New York City, the valley remains rustic and sparsely populated, with an abundance of deer, bears, bald eagles and other wildlife.    Instead of buying a vast tract to establish a national park -- its practice for much of the century -- the Park Service is testing the idea of leaving the land in private hands, then coaxing local towns to carefully control development. It plans to buy only 124 acres, mainly for canoe access sites, while controlling 55,000 acres of the surrounding private land through local zoning laws or conservation easements. Local towns will have until January 1990 to bring their land-use ordinances in line with Park Service standards, which require minimum two-acre lots and restrict building on steep slopes and hilltops. If a local community is unable or unwilling to block what the Park Service deems adverse development, the agency can condemn as many as 7,340 acres, but only as a last resort.    The plan is aimed at preserving the rural character of farmlands and hamlets. How well it works could help decide the fate of dozens of natural landscapes, ranging from coastal areas in Maine to the Amish country of Pennsylvania.    &quot;We expect to learn more about landscape conservation from the upper Delaware than from any other area,&quot; says J. Glenn Eugster, the chief planner of the Park Service's Mid-Atlantic region in Philadelphia.    Congress paid special attention to the upper Delaware when it added the river to the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act in 1978. The act, which has preserved dozens of rivers generally through federal acquisition, directed the Park Service to establish a plan to protect the upper Delaware within three years.    But Park Service errors slowed the process. The agency called in a planning team from its Denver office, which enraged residents by failing to consult with local communities. &quot;They acted like they owned the land,&quot; says Margaret Hillriegel, a former Freemont, N.Y., councilwoman. &quot;They upset everyone very much.&quot;    &quot;We did some very stupid things that caused a lot of anxiety,&quot; acknowledges James Coleman Jr., the director of the Park Service's Mid-Atlantic region.    Residents rejected the plan drawn by the Denver team. The towns later wrote their own version, which reduced the protected area, shifted more control to local governments and loosened restrictions on developers.    The plan that emerged drew a mixed response from the 4,000 full-time residents of the upper Delaware, a small number of whom still earn their livelihood by cutting timber, quarrying bluestone for sidewalks and selling smoked eels as a local delicacy.    While Mr. Campfield, the eel fisherman, prizes the valley because it &quot;has very few people but lots of peace and quiet,&quot; other residents view the area quite differently. Noel Van Swol, whose family owns 337 acres along the river in Long Eddy, intends to build a camp for recreational vehicles on part of it. He says the Park Service &quot;wants to turn this region into a living museum at the expense of local residents.&quot; To protect their rights, he says, &quot;we'll take them to court and make them pay for their folly.&quot;    Donald Rupp, who owns a diner near the river in Barryville, says, &quot;The Park Service doesn't have the money to buy our land, so it is taking it through regulation.&quot;    Stoking the conflict is the sharp rise of local land prices. Real-estate values within a half mile of the river have doubled in the past year to about $6,000 an acre. Some of the most attractive land on the river's edge is selling at $35,000 an acre. That's far below prices of $200,000 an acre in the New York suburbs. But the upper Delaware has &quot;tremendous potential&quot; for development, says Steven Adler, a New York developer who seeks to build a 240-unit housing complex here in this hamlet of 700 people.    Fred Reber, a real-estate agent in Barryville, says the upper Delaware is &quot;ideal&quot; for second-home buyers since the area is only a three-hour drive from New York City, 100 miles away. Mr. Rupp is optimistic that 10,000 homes will be built in the valley, three times the current number. Large tracts already have been sold to big outside speculators such as Patten Corp., which has subdivided 700 acres north of here.    Yet the remarkable thing about the upper Delaware, say environmentalists, is that it has resisted such development pressures and has kept its rural beauty for so long. The valley lacked coal and other natural resources to lure heavy industry, and it was bypassed by previous building booms that hit the nearby Pocono and Catskill mountains.    Dotted with old houses, the valley is without power lines, four-lane roads, office buildings, shopping malls and other trappings of 20th-century life. Indeed, one federal report noted that vestiges of 19th-century America, including a suspension bridge built in Lackawaxen, Pa., by Brooklyn Bridge designer John Roebling, survive as &quot;though preserved in amber.&quot;    The upper Delaware was a busier place a hundred years ago when loggers stripped the hills of timber and the Erie Railroad hauled tourists to riverside hotels. The boom fizzled by the 1930s, sending the valley into economic decline. Meanwhile, the forests grew back.    When the Park Service arrived in the valley in 1979, its first mission was to battle an invasion of weekend canoeists, many of whom rode the river drunk, stoned or nude. The agency's river patrols reduced drownings and sharply cut complaints of trespassing, and rangers arrested scuba divers who would overturn canoes and make off with any valuables that fell overboard.    The Park Service's efforts to protect the upper Delaware from adverse development so far are bringing mixed results. The agency has scuttled an Army Corps of Engineers plan to build ice booms across the river, and last year it helped Shohola, Pa., stop a hydroelectric dam on a Delaware River tributary. The Park Service has also spurred 12 of the 15 towns along the upper Delaware to pass zoning laws, compared with only a handful which had such rules before 1979.    But even Park Service officials acknowledge that they may have an easier time stopping big projects -- a dam or a factory, for example -- than curbing home building. On a wall map in a sprawling white house that novelist Zane Grey inhabited early this century, Malcolm Ross has marked the sites of nine new subdivisions planned within a half mile of the upper Delaware. &quot;I worry the valley will be chewed up a little bit at a time,&quot; says Mr. Ross, a Park Service resource specialist.    Some environmentalists are heartbroken that neither the Park Service nor state governments acquired the most scenic parts of the valley. And others are openly skeptical that local officials will be able to protect the upper Delaware because of demands from their neighbors to develop the land.    Amid the controversy, change is overtaking the 51-year-old Mr. Campfield. He still relishes the serenity of his life along the river, and he doesn't mind standing waist deep in the swiftly flowing river to build the rock walls for each fall's eel migration. But while a dozen eel fishermen used the river a decade ago, Mr. Campfield, a former state trooper, now is one of the last holdouts, he says.    For years Mr. Campfield relied on his son, Tom, to help him with the catch. But this autumn he plans to turn to outside help because his son has grown busy as a house builder. &quot;Eels really don't interest me much,&quot; says Tom Campfield, 21, who prefers instead to &quot;buy some land, put up a house and make 100% profit easy.&quot;    Though Mr. Campfield's son has repeatedly asked his parents to sell or give him some of their property along the river for house lots, his father steadfastly refuses. &quot;Over my dead body,&quot; says Mr. Campfield. </TEXT></DOC>