<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0036 </DOCNO><HL> ETA Systems Challenges the Supercomputer Giant---But Hitches Are Slowing the NewcomerIn Race With Cray Research---By Richard GibsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CDA CYR GOVMTCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> ST. PAUL, Minn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After more than a decade of dominating the market for the fastest and most powerful computers, Cray Research Inc. of Minneapolis now faces a new domestic challenger: ETA Systems Inc.    In late December, ETA, 89% owned by Control Data Corp., shipped its first supercomputer, boasting that its new line would run faster than the fastest Cray computer. The company's brash confidence is reflected right down to the bold red letters on its envelopes proclaiming: &quot;We will win the supercomputer race.&quot;    It may -- someday. But for now, the new supercomputer, the ETA-10, is off to a slow start. Its operating system hasn't been debugged. Despite a crash effort, the company is behind schedule on writing software. And disagreements over the level of funding from Washington to purchase ETA supercomputers for university research centers have delayed early orders.    But clearly, Cray, a powerhouse with a world-wide marketing force and a $100 million Randamp;D budget, is its biggest problem. Cray already has cut prices on some current models, stepped up its sales efforts, and speeded work on future machines that may sprint past ETA.    &quot;No one ever got fired for buying a Cray,&quot; says Gary P. Smaby, a computer analyst with Piper Jaffray andamp; Hopwood Inc. of Minneapolis. &quot;It's the safe choice.&quot;    Supercomputers, which can process data much more quickly than other machines, are used for tackling immensely complex problems. Common uses include simulating nuclear explosions and testing new airplane designs.    Not that ETA's problems with the machine are insurmountable; indeed, in some ways the new entry has changed the supercomputer business. Designed on computers and built largely by robots, the new machine uses chips, circuitry and architecture that likely will be imitated. ETA's highly automated factory is a model for low-cost production. Control Data and ETA executives believe the automation eventually will make the ETA-10 less expensive than Cray machines.    And if the problems are resolved, the ETA machine will have breathtaking speed. Running full out, it is designed to make 10 billion calculations a second -- speed that will take months off complex scientific computations.    Says Peter Patton, director of the Minnesota Supercomputer Center in Minneapolis: &quot;ETA will send the Japanese back to the drawing board.&quot;    Others note that the new machine contains so much innovative technology that problems are inevitable.    &quot;They're pushing state of the art in multilayer board technology and in supercooling and cycle time,&quot; says Jonathan Fram, analyst with Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. &quot;When you do that on so many fronts, problems start to compound themselves.&quot;    The first ETA-10, delivered in early January to Florida State University in Tallahassee, still is being debugged. It could be six months before the machine is fully operational, but the company says that shouldn't affect initial sales.    Moreover, the machine doesn't work as fast as promised. The fleetest Cray can perform a calculation in 4.1 nanoseconds, about twice as fast as the ETA-10. The company says the ETA-10's speed can be increased by adding processors, but outsiders say a more critical question involves available software, the real key to performance. There isn't much written yet for the ETA-10, and that is an important element in the decision to purchase the machine.    Software for the Cyber 205, Control Data's aging first-generation supercomputer, will be compatible with ETA's machines. But the Cyber uses an unusual internal operating system; to sell to non-Cyber users, ETA must offer programming that runs on American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.'s UNIX operating system, fast becoming an industry standard. That is yet to be done.    Even if its machine were working perfectly, ETA faces other problems. Its main initial market -- the government -- had supported ETA as an alternative to Cray for strategic reasons, but two showcase university installations have been delayed. Political infighting at the National Science Foundation, which was planning to fund the machines, plus recent federal budget cuts, may delay delivery of an ETA-10 to Princeton's National Supercomputer Center until summer. Delivery to Minnesota's Supercomputer Center also is doubtful.    ETA concedes that it needs such orders. &quot;It's important for us to penetrate the government laboratory marketplace,&quot; says Lee F. Kremer, the company's marketing vice president, who notes that the supercomputer industry relies heavily on government purchases.    At the same time, ETA faces competition from nearly every major computer maker. They all see the market swelling as more businesses use supercomputers to design and test products and to control complex data-processing networks, and as Wall Street uses them for trading programs.    The Japanese companies Fujitsu Ltd., Hitachi Corp. and NEC Corp. are setting up marketing arrangements with U.S. concerns, though only one Japanese-made supercomputer has been installed in the U.S. Digital Equipment Corp., Convex Computer Corp. and others are chipping away at the low end of the supercomputer market with minisupers, machines that have been enhanced so they are almost as fast as supercomputers at a tenth of the cost. International Business Machines Corp. also is improving its newest mainframes so they can perform some of the same tasks as supercomputers.    Control Data once owned the supercomputer business. But in the early 1970s, Seymour Cray, its principal computer designer, left the company to found Cray Research. Since then, Cray has sold or leased almost 150 machines, 60% of the world market. Cray expects to sell or lease 45 additional machines this year; at its most optimistic, ETA hopes to sell 10, says Lloyd M. Thorndyke, ETA's president. Control Data no longer makes its Cyber 205, although some models still are being sold.    No one will say exactly how many supercomputers exist. &quot;You'll never, ever find some&quot; of the machines, says Gary Blauer, a computer analyst with Dain Bosworth andamp; Co., Minneapolis. &quot;They go into the black hole of the spook world&quot; -- spying and weapons research.    Cray won't say how it is responding to ETA and the Japanese -- it publicly discounts ETA, calling it a &quot;paper tiger&quot; -- but Cray is speeding up development of two new models, which may run 100 times faster than current supercomputers.    It also recently introduced a $2.5 million &quot;starter set&quot; machine designed to capture more business. That increases pressure on ETA to cut its prices as well, says Jeff Canin of Hambrecht andamp; Quist, a San Francisco investment concern.    For Control Data, all this adds up to a huge risk. The company has invested $150 million in ETA; if the machine performs as advertised, Control Data could make big money on scientific and engineering computers, its main market. The manufacturing technology also will be implemented in other Control Data factories and machines. But an ETA flop would sting; Control Data is only now recovering from two years of record losses brought on by problems in its data storage business and the computer industry slump.    Control Data is searching for someone to run the supercomputer unit's day-to-day operations, although Mr. Thorndyke will stay on. &quot;It's changed from a development organization to a product one,&quot; explains a Control Data spokesman.    Initial sales efforts are targeting users with old Control Data Cyber 205 supercomputers, giving ETA time to fine-tune its machine before going head-to-head with Cray. Its lone overseas sale so far was a $21 million contract to the West German Weather Service, a longtime Control Data customer.    Even with glitches, the ETA-10's potential excites many would-be users. Says Joe Lannutti, director of the Supercomputer Computations Research Institute at Florida State: &quot;If you have a physicist champing at the bit to improve his calculations by a factor of 10, he's willing to suffer with a crude operating system.&quot;    ---   World-Wide Supercomputer Installations  Cray Research ........................... 148 Fujitsu .................................. 42 Control Data ............................. 39 Hitachi ................................... 8 NEC ....................................... 7 *Note: As of Dec. 31, 1986 Source: Piper, Jaffray andamp; Hopwood estimates</TEXT></DOC>