<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880614-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: A Tourist's-Eye View of the American Economy </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ECO </IN><TEXT>   One good way to study economics is from the seat of an automobile, motoring across the U.S. The newness of cars on the highways, the amount of truck traffic, the activity in and around towns and cities, the filled spaces in factory parking lots, the numbers of new or refurbished homes and businesses in places familiar from past trips -- all combined provide a gauge of economic health.    A meandering drive from New Jersey to Virginia and then through West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, Oklahoma and the Texas Panhandle to Santa Fe, N.M., has provided me with a rather extensive view of real-world economic indicators, not to mention a great deal of pleasurable touring. The return trip followed the Santa Fe Trail up through the Oklahoma Panhandle to Dodge City, Kan., where a huge bronze longhorn steer reminds motorists of an economy long past, when cowboys drove cattle from Texas to provide T-bones for the East. Then eastward through Kansas City and St. Louis to Indiana and towns familiar from boyhood: Franklin and Whiteland and on a more exotic level, Beanblossom and Gnawbone. Finally, Ohio, Pennsylvania and back home.    One observation is inescapable after this nearly 5,000-mile journey: Americans, blessed with more than five years of low inflation, tax restraint and resultant economic growth, are rebuilding the nation's economic base -- its homes, factories, offices, small businesses, public buildings, and transportation and communications networks. Economists call this capital formation, but what that dry expression really signifies is an improving quality of work and life.    In the 1970s, similar trips told quite another story: With no tax indexing, inflation automatically raised taxes and drained the private sector of income. It destroyed investor willingness to make long-term commitments and caused costs of plant and equipment to soar. Washington, D.C., was a boom town but the rest of the nation was suffering an insidious decay that inflation partly masked.    Even today, the nation's capital is hardly a pocket of recession. At a garden party in Virginia, a well-born lady fears loss of the genteel charm of Leesburg as Washington developers push ever farther outward. It is the classic conflict between old money and new money, which has little to do with me, but I am sympathetic at the level of my mind that harbors some resentment of a local expansion fueled with tax dollars. A lunch stop at the opulent Greenbrier in White Sulfur Springs, W.Va., offers further evidence of D.C. prosperity in the form of a convention of Virginia real-estate agents spending some of the fruits of that prosperity.    Real-estate agents can hardly be blamed for enjoying their good fortune, however, and a further plunge westward through West Virginia, a state that for years has struggled against poverty, shows that today's prosperity is spread more broadly. &quot;Chemical valley&quot; along the Kanawha River is bustling with rush-hour traffic, testimony that the chemical industry is thriving.    On farther, the bluegrass country around Lexington, Ky., is as sleek and pretty as the thoroughbreds that gave it wealth. A visit to Cub Run, Ky., and the graves of grandfather Abraham Merideth, who fought on the Union side at Lookout Mountain, and grandmother Minisa Jane, reveals that even this little place has shared in the recovery. The general store now devotes an entire section to rental video movies for VCR owners.    On south, Nashville, Tenn., hums to a country beat, a mecca for elders with stillfond memories of the senior Hank Williams and younger types drawn to Twitty City. In Memphis, the old Peabody hotel has been restored to its former glory and a Beale Street restoration is under way. But an ancient black man strumming a bass guitar and singing old-time blues for tips in the soft early evening light provides the warmest welcome.    Arkansas, as with West Virginia, has shucked off many of the signs of poverty it once displayed. In Oklahoma City, the oil wells on the statehouse grounds still pump industriously at $17 a barrel. A new downtown park is being built, a tropical garden enclosed in a huge glass cylinder lying athwart walkways and lagoons. Canyon, Tex., on the high and windy plains, has a marvelous museum displaying the clumsy machinery of the early oil wildcatters and the graceful windmills that brought water up from deep boreholes -- and still do -- to slake the thirst of range cattle. The men and women who conquered this hard land knew all about risk and reward in its most basic, life-and-death, sense.    Finally, there is Santa Fe, that unique and beautiful soft-brown, adobe-modern city, with its Indians vending jewelry and its abundance of art galleries. The town teems with visitors who seem to have money to spend. That the galleries survive so well offers testimony that even in a noninflationary era many visitors spend for expensive art, some of it of a quirky and eccentric sort that might even dismay Georgia O'Keeffe, the great artist who helped give this region its early renown as an art colony.    As we headed eastward again across the Oklahoma Panhandle, the radio warned of tornadoes just to the south but heavy rain soaking the broad plains was good news to grain growers. There was no drought relief for Indiana and Illinois. Indiana had had almost no rain for a month and the Agriculture Department had told farmers that they could graze livestock on set-aside land during the emergency. The radio market report had soybean prices still rising.    Yet Franklin, seat of Johnson County, looks more prosperous than even a year ago. It has a new $1.8 million library and an elaborate water slide at the renovated municipal swimming pool. The fire-damaged &quot;Old Main&quot; building of Franklin College has been beautifully restored and downtown has been spruced up with new stores and storefronts. Old houses are being repainted and a nice new development is going up on the eastern edge of town. Franklin, a prototypical American small city, had showed signs of decline, empty stores and crumbling buildings, not many years ago.    Indianapolis is rebuilding its downtown, the latest addition being a $64 million zoo that will be the centerpiece for a new Tivoli-type central recreational area. Out through Ohio and Pennsylvania, long stretches of Interstate 70 are under repair, to remedy the erosion of infrastructure when inflation was sending repair and maintenance costs soaring.    An eighteen-wheeler wending through the construction barriers carries a familiar sign on the back, &quot;Drivers Wanted.&quot; This one adds that &quot;You can learn to drive a rig like this.&quot; The thought is tempting. A fast-food restaurant with the equally familiar &quot;help-wanted&quot; sign offers &quot;premium wages.&quot;    These totems suggest, of course, that the nation may be straining the limits of its capacity, risking a new outbreak of inflation. But if there is responsible political management of the dollar, inflation need not be a corollary to prosperity. Rather, it is the enemy of prosperity as any comparision of the economic landscape today with that of the 1970s will attest. There's nothing like a cross-country tour to bring that lesson home. </TEXT></DOC>