<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0084 </DOCNO><HL> NATO Needs Candor</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Following are excerpts from a speech given by Richard Perle, assistant secretary of defense for international security policy, at a conference in Munich Sunday. A related editorial appears nearby (See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK {Editorial}: Plain Talk in Munich&quot; -- WSJ, Feb. 6, 1987).    Let me say at the outset that these reflections on the evolution of the alliance, unshrouded by the diplomatic mist of an official statement -- are mine alone. For whatever the virtues of diplomacy in our public discourse, clarity is not among them; and yet it is clarity above all that this alliance of ours most urgently needs.    Unlike our adversaries to the east, the Atlantic Alliance has no party line. Its members are free to dissent from majority views and they do so frequently. At the same time they are deeply involved in the shaping of those views which are regularly expressed, in convoluted and often lengthy communiques, at the conclusion of each alliance ministerial meeting.    Often these communiques are the product of a sleepless night during which the bureaucrats of 15 or 16 nations have wrestled the English and French languages to the ground in order to paper over differences, avoid controversy, placate public opinion and round all corners and smooth all sharp edges as though we were designing a stealth airplane rather than declaring our most fundamental convictions. No wonder no one reads these official pronouncements except those who draft them and, from time to time, an opposition party looking for a quarrel with its own government.    At one recent ministerial meeting, the United States proposed saying that {General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party Mikhail} Gorbachev would destroy the credibility of the Soviet leadership if, after having agreed not to do so, he persisted in holding an agreement of intermediate missiles hostage to one on strategic defense. The experienced ambassador for an important alliance nation speaking, presumably for his government (or, more likely, reflecting what he thought his minister would think if he knew what was going on it Brussels at that moment), vigorously opposed so unambiguous a formulation. &quot;You can't say that,&quot; he said. &quot;Why not,&quot; I asked? &quot;It just isn't done,&quot; he replied. &quot;You don't say in a NATO communique that Gorbachev has lied.&quot;    So we took a brush to that sentence and painted it pallid, sacrificing clarity to consensus as we have done countless times in recent years. And then we wonder why the public is confused about defense and security issues and even, if some European polls are to be believed, about whether the president of the United States or the general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is the more sincere in the pursuit of arms control.    How can we possibly be convincing when we cower behind bland and oblique formulations so as not to offend the sensitivities of our enemies or the prevailing wisdom of our editorial writers? Add to the sotto voce murmurings that pass for alliance statements the tendency to embrace every fashionable idea, no matter how ill-founded, and you have a recipe for diplomatic drift and political disaster. It is pointless to complain of the inroads of Soviet propaganda while joining in the charade that permits it to succeed.    There is, in all of this, an unconsciously patronizing quality to the way we choose, both as an alliance and, often, as leaders of member governments, to communicate with our people. It is wrong to believe that they must be protected by officials wiser than themselves from knowledge of the source and nature of the danger that threatens their security and our democratic institutions. They possess the strength and resilience to face unpleasant truths if they are only laid before them.    On such complex subjects as military strategy or defense spending or chemical weapons or nuclear testing or arms control or Soviet treaty violations or international terrorism, a failure of forthrightness or just plain silence -- particularly among the European members of the alliance -- often has led to confusion and wishful thinking of alarming proportions. In such a climate reality is subordinated to hope and policy is shaped by fear.    Consider the notion that an agreement to abolish nuclear weapons would enhance our security and diminish the threat of a nuclear war. This idea was artfully and disingenuously cultivated by Mr. Gorbachev in his January 1986 proposal to eliminate all nuclear weapons by the year 2000. It is dangerous nonsense, calculated to undermine the legitimacy of weapons that are vital to Western security -- and to whose numbers the Soviets have been adding steadily for the past two decades.    For a quarter century the alliance has relied on nuclear weapons to offset a massive Soviet superiority of conventional forces. And even as Soviet theater nuclear forces have grown to exceed those of the Western allies we have sought to confront the Warsaw Pact with the threat of escalation, however unlikely, to deter aggression. Exhortations to diminish our dependence on nuclear weapons by strengthening our conventional defenses have been unavailing. And despite the abhorrence of nuclear weapons routinely expressed by those least prepared to pay for conventional ones, we remain, as an alliance, unwilling to invest in a more favorable conventional balance with the Warsaw Pact.    To talk, in these circumstances, of the abandonment of nuclear weapons and the substitution of a conventional deterrent is absurd. Indeed, the very concept of deterring the Soviet Union with conventional weapons, however much they might be improved, however many divisions we might raise and equip (even with advanced conventional munitions), is hopelessly unrealistic. For while conventional defense is both possible and desirable (and expensive), conventional deterrence is a dangerous illusion.    Even if NATO mounted a superior conventional force it could not deter the Soviet Union with its vast nuclear arsenal. And as for the Soviets agreeing to eliminate nuclear weapons, what Western leader would turn in his country's last remaining nuclear weapon on the strength of assurances -- mere words -- that the Soviets had done the same?    The simple truth is that the verification of an agreement to abolish all nuclear weapons is not difficult, or very difficult: It is impossible, and Mr. Gorbachev knows it. Indeed, he counts on it. It enables him to propose eliminating all nuclear weapons with full confidence that the West cannot agree. And he has the added insurance that if we were so foolish as to do so the Soviet Union, which would surely cheat, would wind up with a monoploy of nuclear weapons and the realization of the Leninist dream of a decisive correlation of forces. For this reason alone it is idle to speak of conventional deterrence or a nuclear-free world.    The foolishness of a nuclear-free world is in no way mitigated by the &quot;conditions&quot; that Western statesmen routinely attach to its achievement in order to avoid dismissing the idea as the empty propaganda that it is. To argue that eliminating all nuclear weapons is a good idea but the year 2000 is too soon; or to suggest that it must proceed by steps or stages, or that it must await a more favorable conventional balance or the settlement of regional disputes is self-defeating obfuscation. These arguments -- rationalizations, really -- are deployed by officials and politicians who fear that the public would not support them if they simply rejected outright Mr. Gorbachev's beguiling maneuver.    This, I believe, is profoundly mistaken. Our people are more realistic than many politicians and most foreign offices think. They will work their way through an issue like this one and they will get it right. But they will get it right sooner and with greater confidence if their leaders earn their pay and begin to lead. </TEXT></DOC>