<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0034 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Winter Olympics: French Nightingale Calls Tune on Slopes </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> MT. ALLAN, Alberta  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If Team Rossignol were a country, its two gold medals and four bronzes would have entitled it to fifth place on the national list in these Winter Olympics at the close of business Monday. Only the Soviet Union, East Germany, Austria and Switzerland had more medals to their credit at that point.    But Rossignol isn't a country, it's a company, a maker of skis based in Grenoble, France, whose name means nightingale in French. If you say it isn't a team, however, you run the risk of rebuttal from Daniel Mornet, who is overseeing its Olympic effort.    &quot;Oh, yes, we are very much a team, sort of like the pit crew in Formula 1 auto racing,&quot; he says in his French-accented English. &quot;I believe we are very much a part of the success of all of our skiers, from whatever nation. Alpine skiing has become a high-tech sport, and we are the technicians. Without us ski makers, they don't go down the hills so fast.&quot;    Mornet's assessment is widely shared by the participants on the scenic slopes of Mt. Allan in the Canadian Rockies west of Calgary, even though it is barely glimpsed by the ski-watching public. In fact, the ski-watching public glimpses very little of anything here. If it weren't for the television screens on the premises, they'd see only flashes of the action.    I must say, though, that the spectators looked to be having a wonderful time admiring one another's ski clothes. I have come to see the wisdom of my skier friend, Seymour, who says that every time he sees a good-looking woman in a swimsuit, he wonders how she'd look in a ski outfit.    What the folks here and at home in televisionland do see are the competitors' skis, emblazoned with their manufacturers' names and trademarks. Once down the mountain, the skiers snap 'em off and clutch them throughout any on-course interviews or photographs. In the standard pose, the skis are held straight up, just off the right ear. They're most photogenic that way.    &quot;That's the payoff,&quot; says Mornet. &quot;And if you knew what we and our competitors pay some of the athletes, you'd wonder if it was worth it.&quot;    The involvement of the manufacturers with alpine skiing dates from the time people stopped wearing barrel staves on the slopes, but it hasn't always been welcomed by the sport's honchos. At the 1968 Olympics at Grenoble, the International Olympic Committee ruled that all brand names be stricken from skis. The skiers protested en masse and the IOC relented, ruling instead that no contestant could be photographed holding his or her skis. But when Jean-Claude Killy stepped off the course skiless with the best time in the downhill, his business manager leaped out and planted his own skis in the snow next to Killy's head, with the brand name (Dynamic) facing out.    No such trickery is required to get exposure today, but a good deal of cash is. Mornet says Rossignol spends between $7 million and $8 million annually on racing. Some of it goes to secure the endorsements of 90-odd skiers, about 30 of whom are here. They represent every major alpine skiing nation except Austria, which insists that its athletes use only home-made products. The rest goes for on-site servicing that is a key part of any maker's effort.    Rossignol's Olympic staff numbers 26, including 19 &quot;technicians&quot; who prepare skis for racing and four crack local skiers, called &quot;test pilots,&quot; who traverse the slopes before races in search of data on snow conditions. The information is fed into a computer at the chalet near here that the company has turned into its workshop for the Games, and goes into preparation decisions. Other makers have similar operations.    The number of variables involved in matching skis with skier is large. Top downhillers show up at major events with as many as 15 different pairs, and slalom specialists with a half-dozen. All can be prepared in many ways. On top of that are literally hundreds of waxing formulas.    Snow conditions on the slopes can be altered by wind and temperature, and the weather here has been more changeable than Chicago's. In addition, real snow has been as scarce as U.S. medals, forcing the use of harder-to-read, man-made stuff.    &quot;It's been wicked; we've been taking three or four different types of skis to the start per racer, and not picking the ones they'll use until a couple minutes before they go,&quot; says Rob Singer, Rossignol's chief downhill technician. He is crystal clear about who does the picking. &quot;We do. We're the doctors, and our skiers know it,&quot; says he.    How much credit for a victory should go to the ski and how much to the skier is a matter of dispute, but it's agreed that skis play a larger role in success in downhill races, where flat-out speed rules, than on the twisting slalom courses. It's also agreed that as major ski races tighten, the role of the technician grows.    &quot;When you're talking about a half-second difference between first place and sixth or seventh, any advantage is important,&quot; notes Harald Schoenhaar, the U.S. team leader here. He adds: &quot;It's getting to be like the arms race. When one ski maker gets something, every other one goes crazy getting it, too.&quot;    If the Olympic results are any guide, Rossignol is among the chased, not the chasers. It has scored golds in the women's downhill on the feet of red-haired Marina Kiehl of West Germany, and in the men's Super G, a new event combining downhill and slalom, with Franck Piccard of France. Two of its bronzes were won by Karen Percy of Canada, in the downhill and Super G. Piccard took a bronze in the downhill, and Paul Accola of Switzerland got one in the combined. Still more precious metal may come from the company's star, Alberto Tomba of Italy, a favorite in men's slalom events tomorrow and Saturday.    Mornet says its hard to say which win was sweetest. &quot;The downhill is the glamour event, so Kiehl's win was wonderful,&quot; he beams. &quot;We're French, so we're happy for Piccard. Percy is from Canada, where we sell a lot of skis, and that is very good, too.&quot;    And the skiers, in their turn, are properly grateful. The pert Percy, Canada's new sweetheart, greeted her adoring fans after winning her Super G bronze here on Monday by giving them a big wave. With her skis. </TEXT></DOC>