<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Presidential Styles and the Churchill Model---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   I admit that over the holidays I pretty much tuned out all the news about &quot;Irangate&quot; or whatever the flap over arms to Iran is now being called. When the evening TV news dwelt on it, as was done incessantly, my eyes glazed over. As for the newspaper headlines and the multitude of commentary, I gave them a glance and passed on to other matters.    But I guess I couldn't fully put the topic out of my mind because I found myself brooding over the various styles of presidents, past and present, toward the management of the government entrusted to them. And that led inevitably to some recollections about another head of government in another country in another time.    Everybody recognizes Winston Churchill as a great man, farsighted when out of office and once at the helm indomitable in defeat and magnanimous in victory. I fell to thinking, though, about another quality that made him a unique chief of government.    In the midst of a great war he was constantly interested in every aspect of the government he managed. And not only with the doings of generals in far off India or Egypt who felt his proddings and had to report constantly and in detail on what they were doing and why. The city fathers of London were equally badgered to report on the city's sewage system, Treasury officials to keep him posted on the state of the nation's finances.    Churchill gave few orders to anyone, but everyone was chivvied with suggestions, admonitions and repeated requests to keep him informed of what was being done in every agency of government. No official, high or low, was allowed to forget his performance was being watched.    We have not had his like as chief executive in the White House, so far as I can discover. All our presidents have been the subjects of biographies, and some the subject of many; those of FDR would fill a library. From these you get gleanings of how each president approached his job. What I've missed, if it exists, is a comparative study of the styles of governance of our many presidents.    In my time Roosevelt was a man of many interests, but those interests were fleeting and changeable. At times he would completely ignore what went on in some department or agency. He never asked for or received constant reports from the Treasury or Interior or that multitude of alphabetical agencies about what was going on. His interest in them shifted with circumstances. As a result, Morgenthau or Ickes or Wallace frequently just went his own way, undisturbed until something untoward caught Roosevelt's eye.    Had Roosevelt paid more attention to how the War and Navy departments dealt with distant commanders there might never have been a Pearl Harbor. Only when war came was he constantly mindful of their actions.    Harry Truman, suddenly thrust into the place of decision, was at first too overwhelmed with the urgent need to grapple with matters such as the atom bomb -- of which he was until then uninformed -- to pay much attention to other governmental problems. It detracts nothing from his accomplishments to recall how the rest of the government went on in confusion.    Dwight Eisenhower relied almost entirely on his staff to keep track of the government. It was he who created the post of chief of staff, sometimes (as in the U-2 affair) to his detriment.    Lyndon Johnson, caught up in the Vietnam bequeathed by Kennedy, tried to run that war himself, which is a different thing from just paying presidential attention. Perhaps he remembered how JFK botched the Bay of Pigs for want of attention and then succeeded in the Cuban missile crisis by constant orders to the fleet at sea.    Richard Nixon was a president of many accomplishments too little remembered. Watergate came to destroy him largely because he left the actions of subordinates too little watched. Then he made a mistake Churchill never did, trying out of mistaken loyalty to protect those subordinates from their own blunders.    As for Messrs. Ford and Carter, neither ever really grasped the role of the presidency and both were therefore dismissed by the electorate.    Ronald Reagan certainly grasped one essential of the presidential role, to lead the nation in the direction the president thinks it should go. He succeeded in restoring the ramparts of the nation's defense. He lowered the burden of government taxes on its citizens. He has been willing to take executive decisions, risking the consequences, as he did in Grenada and in striking back at Libya.    But the present scandal, or whatever you wish to call it, over Iran illustrates again the necessity for a chief executive -- of a large business enterprise or of a government -- to keep tabs on those who serve him lest they act on their own and in ways that can lead to trouble.    It appears from what I've read that President Reagan made the decision to sell arms to Iran in an effort to better relations with that country. This was a policy decision, the wisdom of which can and should be debated on its merits. If the nation thinks it a bad decision, so be it. Wise or not, it is in no sense a &quot;scandal.&quot; That is the kind of decision presidents are supposed to make, as Mr. Nixon did when he decided to renew relations with Communist China.    From what I've read it also appears that his subordinates &quot;in the basement of the White House&quot; went off on their own doing what they thought was the thing to do. That's what put the fat in the fire.    Unfortunately, Mr. Reagan bears some responsibility for that, too. Despite his intuitive wisdom he's been pretty much a hands-off president, leaving many in his official family unwatched.    That leads me to a thought for some scholar, the need for a sort of &quot;Manager's Journal&quot; for the White House, a comparative study of presidential styles. Since every president perforce comes to office with no experience in it, that might be a useful handbook for those in the White House. And it might begin with a study of the style of that other leader, Winston Churchill.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>