<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870716-0025 </DOCNO><HL> Poindexter Says He Didn't Tell ReaganAbout Diverting Arms Profits to Contras---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Adm. John Poindexter testified that he never told President Reagan of the diversion of arms-sale profits to Nicaraguan insurgents and that last fall he destroyed a secret presidential directive that characterized the Iran initiative as an arms-for-hostage swap.    The former national security adviser said he approved the diversion himself in order to protect the president, but believed Mr. Reagan &quot;absolutely&quot; would have endorsed the secret transfer of funds that began in February 1986.    &quot;The buck stops here,&quot; said the naval officer. &quot;I'm sure the president would have enjoyed knowing about it, but . . . I wanted the president to have some deniability so that he would be protected.&quot;    Ending months of silence on his role in the Iran-Contra affair, the admiral, whose testimony continues today, said it was his duty to &quot;protect&quot; Mr. Reagan. Toward this end, he also destroyed a related 1985 presidential finding when the scandal surfaced last fall.    The document bluntly described the November 1985 sale to Iran as an arms-for-hostages exchange, and ratified the Central Intelligence Agency's role in the transaction. Adm. Poindexter said it would have been &quot;politically embarrassing&quot; if it became known that the president had signed the finding.    &quot;I tore it up,&quot; the officer testified, &quot;and put it in the burn basket behind my desk.&quot;    The White House was clearly pleased with Adm. Poindexter's testimony regarding the diversion. But after insisting that Mr. Reagan knew nothing of the transfer, the reaction was calculated to be low-key. &quot;What's new about that?&quot; said the president after a speech yesterday morning. &quot;I've been saying it for seven months.&quot;    As recently as last week, the administration said Mr. Reagan had never approved the 1985 covert finding described by Adm. Poindexter, and White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater told reporters the president still doesn't remember signing the document, &quot;though he doesn't disagree with those who say he did.&quot;    Aides were privately relieved, but Adm. Poindexter's testimony before House and Senate committees has a double edge for the president. Whatever small threat there was of impeachment proceedings has been diminished, but it remains to be seen whether a skeptical public will accept the admiral's account of the diversion.    Lawmakers were disturbed that the president could be unaware of such a major decision, and testimony about the destruction of the 1985 finding adds to evidence that high officials sought last fall to disguise the administration's role in the Iran-Contra operation.    &quot;I think the 'smoking gun' part is behind us,&quot; said Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn. &quot;There is a tremendous amount of circumstantial evidence that he knew, but there is no direct evidence,&quot; said the Georgia Democrat. &quot;People will be split on this.&quot;    As the national security adviser, the naval officer had frequent contact with the president throughout the operation. Therefore, Adm. Poindexter's testimony is significant too as a witness intimate with the president's thoughts on the Iran initiative.    Describing a &quot;freewheeling&quot; meeting in December 1985 in the White House residence, Adm. Poindexter said both Secretary of State George Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger had expressed &quot;very strong, vociferous objection&quot; to proposed arms sales to Iran. But after listening, Mr. Reagan returned to the issue of American hostages.    Adm. Poindexter paraphrased the president as saying: &quot;I don't feel that we can leave any stone unturned in trying to get the hostages back. . . . We clearly have a situation here where there are larger strategic interests, but it's also an opportunity to get the hostages back.&quot;    Unlike his predecessor Robert McFarlane, Adm. Poindexter said he believed the NSC staff wasn't covered by a two-year ban on U.S. military aid to the Contras that began in October 1984, and even assisted his aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, in acquiring arms for the insurgents.    While concealing the source of the funds from the president, the admiral testified that he briefed Mr. Reagan at least on some of the activities paid for by the diverted arms profits. These included an airstrip built in Costa Rica with the assistance of the U.S. Embassy there and Col. North. And according to Adm. Poindexter, the president knew &quot;Col. North was instrumental in keeping the Contras supported.&quot;    The November 1985 arms shipment -- covered by the presidential directive that Adm. Poindexter destroyed -- touched on both sides of the Iran-Contra operation. U.S.-made Hawk anti-aircraft missiles were sold from Israeli stocks in what the finding bluntly called a &quot;hostage rescue&quot; effort, and most of the $1 million put forward by Israeli middlemen to cover transportation costs later was used instead to aid the Contras.    Congress was never notified of the operation, and Adm. Poindexter said he kept the document in an NSC safe after Mr. Reagan signed it in early December 1985. As the Iran-Contra operation began unraveling, Attorney General Edwin Meese began a preliminary investigation into the matter, and Adm. Poindexter said he destroyed the finding after being informed of the inquiry last Nov. 21.    Prior testimony has established that in the same week, officials in the administration sought to cover up the U.S. role in the November 1985 transaction, and Col. North has said he shredded classified documents in his offices as well last Nov. 21.    An internal chronology prepared by NSC staff was written to indicate the administration had no knowledge of the true nature of the Hawk shipment when it took place. Adm. Poindexter is expected to be questioned today about his knowledge of this exercise and the preparation of false testimony to be given to Congress.    While he repeatedly defended the Iran initiative as being more than a trade of arms for hostages, Adm. Poindexter disclosed that Mr. Reagan last year approved a major concession to Iran. The admiral said the president approved a nine-point program, put to the Iranians last fall by businessman Albert Hakim, that included an offer to formulate a plan to help the Iranians free 17 convicted terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait.    Adm. Poindexter insisted the offer didn't contradict the administration's repeated claims that it wouldn't make concessions to terrorists. He said the plan was to be devised by Mr. Hakim and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, who weren't government officials, and carried out by Iran, not the U.S. He said the State Department wasn't told about the nine-point proposal, and he conceded that Gen. Secord had become involved in the Iran initiative at the request of the CIA and the NSC.    Though outwardly supportive of Col. North, the 50-year-old admiral was a striking contrast with the Marine who came out of Annapolis to Vietnam a decade after him. The hearing room was drained of much of the emotion of the past week, and hunched forward in a dark suit, the former national security adviser seemed to encircle himself in pipe smoke after the first two hours.    The admiral's reputation at the White House was of a man with a photographic memory, but he testified repeatedly that he couldn't recall specific events. He &quot;seriously doubted&quot; that he told Mr. Reagan that profits from the arms sales were being used to fund other covert activities besides the Contras, and was vague on what details he gave the president about Col. North's activities.    Adm. Poindexter was uncertain if he had ever seen an April 1986 memo by the colonel referring to the diversion, and said he had no recollection of four other similar memorandums that the Marine testified he prepared for his superior in connection with the arms sales. As described by Col. North, the memos were written to obtain presidential authorization. The committees are expected to question a former custodian of NSC documents, James Radzimski, in an effort to resolve the disparity.    In questioning yesterday, Senate committee counsel Arthur Liman led Adm. Poindexter through testimony that revealed the former national security adviser's preoccupation with leaks of classified information and his penchant for secrecy. Adm. Poindexter said he withheld knowledge of Col. North's secret Contra-resupply operation from former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan and Mr. Regan's aides because he knew they occasionally dealt with the press.    &quot;The one way I had of keeping things secret was not to tell people,&quot; Adm. Poindexter said.    He testified that after Secretary Shultz and Charles Price, the American ambassador to Britain, got indications in April 1986 that the U.S. secretly was selling arms to Iran, he indicated to both officials that it wasn't so.    But Adm. Poindexter said he didn't tell Mr. Shultz that the arms sales were aborted, merely that he had ordered the officials running the program &quot;to stand down.&quot; He explained to the committees that &quot;standing down doesn't mean telling them to stop, it's just a pause while you sort things out.&quot;    The admiral testified that he is &quot;almost certain&quot; he told Mr. Shultz about the arms sales at a lunch meeting in the White House with former CIA Director William Casey and Secretary Weinberger. He also told the panels that Mr. Shultz opposed selling arms to Iran, but didn't want to know the details of the program that the president had approved over his and Mr. Weinberger's objections.    The hearings began yesterday morning with Richard Beckler, Adm. Poindexter's attorney, saying his client is &quot;the primary target of a grand jury&quot; investigation conducted by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh.    During the afternoon session, the presence of former hostage David Jacobsen offered a graphic reminder of a driving force behind the Iran initiative. He told reporters that he believes a fellow hostage, Associated Press reporter Terry Anderson, remains confined in a six-foot-by-six-foot cell, and that his captors may be singing &quot;Death to America&quot; and laughing at the unfolding investigation.    During a break in the testimony, Mr. Jacobsen, one of three hostages released as a result of the secret arms sale to Iran, shook Adm. Poindexter's hand and told him: &quot;Thank you and Ollie for getting me out and keeping me alive.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>