<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0059 </DOCNO><HL> Heard on the Street:Heads of Some Big Companies Make EffortTo Show Shareholders They Really Do Care---By Linda Sandler</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GM GT GS DIA UAL RJR C S X GEHEARD ON THE STREET (HRD)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Some heads of major companies seem to have gotten religion. Suddenly, they're going out of their way to court shareholders, even though the takeover scene is relatively quiet in the wake of Wall Street's insider-trading scandals.    Not long ago, money managers say, some companies appeared so set in their ways that only a threat to their autonomy could force them to change. When raiders were temporarily sidelined after the Boesky scandal, many people predicted that companies with lagging stocks -- which management didn't generally own much of -- would go back to business as usual. The recent flurry of greenmail payments by General Motors, Goodyear, Gillette and others only reinforced portfolio managers' worries.    But currently, the chairmen of GM, Diamond Shamrock, UAL and other companies with lagging stocks are working to mend fences with stockholders. They're acting as if raids, takeovers, proxy fights and other forms of harassment might be here to stay, despite the recent arrests of arbitragers and moves in Washington to curb hostile acquisitions. Even companies with strong shareholder support, such as RJR Nabisco and Chrysler, remain attentive to their stock prices.    &quot;These are days of more heightened awareness&quot; of shareholders' needs, says John Neff of Wellington Management.    Recently, William Bricker of Diamond Shamrock made the ultimate concession to restive holders by agreeing to resign as chairman. Sears, in a more orthodox display of concern for holders, raised its dividend after reporting lower fourth-quarter profit. Goodyear completed a big buyback in partial compensation for paying greenmail to James Goldsmith in November. RJR is mulling a spinoff of its tobacco operations to boost its stock further.    Roger Smith of GM angered many shareholders last year by buying out Ross Perot. Mr. Smith became a salesman, publicly defending the company's actions and plans. He recently wrote to stockholders and made pilgrimages to big GM holders such as Wellington. Few chairmen of top companies were ever so &quot;available&quot; to holders, Mr. Neff says.    Richard Ferris of UAL -- which said yesterday it will change its name to Allegis Corp. -- used to address analysts once a year at their invitation. Today, however, Mr. Ferris and other UAL executives are in New York as hosts of an analysts' meeting for the first time. Among other things, analysts hope to hear how Mr. Ferris will restore United Airlines' profitability.    &quot;Chief executives of established companies have been hearing from the stock market&quot; and they're getting the message, says Gershon Kekst of Kekst andamp; Co., a public relations firm.    Many chairmen of major companies used to think it was enough to do their job, Mr. Kekst says. But some corporate plans have been slow to pay off, while &quot;the stock market is near-term oriented.&quot; Management members decided &quot;they had better get out and face the stockholders,&quot; he says.    Management didn't discover the stock market yesterday, of course. UAL commissioned a study in 1985 of Wall Street's perceptions of the company, which weren't very positive. But the lingering threat of raiders finally drew Mr. Ferris out of his shell, analysts say. Only a week ago, large trading volumes in UAL briefly rekindled rumors that somebody might be accumulating the stock.    Johnnie Johnson of Georgeson andamp; Co., investor relations consultants, says fear still drives many companies' public relations efforts. &quot;Raiders may return someday,&quot; he says, so management wants a high stock price. It wants sympathetic holders in case it wants to make or resist an acquisition or raise capital, he adds. Fear of stockholder suits is another influence, analysts say.    With takeover financing in disarray, Diamond didn't think Mesa Limited Partnership could raise $2 billion to complete its takeover bid. But Diamond felt it had to help shareholders sooner or later, so it recently restructured -- like many companies in the thick of last year's raids.    Even giant companies aren't considered immune to pressure. If GM's stock keeps lagging, some traders say, investors might launch a proxy campaign to expel Mr. Smith. David Roderick of USX might be harassed again by Carl Icahn, who's trapped in the stock, or others, analysts say.    Moreover, they add, many companies such as RJR and General Electric have cash and are looking for large acquisitions. Gillette, which bought out Revlon Group's Ronald Perelman in 1986, remains the subject of takeover rumors, one involving RJR.    Equally unnerving for executives, supposedly passive stockholders are getting very noisy. Wellington's Mr. Neff sent a Mailgram to GM's board after the Perot buyout, demanding that members ask &quot;hard questions&quot; about why GM was underperforming competitors.    Some public relations efforts have backfired. GM's stock ran up briefly during Mr. Smith's tour, but only because money managers mistakenly thought he was promising an imminent buyback. Diamond could still get another bid by Mesa, some analysts say.    Chairmen under pressure are doing too little, too late, some money managers say; their companies' stocks have already missed the greatest bull market in history. Some chairmen may retreat into their shells when the bull market ends, adds one analyst. Right now, he says, &quot;Everybody is sensitized to the stock market owing to its rise.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>