<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870325-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Change of Heart:Yugoslavia's WorkersFind Self-ManagementDoesn't Make Paradise---After Years in Control, SomeAre Voting to RelinquishCertain Important Powers---Who Wrecked the Economy?---By Barry NewmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BELGRADE, Yugoslavia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Beneath the saw-toothed roof of Rakovica Motor Works, men build engines. They drive forklifts fast. They shape spinning blocks of steel on heavy lathes. They wear coveralls, and their fingernails are dirty.    Over in the executive wing, men make decisions. They sit around a glass-topped conference table in a carpeted meeting room at the end of a hall lined with potted ferns. They set pay and prices. They direct export deals. They approve annual reports. They wear coveralls, and their fingernails are dirty.    When six engine-builders cross the snow to sit at the big table and educate a guest in the factory's affairs, they don't bother inviting their managers. Managers have never counted for much at Rakovica Motor Works.    &quot;We can dispose of them at any point,&quot; says a mechanic named Rados Karaklajic, proffering the gift of a company pin.    In the West and in the East, workers dream now and then of running the show. Some in West Germany have won a say. In Poland, many tried and pretty much failed. Now Mikhail Gorbachev talks about it: He wants Soviet workers to elect their bosses.    But he doesn't impress the Yugoslavs; here, the workers took charge ages ago. They have been in charge so long, as it happens, that some are tired of working for themselves. A movement has actually begun to hand some of the power back. Big revisions in the scope of worker control are under discussion with the government's active encouragement.    In some factories, including Rakovica, the changes are already under way. At Rakovica, the workers recently voted to scrap the basic building block of self-management. Mr. Gorbachev might do well to ponder that. Marshal Tito wouldn't believe it.    &quot;The factories belonging to the workers!&quot; Tito exulted when the idea was brought to him in 1949. After his rift with the Russians, giving workers sway was his way to out-Lenin Lenin. By Tito's fiat, Yugoslav workers still decide what to make and how to sell it. When profits come in, they decide how to divide them.    Yugoslavs call this &quot;our socialist system of self-management.&quot; It is a source of national pride. Workers control every factory in the country. They control schools, hospitals, hotels, shoe stores, bus companies, ballet companies. The only thing workers don't control in Yugoslavia is the army.    And what do workers do when they run the show?    If the pride of Yugoslavia provides any pointers, the one thing they don't do is invest their profits. They do award themselves fat raises. Then they borrow. And when debt ruins the economy, inflation tops 85% and their buying power collapses -- they strike.    At least that is what they have done lately. In the city of Maribor, the doctors went out last year; so did the vegetable vendors. In Split, on the Adriatic, 6,000 workers shut the shipyard and 140 bus drivers stranded 150,000 riders. Coal miners and mill hands and schoolteachers struck, too. So did the clerical staff of Croatia's Parliament. Close to 800 wildcat strikes hit Yugoslavia in 1986, twice 1984's number. Around 80,000 workers took part.    This month, things have suddenly become even worse. A wave of strikes has clobbered the country in response to the government's feeble efforts to impose some restraints on wages. In Croatia, walkouts reportedly forced 40 factories to close.    In a Communist country where official documents don't even use the word &quot;strike&quot; (preferring euphemisms like &quot;temporary cessation of labor&quot;), this causes a certain amount of head scratching. &quot;How come that in a state in which workers are in power these same workers go on strike?&quot; wondered the newspaper Borba. &quot;Against whom do they strike?&quot;    Few Yugoslavs have a direct answer to that one, certainly not the state trade unions. &quot;We are unprepared to deal with such issues,&quot; says Darko Marinkovic of the Serbian union council. He has an excuse: In Yugoslavia, raising doubts about the genius of worker control can land you in jail.    Yet everybody knows the economy has been wrecked, and everybody has somebody to blame. Workers and bureaucrats blame the Communist Party: The party doesn't have much to do when workers have all the power; it meddles, and politics pollute business. The party and the workers blame the bureaucrats: The bureaucrats swamp workers with information, hijack decisions with technocratic tricks and skim profits to pay paper shufflers.    Naturally, the bureaucrats and the party blame the workers. So do a number of academics, and sociologists, and foreigners.    &quot;I want mine, Jack,&quot; is one Westerner's summary of the worker's mental set. Though many own small farms, they can't seem to believe society entrusts them with big factories. Apart from raising pay, hiring is the executive act workers relish most. They rarely fire anyone.    Asked how well self-management works, a British engineer on a Yugoslav joint venture replies: &quot;Not hard.&quot;    There is one other view. It commits sacrilege and blames the system. Self-management, the argument goes, gives everyone the capacity to impede and no one the strength to implement.    &quot;Self-management can't be exchanged for political democracy,&quot; says Radmila Nakarada, a Belgrade sociologist. &quot;It has to be part of it.&quot; Voicing an opinion like that takes some guts here. But the country's political rulers already agree with Miss Nakarada's idea for a quick fix: more power to the executives.    &quot;Even the workers want discipline,&quot; she says. &quot;They're hungry for management.&quot;    They had a little of both until 1976, the year a new constitution carried decentralization to the outer limits. It diced the whole of Yugoslav society -- offices, hospitals, colleges -- into &quot;basic organizations of labor.&quot; Each is a set of workers capable of making something salable. In other words, a department. A worker, the theory went, can make more waves in a small pond than in a big one.    Each department in each enterprise in the country became totally autonomous. Each now sets its own working conditions, holidays, benefits. Each has its own balance sheet and debts. Each hires its own manager. Under Yugoslavia's constitution (330 pages) and the related statute (419 pages), a factory isn't a company. It is a confederation.    At Rakovica Motor Works, where the system is about to be turned on its ear, 5,000 workers have up to now inhabited 10 duchies in a set of buildings alongside the train tracks in suburban Belgrade. One duchy builds engines, another chassis, another transmissions. Maintenance has an independent state, as do the accountants and lawyers. So does the mountain resort run by the workers for their holidays.    &quot;You see, this is rather complex,&quot; says Milorad Despotovic, a metalworker sketching out the organization chart on the glass-topped table in the meeting room. But things become a lot more complex when the factory's factions get down to building tractors.    For the moment, each elects a council and sends delegates to a central council. The general manager presents the central council with a budget. The council amends it and sends it to each of the other 10 councils. When all the councils have passed it, the budget goes to a vote of the entire work force. The process is only slightly more involved than amending the U.S. Constitution.    Any one of the 10 councils can veto the budget. Each can veto a project to build a new model or to buy new machinery. And for every variation of every product, each council negotiates a joint-venture deal with all the other councils. Rakovica has 78 of those. The meetings take up 18,000 manhours a year, when they go smoothly. But they don't always go that way. That is why Rakovica workers strike about twice a year.    Like most strikes in Yugoslavia, the Rakovica walkouts begin when workers in one department find less than expected in their pay envelopes. They put down tools and demand redress. The self-defense committee goes on alert. But this isn't Poland, not yet, and the police usually don't appear. Strikes are neither legal nor illegal. Instead, management herds the strikers into the cafeteria and listens to their speeches. And then, nearly always, it does what they want.    &quot;There is unhappiness with the accounts,&quot; Rados Karaklajic says from his seat at the conference table. When a missed delivery of parts cut engine production, the company cut his pay. He walked out. &quot;It wasn't our fault,&quot; he says. &quot;It was the purchasing department.&quot;    &quot;Let's speak openly,&quot; says Zdrvko Petrovic, a lathe operator. &quot;If there is even a tiny mistake in my pay, I revolt. In an economic crisis, workers lose patience.&quot;    They lose patience with the bureaucrats, in and out of Rakovica. The bureaucrats inside make up 45% of the work force, absurdly high by any standard, and take in an ever-fattening wad of blue-collar wages. Those outside, in the spirit of self-management, spend workers' taxes on more pay for themselves, not on more social services for Yugoslavia.    Mostly, though, workers lose patience with workers. They strike less over pay increases than over the way the factory's dwindling income is doled out among competing departments. Settling these fights according to the rules takes longer than workers can bear.    &quot;If a department wants to be stubborn, it goes on forever,&quot; says Dragutin Zujovic from the far end of the table.    &quot;Narrow interests become obstacles,&quot; Mr. Despotovic says. He used to head the factory's central council and belongs to the Serbian Parliament. He measures his words. &quot;We will never exchange our system for another. But we have found that in a number of cases the system does not work.&quot;    And that is why Rakovica Motor Works recently became one of the first factories in Yugoslavia to decide that self-management's basic building block had to go. Soon, departments will be abolished and Rakovica will settle into a new style of self-management -- with only one council and one general manager.    Doing that all over the country will require an amendment to the constitution. Yugoslavs are debating it. Meanwhile, Rakovica's manager intends to manage.    &quot;Start with the fact that we must export,&quot; Strahinja Kostic says. &quot;We have to fight our way into these markets. This is pure economics.&quot; Under self-management, he explains, a janitor can influence the organization of work. But under the proposed new system, he says, approvingly, &quot;managers make decisions.&quot;    He wears a blue pin-stripe suit and a watch with an elegant gold band. The glass-topped conference table in his office accommodates far fewer people than the one in the workers' meeting room.    Says Mr. Kostic: &quot;The crucial issue is this: Wherever the manager is, in Yugoslavia or America, it is up to him to determine all the elements of production strategy and to choose the best people to implement it. We should have done this 10 years ago.&quot;    The workers of Rakovica will soon have their productivity measured and the quality of their products monitored. On expensive machinery, they will work double shifts. They will spend drastically fewer hours in meetings. If they work slowly, Mr. Kostic will warn them. Even under the new system, he won't be able to fire them (and they will still be able to fire him), but if he finds that a part is made more cheaply someplace else, he will quit making it here.    Mr. Kovic stabs at a yellow pad with the sharp point of his pencil. &quot;Managers are responsible for the production process,&quot; he says. &quot;That is where the workers should not and cannot interfere. The workers' council has accepted this. Now I want results.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>