<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Justices' Ruling on U.S. Clean Water ActLeaves Both Sides Claiming a Victory---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SFDS LABORENVIRONMENT (ENV)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled that the federal Clean Water Act may be enforced through lawsuits by private individuals and groups alleging continuing or occasional pollution, but not when they are trying to elicit fines for past violations.    The high court said such citizen lawsuits must be based on a &quot;good-faith&quot; allegation that the water pollution violation is continuing or occurs intermittently. Relying exclusively on past violations that have stopped before a lawsuit is filed is insufficient, the court said in an opinion written by Justice Thurgood Marshall.    The ruling, which was intended to clarify procedures for non-government enforcement of the Clean Water Act, left opposing parties, including environmentalists and business and industry groups, claiming victory.    Although environmental groups had hoped to be able to sue both for continuing and past violations, the decision is a victory for them because the high court rejected more restrictive views of the clean water law. At least one federal appeals court had ruled that groups could sue only if a polluter was in violation of the law at the time the lawsuit was filed, but the high court rejected that requirement. And the high court rejected the argument by business and industry groups that such lawsuits could be filed only with proof, rather than mere allegations, of continuing water pollution.    &quot;We have been bringing these cases only where we have a good-faith allegation that the violation is continuing,&quot; said James Simon, a lawyer for the Natural Resources Defense Council in New York.    But business groups said the court sent a clear message that past violations can't serve as the basis for lawsuits and that federal and state government regulators, rather than environmentalists, are the first line of clean water enforcement. &quot;I think it's a victory for business,&quot; said Robin Conrad, a lawyer with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce's national litigation center.    Mr. Simon and other environmental lawyers said they would continue to use the citizen-lawsuit provision of the Clean Water Act to supplement government enforcement. &quot;There are too many violators for the government to keep up with all of them,&quot; he said. Mr. Simon said Natural Resources Defense has filed about 120 such lawsuits in the past four years.    The high court ordered a federal district court in Virginia to reconsider its imposition of a $1.3 million penalty against Gwaltney of Smithfield Ltd., a unit of Smithfield Foods Inc. The penalty was imposed as a result of a lawsuit filed by Natural Resources Defense and the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, also an environmental group, alleging excessive discharges by Gwaltney into Virginia's Pagan River.    Under the clean water law, civil penalties such as the one levied by the court against Gwaltney are paid to the Treasury.    The penalty against Gwaltney was based on the federal district court's view that lawsuits brought by citizens could be based on past violations of federal clean water requirements. That view was later upheld by a federal appeals court in Richmond, Va.    The environmental groups also claimed that Gwaltney's water discharges were continuing, but the federal district and appeals courts didn't rule on that claim. Yesterday, the high court told the district court to decide whether the allegation of continuing discharges is legitimate and whether it justifies the fine.    In a separate opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Justices John Stevens and Sandra O'Connor, agreed that past violations are an insufficient basis for a lawsuit, but objected to the court majority's view that an allegation of a recurring violation is sufficient. Justice Scalia also said those filing water pollution suits should be able to prove their allegations.    Labor Arbitration   The high court unanimously reiterated its view that federal courts reviewing labor arbitration decisions have a very limited role. Federal courts may only overturn an arbitrator's decision, when issued under a collective bargaining agreement, if the arbitrator acted dishonestly, the high court said in an opinion written by Justice Byron White.    The ruling in effect reinstated an arbitrator's decision awarding back pay and job reinstatement to a worker fired in 1983 by Misco Inc. of Monroe, La. The worker was fired for alleged use of marijuana in a parking lot of the company's paper processing plant.    Moment of Silence   The justices ruled unanimously that former leaders of the New Jersey Legislature can't appeal to the Supreme Court in their effort to save a 1982 state law permitting a daily moment of silence in public school classrooms.    A federal district court in Newark in 1983 and a federal appeals court in Philadelphia in 1985 declared the New Jersey law unconstitutional. Both courts said the law violated the First Amendment goal of separation of church and state.    When the law was challenged in court, the governor, who had vetoed it and was overridden by the Legislature, refused to defend it. The state Assembly speaker and Senate president hired lawyers to defend the law on behalf of the Legislature. But the Legislature changed leadership before the Supreme Court appeal was filed, and the new leaders chose not to defend the law. Yesterday, in an opinion written by Justice O'Connor, the high court said the former leaders don't have the authority to appeal.    The high court didn't address the question of whether the law is constitutional. But the court's action leaves intact the appeals court ruling that the New Jersey law is unconstitutional. </TEXT></DOC>