<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880902-0131 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: Way to Win Anti-Terrorism Game </HL><AUTHOR> David Brooks </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In 1980, there were 278 terrorist incidents involving Americans. Ten U.S. citizens were killed and 94 were injured.    In the 28 months since the American raid on Libya, three Americans have been killed by terrorists (two within days of the raid), and six have been kidnapped in Beirut.    In the months leading up to the Libya raid, there was the hijacking of the Achille Lauro, the Rome and Vienna airport massacres, the bombing of TWA flight 840, and of the American Embassy in Kuwait. Since the raid, there has been a dramatic drop in the number of major terrorist incidents.    Nevertheless, the Reagan administration's anti-terrorism effort is almost universally regarded as a failure.    &quot;Best Laid Plans: The Inside Story of America's War Against Terrorism&quot; (Harper andamp; Row, 392 pages, $22.50) begins with the failed attempt to rescue the American hostages in Tehran in 1980, and ends with the Iran-Contra fiasco. It is a story of almost unrelieved setbacks.    Authors David C. Martin and John Walcott began covering terrorism for Newsweek. Mr. Martin is now Pentagon correspondent for CBS News. Mr. Walcott is national security correspondent for The Wall Street Journal. As the subtitle advertises, theirs is an inside story. They take the reader inside the helicopters that burned in Iran in 1980; inside the guard shack near the Marine barracks that blew up in Beirut in 1983; inside the cell of hostage Terry Anderson in Beirut; inside the Oval Office where President Reagan anguished daily over the fate of the &quot;Forgotten 7&quot; hostages.    The authors themselves are not nearly so pessimistic, but I suspect most readers will finish &quot;Best Laid Plans&quot; with one lesson seared onto their minds: If a future president walks up to you and asks you to head up his anti-terrorism effort, run away, change your name, hide in the hills of Sierra Leone. There is no way anyone can succeed at such a job.    On the other hand, there are millions of ways to fail. First, you can fail by succeeding too forcefully. In 1985, four Soviets were kidnapped in Tripoli, north of Beirut. The Soviets hired some Druse militiamen to snatch relatives of the kidnappers, and even sent a piece of one of the relatives to the kidnappers as a show of resolve. Immediately, three of the four Soviets were released (the fourth already had been killed). For the Soviets, this maneuver was a success. They got their men back. If the U.S. pulled this maneuver, on the other hand, the guy in charge would resign in disgrace.    Second, you can fail by being too nice. After the hijacking of TWA flight 847, U.S. officials learned that the entire high command of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard was meeting in Baalbek, along with the high-ranking Iranian official in charge of terrorism. A well placed missile could have decimated the world's most vicious terrorism force. The Joint Chiefs of Staff rejected that approach out of hand. &quot;Instead of attacking Iranian terrorists, Messrs. Martin and Walcott charge, &quot;the Reagan administration decided to try making friends with them.&quot;    Third, you can fail if you try to mislead terrorists. A disinformation plan to confuse Moammar Gadhafi was drafted by the State Department, but it got caught in a bureaucratic feud, and was leaked to the Washington Post. It caused another miniscandal.    Fourth, you can fail if you use American military hardware. In February 1983, Egypt and the Sudan lured Gadhafi into a trap. Springing it required the appearance of four American AWACS planes. But when the planes were moved to Egypt, ABC's John McWethy broadcast the news, and the operation began to unravel. During the hijacking of TWA 847, NBC and ABC reported that the Delta Force was en route to a location near the hijack site hours before the force actually took off.    If a president is patient with terrorists, it is said he is letting the problem paralyze his presidency. If he is hasty he risks being rash. If an operation goes through normal channels it gets bogged down in bureaucratic spitting matches, but if it is run out of the White House it can get out of control. If there is a massive intelligence network it will produce reams of reports no one will have time to read. If there is a limited network, it is said that experts are being ignored.    If a U.S. president does not consult allies he is guilty of unilateral aggression. But allies also can let him down. Because France would not grant overflight rights, the U.S. F-111s raiding Libya were stretched beyond their limits; seven of the nine planes could not drop their bombs.    Terrorist attacks abroad are like tiny detonation charges that set off major explosions back in Washington. Those who criticize an administration on domestic issues tend to tie themselves to alternative policies, either liberal or conservative. But those who speak out on terrorism are less tied down; they can criticize a president for being too harsh one day and too soft the next. Terrorism experts are unrelenting.    So, Mommas, don't let your babies grow up to run anti-terrorism outfits. They can only fail. And nobody has even established a criterion for success. </TEXT></DOC>