<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871009-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   U.S. HELICOPTERS SANK three Iranian patrol boats in the Persian Gulf.    The Pentagon said the helicopters returned fire after three of Tehran's speedboats attacked the U.S. force. The Iranian vessels were on an unidentified mission about 15 miles southwest of Farsi Island. A spokesman said the choppers acted in &quot;self-defense,&quot; firing both rockets and machine guns in the nighttime incident. Officials said there weren't any Americans injured in the clash. A Navy patrol boat picked up at least six Iranian survivors. Two of the crew members later died, and another was said to have serious injuries.    The incident was the first U.S. military engagement in the gulf since Sept. 21, when an Army helicopter attacked an Iranian mine-laying ship.    ---   ORTEGA URGED direct peace negotiations between the U.S. and Nicaragua.    In an address to the U.N. General Assembly, the Nicaraguan president called on the U.S. to respect the five-nation Central American peace plan signed Aug. 7 in Guatemala. He faulted Reagan for stepping &quot;out of line&quot; by seeking $270 million in new military and other aid to the anti-Sandinista rebels. The U.S. delegation walked out to protest Ortega's speech, which was critical of U.S. policy in the region and drew loud applause from many of the world representatives.    House Speaker Wright, who opposes the renewed military aid to the Contras, warned Reagan that his aid plan might violate the Guatemalan agreement.    ---   BORK'S OPPONENTS REACHED a majority in the 100-member Senate.    As five more Democrats declared that they would vote against Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court, the number of publicly announced opponents reached 53. Some senior Reagan administration officials and Senate Republicans, however, are urging the judge to continue his fight. Still, Bork, who discussed the status of his nomination with Meese, is said to be considering withdrawing his name.    Reagan reaffirmed his intention to continue to seek Bork's confirmation, and decried the &quot;lynch mob&quot; opposing his nominee to the high court.    ---   The Reagan administration moved to avoid a probable confrontation with Congress and dropped plans to sell 1,600 Maverick missiles to Saudi Arabia. The administration prepared to notify lawmakers today of the remaining $1 billion arms-sale package.    ---   Poland's leadership adopted broad economic changes that could increase consumer prices more than 50%. The Communist Party's Central Committee, meeting in Warsaw, also approved holding an unprecedented referendum that would permit Poles to express their views on solving the country's economic problems.    ---   Immigration officials eased some regulations, making amnesty possible for about 100,000 people who have re-entered the U.S. legally with valid visas after leaving the country for brief periods. The INS officials also disclosed a 30% decline in the number of illegal aliens arrested in the last year along U.S. borders.    ---   Buddhist monks in Tibet said they were goaded into recent pro-independence demonstrations because Chinese police insulted their spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama. Meanwhile, Beijing ordered foreign journalists to leave Tibet, and urged India to crack down on the exiled Dalai Lama's political activity.    ---   Japan's ruling party said the election of a new party president, who will become the country's next prime minister, will take place Oct. 20, 10 days earlier than expected. The party's three candidates said they hope to agree as early as this weekend on who will assume the post.    ---   James Burnley was nominated by Reagan to succeed Elizabeth Dole as transportation secretary. Currently deputy secretary, Burnley began trying to assuage critics in an effort to avert a contentious and lengthy confirmation fight.    ---   Pat Robertson said the admission that his son was conceived out of wedlock wouldn't hurt his campaign for the 1988 GOP presidential nomination, despite his emphasis on &quot;moral tradition.&quot; The former TV evangelist also faulted reporters for violating &quot;the limits of propriety&quot; by probing his past.    ---   PTL Chairman Jerry Falwell resigned from the ministry and predicted the return of Jim Bakker. PTL's entire board and its top officers also quit. The resignations were precipitated by a bankruptcy-law judge's decision Wednesday to allow PTL's creditors and contributors to file a competing reorganization plan for the ministry.    ---   Indian peace-keeping forces arrested 50 Tamil rebels in an attempt to restore a cease-fire in Sri Lanka following this week's massacre of almost 180 people. In the eastern Batticaloa district, a landmine exploded and killed as many as 22 people.    ---   Canada's government introduced legislation in the House of Commons in a bid to force striking postal employees back to work. Prime Minister Mulroney's Conservatives acted after talks between Canada Post Corp. and its largest union, the Canadian Union of Postal Workers, collapsed Wednesday.    ---   The Senate voted to order the Soviet Union to move out of its new embassy in Washington and rebuild it in an area where it can't be used for espionage activities. The move would require the White House to void a 1972 embassy pact with Moscow.    ---   Philippine President Aquino ignored calls to declare martial law and traveled to southeastern Luzon island to inspect damage caused by communist rebels. In Manila, opposition leader Enrile challenged the government to arrest alleged coup plotters.    ---   Cambodia's communist rulers proposed free elections for a coalition government that would include opposition leader Prince Sihanouk. The move by the Vietnam-backed government apparently was aimed at ending an eight-year political deadlock between Phnom Penh and the opposition.    ---   A senior Soviet official acknowledged that Moscow's conventional military strength in Europe was superior to that of NATO, and that the Kremlin was prepared to reduce the number of its troops. </TEXT></DOC>