<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Sexual Politics:Difficult QuestionsFor the Press---By Albert R. Hunt</HL><DD> 05/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN><TEXT>   &quot;Miami Woman Is Linked to Hart,&quot; blared the headline across the top of Sunday's Miami Herald front page. Thus, along with trade and arms control has emerged a new issue of the 1988 presidential campaign: the sex lives of the presidential aspirants.    The specific target is Gary Hart amid charges that he's a womanizer, allegations that the Colorado Democrat denies. Even before this weekend's bombshell, newspapers and magazines were writing a round of stories both about Mr. Hart's particular situation and the larger subject of covering presidential candidates' private lives.    More and more, the national press now believes that prying into the personal and sex lives of presidential candidates is legitimate fare. Journalists are also talking privately about doing stories on at least three other presidential hopefuls and perhaps writing about the personal activities -- sex or drugs -- of top aides to other presidential contenders.    Boston Globe columnist Ellen Goodman, who has thoughtfully analyzed the pros and cons of delving into a politician's sex life, concluded that, on balance, this is healthy: &quot;You do learn something important about the character of a man from revelations of his sexual behavior.&quot;    Ms. Goodman's reasoning is sound -- from Freud to Falwell it's agreed that sexual behavior is one guide to character. But to conclude that this makes it desirable for press pursuit is another matter.    Efforts by the media to cover the sex lives of leading political figures raise troubling questions. For one, this often is an impossible story to report adequately. Second or confirming sources on bedroom behavior are hard to locate.    Sunday's Miami Herald story -- reporters staked out Mr. Hart's Washington town house where, the paper says, a Miami woman spent most of the weekend with the candidate -- underscores this problem. Mr. Hart denies the woman stayed at his place, and subsequently the paper's editors conceded it's &quot;possible&quot; that she left unobserved.    I have covered national politics for 15 years and have heard stories about dozens of philandering politicians. A few women even have talked privately about affairs with prominent political leaders, and this helps form views of those politicians. But it would have been exceedingly difficult to write a credible, well-documented story about most of those tales.    Even if the huge hurdle of reporting such a story is overcome, there's the difficulty of putting it into perspective. Proponents argue that voters need to know as much as possible about a potential president's character and that this is one more ingredient that can be tossed into the decision-making process.    In other words, if we report that candidate Jones had a domineering father, is generous to staffers, has a hot temper and has been secretly sleeping with the office receptionist for the past 17 months, voters will evaluate these traits evenhandedly and judiciously. Sure they will!    Moreover, there's the task of analyzing exactly what it tells us about a prospective president. Among relatively recent presidents, biographers or historians have written about extramarital affairs of Warren Harding, Franklin Roosevelt, Dwight Eisenhower, John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson, but made almost no such allegations about Calvin Coolidge, Harry Truman, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter. I defy any political scientist, sociologist or journalist to find common themes within these two groups.    Indeed, a convincing case can be made that while sexual behavior reveals something about a person's private character, it doesn't necessarily tell us as much about political character. &quot;It's wrong to confuse presidential or political character with morals,&quot; argues James David Barber, the Duke University political scientist who has written extensively about presidential character.    Of course, this subject isn't limited to sex. Drugs might be fair game, too; clearly, we ought to know if a would-be president takes dangerous drugs. But let's also remember that former Carter chief of staff Hamilton Jordan was almost destroyed politically and financially by allegations that he snorted cocaine -- charges that months later were found to be patently false.    Another thorny question is whether presidential aspirants ought to undergo tests for drugs or AIDS. There are legitimate civil-liberties objections, but since we demand exhaustive physical reports, it's as appropriate to ask about drugs or AIDS as about electrocardiograms in weighing their fitness for office. Tougher tests may lie ahead: Scientists aren't far from developing mechanisms to detect manic-depressive traits. Should that be demanded of aspiring presidents?    For now, however, the main focus is on sexual conduct. Plainly, the issue should be pursued when politicians make it legitimate, such as with Ted Kennedy after Chappaquiddick, or when they raise the issue themselves as Gary Hart has done so foolishly. (He responded to initial stories about rumors, giving them far more credence, and then challenged reporters to follow him to check on these rumors, making it tough for him to criticize the Miami Herald's tactics.)    Finally, there's the issue of hypocrisy. If an anti-abortion candidate had an abortion, that's news. Or if a political candidate, like some of the recent television ministers, is preaching one way from the pulpit and another from the bedroom, that's fair game.    Following Watergate, Koreagate and now Contragate, the public could benefit from more aggressive political reporting of substance, including the elusive issue of character. But the way to do this isn't by chasing the sex lives of politicians. &quot;Talegate&quot; might produce a more titillated public but not a more informed one.    ---   Mr. Hunt is the Journal's Washington bureau chief. </TEXT></DOC>