<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Who's News:IBM AppointsOne of Its OwnTo Head Rolm---Move Indicates CompanyIs Taking Firm ControlOf Phone-Switch Unit---By Paul B. Carroll and Dennis KnealeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WNEWS IBMTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   International Business Machines Corp. named one of its executives to head its Rolm Corp. unit, in its most visible move yet to take control of the phone-switch maker it bought 2 1/2 years ago.    IBM had been slowly integrating Rolm into its corporate structure. Last month, for example, Rolm's 6,000 salesmen were assigned to IBM's own marketing group. But even at that point Rolm employees maintained that their management's structure left them with considerable independence. Yesterday's move removes that symbolic management buffer and makes it clear that IBM is taking Rolm firmly in hand.    Ray S. AbuZayyad, a 49-year-old IBM vice president with a strong manufacturing background, was appointed Rolm's president, showing that IBM intends to tackle Rolm's major weakness -- its expensive and inefficient manufacturing process. The departure of Rolm's Dennis D. Paboojian, 44, continues the exodus of Rolm's original senior management team.    &quot;Rolm is so integral to IBM's strategy that running it as an independent business unit didn't make sense any more,&quot; says Dixon R. Doll, general partner in Accel Telecom Partners, an Ann Arbor, Mich., venture capital firm.    Moreover, analysts say the change, which is effective immediately, is just the beginning of new IBM moves on Rolm. They say IBM will continue to digest Rolm's sales force, asking many sales people to relocate, to better fit with IBM's sales operation, and do likewise with Rolm's design group. Some even speculate that IBM may do away with the Rolm name in a year or so.    The exodus of Rolm managers in some ways reflects a clash between the button-down IBM style and -- in the best tradition of a Silicon Valley start-up -- the more laid-back culture at Rolm, based in Santa Clara, Calif. But, more importantly, IBM's moves at Rolm reflect the serious business problems it found there after it completed the more than $1.5 billion acquisition of the company in the fall of 1984.    IBM acquired Rolm just as the phone-switch market was heading into fierce price-cutting; Rolm is believed to have had a loss of $50 million after taxes in 1985. It had only modest profit last year, just when a slumping IBM needed earnings help badly.    Analysts say IBM found some design and reliability problems and, most importantly, an inefficient manufacturing process. For instance, Rolm custom-tailors much of its equipment, so that as many as 16 different system set-ups must be assembled largely by hand.    In addition, IBM has found that some of the synergies it expected from the acquisition never materialized. For example, it's now possible to connect an IBM electronic mail system with a Rolm voice message system, but the connection is much more limited than initially envisioned. It's possible to send a message from a computer to someone's Rolm voice message system, but the message can only tell the recipient he has received some mail. A customer still can't have the voice system read the message to the recipient; he has to turn to his computer to call it up. The reverse is true, as well: A computer user can be notified that he has received something via the voice message system, but the computer can't print it out for him.    At the time of the acquisition IBM said it would let Rolm remain very independent and, in fact, IBM moved surprisingly slowly for two years. The business of phone systems was alien to IBM executives and they badly needed critical Rolm employees to stay on. So IBM let Rolm workers -- &quot;Rolmans,&quot; as they call themselves -- retain their existing employee benefit packages, and gave Rolm special status as an independent unit reporting only to the IBM vice chairman. Rolm executives were steadfast in that independence, replying to requests from IBM staff to follow the practices of IBM's 15 divisions: &quot;We're not a division. We're Rolm.&quot;    But the autonomy began to change last year. IBM told Rolm to begin phasing out its employment plan and a coveted sabbatical benefit that gives employees with seven years tenure a 12-week paid leave, for fear the generous program would eventually cause resentment among IBM employees. IBM also instructed Rolm managers to begin hiring first from inside IBM, which needed to move people out of overstaffed computer plants while maintaining its no-layoff practice.    IBM, which initially placed some of its executives at Rolm as &quot;liaisons,&quot; began to give them more substantial roles. For examle, IBM took an executive from its automated plant in Austin, Texas, and made him Rolm's vice president of manufacturing.    Each time IBM made a new move, it seemed, another longtime Rolm executive left. Ken Oshman, a founder and chairman whose initial is the 'O' in Rolm, left in early 1986. The No. 2 executive, Richard Moley, left last June, and several other senior executives followed. The slowness of IBM's moves at Rolm did, however, help it hold on to most mid-level managers and many of the technical people who were crucial to IBM's decision to pursue the acquisition in the first place.    &quot;Rolm's attrition rate has been low,&quot; an IBM spokeswoman said. &quot;In fact, it has gone down since the acquisition. Morale is still very high.&quot;    Francis McInerney, an analyst at Northern Business Information Inc., New York, says Mr. Paboojian decided to quit as Rolm president because the loss of autonomy &quot;was just more than he could stand.&quot; IBM said Mr. Paboojian will continue as a consultant to the company. Mr. McInerney says IBM has decided to break up Rolm, meaning it will split up the sales and design forces to make them fit into IBM's. IBM said it doesn't comment on speculation.    Mr. Paboojian couldn't be reached for comment. An IBM spokesman said Mr. AbuZayyad wasn't available for interviews.    Whatever happens on other fronts, analysts say Mr. AbuZayyad is a good choice to address the manufacturing problems at Rolm. He ran the division that makes data-storage devices for big computers, a division that has one of IBM's most elaborate manufacturing lines.    Dick Imershein, an analyst at Gartner Group, says Mr. AbuZayyad also has a good technical background. &quot;He may not be a communications expert, but that's not what they need,&quot; Mr. Imershein said. &quot;What they need is some management skills.&quot;    IBM said Paul R. Low, 54, formerly head of IBM's semiconductor operations, succeeded Mr. AbuZayyad as president of the General Products Division. Michael J. Attardo, 44, formerly vice president, development, succeeded Mr. Low as president of the General Technology Division. </TEXT></DOC>