<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880801-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Orlando Bosch Fires Anti-Castro Passions Of Exiled Cubans ---- Terrorist or Freedom Fighter? U.S. May Deport Him, Despite Miami Sentiment </HL><AUTHOR> Jose De Cordoba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. wants to deport him. Cuba wants to try him for murder. Yet much of Miami thinks he is a hero.    So it is that Orlando Bosch, a 61-year-old pediatrician and standard-bearer of many of this city's anti-Castro exiles, once again finds himself at the center of a political storm.    &quot;Orlando Bosch is the voice of the struggle of the Cuban people,&quot; declares Pedro Reboredo, the Cuban-born mayor of tiny West Miami, as he demonstrates with 100 others in support of Dr. Bosch in the sweltering heat of a Miami street.    &quot;He is a convicted terrorist,&quot; counters Verne Jervis, an Immigration and Naturalization Service spokesman. The U.S., he says, wants Dr. Bosch out of the country, and the INS has made a preliminary decision to deport him.    It may achieve its aim: Dr. Bosch is currently in a federal prison in Dade County, Fla., fighting deportation, and the INS is expected to decide his fate soon. Meanwhile, Miami police stand by, worried. They acknowledge the danger of having Dr. Bosch free on the streets of Miami again, but, by the same token, they fear even more that his deportation would ignite violent and deep-seated passions in Miami.    Dr. Bosch is one of the best-known anti-Castro militants in the large exile community in this city. He is a man whose past includes such bizarre episodes as a 1964 incident in which he towed a homemade, radio-controlled torpedo through the streets of Miami in rush-hour traffic.    Just last year, Dr. Bosch was released from a Caracas, Venezuela, prison where he was detained for 11 years on charges of having masterminded a 1976 bombing of a Cuban jet in which 73 people died. He was acquitted twice. Earlier, he spent four years in a U.S. prison for firing a bazooka round at a Polish freighter anchored in Miami harbor. But many Cuban exiles have rallied to his cause. They view him as a man who has sacrificed his family life and medical career, waging a lonely war against the Castro regime.    A one-day radio marathon by four of the city's Spanish-language stations raised about $130,000 for Dr. Bosch's legal defense. His family and friends collected 31,400 signatures urging authorities to release him. Twenty Cuban-American state and local officials petitioned the government to drop its charges against him.    Moreover, Florida's Republican governor wrote a letter to President Reagan on Dr. Bosch's behalf. And, in a recent 10-minute private meeting with the president, Cuban-American leaders pressed him to free Dr. Bosch.    Dr. Bosch's continued imprisonment has even managed to put a frost on the normally warm relations between President Reagan and some of his Cuban-American admirers. During Mr. Reagan's visit to Miami, a handful of Republican politicians skipped a meeting with the president and demonstrated in the streets outside for Dr. Bosch's release.    Dr. Bosch isn't universally loved. Given the depth of anti-Castro feeling in this city, no one will speak harshly of him publicly. But privately, it's another story. A former CIA operative who used to train members of Dr. Bosch's exile group for anti-Castro missions says Dr. Bosch was a publicity hound whose actions &quot;have helped to destroy the reputation of anti-Castro Cubans.&quot; A former associate calls Dr. Bosch a political &quot;mad inventor whose inventions all fail&quot; and accuses him of &quot;grandstanding.&quot;    Dr. Bosch declined to be interviewed for this story but has made his own views clear in the past, denouncing critics as &quot;communists and Castro infiltrators.&quot;    Is he hero or villain? The public record on Dr. Bosch offers elements of both. It also, at times, reads like a bad spy thriller, if not a script for the Keystone Kops.    In the 1950s, Dr. Bosch was an underground chief in the struggle led by Mr. Castro against Cuban strongman Fulgencio Batista. When the Cuban Revolution tilted leftward, Dr. Bosch turned against Mr. Castro and helped organize an insurgency against him, former Bosch associates say. Soon after, he left the island.    In Miami, where CIA-backed anti-Castro plots were plentiful, Dr. Bosch organized his own movement. His anti-communist group claimed in statements to the press that it organized a number of aerial bombing missions against Cuban sugar mills and other targets.    But by 1963, Dr. Bosch had split with the CIA, publicly denouncing the agency for not backing the anti-Castro cause strongly enough.    In 1965, Dr. Bosch told the Miami Herald that he was &quot;officially declaring&quot; war against Spanish and British shipping for trading with the enemy, Cuba. Two months later, according to press reports, Dr. Bosch was stopped at a roadblock in his Cadillac convertible by police officers who found six 100-pound surplus aerial practice bombs stuffed with dynamite in the trunk of his car. The bombs, Dr. Bosch told the press, were on their way to a secret base to &quot;bomb Castro.&quot; Similarly, the torpedo that Dr. Bosch once towed through Miami was meant to be used against the Castro regime, a former associate says.    In 1966, Dr. Bosch was acquitted in federal district court in Miami of charges he extorted money from wealthy Cuban exiles for a &quot;war chest&quot; against the Castro regime, says Melvyn Greenspahn, his lawyer at the time. During the trial, a witness testified she received a telephone threat from a man who sounded like Dr. Bosch &quot;holding his nose.&quot;    Two years later, in a bizarre press conference, a black hooded man who called himself &quot;Ernesto&quot; nominated Dr. Bosch to represent &quot;Cuban Power,&quot; a militant organization, according to a reporter who attended the session. Reporters, who had been driven blindfolded for an hour before arriving at the press conference, weren't surprised when, not long after, Dr. Bosch called his own press conference to accept the nomination.    A few days later, Dr. Bosch and eight others were arrested for firing a 57mm recoilless rifle shell at the Polish freighter Polanica. The shell put a small dent in the freighter and bounced off, according to a former policeman who took part in the investigation. The group launched the attack to try to discourage trade with communist countries, says Mr. Greenspahn.    Dr. Bosch was convicted in federal district court in Miami of shooting at the ship as well as of sending threatening telegrams to the president of Mexico, the prime minister of Great Britain and the late Generalissimo Francisco Franco of Spain, all leaders of countries which traded with Cuba. Sentenced to a 10-year term, he served four years and was paroled after an intense campaign on his behalf by supporters.    Dr. Bosch then broke parole and fled the country in 1974, in order to &quot;internationalize&quot; the war against Mr. Castro, says Adriana Bosch, his wife. For the next two years, he did precisely that, popping up in the middle of intrigues and plots throughout Latin America.    He went to Chile, where he sought help from the right-wing government of Gen. Augusto Pinochet for his anti-Castro campaign. Next, traveling with a Chilean passport, he turned up in Costa Rica, where he was arrested in connection with an alleged Chilean-sponsored assassination plot aimed at a nephew of Salvador Allende, the late president of Chile, according to published reports. Dr. Bosch denied the charges and was eventually deported, the reports said.    Dr. Bosch then went to the Dominican Republic, where in June 1976 he attended a summit meeting of anti-Castro activists, according to a Metro Dade police department summary of a Federal Bureau of Investigation report. At the meeting, according to U.S. law enforcement officials and a former high-ranking Venezuelan intelligence official, guidelines were drawn for a campaign of terrorism against Cuban and perceived pro-Castro targets throughout Latin America.    In October, he was arrested in Caracas shortly after a Cubana Airlines jet blew up after taking off from Barbados. The incident was a particularly murky affair since two of the four men charged by the Venezuelan government in the conspiracy were former Venezuelan intelligence officers. One, Luis Posada, a CIA-trained Bay of Pigs veteran, later escaped from prison and turned up in Lt. Col. Oliver North's Contra resupply effort in El Salvador.    Cuba blamed the CIA for the bombing and, as a result, abrogated an anti-hijacking treaty Cuba had signed with the U.S. In 1980, the day after a secret Venezuelan military court acquitted Dr. Bosch of the bombing, Mr. Castro withdrew all of Cuba's diplomatic personnel from Caracas in protest.    Dr. Bosch would nonetheless be detained in Venezuela for several more years. Finally, after 11 years in prison and a second acquittal, he was released last year and came to the U.S., where his family lives.    More trouble awaited him, however. Police arrested Dr. Bosch earlier this year at the Miami airport for having violated his parole in the U.S. 16 years ago. These days, he spends his time in jail listening to Spanish-language radio and preparing for what most believe will be a long legal battle to prevent his deportation, a battle that will likely spill into the courts.    The Miami police, wary of Dr. Bosch's past record, hope his years in prison have mellowed him. &quot;Personally I think he is tired,&quot; says a plainclothes police officer at a recent pro-Bosch rally in Miami. But, as if to underscore their lingering concern about any event involving Orlando Bosch, the police dispatched a bomb squad truck to this demonstration. It sat parked in the shade near the protest -- just in case. </TEXT></DOC>