<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880211-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A U.S. APPEALS COURT RULED unconstitutional an Army ban on homosexuals.    In a potentially far-reaching decision, a three-judge panel in San Francisco found that homosexuals are entitled to the same protection against discrimination as racial minorities. It said the concerns cited by the military about morale and discipline &quot;cater to private biases.&quot; The ruling contradicts a number of court cases, and legal experts said the Supreme Court will probably hear the case if appealed. If upheld, it could be used to limit bias against homosexuals in a number of areas.    The ruling, in a case from Seattle brought by a soldier who was ordered discharged in 1981, was promptly hailed by gay-rights organizations.    ---   NORIEGA PROVIDED military training for the Contras, an ex-aide said.    In testimony before a Senate panel, former Panamanian intelligence official Jose Blandon said the military chief agreed to train the Nicaraguan rebels at Panamanian bases after two 1985 meetings with Lt. Col. North. Blandon, in his second day of testimony, also said Vice President Bush used Noriega to send a warning to Cuba's Castro hours before the U.S. invasion of Grenada in 1983. Bush denied the allegation.    A former Panamanian pilot, who testified under federal guard, said he had helped arrange a deal between Noriega and a Colombian cocaine cartel.    ---   Shultz is considering a trip to the Mideast to promote a peace plan, administration officials said. It is understood that the secretary of state would travel to the region Feb. 25 and remain until about March 1, traveling to Jordan, possibly other Arab capitals, and Israel. An announcement could be made as soon as tomorrow.    U.S. envoy Murphy presented Israeli leaders with a plan calling for elections this year for Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, where unrest continued. The plan also seeks an international forum to launch Arab-Israeli peace talks.    ---   South Africa sent troops into the black homeland of Bophuthatswana after dissident army officers ousted the president in a bloodless coup. The South African forces entered the homeland and restored the president to power. It was South Africa's first military intrusion into one of the nation's 10 black homelands.    ---   Thatcher said West Germany is failing to make either economic or military decisions needed to strengthen NATO. The British prime minister made her remarks in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on the eve of today's Common Market summit meeting in Brussels.    ---   Supporters of rival candidates clashed during municipal elections in Bangladesh, killing as many as 80 people and injuring hundreds of others. Police said more than 200 people were arrested, and voting was suspended at dozens of polling places. Opposition parties have been waging a drive since November to oust President Ershad.    ---   Contra leaders said they will resume cease-fire talks with Nicaragua's government next week in Guatemala, after a delay caused in part by congressional rejection of rebel aid. In Nicaragua, opposition to the Sandinistas appeared to be mounting as demonstrators in Masaya staged anti-government protests.    ---   Education Secretary Bennett said that six Southern and border states still are in partial violation of civil-rights law. He asked the governors of the states to send him written assurances within 90 days that they will carry out by the end of this year desegregation measures agreed to in 1978.    ---   Officials in Beijing said Chen Boda, one of the top leaders of the Cultural Revolution, has been released from prison because of ill health. Chen, 83, was arrested in 1971 and sentenced in 1981 to 18 years in jail for his role in the era's purges and persecutions.    ---   Goria resigned as prime minister of Italy's 47th postwar government. He submitted his resignation to President Cossiga, who asked Goria to remain as caretaker until a new government can be formed. Goria, who assumed office Aug. 1, had faced feuding within his five-party coalition.    ---   Meese is expected to order the closing of the PLO's observer mission to the U.N., Reagan administration officials said. The decision, which could be announced early next week despite opposition from the State Department and the U.N., would implement legislation adopted by Congress last year.    ---   Independent counsel Walsh said he had retained a former federal judge to fight any legal challenges to possible criminal prosecutions of those involved in the Iran-Contra affair. The move signaled Walsh's apparent readiness to bring criminal charges.    ---   The Philippine military said it had uncovered a plot by communist guerrillas to kill retired U.S. Maj. Gen. Singlaub. The plan was discovered after decoding data captured in last week's arrest of 20 rebel leaders. The rebels have accused Singlaub of forming anti-communist vigilante groups.    ---   A U.S. judge in Philadelphia sentenced a Pakistani-born Canadian man to five years in prison for conspiring to defraud the U.S. The 43-year-old man was convicted in December of trying to export to Pakistan special metals used to make nuclear bombs.    ---   Gunmen in Lebanon kidnapped the granddaughter of a Christian businessman from a chauffeur-driven car in Beirut. In southern Lebanon, Palestinian refugees staged a strike to protest last week's abduction of two Scandinavian relief workers.    ---   A land mine exploded outside the port city of Trincomalee in eastern Sri Lanka, killing at least 12 people, including nine police officers. Tamil rebels were blamed. </TEXT></DOC>