<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871020-0033 </DOCNO><HL> GOP Can Win Southern Seats in a Firefight---By Stuart Rothenberg</HL><DD> 10/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The near unanimity of Senate Democrats in opposing Robert Bork's nomination demonstrates how far apart the two major parties now are in their ideologies and political bases. Other indications of the parties' differences abound. The failure of the Republicans to take advantage of this suggests that the GOP must now consider a new strategy for dealing with its minority status.    If there is a great deal of diversity among Democratic federal officeholders it is difficult to find. The Democratic presidential hopefuls (including those who have dropped out of the race) sound very much alike, and when one of them stakes out a more moderate position, as Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee has done regarding foreign policy and weapons testing, he is immediately pounced upon and charged with creating &quot;phony differences.&quot; Their positions on a wide range of issues from economic and social policy to foreign affairs seem remarkably close to those of Walter Mondale, though they have been slightly more politic in presenting them.    Out of a Senate majority, only two Democrats, David Boren of Oklahoma and Ernest Hollings of South Carolina, have publicly indicated they favor confirmation of Robert Bork. The Democratic reaction to Judge Bork (including the accompanying rhetoric) is something of a surprise, considering that most observers assumed that the administration could count on at least a handful of Southern senators.    The chasm separating most Republicans on Capitol Hill from their Democratic opponents is easy to document. For the past 30 years, Congressional Quarterly has monitored Congress's &quot;conservative coalition,&quot; which it defines as the &quot;voting alliance that occurs when a majority of Republicans and Southern Democrats vote against a majority of Northern Democrats.&quot; During the 1960s the coalition appeared on 21.6% of all House and Senate recorded votes, and during the 1970s the coalition grew to 24.5%. But from 1980 to 1986 the coalition appeared in only 16.9% of all House and Senate votes.    Clearly, Southern Democrats are increasingly less likely to depart from party orthodoxy, leading to the conclusion that they are reacting to new political pressures or arrive in Washington with a different political outlook from those who served before them.    The divergence in the nature of Southern representation becomes apparent when the roll is called. In the late-1960s, Jim Allen and John Sparkman represented Alabama in the Senate. Louisiana sent Allen Ellender and Russell Long, while North Carolina sent Sam Ervin. Richard Russell (Georgia), James Eastland (Mississippi), Spessard Holland (Florida) and Harry Byrd Jr. (Virginia) also were in the Senate. These men represented conservative Democratic constituencies and found themselves allied often with Republicans in the Senate.    The Southern Democrats who now represent their states have been elected by a more liberal, frequently heavily black constituency. The result is that even allegedly conservative Southerners such as Richard Shelby of Alabama, John Breaux of Louisiana and Sam Nunn of Georgia find themselves voting more often with the rest of their party than with conservative Republicans.    When, in late July, Washington Sen. Dan Evans sponsored an amendment to a debt-increase bill that would have allowed the president to veto single appropriations bills that were combined into a continuing resolution, only six Democrats -- Lloyd Bentsen from Texas being the closest thing to a Southerner -- joined with 36 Republicans in supporting the amendment. When most Republicans voted last month against the confirmation of Melissa Wells, a critic of anti-communist guerrillas in Mozambique, as ambassador to that country, they were joined by only three Democrats -- Southerners Howell Heflin (Alabama), Ernest Hollings (South Carolina) and Mr. Shelby.    Of course, there are some issues, particularly on foreign policy, where many Southerners vote with the GOP. But even then some Southern Democrats -- North Carolina's Terry Sanford, Louisiana's Mr. Breaux and Bennett Johnston, and Georgia's Wyche Fowler are prime examplesusually find themselves in the Democratic mainstream, not joining forces with the more conservative GOP minority.    Ironically, the Southern Democratic opposition to Judge Bork and the decline in the conservative coalition can be traced to the growth of Republicanism in the South. The realignment of white Southerners away from the Democrats and into the GOP has sapped the strength of the conservative wing of the Democratic Party. This has led to the nomination of more moderate Democrats and to a timidity on the part of conservative Democratic senators about breaking with their party.    But Southern Democrats still depend on the votes from thousands of moderates and conservatives, or at least on those voters' not turning out for their opponents. Democrats such as Sens. Sanford, Shelby and Breaux emphasized conservative credentials during their 1986 races, not a surprising strategy since Ronald Reagan carried every Southern state in 1980 and won every Deep South state four years later with at least 60% of the vote.    While Democratic Senate candidates in the South won all the closely fought contests last year, their vote totals weren't impressive. In North Carolina, Terry Sanford actually received fewer votes for the Senate in 1986 than Mr. Mondale drew for president in 1984. Sen. Fowler ran more than 80,000 votes behind Mr. Mondale's Georgia total. Lower turnout and weak GOP candidates, combined with the return of white working-class Democrats to their party and monolithic black support for Democratic nominees cost the Republicans control of the Senate.    In spite of all this, a mythology has appeared that the large black vote in the South makes it almost impossible for Republicans to elect candidates statewide unless the party dramatically increases efforts to woo black voters. There may be good reasons to reach out to rank-and-file blacks, but Republican success in the South does not solely depend on such a strategy.    Over the past decade, Republican Party identification has risen, and the GOP has shown electoral strength in presidential and Senate races. However, the party has made little headway at the state and local level or in the House. What can the party do to change the political dynamics that seem to relegate them to minority status?    Naturally, the GOP must try to recruit stronger candidates than in the past and maximize a technological advantage over the Democrats, but the party also could try to alter the nature of the choices given voters. Southerners such as Sens. Shelby, Breaux and Nunn succeed politically by marrying enough moderates and conservatives to a traditional Democratic base, which includes union members, government workers, blacks and white liberals. They do so by emphasizing their political independence, constituency attentiveness and interest in local matters.    The Republicans might make substantial inroads at the state and local levels, and in House races, by embarking on a national campaign that emphasizes &quot;party government.&quot; The 1980 &quot;Vote Republican for a Change&quot; was effective because, unlike the 1982 &quot;Stay the Course&quot; or the 1984 &quot;It's Morning in America&quot; themes, it was bold and confrontational. It communicated the importance of party control, and the differences that party control can make. Individual candidates frequently try the same message, but it gets lost in the midst of a campaign with charges flying and is usually offered by candidates who have little else to recommend them.    A national advertising campaign begun substantially before the actual electoral campaign, possibly as early as this winter, could alter the nature of the 1988 elections, making them more a choice between two parties with two sets of reasonably coherent values and outlooks, rather than simply a series of individual elections during which stronger candidates seek to insulate themselves from issues. The Republicans could stress that they stand for the sort of cultural values and economic opportunities that would appeal to a majority of Americans. At the same time, they would probably have to define the Democrats in terms of their more unusual constituencies.    Naturally, some Republicans would object to the characterization of their party as having a distinctive conservative ideology, and the GOP would have to be careful about the way it framed the national debate and characterized itself and the Democrats. The Democrats might counter with their own national campaign, and public-opinion trends on a number of issues make the strategy risky. But a minority party must take risks if it wants to become the majority and if it truly believes that it is more in tune with the electorate.    ---   Mr. Rothenberg is editor of The Political Report, published by the Free Congress Foundation. </TEXT></DOC>