<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870512-0006 </DOCNO><HL> The Hearings:What if CongressHadn't Vacillated?</HL><DD> 05/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   These edited excerpts are from the Iran-Contra hearing of Friday, May 8. The witness is retired Maj. Gen. Richard Secord:    Rep. Henry Hyde (R., Ill.): I have studied the checkered career of assistance to the democratic resistance in Nicaragua. In 1982, Congress authorized and appropriated $24 million. In 1983, we increased that to $27 million, but we restricted it to humanitarian assistance only, no military aid. In 1984, zero, no humanitarian, no military. In 1985, zero for military, but then when we got to September '85 to March '86 we authorized and appropriated $27 million for humanitarian only and a limited amount of information sharing. Then in '86 for fiscal '87, $100 million for humanitarian and military, but of course that got delayed by the speaker of the House until the last, waning moment of the session. Now 1987, this year, I think the smart money is on another big fat zero.    So when I try to characterize the policy of Congress, the official partner with the president in foreign policy, our policy toward Central America, a life-and-death situation, I grasp for words -- vacillating, oscillating, wavering, hesitant, inconsistent, faltering. So it seems to me as we stand on Mount Olympus wagging our fingers at extralegal foreign policies, we don't do so from a position of strength.    ---   Rep. William Broomfield (R., Mich.): Now I want everyone to know that I'm not a former prosecutor. Hell, I'm not even a lawyer. But I've got some common sense. I'm not one of those who is predicting who should or who shouldn't be indicted. If there is evidence of criminal wrongdoing by individuals involved in this affair, I would hope that the committee would leave that to the special prosecutor. That's not our job.    I've been involved with foreign policy for more than 25 years as a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and from that perspective, I think a great deal of blame for this foreign-policy foul-up rests right at the doorstop of Congress. Over those years, as everyone knows, there has been a great change in the constitutional role of Congress in making foreign policy. Since Vietnam, Congress likes to boast that it's been an equal partner with the president in shaping foreign policy. Well, I think Congress ought to shoulder the blame for an on-again, off-again Nicaraguan policy. President Reagan, who still carries the burden of making foreign policy, must deal almost daily with 535 secretaries of state in the House and Senate who seldom can form a simple majority around a single issue.    I guess what I'm trying to say, General, is that the problems you confronted in trying to assist your country were the direct results of Congress's inability to maintain a consistent policy line regarding Nicaragua. If Congress had been able to get its act together, there would have been no need for the covert efforts to bridge the gap in our policy.    ---   Rep. Dante Fascell (D., Fla.): You were quite positive and comfortable with the fact that you were not covered by the Arms Export Control Act, the other export acts, the Foreign Assistance Act, the Boland amendments and whatever other matters seemed to be directed toward the U.S. government as a government doing anything. Am I correct, generally speaking?    Gen. Secord: Yes.   ---   Rep. Richard Cheney (R., Wyo.): Wouldn't you think that if Congress wanted to prohibit private activity such as that that you were engaged in perhaps we should have changed the law, such as the Neutrality Act, to make it clear that it was intended to prohibit private actions in support of the Contras?    Gen. Secord: Definitely.   ---   Rep. Edward Boland (D., Mass.): I'd like to direct your attention to the period Oct. 3, 1984, through Dec. 19, 1985. It's a matter of a little amendment. It's been variously described. It's been described I think by you as like Swiss cheese, full of holes. . . .    Let me read the Boland amendment: &quot;During fiscal year 1985, no funds available to the CIA, the Department of Defense, or any other agency, or entity of the U.S. involved in intelligence activities may be obligated or expended for the purpose of, or, which would have the effect of supporting, directly or indirectly, military or paramilitary operations in Nicaragua by any nation, group, organization, movement, or individual.&quot;    General, they're very simple English words. And if you've demonstrated anything here in the last four days it's your magnificent knowledge of the English language. Now, what would be your literal interpretation or your opinion, unadorned opinion, of that particular amendment?    Gen. Secord: I'm not a lawyer, obviously, but I believe it is an anti-appropriations act, pure and simple, and it does not cover private funds.    Rep. Boland: General, you understand words. I just read the amendment . . .    Gen. Secord: Yes sir.    Rep. Boland: . . . the words are simple; they're unadorned; they're literal; they're clear.    Gen. Secord: It means to me that no U.S. government funds can be expended by those agencies that you ticked off.    Rep. Boland: You have any confusion at all with respect to the Boland amendment?    Gen. Secord: I understand the words, Mr. Boland, but it also tells me that private funding is legal.    ---   Rep. Bill McCollum (R., Fla.): There's a lot of discussion about whether the NSC was indeed covered by this. In 1981, before we got to those Boland amendments we passed, the president issued Executive Order 12333, which explicitly excluded the NSC from the definition of an intelligence agency. That was done in concurrence and consultation with Congress.    ---   A related editorial appears nearby. {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Not Following the Script&quot; -- WSJ May 12, 1987} </TEXT></DOC>