<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0050 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NORIEGA'S OPPONENTS FAILED to win widespread support for a strike.    The general strike, called by a 200-group alliance opposed to the Panamanian military leader's regime, appeared to falter, with most commerce and transportation proceeding uninterrupted. Many factories, however, remained closed. The police arrested a leader involved in organizing the nationwide strike, which was called in an effort to oust Noriega. Intimidation, censorship and an apparent lack of faith in the effectiveness of mass action reportedly contributed to the strike's limited impact.    Ousted President Delvalle remained in hiding, defying Noriega's order to leave the country. Panama's envoy to the U.S. refused to relinquish his post.    --   TUTU WAS ARRESTED while protesting Pretoria's curbs on anti-apartheid groups.    The Anglican archbishop, the Rev. Allan Boesak and other South African religious leaders were taken into custody during a march toward South Africa's Parliament with a petition protesting the recent crackdown on 17 anti-apartheid organizations. Under the restrictions announced last week, the groups were banned from engaging in political activity. The clergymen from all races were released after a few hours.    A white-supremacist group staged a similar demonstration Saturday, delivering a petition in Pretoria demanding an all-white state. Arrests weren't made.    ---   Shultz neared the end of his Mideast peace mission with inconclusive responses from Israeli and Arab leaders over a U.S. plan to end unrest in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. The secretary of state again traveled to Jordan before returning to Jerusalem to brief Israeli leaders on the talks, which were called &quot;constructive.&quot;    Perez de Cuellar opened an emergency three-day session of the General Assembly and urged the U.S. to refrain from closing the PLO's mission to the U.N. Anti-terrorist legislation approved by Congress last year and signed by Reagan calls for the 13-year-old mission to be closed by March 21.    ---   Rioting erupted in Sumgait, in the republic of Azerbaijan, adjacent to Soviet Armenia. Tass blamed &quot;hooligans&quot; for the &quot;rampage and violence&quot; in the city, which has a large Armenian population. The ethnic unrest poses a challenge to Gorbachev, whose power is being resisted by opponents, U.S. experts said.    ---   A Pentagon official said plans for initial deployment of a space-based antimissile system have been set back &quot;perhaps two years&quot; from a 1994 target date because of budget cuts. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson, director of the program, also said a recent test indicated attempts to fool a missile defense by using decoy warheads can be detected.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to hear a challenge by Customs Service employees to mandatory drug testing. The case is the first test of the constitutionality of mandatory drug screening since Reagan signed an executive order in 1986 calling for testing of federal workers. A ruling isn't expected until early next year.    ---   Iraq fired five rockets on Tehran, and its jets staged bombing raids that killed 16 people. The attacks followed Iran's bombing of Baghdad, in which &quot;many civilians&quot; were killed or wounded, the Iraqi news agency said. Baghdad, which wasn't known to have missiles capable of reaching Tehran, said the weapons were Iraqi made.    ---   Arizona Gov. Mecham faced an impeachment trial as the state's chief justice convened a jury of 30 senators to decide whether Mecham should be removed and possibly barred from holding office. The GOP governor, the first in almost 50 years to face such a trial, is accused of concealing a $350,000 loan and other charges.    ---   The EPA estimated that one in five commercial and public buildings may have asbestos problems. But the agency, which claimed it would cost $51 billion for a nationwide inspection and clean-up program, won't recommend rules to remove the cancer-causing material.    ---   Anti-government protests flared in Bangladesh in an attempt to disrupt Thursday's parliamentary elections. Police said three people were injured in two bomb blasts. Meanwhile, opposition leaders began preparing for a 36-hour general strike beginning tomorrow and disclosed plans for a civil disobedience campaign after the balloting.    ---   Senegal's President Diouf declared a state of emergency in Dakar as police battled supporters of a rival political party, whose leader was arrested. Witnesses in the capital city said police were using tear gas to break up unauthorized gatherings. Early returns from Sunday's election indicated Diouf won a new five-year term.    ---   Bokassa's death sentence was commuted to forced labor for life, state-run radio in the Central African Republic reported. The ousted emperor was convicted last June for crimes committed during his 13-year rule. </TEXT></DOC>