<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880125-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   MANAGUA SAID its troops shot down a DC-6 that had dropped Contra supplies.    A spokeswoman for the U.S.-backed Nicaraguan rebels said 11 Contras were killed when the cargo plane, a four-engine propeller-driven aircraft, went down. No Americans were aboard, she said. The Sandinista government said its troops were searching the crash site, about 115 miles southeast of Managua. The U.S. confirmed that a plane had gone down, but refused to say if it was a Contra-supply aircraft. Reagan last week authorized the CIA to resume air deliveries of previously purchased Contra arms.    House Speaker Wright said he would consider new aid to the Contras if there were safeguards to make sure it was used only for humanitarian purposes.    ---   Israel dropped curfew restrictions on three more Gaza Strip refugee camps and said some 50,000 Palestinians returned to work. Egyptian President Mubarak sent Israeli Prime Minister Shamir a message urging his support for an international peace conference, but Shamir reiterated his opposition.    ---   A U.S. appeals court panel struck down the system of court-appointed special prosecutors set up by Congress in 1978 to insulate prosecutions of high-level officials from political influence. The 2-1 decision also hinted that the Iran-Contra special prosecutor appointed by Attorney General Meese should be reined in.    ---   Haiti's Leslie Manigat won last week's boycotted military-run presidential election, the electoral council installed by the junta said. The council said the 57-year-old political science professor won 50.3% of 1,062,016 votes cast. Haiti has three million eligible voters and opposition leaders said double voting inflated the council's turnout figure.    ---   Iraqi warplanes struck a supertanker off the Iranian coast and Iranian gunboats attacked a Danish vessel in weekend raids, Persian Gulf shipping sources said. Separately, administration sources in Washington said Britain, France and Italy have agreed to work together under a unified command to sweep mines in the gulf.    ---   Japan plans to impose sanctions on North Korea, including travel restrictions and limits on diplomatic ties, over its suspected role in the bombing of a Korean Air Lines jet that killed 115 in November, according to Japanese newspaper reports. Separately, North Korea Saturday called for a disarmament conference with South Korea.    ---   Riot police in Bangladesh shot and killed at least 10 people during demonstrations in the southeastern port city of Chittagong. The protests were led by Sheik Hasina, who leads a 21-party opposition alliance seeking the ouster of President Ershad.    ---   A Soviet scientific team traveled to Nevada to visit the U.S. nuclear-test facility. The visit is designed to familiarize scientists with the facility as a prelude to a possible exchange of verification data that could lead to a test-ban accord. A U.S. team visited the Soviet test facility earlier this month.    ---   Reagan will propose an ambitious policy to re-establish U.S. leadership in space in his State of the Union address tonight, administration officials said. The president's plan, which is to be presented to Congress in a written proposal, includes a Mars mission, a moon base and joint U.S.-Soviet space exploration, the officials said.    ---   Britain's Liberal Party voted to merge with the Social Democratic Party. The 5-1 approval margin by 2,500 delegates attending a party conference in Blackpool, England, exceeded party leaders' predictions.    ---   Democratic candidates sparred in a Durham, N.H., debate that matched the three Iowa front-runners for the presidential nomination against an aggressive Sen. Albert Gore, and left little of the spotlight for former Sen. Gary Hart. Separately, Hart said he would return money that proved to be contributed illegally.    ---   A Chinese train derailed during an express run from Kunming to Shanghai, killing 90, China's official Xinhua news agency said. The accident occurred in Yunnan province about 220 miles from Kunming.    ---   Five South Africans died in continuing black factional violence in townships outside Pietermartizburg. Fighting between the United Democratic Front and the Zulu Inkatha has claimed 62 lives this year.    ---   Sweden's Mats Wilander won the men's tennis final at the Australian Open in Melbourne, three sets to two, over Australia's Pat Cash. West German Steffi Graf won the women's title, beating Chris Evert of the U.S. in straight sets.    ---   Died: Wallis B. Dunckel, 86, former president of Bankers Trust Co., Thursday, in Danbury, Conn. . . . W.C. &quot;Dan&quot; Daniel, 73, 10-term Democratic representative from Virginia, Saturday, in Charlottesville, Va. </TEXT></DOC>