<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881010-0018 </DOCNO><HL> First Boston, Europe Affiliate Plan to Merge --- Deal, Valued at $1.1 Billion, Represents Major Boost In Credit Suisse's Power </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FBC </CO><IN> TNM BNK SCR </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   First Boston Inc.'s board approved a merger with its European affiliate, Credit Suisse First Boston, in a transaction that will take the combined companies private and trigger a major restructuring of their senior management.    The proposed transaction, which came after more than a year of internal strife and operating setbacks for First Boston, represents a significant boost in the power of Credit Suisse. The big Swiss bank will increase its ownership in First Boston and position its people to become chairman and chief executive officer of the combined companies. Some people close to First Boston said the transaction amounted to a takeover of the U.S. securities firm by the Swiss bank, in part because some members of First Boston's senior management had lost the support of some of their own key employees.    But Peter T. Buchanan, First Boston's chief executive, sharply denied any notion of a takeover. He praised the proposed merger, saying: &quot;I'm very excited about this. It gives us a very unique jump on the competition in terms of an imaginative structure for the future.&quot;    Under the terms of the transaction, First Boston's 15.7 million publicly held shares, plus certain shares owned by First Boston employees, will be bought for $52.50 each, or a total of $1.1 billion. (The firm expects the transaction to close in December.)    The per-share price is $3.625 above the $48.875 closing price for First Boston shares Friday in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. And it is more than $20 above the trading price in May, when First Boston announced that a restructuring was under consideration.    But some analysts and others close to First Boston said it is difficult to assess whether or not the price is fair because First Boston has numerous investments in other companies, from so-called merchant banking transactions, which go back several years and could add significantly to First Boston's value. Lawrence Eckenfelder, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said First Boston has been unwilling to provide information on many of these tranactions. He nonetheless said he thought the price was &quot;good, given this {post-crash} environment.&quot;    What's more, some First Boston shareholders questioned why Credit Suisse wasn't being asked to pay a hefty premium in return for being able to get effective control of First Boston.    But Mr. Buchanan responded that Credit Suisse already controls 40% of First Boston's voting rights, and that it is barred by U.S. banking law from going further than its new stake.    The new firm, which will be called CS First Boston Inc., will be 44.5%-owned by Credit Suisse, which, in contrast to its voting control, now controls only about 24% of First Boston's profit. The new firm also will be 25%-owned by the management.    But in a highly unusual move, First Boston said it hasn't yet lined up the investor or investors who will own the other 30.5%. It said that a friendly investor has agreed to assemble short-term financing to buy the shares and hold them until First Boston finds a permanent investor, which probably would occur in early 1989.    First Boston also refused to identify this friendly investor, who one official characterized as a wealthy individual from the Middle East. When asked whether there wasn't some disclosure requirement to identify the investor, a First Boston official said the investor's identity would be announced before the merger is completed.    First Boston officials added that the temporary investor, which will be paid an unspecified fee for its services, will under certain conditions split with the former public shareholders any premium that a permanent investor might pay for its shares above $52.50.    First Boston said the $1.1 billion buy-out cost would be shared accordingly: Credit Suisse will pay $300 million, and First Boston will issue $200 of preferred stock at the time of the merger. The preferred stock will be in First Boston itself, which will be an operating unit of the new firm. The temporary investor, and ultimately the permanent investor, will be required to put up about $600 million.    For a permanent investor, First Boston officials said, they now hope they can find an Asian firm that could help the new firm with business contacts there. One firm that had been under consideration as a third investor, Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., is no longer in the running and also won't be the friendly, interim shareholder, people familiar with the talks said.    The proposed transaction is still contingent on the approval of a majority of First Boston shareholders. The proposed agreement also provides for the possibility of a higher, outside offer being accepted by the First Boston board. But First Boston employees and Credit Suisse control a majority of the fully diluted shares, so officials don't expect any problems in the merger.    For First Boston itself, the biggest changes resulting from the merger are in top management, where its chairman and its chief executive will not be with the new firm for more than a year. Mr. Buchanan will become chief executive of CS First Boston but only until the fall of 1989, when he will retire at age 55. Credit Suisse Chairman Rainer Gut, 55, will become chairman of CS First Boston upon completion of the transaction.    Mr. Buchanan will be succeeded next year by John M. Hennessey, a former First Boston official who has for several years been chairman of CSFB in London, and who enjoys the strong support of the Swiss, for whom he has effectively worked.    The man Mr. Buchanan had long said would succeed him as chief executive, First Boston Chairman Alvin Shoemaker, 49, will retire at the end of this year. In an interview with Institutional Investor magazine published in June, Mr. Buchanan was quoted as saying: &quot;There is no question. There is only one guy who would take over for me, and that's&quot; Mr. Shoemaker.    Some people close to First Boston said that, ironically, Mr. Hennessey was exiled to London several years ago by Mr. Buchanan in favor of Mr. Shoemaker. But Mr. Buchanan denied this account and that there was ever any bad blood between him and Mr. Hennessey. &quot;We're delighted to get him back,&quot; Mr. Buchanan said.    People familiar with the situation said support for Mr. Buchanan's chosen successor and some other senior First Boston officials had slipped considerably in the past several months along with the firm's results. Mr. Buchanan himself long said he would retire in a year or so, so his announcement was expected.    But already, one member of the four-man ruling executive committee, Francis Jenkins, resigned last month, and Mr. Shoemaker will make two. Mr. Jenkins hasn't announced any plans, and Mr. Shoemaker will be heading up a fund-raising drive for the University of Pennsylvania, Mr. Buchanan said.    Credit Suisse's Mr. Gut has also been outspoken in his displeasure with certain aspects of the operation, particularly the firm's bond trading, which has periodically suffered big losses. Mr. Gut is said to be a strong supporter of Mr. Hennessey, who will serve as vice chairman of CS First Boston for a year, but who will have all operating units reporting to him during that time.    The new firm will have the same amount of capital, $1.1 billion, as First Boston currently has, and about 6,100 employees, First Boston officials said. It has been widely expected that a significant staff reduction would come soon after the merger. But Mr. Buchanan said &quot;no layoffs have been contemplated.&quot;    First Boston officials immediately hailed the merged firm as a major global investment bank. Along with its expected ties to local markets in the U.S., Europe and Asia, it will probably have greater access to Credit Suisse's enormous reserves of funds. &quot;They're going to be a stronger firm,&quot; particularly if this ends the squabbling between First Boston and CSFB that has hurt the relationship, says Mr. Eckenfelder of Prudential-Bache. He added, though: &quot;Whether this is going to propel them to the top of the heap remains to be seen.&quot;    Mr. Eckenfelder notes that one of the strengths of the merged firms, particularly abroad, is in bonds, a business in which profit margins have slimmed substantially.    First Boston's chief strength in the U.S., at least, is in mergers and acquisitions and related fields. But Mr. Eckenfelder and others say it still isn't clear just how badly the firm was hurt by the loss of its two biggest mergers stars and new-business generators, Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph Perella. The firm has performed well in that field since their departure, but some of the deals the firm has completed were through client relationships forged before the two left, Mr. Eckenfelder said.    What's more, it is unclear whether First Boston and CSFB will really squabble less just because they will be under one corporate roof. The new company will be divided into three operating groups, with the London-based unit being headed by Mr. Hennessey's deputy, Hans-Joerg Rudloff, 48, and the U.S. entity being headed by Mr. Buchanan's close associate, William Mayer, 47. Mr. Rudloff, a strong-willed and excitable executive, is said to have strained relations with several First Boston executives in New York.    The combined companies are hoping that Mr. Hennessey will be able to provide the unifying leadership that has been lacking.    The inherent differences between the sides were illustrated by the enormous difficulties they had in negotiating the transaction. The arduous talks, which began more than a year ago and which have been conducted in earnest for more than six months, almost fell apart several times, people familiar with the talks said, with the latest wavering occurring last Thursday. These people say the various tax-law and regulatory considerations resulted in a situation in which even a slight change threatened the entire agreement. At many times during the talks, these people say, the two sides considered a divorce.    The talks were largely kept secret from First Boston's employees, even from many of its more than 100 managing directors, who were summoned to the firm's headquarters at 6 p.m. last night to hear about the deal.    The long-expected merger announcement punctuates a turbulent period in First Boston's history. In the mid-1980s it became one of the fastest-rising and most successful investment banks, only to sputter in the past 18 months.    The firm had a loss of about $100 million trading risky options on Treasury bonds in the summer of 1987. Last February, Messrs. Wasserstein and Perella walked out and set up their own firm after learning that a strategic review conducted by First Boston would produce no major changes there. The firm incurred a loss of $50 million trading mortgage securities. Its mortgage securities chief, its head of municipal finance, its head of risk arbitrage, seven members of its leveraged buy-out group and several others either left or were asked to leave.    None of these developments pleased Credit Suisse, which has had a relatively passive stake in First Boston since 1978. In that year, Credit Suisse and First Boston formed their complicated joint venture, CSFB, Credit Suisse owns 60% of CSFB, and First Boston 40%. CSFB, in turn, owns 40% of First Boston. The arrangement has given Credit Suisse an effective 24% stake in First Boston.    The First Boston-Credit Suisse alliance is permissible under a grandfather clause to U.S. banking laws. First Boston officials said the Federal Reserve approved the new Credit Suisse stake as &quot;consistent&quot; with the law.    Mr. Hennessey, the man who will eventually run the merged companies, is a Harvard graduate who worked at Arthur D. Little and Citibank before becoming assistant Treasury secretary at the end of the Nixon Administration. Recently, he has been very active raising money for the presidential campaign of Vice President George Bush.    He joined First Boston in about 1977 and worked in international and domestic investment banking before heading to London to run CSFB in late 1982. People familiar with First Boston say Mr. Hennessey was perceived as an outsider in the somewhat clubby environment of First Boston, where many senior executives have spent their entire career.    His management style is said to be far different from that of Mr. Buchanan, a former trader who is aloof from many employees and from clients.    Mr. Hennessey is described as a handsome manager and a cheerleader who likes to visit with employees and clients. &quot;He even likes to go to conventions,&quot; said a former First Boston official. </TEXT></DOC>