<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870417-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Cloudy Skies:Rising UAL TurmoilThreatens Ferris's JobAs the Chief Executive---He Fights Pilots' Bid to BuyUnited Airlines and FacesCriticism on Profits, Stock---A History of Bouncing Back---This article was prepared byWall Street Journal staff reportersJudith Valente, John Koten and Scott Kilman</HL><DD> 04/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> UAL LABORAIRLINES (AIR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Richard J. Ferris seemed to have the &quot;right stuff&quot; when he first took command of United Airlines.    A frequent visitor in the cockpits of United's jets, the barrel-chested executive was widely admired by pilots for his tough-guy determination. They also were impressed that the former hotel man, who rose through the ranks at UAL Inc.'s Westin hotel unit, had taken the time to get his own pilot license. They even awarded him an honorary seniority number on the United pilot list.    But no longer are the skies so friendly for Mr. Ferris, now UAL's chairman. Because of a continuing feud with the company's 7,000 pilots, he is doing much of his travel on private jets. When he does fly United, he usually waits until the last moment to board. Most pilots &quot;would just as soon have as little contact with him as possible,&quot; says Richard Russell, a DC-10 captain and 32-year veteran at United.    The feud has been sharpened by the Air Line Pilots Association's unprecedented bid to buy the carrier from UAL for $4.5 billion. Coming amid talk of other possible takeover efforts, the union's buyout proposal presents Mr. Ferris not only with the short-term problem of how to respond but also with long-term questions about his leadership.    Even if the 50-year-old Mr. Ferris succeeds in fighting off the pilots, his job may be in jeopardy, some people close to the UAL board suggest. One associate notes that Mr. Ferris has faced major problems in the past -- including the grounding of United's DC-10s, like all DC-10s, after an American Airlines crash in Chicago in 1979, a 29-day strike by United's pilots in 1985 and more labor strife last year -- but says this &quot;is clearly his biggest challenge yet.&quot; Other careers at the company also are said to be at risk.    Unwilling to leave solely to Mr. Ferris the decision of how to respond to the pilots' bid, some outside directors are understood to have hired their own advisers to review their options. They also may be putting his whole business strategy under hasty review. In addition, shareholder criticism of his long-term strategy has reached a fevered pitch in recent weeks.    The strategy most under attack is UAL's attempt to become the nation's pre-eminent travel company, with airline, hotel and rental-car operations. In a recent telephone conversation, Donald Trump, the New York real-estate investor who owns almost 5% of UAL's common, advocated to Mr. Ferris that the company be broken up and its parts sold separately.    And solving the labor problems will require more than just defeating the pilot union's bid. The resentment festering on both sides probably will grow if the offer is rejected. There is doubt, in fact, whether Mr. Ferris can ever restore normal relations with the union. &quot;Events have started a chain reaction that may be very difficult to control,&quot; warned a telex sent to United's pilots last week by Lloyd W. Barry, the vice president for flight operations.    The pilots themselves apparently are becoming warier. They are said to be trying to monitor the comings and goings of UAL directors. One pilot on a flight from Washington told the union that Andrew Brimmer, a UAL director, had been on his plane and had quizzed flight attendants about their reaction to the pilots' bid.    The pilot union is worried that Mr. Ferris will ask for major wage concessions during the next round of bargaining, in 1988. At a Northwestern University dinner last year, Mr. Ferris was overheard boasting to American Airlines Chairman Robert Crandall that United would one day have some of the lowest labor costs in the industry. For all the acrimony between the company and the union, United pilots' wages average 33% more than those paid by Continental Airlines. Officially, United has told the union that it won't seek wages comparable to those at the Texas Air unit.    Few observers expect Mr. Ferris to give up without a fight. Though his aggressive management style has made him a lightning rod for criticism of the company's policies, he has survived several scraps since becoming United's chief executive in 1976. Working at a stand-up desk and wielding a hot temper, he typically attacks a problem by moving quickly to the offensive. &quot;He's a very tough character,&quot; a former United executive says. &quot;This isn't the first time that people have been calling for his head.&quot;    Although Mr. Ferris hasn't commented publicly on the pilots' bid except to say it isn't clear, associates say he was furious when he learned of it while on his way to give a speech in Des Moines. &quot;The company had focused all of its attention on watching for a possible bid by Donald Trump,&quot; one recently departed executive says. &quot;This came out of the blue.&quot;    Mr. Ferris's initial maneuver may be an attempt to muster opposition to the union's bid within its own ranks. The airline has been conducting a survey of employee support for the proposal. If Mr. Ferris can turn up substantial doubts on the part of a lot of pilots, the union may be forced to rethink its efforts.    United itself has moved to sow such doubts. In messages sent last week, it asked its pilots to reconsider whether they really want to foot the bill for buying the carrier and whether they believe that their jobs would be more secure if they own United through an employee stock ownership plan. &quot;The glory of ownership will be short-lived,&quot; one message said.    The pilot union, meanwhile, has begun a city-by-city campaign to promote its buyout plan among the membership. Its efforts seem to have picked up momentum in recent days as an increasing number of airline-industry analysts have declared the union plan workable. The pilots have yet to obtain financing for their proposal, and United's machinist union has further complicated their plan by saying it may make a separate bid for the airline. Nevertheless, securities analysts term the pilots' prospects good because the tax laws allow a lender to deduct 50% of the interest on a loan to an employee stock ownership plan.    Just as troubling for Mr. Ferris as the buyout offer has been the apparent erosion of support for his policies among UAL directors and shareholders.    Some UAL board members are understood to be upset about the airline's deficits in recent years as well as the lackluster profits from UAL's hotel and rental-car units. The airline posted an $80.6 million loss in 1986 and an $88.2 million loss in 1985. UAL itself earned $11.6 million in 1986 and lost $48.7 million in 1985 -- a far cry from its 1984 net income of $282.4 million.    One director is said to have declared his impatience to Mr. Ferris a few months ago, saying the financial results had better improve soon or he would lose support on the board. Shortly afterward, United announced a cost-cutting plan to furlough more than 1,000 white-collar workers.    The directors' fears intensified last week when UAL stock jumped more than 20% on speculation that the pilots' offer might smoke out a bid for all of UAL. Among other things, the market response indicated that shareholders might support a takeover attempt.    Institutional holders of UAL stock seem upset mainly because the $2.3 billion spent on acquisitions in the past two years -- on Hertz Corp., the Pacific division of Pan American World Airways, and the Hilton International hotel chain -- hasn't significantly increased the value of their stock. Mr. Ferris &quot;hasn't performed up to standards,&quot; says Wolodymyr Wronskyj, an investment officer at Dreyfus Corp., which holds 667,500 shares.    After UAL's officials tried to explain its strategy to a group of New York securities analysts this year, the stock fell $1 a share that day. One large shareholder was particularly angry that Mr. Ferris has spent the equivalent of more than 60% of UAL's 1986 net income on changing its name, effective at month-end, to Allegis Corp. -- a name that, Mr. Trump complained, sounds like the next &quot;world-class disease.&quot;    Moreover, if UAL activates a poison pill against any buyout efforts, some big holders say they will call for Mr. Ferris's resignation. &quot;We have been sitting here for too long a time with underperformance,&quot; declares Lawrence Weissman, an analyst for the College Retirement Equities Fund, which owns a large block of UAL stock.    UAL stock jumped $2.875 Wednesday when the pilots pitched their takeover plan to about 60 Wall Street analysts, traders and institutional holders in New York (yesterday, the stock closed at $72.625, down 62.5 cents). The union didn't win over all its listeners, but it sustained pressure on the company by convincing some that UAL would be worth more if broken apart.    The shareholder everyone is watching, however, is Mr. Trump, whose attacks on UAL's strategy have prompted rumors that he might be weighing a takeover bid. Associates of Mr. Trump, who is said to have more than $500 million in cash and assets exceeding $2 billion, attribute his interest in breaking up UAL mainly to a desire to own the UAL's Plaza Hotel in New York and the Century Plaza in Los Angeles. But although his goal apparently meshes with that of the pilots, he has so far remained on the sidelines.    Mr. Ferris's recent problems contrast with his popularity with the pilots during his first years as UAL's chief executive. Although his relationship with United's union employees was tested by some of his tough bargaining stands -- unlike other chief executives, he usually participated directly in labor talks -- things didn't become acrimonious until contract negotiations sparked the pilots' 1985 strike.    Mr. Ferris triggered the strike by demanding that United's pilots, like those at American Airlines two years earlier, accept a two-tier wage system for newly hired pilots. The union agreed within a week, but the walkout dragged on for nearly a month. Already suspicious that Mr. Ferris wanted to break the union, the pilots erupted in anger when he tried to fire 570 newly hired pilots who refused to cross picket lines.    Even after the strike ended, the two sides continued fighting over that issue in the courts. The case was resolved just two weeks ago, when United agreed to rehire most of the 570 but at lower seniority levels than the union had demanded.    Shortly after the strike, Mr. Ferris moved to distance himself from day-to-day affairs of the airline. Retaining only his chairmanship of United, he named James Hartigan the new president and chief executive officer of the airline subsidiary. Mr. Hartigan, an affable executive who had enjoyed good relations with pilots, got orders to turn around the company's labor relations. Internal communications were beefed up, and new executives were hired to help try to improve morale.    But that effort apparently has failed. Last year, labor strife wrecked UAL's plans to acquire Frontier Airlines. UAL withdrew its offer after the union refused to accept its plan to pay Frontier's pilots 40% less than its own.    And with the pilots still on the warpath, some believe that Mr. Hartigan's job also may be in danger. &quot;If anything, things are as bad now as they ever have been,&quot; one union official says.    To pursue its offer, the union has lined up a formidable team that includes Lazard Freres andamp; Co., a New York investment-banking firm; F. Lee Bailey, a Boston criminal attorney whose wife is a United flight attendant, and Jared Kaplan, an expert on employee buyouts. Also advising the pilots is Sam Higginbottom, a former president of Eastern Airlines.    The pilots' efforts are being widely watched by other unions and labor experts because it is the first time a union has tried to buy a major company that wasn't struggling financially. &quot;People find it an exciting proposition to own the company and go fire the boss,&quot; says Rich Delaney, the president of the union local representing United's machinists in Chicago.    But the machinists are resisting the pilots' bid, saying they oppose taking deep wage cuts to buy a healthy company. The machinist union, which represents primarily blue-collar workers, says it is considering making a separate bid for the airline, among other things, if necessary to derail the pilots' offer or a takeover by a corporate raider. &quot;This just makes things more confusing,&quot; a UAL official says.    Meanwhile, the airline's executives are worried about the effect that the turmoil may have on its daily operations. In meetings last week, managers were told to be on their toes. A letter to all employees that was being drafted by the company cautioned that &quot;this is a serious time for the airline. All our futures depend on what's happening,&quot; a United official said. </TEXT></DOC>