<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871016-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   DUARTE URGED the U.S. to withhold military aid to Nicaragua's Contras.    Speaking in Washington, the Salvadoran president said such a cutoff of outside military aid to insurgent forces is &quot;an indispensable element&quot; of a Central American peace accord signed Aug. 7. He said new military aid should be withheld until at least January to give the regional plan a chance to succeed. The request is sharply at odds with Reagan's intention to seek $270 million in renewed rebel funding. Duarte also urged direct peace talks between the Nicaraguan government and Contra leaders.    Nicaragua's Contra leadership offered to go to Managua for talks with Sandinista officials to arrange a truce by the regional pact's Nov. 7 deadline.    ---   AN IRANIAN MISSILE STRUCK an American-owned tanker near Kuwait.    According to shipping executives and U.S. officials, Iranian gunners fired what was believed to have been a Chinese-made Silkworm missile into an anchorage off Kuwait's main oil terminal in the Persian Gulf, setting the vessel ablaze. Casualties weren't reported. In Washington, Reagan left open the possibility of retaliation for the attack on the ship, which flies the Liberian flag. Other officials, however, cautioned against speculation.    The U.N. secretary-general began a second round of peace talks with Iran and Iraq to discuss &quot;detailed guidelines for the implementation&quot; of a truce.    ---   The U.S. sued to take control of New York's wholesale seafood business, alleging that the city's Fulton Fish Market is dominated by a corrupt union and organized crime. The suit is the first attempt by the government to supervise the operations of an entire commercial center allegedly dominated by crime.    ---   Tamil rebels killed 36 people, including Indian soldiers and civilians, in renewed attacks in eastern Sri Lanka as New Delhi's peacekeeping troops pressed their offensive against the separatist rebels' northern stronghold of Jaffna. The Indian forces, attempting to enforce a July 29 truce, urged the rebels in the peninsula to surrender.    ---   The Reagan administration will propose to eliminate all licensing requirements for the export of militarily sensitive technology to allies if those countries satisfactorily tighten their own control standards for the export of goods to Soviet-bloc nations. The U.S. will take the offer to 14 allied capitals starting next week.    ---   Striking NFL players voted to return to work. The players union also filed an antitrust suit in a Minneapolis federal court, alleging that the owners of the football league's 28 franchises have &quot;refused to deal fairly&quot; with the strikers during six months of bargaining.    ---   Senate GOP leader Dole said debate will begin Monday on Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court. A number of Republicans have called for three days of debate on the imperiled nomination, which would permit a confirmation vote by Wednesday.    ---   Shultz traveled to the Mideast to discuss prospects for Arab-Israeli peace talks before heading to Moscow for discussions with Soviet officials. The secretary of state said he expected progress on superpower arms negotiations, but added that if none is made, a Reagan-Gorbachev summit, tentatively set for later this year, should be postponed.    ---   The Soviet Union said it had paid $111 million to the U.N. in all outstanding general contributions. A spokesman also said that Moscow is prepared to pay an additional $197 million for peacekeeping operations dating back to the early 1960s.    ---   Two Eastern Airlines pilots accused the carrier of repeatedly pressuring pilots to fly unsafe planes. The pilots also told the Senate Commerce panel that important cockpit equipment often goes unfixed because of the airline management's determination to cut costs.    ---   An Italian airliner crashed in a mountainous area near Lake Como in northern Italy during a rainstorm, authorities said. The Alitalia aircraft, carrying 34 passengers and three crew members, was bound for Cologne, West Germany, from Milan. It wasn't known if there were any survivors.    ---   Burkina Faso's government was ousted in a military coup, according to a broadcast by the small West African nation's official radio. The country's leader, who seized power in 1983, reportedly was arrested. The broadcast identified the coup's leader as a former minister of state and justice in the country, formerly called Upper Volta.    ---   The House approved legislation to require notification of workers if they've been exposed to toxic chemicals or other workplace hazards that pose a potentially high risk of disease. The measure was passed by a 225-186 vote.    ---   Authorities in Bangladesh said a ferry carrying about 200 people, double its official capacity, sank in a river outside Dhaka. About 100 people were missing and believed drowned. A number of the passengers jumped from the vessel and swam ashore.    ---   Brock announced his resignation as labor secretary to become chairman of Kansas Sen. Dole's campaign for the 1988 GOP presidential nomination. Brock, who is to take over the campaign Nov. 1, is the second Reagan cabinet member to join Dole. The candidate's wife, Elizabeth, quit as transportation secretary Oct. 1.    ---   Christians and Moslems marched across Beirut's sectarian demarcation line to protest Lebanon's economic crisis. About 10,000 people participated in the rally. Lebanon's currency has lost about 80% against the value of the U.S. dollar this year, and the inflation rate is estimated at about 300%.    ---   Belgian Prime Minister Martens offered his government's resignation after failing to resolve the French-Flemish language dispute. King Baudouin withheld a decision on accepting the resignation. Martens quit over the same issue a year ago but was asked by the king to continue in office. </TEXT></DOC>