<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870722-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. HOISTED its flag on two Kuwaiti ships destined for the Persian Gulf.    Navy warships stood ready to escort the Kuwaiti tankers through the Strait of Hormuz and into the gulf. Iran has a store of Chinese-made anti-ship missiles on its side of the strait and has threatened attacks despite Monday's cease-fire call by the U.N. Security Council. Defense Secretary Weinberger, saying the Navy was prepared to repulse any air or sea assault, refused to disclose when the ships would leave the United Arab Emirates for the gulf other than to say the departure was &quot;imminent.&quot;    Gorbachev, in a letter to Reagan, proposed superpower talks to end the gulf war. The White House reportedly rejected the Soviet leader's appeal.    ---   POINDEXTER CITED a lack of alternatives for NSC actions to free hostages.    The former national security adviser told the congressional Iran-Contra panels that the NSC staff became &quot;the driving force&quot; behind freeing U.S. hostages in the Mideast as the State and Defense departments failed to recommend any initiatives. He implicitly faulted Shultz for withdrawing last year from the White House's secret Iran initiative. In his final day of testimony, Poindexter also said he believed the CIA's Casey didn't brief Reagan about the diversion of funds to the Contras.    Sen. Inouye (D., Hawaii) expressed doubt that Poindexter told the full story, despite the admiral's contention that he had told &quot;the whole truth.&quot;    ---   Japan and the U.S. signed a research agreement for Reagan's space-based antimissile system. U.S. officials said, however, that because of a Toshiba Corp. unit's sale of submarine data to Moscow, the accord contains special provisions to ensure that U.S. technological secrets are protected.    ---   The Soviet Embassy in Tokyo rejected a Japanese request that one of its diplomats submit to police questioning about the possible illegal transfer of aeronautical technology to Moscow by a Japanese aircraft company executive. Moscow's embassy called the investigation anti-Soviet harassment.    ---   Three Lebanese were questioned by France's counterespionage service about a spate of bombings that killed 11 people in Paris last fall, Interior Ministry sources said. Meanwhile, French officials said talks between Paris and Tehran were deadlocked over an Iranian translator's refusal to give evidence about alleged terrorist links.    ---   The Philippine government filed new civil charges against Marcos and his wife, raising to $30 billion the amount of damages it is seeking from the deposed president and his associates. Manila also said it plans to file corruption charges against former Defense Minister Enrile, accusing him of participating in government theft.    ---   Argentina's austerity steps were timed so details of the program could be publicized prior to Sept. 6 gubernatorial and congressional elections. The economic measures were announced Monday as polls showed candidates of President Alfonsin's ruling party leading opposition challengers in most districts.    ---   Aid to Pakistan is to be discussed today at a House Foreign Affairs panel hearing. Despite Islamabad's apparent attempt to illegally acquire U.S. material for making nuclear weapons, officials aren't expected to seek to punish Pakistan, largely because it plays a role in funneling U.S. assistance to Afghan rebels.    ---   The Interior Department confirmed that it tentatively traded 166,000 acres of what is considered a promising oil field to native Alaskans backed by oil industry partners. The acreage in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge is to be exchanged for surface rights to 891,000 acres of native-owned lands elsewhere in Alaska.    ---   Canada's socialist party has raised a challenge to Prime Minister Mulroney's government, winning three parliamentary by-elections Monday, two in what had been Conservative strongholds. The New Democrats are critical of U.S. domestic and foreign policies.    ---   A U.S. judge in Los Angeles ordered the federal government to return nearly $30,000 in contributions to Gary Hart's 1988 presidential campaign. The judge ruled that the funds, seized in April, can't be used to repay the Colorado Democrat's 1984 debts.    ---   Mozambique said guerrillas fighting Maputo's Marxist government massacred as many as 380 people in a coastal town after receiving arms and ammunition from the South African air force. Few details of the weekend attack were given and the report couldn't be independently confirmed.    ---   Britain ordered the expulsion of Bulgaria's military attache in London on charges of spying, the first time a diplomat from the Sofia government has been expelled from the country. London also said that any retaliation from Bulgaria would be &quot;entirely without justification.&quot;    ---   Afrikaner dissidents returned to South Africa from a meeting with members of the outlawed African National Congress in Dakar, Senegal. They were greeted in Johannesburg by right-wing extremists who accused them of treason. Several people were taken into police custody as scuffles erupted between the rival demonstrators.    ---   A former FBI agent has admitted that an aide to Teamsters chief Jackie Presser pledged financial support if the agent was fired or sent to jail, the Los Angeles Times reported. Robert Friedrick, who was dismissed from the FBI last year, is accused of lying to block an indictment of Presser.    ---   Israel has successfully tested an intermediate-range ballistic missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead and hitting major Arab capitals, International Defense Review magazine reported. The monthly publication cited official U.S. sources. Israel's government has denied having any nuclear arms. </TEXT></DOC>