<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870522-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Contra DonorsSay They DealtWith Col. North---Investor Was Told He CouldMeet the President if HeContributed $300,000---By David Rogers and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A panel of wealthy American contributors said they dealt directly with Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North in connection with large donations they made to buy arms and planes for the Nicaraguan Contras during the time Congress banned U.S. military aid to the insurgents.    New York investor William O'Boyle and Ellen Garwood of Texas described both social functions and briefings in which Col. North operated in tandem with conservative fund-raiser, Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell. And Colorado brewer Joseph Coors, a friend and supporter of President Reagan, said he was referred to the former White House aide by the late William Casey, former director of the Central Intelligence Agency.    &quot;Ollie North's the guy to see,&quot; said Mr. Coors, quoting Mr. Casey.    Following Col. North's instructions, Mr. Coors in August 1985 sent $65,000 to a Swiss account used by retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord to finance the private Contra arms network. The following year, Mr. Channell collected donations totaling $2.14 million from Mr. O'Boyle and Mrs. Garwood; the fund-raiser's records show he was funneling money in this period to the same Swiss account.    Appearing before House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, all three witnesses said President Reagan never directly solicited them for contributions. But they said they saw the donations as a way of furthering the administration's policy in Central America. And Mr. O'Boyle said that Mr. Channell held out the promise that larger contributions could earn donors private meetings with Mr. Reagan.    Sen. Warren Rudman, a member of the Senate panel, said it was a &quot;legal fiction&quot; to argue that Col. North wasn't a partner with Mr. Channell in soliciting funds. &quot;Where I come from,&quot; said the New Hampshire Republican, &quot;We call that the old one-two punch.&quot;    Mr. Channell recently pleaded guilty to conspiring to defraud the government by soliciting tax-exempt donations intended to provide military aid to the Contras. At the time, he named Col. North as a co-conspirator.    Neither Mr. O'Boyle nor Mrs. Garwood have taken deductions for the contributions. But their testimony indicates that the possibility of a tax break was only one of a number of inducements used by the polished, often secretive Channell operation to raise funds.    Mr. O'Boyle said he was provided a limousine when he arrived in Washington in the spring of 1986. He said his meals and lodging at a prominent Washington hotel were covered by Mr. Channell, and that he was told by the fund-raiser that there would be no record of either his stay in Washington, or of a private meeting with Mr. Reagan if one materialized.    During his visit, Mr. O'Boyle said Col. North briefed him on a &quot;secret&quot; strategy to topple the Nicaraguan government with a combined Contra offensive and U.S. naval blockade. With Col. North sitting by silently, the investor said that Mr. Channell told him that he would have an audience with Mr. Reagan if he raised his contribution to about $300,000. Mr. Miller said he ended up giving a total of $160,000, and he said he neither sought nor received a meeting with the president.    In a separate meeting, Mr. O'Boyle said that Mr. Channell told him he could become part of a &quot;small group of people&quot; who &quot;the president relied on&quot; to help supply arms to the Contras.    Yesterday's appearance by the three contributors capped a week of testimony that added details of Col. North's intimate involvement in directing both funds and arms to the Contras. The hearings have been under way for three weeks.    According to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, there has been a sharp increase in the number of Americans who don't believe that the president is telling the truth about one aspect of the scandal -- the diversion of profits from Iran arms sales to the Contras. In the survey of 1,568 adults, which was conducted Monday and Tuesday, 62% said they don't believe the president's assertions that he wasn't fully informed about the diversion of funds, while only 32% said they believe him. When the same question was asked last December, 45% said they believed Mr. Reagan, and 41% said they didn't.    Albert Hakim, Gen. Secord's business partner, is scheduled to testify when the hearings resume next Wednesday. Investigators are still seeking access to all the banking records for the two men's operations in Switzerland.    The committees also are using information provided by the government of Israel to trace the flow of funds, but there are tensions between Jerusalem and independent counsel Lawrence Walsh. This week, David Kimche, a former senior Israeli government official who helped plan and supervise early arms sales to Iran, was subpoenaed to testify before a federal grand jury directed by Mr. Walsh. Mr. Kimche currently is traveling in the U.S.    Law enforcement officials said they expect Mr. Kimche, now a private citizen who doesn't enjoy diplomatic status, to comply. But Israeli officials said that the subpoena violates an agreement between the U.S. and Israel under which Israeli citizens wouldn't be required to testify. Mr. Walsh contends the agreement only pertains to congressional investigators.    Yesterday, the congressional investigating committees also completed their interrogation of retired Air Force Maj. Gen. John Singlaub. The general described working with Col. North in 1985 on a major arms shipment for the Contras. Yet he said he later was &quot;cut out&quot; of opportunities to acquire arms for the insurgents, and became viewed as a potential rival to Gen. Secord, who charged the Contras significantly higher prices for equivalent rifles and ammunition.    Gen. Singlaub also gave testimony about 1986 Contra fund-raising efforts that appeared to conflict with previous statements by Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams. Gen. Singlaub said that while traveling -- with the administration's blessing -- to southeast Asia to seek funds for the Contras, he received an unexpected call from Mr. Abrams advising him to hold off soliciting one country. He said Mr. Abrams later told him that revised plans called for that country to be solicited by &quot;the highest level&quot; of the U.S. government.    Mr. Abrams, in testimony to the presidentially appointed Tower Commission and in later statements, said he didn't recall endorsing Gen. Singlaub's solicitation, or discussing the possibility of involvement of more senior U.S. officials in it.    Separately, a federal appeals court panel scheduled oral arguments for June 2 on a challenge by Col. North to the independent counsel's authority to use a grand jury. The judges didn't provide details about the legal issues in the sealed case, but attorneys familiar with Mr. Walsh's investigation said that Col. North is attempting, among other things, to block the grand jury from obtaining certain documents. Col. North's attorneys two weeks ago argued their case during a closed hearing before a federal district court judge and then filed appeals with the higher court. Col. North and his attorneys have declined to comment on the matter. </TEXT></DOC>