<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861204-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Loophole in Law Threatens Alaskan Fish-Processors---Competition From Foreign FishermenCould Hamper U.S. Expansion---By Ken SlocumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/04/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN CAGTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> SEATTLE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   U.S. fishermen's dramatic expansion into business off the Alaskan coast may be jeopardized by a loophole in the fishing laws.    The loophole is causing foreign fishermen increasingly to consider &quot;re-flagging&quot; as a way of getting around laws giving priority to U.S. fishermen. And, as a result, the north Pacific fishing fraternity from Seattle to Bristol Bay is concerned that it will limit further growth in the lucrative fish-processing industry.    Some, however, argue that the same opportunities are available to U.S. fishermen and that bills recently introduced to plug the re-flagging gap just protect noncompetitive operations.    By re-flagging -- that is, transferring the documents of -- their fish-processing ships to the U.S. flag, foreign companies instantly get top priority in a U.S. allocation system.    U.S. laws, to protect domestic shipbuilders, prohibit the transfer of many types of foreign ships, including vessels that catch fish. But the prohibition doesn't include fish-processing ships.    The U.S. maintains a three-tier system in allocating the number of fish the ships are allowed to catch and the number they can process within its 200-mile limit. Top priority, with the most generous allocations, goes to U.S. caught-U.S. processed operations. U.S. caught-foreign processed operations are second, and foreign caught and processed is considered last.    &quot;The priority that Americans have is where everybody is trying to head; it's a big item,&quot; says Rudy Petersen, president of North Pacific Fishing Inc.    The Alaskan-North Pacific bottomfish industry illustrates the inroads recently made by U.S. fishermen. The Pacific pollack, the principal bottomfish in the area, constitutes the biggest annual catch in the world, with Alaskan waters accounting for about 30%.    As recently as 1980, Alaskan pollack were caught and processed almost entirely by foreign companies, mostly Japanese, Korean and Russian. But, following explosive U.S. demand for fish as a health food, protective regulations such as the Magnuson Act of 1976 -- aimed at giving priority to U.S. fishermen in U.S. waters -- and U.S. fishermen's recognition of the enormous market for pollack in Japan, U.S. fishermen this year will account for 65% to 70% of the bottomfish catch in U.S. waters off Alaska. They expect their share to continue to soar.    As many as 2,500 jobs, mainly in fish-processing and shore support industries, could be affected by re-flagging, estimates Lee Alverson, managing partner in Natural Resources Consultants. That total is probably a third of all jobs involved in the bottomfish industry in the Northwest and Alaska.    In Alaska's coastal fishing communities such as Kodiak, where multihued buildings cluster around a harbor full of fishing ships and the main street is shoulder to shoulder with fish-processing plants, nautical supply houses and ship-support service shops, fishing is the life blood. The jobs at stake represent a significant impact in a state that has a mere half million population and that was already staggered by the decline in oil prices.    In a regional meeting recently, Alaskan coastal communities voted re-flagging as the single-biggest threat to their economies.    &quot;In southwest Alaska, fishing is all we have,&quot; says Paul Fuhs, mayor of Unalaska, a town of 2,000 &quot;almost 100%&quot; dependent on fishing.    To date, foreign vessels still dominate, processing 90% of the area's fish. But, for the past few years, Americans have been determined to catch up. Some industry officials are estimating they are sinking $310 million of capital into building about 25 ships that will sweep the foreigners from U.S. waters.    Mr. Alverson thinks the U.S. could take over the bottomfish industry in the Northwest and Alaska. &quot;In 1980 it was a dream -- not even the best minds could say we would fully Americanize the catcher aspect by 1987, which we now expect,&quot; he says. &quot;We now account for 10% of the processing and you'll see maturation of that in the next three years so fast you won't believe it.&quot;    In a recent study, his company calculated the value of the Northwest-Alaskan bottomfish fishery to the U.S. amounted to $6 million in 1980, and will total $358 million this year and a half billion dollars in 1987.    &quot;With a dozen U.S. factory (fish-processing) trawlers now operating off the Alaskan coast and large factory trawlers coming on line in the fall, this spells the end for foreigners in the north Pacific,&quot; comments a U.S. fishing company official who asked not to be identified.    But re-flagged foreign ships may prevent that from happening.    U.S. maritime laws, even after a recent clarification attempt by the government, remain fuzzy and subject to political and governmental interpretation. But shipowners and law firms specializing in maritime law say wholesale transfer of foreign fish-processing vessels to the U.S. flag appears legal and has already been done by a few ships. But it hasn't been tested.    While the company owning the reflagged ship must have U.S. citizens as top management and a predominantly U.S. board of directors, ownership of the corporation can be totally foreign. As maritime attorneys and the Pacific fishing industry see it, a foreign company with a fish-processing vessel simply forms a U.S. &quot;front&quot; company and puts the ship under the U.S. flag.    Foreign-owned factory ships also have cost advantages because of ship-construction and labor costs.    Foreign nations have had factory ships for decades, while U.S. companies only now are building them. &quot;Their capital costs are an enormous advantage because they don't have any,&quot; contends Bart Eaton, a stockholder and director in U.S.(owned Trident Seafoods Corp., which operates catcher-processor vessels in Alaskan waters. &quot;They use their same ships that are all amortized out.&quot;    In contrast, Trident still pays carrying costs on some $15 million of debt. &quot;That economic advantage can put you out of business the first year,&quot; Mr. Eaton says.    Of course, U.S. fishermen have been competing with foreign-built ships all along but, under the U.S. flag, the foreign vessel is freed of special fees -- such as charges on the amount of fish caught in U.S. waters -- that are saddled on foreign operations.    But the real stunner could be the use on re-flagged ships of foreign workers, which in some instances make a mere fraction of U.S. wages.    U.S. ships have had to use almost totally U.S. labor. At the same time, there appears to be a possibility that if a re-flagged foreign-owned ship never puts into a U.S. port -- relatively easy for modern vessels -- it can use the cheaper foreign labor and still have top priority.    &quot;A technical reading is that if you're not departing from a U.S. port, you're outside the scope of the statute and you need not comply with the citizenship requirement,&quot; says William Myhre, a partner in the Seattle-based law firm of Preston, Thorgrimson, Ellis andamp; Holman, which has specialists in maritime law. &quot;To our knowledge, the issue has not been litigated nor has the Coast Guard contested it.&quot;    Another law firm dealing in maritime law, Davis Wright andamp; Jones, has asked the U.S. Coast Guard for a ruling on the citizenship issue but has yet to receive an answer. Says Mr. Alverson of Natural Resources Consultants, &quot;Of all the fears, this is the most legitimate.&quot;    Despite the hue and cry from U.S. fishermen and processors, some politicians and others -- including some U.S. fishermen -- say the foreign competitive threat is overstated.    After all, only a few foreign ships have been re-flagged over the past decade and, while some U.S. companies report inqueries from foreign companies about re-flagging their factory ships, there's no evidence that a big push into the U.S. 200-mile zone is planned by foreign companies.    Worse, say some U.S. fishermen, the three bills dropped in the hopper late in the last congressional session could actually hurt the U.S. industry by cutting off a source of bargain-priced fishing ships. Generally speaking, the bills -- which are expected to be reintroduced in the next Congress -- would require the processing ships to be U.S. owned and built.    &quot;I don't see any threat at all from a vessel owned by the Japanese as long as it employs American fishermen,&quot; says Robert Breskovich, president of Golden Alaska Seafoods, a U.S. company that owns the re-flagged German processor ship, Golden Alaska. &quot;An American company can buy the foreign (processing) vessel, the same as we did. What's good for the country? Why buy retail when you can buy wholesale? That adds to the national wealth -- that's the issue here.&quot;    Mr. Breskovich contends that much of the current clamor to plug the loophole comes from shore-based processing plants in Alaska, which he considers inadequate to compete with factory ships processing at sea. Catcher ships serving a mother factory ship travel only 20 to 30 miles to unload, while those serving shore plants often go 200 miles or more, he says. &quot;Shore plants are as passe as last year's hem line,&quot; he contends. &quot;They have a limited future unless foolish laws like these are implemented.&quot;    Another company battling efforts to plug the re-flagging gap is Sea-Alaska Products, a division of ConAgra Inc. &quot;My view is the fastest way to totally Americanize this industry is to take existing foreign vessels, re-flag them and crew them U.S.,&quot; says Ronald Jensen, president. &quot;We're in the current marketplace to buy as low as possible and keep prices low for the consumer.&quot; He adds, &quot;The American way is if an American company is set up, we don't look at who owns it.&quot;    Still, some fishing industry sources aren't taking the issue lightly. The North Pacific Fishery Management Council, a federally appointed body that specifies fishing allocations, seasons and equipment in the Alaskan waters, has asked congressmen to look into the re-flagging situation. &quot;There is a real problem here, something to be concerned about,&quot; says Ronald Miller, special adviser to the council. </TEXT></DOC>