<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881104-0071 </DOCNO><HL> An Anti-Takeover Arsenal That Failed --- Macmillan Tried Many Defenses To Stop Suitors </HL><AUTHOR> Cynthia Crossen and Karen Blumenthal (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MLL </CO><IN> TNM PUB </IN><TEXT>   How far will managers go to prevent an outsider from buying their company? How far can they go? The case of Macmillan Inc. may provide some answers.    Few management groups have thrown up as many takeover defenses as the one running Macmillan, a publishing and information-services company based in New York. Although many of the strategies Macmillan used have become commonplace in recent years, it tried more of them -- and pushed them further -- than almost any company in recent memory.    Macmillan granted its managers hundreds of thousands of restricted shares for which they paid nothing; it borrowed millions of dollars to buy shares for an employee stock-ownership plan, then made management the plan's trustees; and it funded a mammoth &quot;golden parachute&quot; plan for executives. Most audacious of all was the company's restructuring plan, which would have preserved Macmillan's independence by giving management ownership of the company's best assets at very little cost to themselves.    Although Macmillan rejected several bids that would have profited shareholders handsomely, investors who held on to their shares will be richly rewarded for management's recalcitrance.    Yesterday, Macmillan's board finally surrendered, recommending to shareholders that they tender their stock to Maxwell Communication Corp. Meanwhile, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. withdrew its rival offer. Maxwell last night completed its tender offer, and will pay $90.25 a share, or $2.62 billion. That price is 80% higher than when Macmillan's six-month-long battle to retain independence began.    Harbir Singh, an associate professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, says one of the only restraints on a management's defensive excesses is the company's board of directors, who are vulnerable to shareholder lawsuits. Macmillan's board, however, approved almost every plan management devised to remain independent, even when those plans could have been costly to shareholders.    The board also voted itself two raises, to $30,000 a year from $20,000, and granted itself a retirement plan guaranteeing $30,000 a year for life for most of its outside members -- as well as benefits for their spouses. The board eventually asked the final two bidders for the company to indemnify the members against shareholder suits.    Edward P. Evans, Macmillan's proud and stubborn chairman and chief executive officer, contends that the maneuvers were meant only to protect shareholders. He also maintains that he has been more a hapless victim than an active player in the struggle. &quot;I didn't mean to do it,&quot; he says. &quot;It was more or less done to me.&quot;    Even critics who say Mr. Evans's efforts were excessive concede that he deserved more than a gold watch for his work at Macmillan. When he took over in 1980, it was an overly diversified concern whose earnings and stock price were sagging. Mr. Evans cut expenses and refocused the company on three core businesses -- publishing, information services and instruction. The company's per-share earnings and stock price soared.    Mr. Evans has been well compensated for this. In addition to a respectable salary -- $420,000 in 1987 -- he now controls at least 739,000 Macmillan shares. Many came through option plans, but at least 230,000 shares were an outright gift from a grateful board of directors. His stock is now valued at more than $65 million.    Though Macmillan's stock price was rising, Mr. Evans was acutely aware that the company was takeover bait, a prosperous and growing company in a glamour industry. Macmillan had already put its board of directors on staggered terms, which made the board much less vulnerable to a change of control instituted by an outsider. It also had a by-law provision prohibiting the calling of a special meeting without a 75% shareholder vote.    But in May 1987, another publishing company, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Inc., narrowly escaped a takeover by Robert Maxwell. Fearful of being the British press baron's next target, Macmillan launched its unprecedented campaign to ward off trespassers.    GOLDEN PARACHUTES: In July 1987, Macmillan's board approved golden-parachute severance agreements for 21 executives, backed by a $60 million letter of credit. If the executives actually received any golden-parachute payments -- some of which could be triggered if anyone acquired as little as 20% of the company -- Macmillan agreed to pay all income or other taxes on the payments.    POISON PILL: The company also adopted a shareholder-rights, or &quot;poison pill,&quot; plan. Under the plan, if anyone acquired 30% of Macmillan's stock, the other stockholders could exchange their rights for the common stock at half price. The effect would be to dilute severely the investment of the potential acquirer, thus deterring all stock acquisitions above the 30% &quot;trigger&quot; level.    VOTING RIGHTS: A $60 million loan was approved for the company's employee stock-ownership plan, which was to be used to buy a million Macmillan shares. The company ousted the ESOP's trustee, replacing it with management members, who would have had voting control of all unallocated shares deposited in the plan. The company was also authorized to issue up to 50 million new &quot;blank check&quot; preferred shares with potentially disproportionate voting rights to be set by the board.    RESTRUCTURING: Of all the company's defenses, the most extreme was its restructuring plan. Although management weighed several approaches, all shared one aspect: They would leave Mr. Evans and a few other top managers owning a sizable chunk of the revamped company. Management would acquire that stake not by investing new capital at prevailing market prices, but by trading in previously granted restricted shares and stock options.    Under the chosen plan, Macmillan would be split into two companies, one containing the publishing businesses, the other the information-services businesses, considered the crown jewels of the company. At first, management, which just a year earlier owned only 1.2% of Macmillan, decided to trade its restricted shares and stock options for a 55% stake in the information-services business. But the company's advisers pointed out that such a hefty stake would be considered a change of corporate control from public stockholders to management. So management's stake in the information businesses was reduced to 39%.    The restructuring not only thwarted unwanted suitors and gave a huge share of the company to management, but it also avoided the necessity of a shareholder vote because, management argued, control of the company wasn't changing. In fact, shareholders first heard of the restructuring on May 31, the day after the board approved it -- and just 10 days before it was to be consummated. There was no time for shareholders to organize a protest.    Only a legal challenge filed by Robert M. Bass Group, which was trying to acquire Macmillan, stood between management and its plan. A Delaware court stopped the restructuring cold. In a stinging opinion, the court ruled that not only did the plan &quot;offer inferior value to shareholders, it also forced them to accept it.&quot;    With its restructuring plan quashed -- and both Bass Group and Maxwell vying for the company -- investors hoped that management would stop fighting to stay independent and start looking for a buyer willing to pay a premium price. Management did neither, and refused to negotiate terms, disclose financial information or discuss price with either bidder.    WHITE KNIGHT: Meanwhile, management thought it had found a way to sell the company while keeping a large stake. It struck a deal with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, the leveraged buy-out specialists, in which management would end up with 20% equity in the company. Macmillan's board quickly endorsed KKR's first offer without giving either Bass Group or Maxwell a chance to top it.    Maxwell was not deterred. It topped KKR's bid, ultimately forcing management to do what it had been resisting: hold an auction. But when the auction was over, KKR had won even though Maxwell was prepared to pay more. Furthermore, Macmillan took steps to prevent anyone else from getting the company, granting KKR the right to buy four of its best assets if the KKR merger fell through.    Once again, a suitor -- Maxwell, in this case -- took Macmillan to court, and once again the suitor won. The Delaware Supreme Court ruled that the auction was &quot;neither evenhanded nor neutral,&quot; and that management had tainted the process by getting involved even though it had a personal interest in the outcome.    Now that Maxwell has succeeded in buying Macmillan, it appears that the company's elaborate defenses, which cost almost an entire quarter's profits for fees and expenses, only delayed the inevitable. &quot;No takeover defense is impenetrable,&quot; says Wharton's Mr. Singh. But as fast as they're knocked down, he adds, managements will find new ones to take their place. </TEXT></DOC>