<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880106-0072 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): All Eyes on the Fed </HL><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON FRX BNK </IN><G> EXE FED </G><TEXT>   As the new year gets under way, securities markets are once again demonstrating their liking for a sound dollar. The markets have risen these past two days on the dollar's strength in the wake of the latest G-7 support action, having crashed last October when the Louvre accord hit the rocks. The only thing the markets are not yet sure of is whether the Fed intends to follow through in maintaining the value of the currency it manages.    The signals have been mixed. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said yet again yesterday that the administration wants &quot;stability&quot; in the dollar. But this administration has taken some delight these past three years in the game of talking the dollar up and down, like a yo-yo. Markets are not fooled for long by words. A government currency monopoly must be managed. Either you do it or you don't.    The markets know that Japan's foreign-exchange reserves have risen substantially as a result of heavy purchases of dollars over the past several days. They know that the Japanese cannot be expected to be the main defenders of the dollar for any sustained period, even with substantial help from other non-U.S. central banks. The job of managing the dollar, and maintaining its value, belongs to the Fed.    The way to defend the dollar is to create fewer of them. Here the figures are somewhat hard to read. Statistics like M-1, and perhaps more importantly direct measures of the Fed's purchase of assets, suggest it had been generous early last year and less generous of late. Over this same time period, however, foreign central banks have been accumulating large stocks of dollars trying to support the exchange rate. To a disturbing extent, the trade balance has been financed not by voluntary inflows but by this official financing. Dollars held by foreign central banks do not show up in money-supply statistics, and an accumulation of them suggests anything but a policy of tightness.    Whether the Fed now backs up foreign-exchange intervention with domestic snugness is what remains to be seen. Yesterday, the Fed responded to a rising federal funds rate by pumping reserves into the banks -- perhaps not too important a sign but certainly not an encouraging one.    We hope that we now are well past the point where the shapers of U.S. monetary policy see merit in weakening the national currency. Such merit appears to exist, but it is largely an illusion.    We know, for example, that a weak dollar improves the perceived cash flow of America's big international corporations as they translate earnings in harder currencies into dollars. But some of that improvement is merely an accounting identity on consolidated balance sheets. To the extent that a weaker currency enables them to price their exports more aggressively, they might gain some market penetration abroad. But it is an artificial boost. Their real gains in competitiveness have come from the economies they were forced to make, and did make, when the dollar was strong. Slippage will come while the pressure is off.    Here again, the real test is a price test. If a weak currency were really good for American corporations, their share prices would go up, not down, in a period of dollar weakness.    Similarly with commodity prices. Copper has jumped to $1.50 a pound from 65 cents a year ago and mining companies are rolling in dough again. That's nice for the mining companies, while it lasts, but is extreme volatility in the dollar price of commodities a desirable goal of economic policy? It is not, because it disrupts the longterm capital-spending programs that are a necessary part of resource development, thereby making the entire economy more vulnerable to cycles of surpluses and shortages, inflation and disinflation.    The markets know all this. They want stability. The White House says it wants stability. The Group of Seven says it wants stability. So it seems to us the intellectual debate has ended. The Fed has its marching orders, though to complete the job it will have to resist the temptation to worry about a few upward blips in short-term rates -- which by the way will most likely be matched with downward blips in the more important long rates. It would help above all if the White House were a source of steadiness rather than nervousness.    At least the Fed has joined other central banks by showing that it thinks the exchange rate matters. If it persists it can perform its vital international responsibility, and the markets can sustain the burst of international confidence they've expressed at the outset of the new year. </TEXT></DOC>