<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Ad Hoc Democracy: Can Gorbachev Make Good Use of Freedoms Now Urged on Soviets? --- His Economic Reform Plan May Hinge on Mobilizing Individuals to Take Part --- Tonic Effects of Speaking Out </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Gumbel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Mikhail Gorbachev lifted the lid from a repressed Soviet society at the historic four-day party conference last week and, in doing so, transfixed Soviet citizens and a skeptical world.    But now that the 5,000 delegates have spoken their piece and dispersed, the question is: Can Mr. Gorbachev take the energies unleashed by the sudden, official encouragement of open expression and harness them to his own purposes -- especially, economic reforms -- or will the ferment bubble out of control into political chaos?    The Soviet-style &quot;democracy&quot; displayed here in recent days was breathtaking to Soviet citizens, but it still shouldn't be confused with the genuine, Jeffersonian article. This, rather, is a tactical, ad hoc democracy aimed at motivating and mobilizing individuals to carry out the purposes of the party and the state.    Nevertheless, Mr. Gorbachev's is a difficult and dangerous course in a nation in which little has changed in decades. Determined as he appears to be to modernize the Soviet economy, he may have no choice but to proceed.    Unlike China, where a tradition of entrepreneurship had been stifled by several decades of Maoist dogma, the Soviet Union has very little experience with individual economic initiative. Whereas China's new leadership is seeking to tap deeply rooted economic energies without resorting to significant political reform, Mr. Gorbachev seems to have concluded that real economic reform is possible only if he can force sheeplike Soviet citizens to begin questioning authority and start thinking for themselves. To reshape the Soviet citizen seems to require changing the political structure and the stultifying bureaucracy that control daily decision making in this society. He also hopes that greater public involvement will prevent a recurrence of Stalinist tyranny or the widespread corruption of the Brezhnev era, which brought cynicism and inertia.    A bit like Ronald Reagan in 1980, Mr. Gorbachev is running against government in order to take control of government. Whether he is truly changing substance, whether liberalization will lead to economic solutions or just to political problems, and whether party conservatives will keep giving Mr. Gorbachev his head or serve it up to him -- all are questions Soviets and Soviet watchers currently can do no more than speculate about.    &quot;The philosophy is lagging behind the reality,&quot; says Nail Bikkenin, the editor of the Communist Party's theoretical journal, Kommunist. &quot;At the moment, we are living under socialist pluralism even though, quite frankly, we don't know what it is.&quot;    Undeniably, last week's party conference, the first in nearly 50 years, has shaken the psychology of the nation. Soviet citizens sat rapt before their television sets watching scenes like these: Mr. Gorbachev arguing politics with a stage actor best known for playing Lenin. A provincial delegate calling for the resignation of Soviet President Andrei Gromyko. Fallen Moscow party chief Boris Yeltsin criticizing Mr. Gorbachev's reforms (as poorly prepared) and demanding that he, Mr. Yeltsin, be politically rehabilitated. Soviet second-in-command Yegor Ligachev berating Mr. Yeltsin while disclosing the persecution suffered by his own family under Josef Stalin. And several hundred delegates actually voting against conference resolutions.    That was heady stuff, and here in Moscow, Soviet citizens were talking about it in parks, while waiting in line at stores and to Western correspondents.    &quot;It's completely different from the past,&quot; marveled Dmitry Likhachev, a prominent 82-year-old authority on Russian culture who isn't a party member. &quot;Now there's a spirit of freedom and democracy.&quot; What thrills the old man is that he can now set up an informal discussion group of like-minded scholars. In the past, even such innocent gatherings were forbidden as political threats.    The practical results of the conference will be played out over the next 18 months or so in constitutional reforms that are supposed to shift administrative power from the Communist Party to a national network of 52,000 elected state councils. In the old system, only one name would appear on an election ballot, and all dissenters could do to express their objection was to cross it out. Now there are to be several candidates for each elective post, and voting is to be by secret ballot. Elected officials won't be allowed to serve more than two five-year terms.    At the top of the new system will be an elected body called the &quot;Congress of People's Deputies.&quot; Its 2,250 elected members will, in turn, vote for a standing two-chamber legislature and a president.    There is a catch, however. While the Communist Party will relinquish formal responsibility for administering state affairs, it will still control the revamped state system. From the smallest district council to the national parliament, the top spot will be held by the appropriate party chief. That means Mr. Gorbachev, stronger than ever, will become president and thus will control both the party and the new state bodies.    &quot;This isn't 'we the people,'&quot; says one Western analyst here. &quot;It's 'I the general secretary.'&quot;    Whether all this restructuring is truly substantial remains to be seen. But if Mr. Gorbachev puts into effect even a fraction of the changes he has outlined, Soviet society will assume some of the qualities of the party conference just concluded. Essentially, he wants ordinary citizens to behave as the 5,000 delegates did: to air their grievances, challenge authority and contribute to running society. Toward those ends, he says he will remove some of the constraints on social freedom and reduce the system's obsessive secrecy, which has been considerable. (As one delegate noted, &quot;We know more about the positions of President Reagan and the budget of the queen of England than we know about our own leaders.&quot;)    Soviet freedom will, of course, have limits. Pluralism of ideas, free assembly, and openness in the press will be tolerated only as long as they are in general harmony with the party. In that spirit, nobody at the conference questioned the thrust of Mr. Gorbachev's political reform; the quibbling was over details. Nobody has even hinted that genuine political opposition to the Communist Party -- the one and only party -- will now be tolerated.    One obvious problem for Mr. Gorbachev is that certain Soviet citizens -- intellectuals, journalists and a few others here in Moscow -- are eager to test the limits of the liberalization. These elements have already provoked Mr. Gorbachev's more conservative allies to the extent that Mr. Ligachev felt it necessary to lecture the party conference on building socialism, not destroying it. But so long as the seeds of true democracy are confined to a small group of Muscovites, Mr. Gorbachev presumably can stand the heat.    Another problem facing Mr. Gorbachev is the growing nationalist sentiment among the Soviet Union's ethnic minorities, sentiment that is flourishing in the current political climate. That was evident at the party conference, where delegations from the Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania reiterated their sweeping demands for economic independence from Moscow. The subtext: They crave political independence as well. The professor who drafted the demands is an adviser to Estonia's new party leader, Vajno Vaelaes, who says, &quot;Economic independence is an imperative of our time.&quot;    Demonstrators in the Caucasian territory of Nagorno-Karabakh are using the word &quot;democracy&quot; to justify their demands to secede from the southern republic of Azerbaijan and join the neighboring republic of Armenia. The dispute spilled over to the conference, where the Azerbaijan delegation firmly ruled out a compromise solution offered by Armenia. Agitated, the delegate from Nagorno-Karabakh had a heart attack.    As Mr. Gorbachev put it, &quot;ethnic issues are knocking at the door and windows of our home.&quot;    With such contagious forces loose in the Soviet Union -- and perhaps subject to spread in Eastern Europe -- a larger problem looms for Mr. Gorbachev. Will the forces of conservatism in the party, the bureaucracy, the military and secret police let him proceed with his plans? That's a question few here venture to ask and no one can answer. All that can safely be said is that Mr. Gorbachev seems willing to run the risk.    In the end, Mr. Gorbachev presumably is going to be judged by most Soviets -- those who wish him well and those who feel threatened -- on how quickly and visibly he can begin implementing economic reform. A steelworker from the Ural Mountains, for instance, bitterly complained to the party conference that there is no meat in local stores. Others moaned about the rationing of milk and sugar and stressed the failings of the Soviet economy. As the steelworker, Veniamin Yarin, put it: &quot;The workers are asking, 'Where is perestroika?' Consumer goods have dropped from sight.&quot;    The villain of the piece is this nation's 18 million-member army of party and government bureaucrats. The Soviet Union is a system of the bureaucrats, by the bureaucrats and for the bureaucrats. Whether Mr. Gorbachev, for all his energy and power, can actually break the monolithic hold of the bureaucracy on the thoughts and actions of Soviet citizens may be his toughest test.    At the party conference, Mr. Gorbachev was challenged by the director of a chicken farm in Stravropol to pension off thousands of bureaucrats. No, Mr. Gorbachev replied, we've tried that approach from the top, and it doesn't work. The whole of society must come out against bureaucrats. &quot;The people will promptly put everyone in their right place,&quot; he said.    It's far from certain that most Soviet citizens have the courage of Mr. Gorbachev's professed convictions, but at least most of them wish him well in his battle against the bureaucrats. In the end, it is to mobilize mass support for this struggle that Mr. Gorbachev is trying tactical, Soviet-style &quot;democracy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>