<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870722-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Portugal's Conservatives Open a New Era in Iberia---By Jaime Nogueira Pinto</HL><DD> 07/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> LISBON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The recent elections in Western Europe were good news for center-right and conservative parties. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher got her third mandate campaigning for a strong approach to Atlantic solidarity, military defense and free-market economics; in Italy, the Communist Party, despite its traditional independence from Moscow, lost the momentum that some analysts were perceiving before the election; even in Spain, the ruling Socialist Party suffered some casualties in the European, regional and local elections, which put at stake its absolute leadership in the country.    The fourth and last country to have a general election this summer in Western Europe was Portugal, which went to the polls Sunday. It not only followed the general trend, but also surpassed it with a surprising and overwhelming victory for the incumbent prime minister, Anibal Cavaco Silva, leader of the Social Democratic Party, known as the PSD. With 50.5% of the popular vote and 148 of 250 parliamentary seats, Mr. Cavaco Silva obtained for the first time in recent Portuguese democratic history a full majority for one party.    Using a patriotic but not doctrinaire speech, he appealed to national pride, stability, law and order, and other middle-class values. But, considering the crowds that celebrated his victory throughout Lisbon, the vote also confirmed his populist appeal to the labor and lower-middle-class electorate. This was supported by the vote swing that made possible the increase to 50% for the PSD from 30% in the previous election, in October 1985.    The major victim of Mr. Cavaco Silva's success was the Democratic Renewal Party, or PRD, a newcomer to Portuguese politics, led by the former president of the republic, Gen. Ramalho Eanes. The PRD, emerged in Portuguese politics in October 1985, obtaining around 18% of the vote and 45 seats. A dubious mixture of political have-beens and former left-wing military officers, the PRD gained its support from former Socialist Party backers. The defeat means the possible end to Gen. Eanes's political period.    Another loser was the Portuguese Communist Party, or PCP, of Alvaro Cunhal, 74 years old, the most Stalinist and pro-Soviet Communist leader in Western Europe. The Communists made a staunch propaganda effort. But it was not enough to avoid a severe loss to 30 seats from 38 -- their worst setback since the party became legal in 1974. Mr. Cunhal, normally a coolheaded and cautious politician, blamed the defeat on the press and television. He threatened the new government with the &quot;social forces,&quot; a reference to the Communist-controlled labor confederation, which in the past used social unrest as a weapon against governments.    Mr. Cavaco Silva's landslide victory was also a big setback to the Christian Democrats. The CDS leader, Adriano Morira, 65, is a brilliant scholar and leading moral figure in the country. But his party was deserted by its traditional rightwing conservative voters, who were moved to back Mr. Cavaco Silva, wanting a full majority and stable government rather than split forces.    On the left, the Socialist Party, or PS, made a good showing. Its current leader, Victor Constantio, is a center-left technocrat and a former finance minister. He tried to keep the Socialists united and survive the loss of Mario Soares, now president of the republic, and to win the major voice on the left. They overshadowed the Communists and the PRD to become the major opposition to Mr. Cavaco Silva in Parliament.    The election marks the end of a cycle and means a rupture with the April 25, 1974, revolution, said Prof. Galvao Teles, a leading constitutionalist and one of Gen. Eanes's top advisers. People say, &quot;The revolution is now over,&quot; meaning that what remains from &quot;April 25&quot; is the democratic Western system of pluralistic elections -- and civil rights. The Messianic doctrinalism of an egalitarian and socialist revolution -- offered by the Communists and the PRD -- was clearly defeated at the polls.    It is also important that the victor, Mr. Cavaco Silva, has no political past as an &quot;anti-fascist fighter&quot; before the April 25 revolution. He began his political rise as a militant of the PSD and a respected economics professor. He was also finance minister of Francisco Sa Carneiro, the center-right prime minister who died in a still-mysterious flying accident in December 1980. So, he is a newly born politician, belonging to a generation that wants to forget the former divisions, struggles and ghosts and face the problems of the future.    These problems center on a restoration of political identity and national pride. The new government will give priority to building confidence in leadership and political institutions and to reforming the public sector, whose costs are being borne by taxpayers. Mr. Cavaco Silva knows that he has a clear mandate for a change. Orthodox Anglo-Saxon conservatives may be shocked by his populist approach to the state's role in social matters. But they must be aware of the deep sense of social solidarity, family and neighborhood values of the Portuguese, an 800-year-old nation that has undergone the trauma of decolonization and the pro-Communist takeover attempt in 1974-75.    Mr. Cavaco Silva must change the country's socialist-inspired constitution, labor laws and economic philosophy, based in direct or indirect state control over the major economic activities. He is now in a strong position to persuade the Socialists to compromise, which requires two-thirds of the 250-member Parliament. He can count on Mr. Soares, who as president has taken an arbitral approach to parties and politics and refused to intervene on behalf of his former Socialist colleagues. The president must face the emergence of the prime minister as the most popular politician in the country. Both men are concerned about maintaining a good personal and political relationship, and Mr. Soares will go on keeping a low profile in domestic and partisan politics.    On foreign policy, Mr. Cavaco Silva will continue his former strategy. There is Europe and Portugal's European Community membership, which began in 1986. The revolutionary period and socialist structure deprived the country of capital, confidence, significant private companies and reliable strategies to face the highly competitive Common Market. Mr. Cavaco Silva is also a strong Atlantist, interested in developing better and closer ties with the U.S. Portugal is a potential agent of compromise in Brussels in Euro-American trade conflicts. The government hopes the U.S. will refrain from protectionist measures that could harm Portuguese exports of textile and footwear. Also important is Portugal's strategic contribution on the Iberian Peninsula at a time when Spain's Socialist government plays neutralist and anti-U.S. cards. Portuguese expertise on Southern Africa could be of help to American policy makers pushing for peace through a progressive reduction of Soviet influence in Angola and Mozambique.    ---   Mr. Pinto is publisher of the Lisbon daily &quot;O Seculo.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>