<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870105-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN UNDERWENT surgery to remove four polyps from his colon.    The White House physician, Dr. John Hutton, said the four small, seemingly benign growths were found during an examination of the president's colon yesterday at the Bethesda Naval Medical Center near Washington. Reagan entered the hospital for a semiannual post-cancer examination and for a medical procedure today to relieve discomfort caused by an enlarged prostate gland. The prostate operation, considered common in men over 50 years of age, had been announced last month.    The president's doctor said tests didn't show any &quot;evidence of a recurrence of cancer.&quot; He said the polyps would undergo laboratory tests.    ---   ARSON WAS CITED as the cause of last week's hotel fire in Puerto Rico.    The justice secretary in Puerto Rico said that law enforcement officials had concluded that the blaze at the Dupont Plaza Hotel was &quot;an incendiary fire,&quot; and that investigators were trying to determine who may have &quot;participated in this crime.&quot; He added that evidence &quot;of explosives or evidence of bombs&quot; hadn't been found. At least 96 people were killed and more than 100 injured in the New Year's Eve fire at the 20-story beach-front hotel in San Juan.    The fire came amid negotiations between the Teamsters union and hotel management. The union has denied allegations of involvement in the fire.    ---   AN AMTRAK TRAIN DERAILED near Baltimore, killing at least eight people.    Authorities in Maryland said at least 160 people were injured when the high-speed passenger train collided with three Conrail diesel engines about seven miles east of Baltimore. A number of passengers were trapped in the wreckage. The Amtrak train was en route to Boston from Washington with about 350 people aboard. The Conrail locomotives also were northbound.    An Amtrak spokesman said &quot;preliminary indications&quot; showed that the freight engines may have passed a stop signal and entered the main line.    ---   Illegal wall posters reappeared at Peking University urging Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping to respond to appeals for democracy. The posters were hung as the official Peking Daily newspaper reported that security officials arrested two non-students in connection with a recent spate of pro-democracy demonstrations in the capital.    ---   French and Ivory Coast soldiers searched for the flight recorder of a Brazilian jetliner to determine the exact cause of a crash Saturday outside Abidjan that killed 49 of 51 people aboard, including an American. The Boeing 707 crashed in a rain forest 45 minutes after taking off for Rio de Janeiro. The pilot had reported an engine on fire.    ---   Libyan jets bombed two Chadian towns south of the &quot;interdiction line&quot; established by French troops in 1983 to prevent a Libyan-backed rebel advance, officials in Chad said. The attacks raised the possibility of direct involvement by France in the conflict in its former colony. Libya's military ordered all reservists to join their units.    ---   New York's Cardinal O'Connor met with Israeli President Herzog after the Roman Catholic prelate apparently worked out a way to meet with Israel's leaders without violating Vatican policy toward the Jewish state. The meeting took place at Herzog's residence. O'Connor is to meet privately with Foreign Minister Peres today.    Israeli helicopters raided bases of Moslem fundamentalists in southern Lebanon, killing at least three people in apparent retaliation for guerrilla attacks on an Israeli-backed militia. Separately, Prime Minister Shamir accepted the resignation of his interior minister, who quit rather than recognize an American convert as a Jew.    ---   Justice Department aides are expected to meet this week with Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel appointed in the Iran-Contra affair, sources told the Associated Press. Walsh will consider taking over three investigations to determine possible criminal activity involving private aid to Nicaraguan rebels, the sources said.    ---   The Education Department praised Japan for fostering high achievement and good student behavior through high school, but found that country's college system lacking. The findings came in a study, released last week, aimed at indicating how each country might benefit from the other's education experience.    ---   Iraqi warplanes attacked a Liberian-registered supertanker laden with Iranian oil, setting it ablaze near Iran's Kharg Island oil terminal, shipping sources said. Tehran, meanwhile, reported that it intercepted eight foreign ships in the Persian Gulf.    ---   Communist rebels accused Philippine President Aquino of reneging on a pledge to disband private armies, and said forces loyal to local warlords harass thousands of civilians. Separately, government negotiators and a Moslem rebel leader announced accords designed to end a war for Moslem self-rule in the southern Philippines.    ---   Black and mixed-race crowds clashed with South African security forces in Cape province and in the Orange Free State. The government said 10 people were injured. Pretoria also said that a black man was burned to death, and a bomb explosion injured three black women in downtown Johannesburg in scattered weekend unrest.    ---   Died: Warren Scripps Booth, 92, former chairman and president of Evening News Association, in Miami. . . . David Maysles, 54, documentary film maker, in New York, following a stroke. </TEXT></DOC>