<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880822-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Promise Seen in 'Anti-Sense' Medicine --- Approach Aims At Neutralizing Harmful Genes </HL><AUTHOR> Marilyn Chase (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Frog eggs, a mouse's ear and slime mold.    They sound like ingredients in a witches' brew. But they are actually the subjects of early laboratory experiments investigating a radical new way of treating genetically based diseases.    Tests involving these three homely items indicate that it may be possible one day to halt a host of cancers and viral ills by blocking the genetic messages that cause them. To the wizards of molecular genetics, this is known as the &quot;anti-sense&quot; approach. It means using an inverted piece of the gene code to lock onto potentially dangerous genetic messengers, canceling their ability to do harm.    In its simplicity and specificity, antisense is utterly unlike mainstream biotechnology, which involves splicing a new gene into a medium such as bacteria to produce a desired protein that will combat a disease. Nor is it like &quot;gene therapy,&quot; which aims to splice in a good gene to compensate for a defective one. The new science looks to target and block bad genes -- such as cancer-causing oncogenes -- much as correcting tape blocks out a typographical error.    The field is exploding, thanks in part to burgeoning information about gene sequences in computerized data banks, and to a generation of new machines that automate the once tedious task of synthesizing and sequencing genes. More and more academic labs are exploring anti-sense, along with such companies as Monsanto Co., Bristol-Myers Co., Enzo Biochem Inc., Microprobe Corp. and the Lifecodes Inc. unit of Quantum Chemical Corp.    &quot;It gets people excited,&quot; says Thomas Rogers, a Monsanto scientist. &quot;It's unique among therapeutic approaches -- something that's that selective.&quot;    One of the most striking examples of the trend is Gilead Sciences Inc. in Foster City, Calif., a company devoted exclusively to genetic targeting. Incorporated just a year ago, Gilead is named for the biblical site of a healing balm. Michael L. Riordan, its founder and president, is a former venture capitalist with an M.D. from Johns Hopkins University and an M.B.A. from Harvard University. After a year of researching the field, he persuaded his mentors at the venture-capital firm Menlo Ventures to provide $2 million in financing -- half of which he collected the day before his 30th birthday last August.    &quot;Probably 80% to 90% of all disease is traceable to the functioning of one or more deleterious genes,&quot; Dr. Riordan asserts. &quot;It seemed to me an enormously powerful tool if you could knock out a gene responsible for a virus or cancer.&quot; If successful, he argues, anti-sense could usher in a new therapeutic era comparable to the advent of antibiotic drugs in the 1940s.    However, no one has yet proved that anti-sense will work in the human body. Scientists must devise agents that are stable, that can be delivered effectively to the right cells, that can withstand attack from the body's defense mechanisms and that can be produced at a tolerable cost.    &quot;Anti-sense is exciting and aesthetically pleasing,&quot; says Samuel Broder, associate director for clinical oncology at the National Cancer Institute. &quot;But it would be wrong to raise public expectations that a therapy is right around the corner.&quot; Indeed, it is likely to be a couple of years before human testing even begins.    A gene, of course, is a unit in the hereditary code, made up of a unique sequence of four chemical elements -- labeled A, C, T and G. Like primary colors blending into a rainbow of hues, these elements are arranged in the various patterns that encode the genes for all living organisms. Paired in spiraling steps to form the double helix of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), this material later gets transcribed to RNA (ribonucleic acid), which then produces a protein.    An anti-sense agent is, literally, a synthetic strand of DNA that duplicates in reverse the order of elements in the RNA. It binds to the gene's messenger and cancels the message, thus preventing cells from following its instructions.    Anti-sense is a natural outgrowth of gene-probe technology, which similarly employs a chain of nucleic acids complementary to the sequence of a specific gene. The aim of a probe, though, is not to wipe the gene out but to zero in on it for purposes of identification and diagnosis.    Anti-sense may be simpler than gene therapy, which involves installing an intact and functional good gene in the organism -- a much more complex biological challenge. &quot;To kill something, to turn it off, is much simpler than doing something positive,&quot; says Monsanto's Mr. Rogers.    While the state of the art in anti-sense is still embryonic, a number of scientists reported early successes at a crowded meeting on the topic sponsored by the National Institutes of Health last fall in Annapolis, Md. For example, Claude Helene, a scientist at France's National Institute for Health and Medical Research (INSERM), said his test-tube studies show that an antisense molecule can block a gene crucial to the life cycle of trypanosomes. These parasites, passed to humans by the bite of the tsetse fly, cause African sleeping sickness.    Paul Miller, a scientist at Johns Hopkins and one of the pioneers of anti-sense research, reported on progress in the development of an anti-sense molecule against the herpes simplex virus. He said that, in an experiment he termed &quot;very preliminary,&quot; his colleague, University of Maryland researcher Laura Aurelian, had incorporated the molecule into an ointment that cleared herpes lesions when swabbed on the ear of an infected mouse.    On the AIDS front, National Cancer Institute scientists Jack Cohen and Makoto Matsukura told the meeting of their progress in testing an anti-sense molecule against human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, which is believed responsible for AIDS. The compound they used, a phosphorothioate that nullifies a gene essential to HIV's replication cycle, was found to inhibit significantly HIV's replication and cell-killing power in the test tube.    Dr. Cohen also reported that Len Neckers, another cancer institute colleague, had achieved &quot;significant inhibition&quot; of an oncogene called myc in cell culture using an anti-sense compound. A great variety of cancers are linked to the myc oncogene, including leukemia, lymphoma and certain cancers of the colon and lung.    While such bright beginnings don't guarantee clinical success, they inspired Dr. Riordan to pursue his notion of devoting an entire company to the science. Joining him on his three-man board of directors are H. DuBose Montgomery, managing partner of Menlo Ventures; and Donald Rumsfeld, former U.S. Secretary of Defense and former president G.D. Searle andamp; Co., the pharmaceutical company.    After a yearlong study of anti-sense and its major players, Dr. Riordan courted three researchers, who joined him as core scientific advisers to Gilead and its staff of 16: Peter Dervan, a professor of chemistry at California Institute of Technology; Douglas Melton, professor of biochemistry and molecular biology at Harvard; and Hal Weintraub, principal scientist in the genetics division of Seattle's Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center.    Prof. Melton, a pioneer in using antisense to block gene function in frog-egg cells, says anti-sense has now been proved, not only in the test tube but also in living organisms including yeast, flies, frogs, slime mold and tomatoes. Such tests set the stage for much bigger studies.    Although the details are still under wraps, Gilead's general game plan is to attack serious viral illnesses and cancers. Dr. Riordan notes that AIDS will be one early target. Gilead already has a license agreement with the federal government to develop the cancer institute's phosphorothioate compound for use against AIDS and similar viruses.    Laying the groundwork for its cancer work, Gilead recently got a license to a patent held by Massachusetts Institute of Technology on anti-sense inhibition of oncogenes. Conservatively, at least 30 oncogenes have so far been linked to a variety of malignancies, says Dr. Weintraub. He believes a likely first target may be the so-called ras oncogene, which has been linked to certain tumors of the nerve cells, gastrointestinal tract, bladder and breast.    Gilead also wants to reach beyond antisense, which targets the gene's RNA messenger, to the more difficult and unproven task of locking directly onto the double helix of DNA itself, in a strategy called &quot;triple helix.&quot; A direct strike against DNA, the master copy of the gene, would allow scientists using smaller doses to reach latent viruses hiding silently in their host's DNA. If this proves possible, it will be a breakthrough in fighting AIDS infection and other slowly smoldering viruses.    &quot;It's too early to say this is a major thrust, and we don't know that it works in cells,&quot; Dr. Riordan cautions. &quot;But,&quot; he asserts, &quot;we'll be the first to know.&quot;    Because genetic targeting marries sophisticated organic chemistry with molecular genetics, Gilead says it sidesteps some of the messier problems of conventional biotechnology -- particularly the manufacture of human proteins. Proteins are very large and infinitely variable, whereas the smaller anti-sense molecules can be precisely defined as chemical formulas. Moreover, anti-sense molecules can be synthesized in a lab. Conventional biotech, by contrast, requires big fermentation vats -- like those used in breweries -- to cook up the bacterial broth that churns out recombinant proteins.    But for Gilead, as for others in the field, challenges abound. The major technical hurdle is figuring out how to deliver the anti-sense molecule into the right cell. The molecule may need modifications -- such as making it &quot;lipophilic,&quot; or fat-soluble -- to get it to penetrate the cell membrane.    Another problem is that the synthetic DNA strands are inherently unstable. They break down and get chewed up by enzymes called nucleases. Finally, the making of anti-sense molecules is prohibitively costly right now; a single human dose would require tens of thousands of dollars of reagents. Better stability and delivery could drive down that cost.    Whether scientists can solve these problems, turning an elegant laboratory tool into a weapon against cancer or AIDS, is still a point of debate. Dr. Riordan says he wrestles with chemical formulas in his dreams, like Jacob with the angel.    &quot;Mike is driven, almost possessed, by the concept that anti-sense can be applied to therapy,&quot; says Harvard's Prof. Melton. &quot;He is absolutely convinced that this is going to happen. I'm about 90% sure.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>