<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Setting a Precedent:High Court UpholdsConviction of Winans,Two Co-Conspirators---Decision in the Journal CaseIs Likely to Give ImpetusTo Insider-Trading Drive---New Fraud Theory Accepted---By James B. Stewart and Stephen WermielStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DJPUBLISHING (PUB)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   In a decision that is likely to give new impetus to the government's crackdown on insider trading on Wall Street, the Supreme Court upheld the convictions of former Wall Street Journal reporter R. Foster Winans and two co-conspirators.    Government lawyers immediately hailed the ruling as vindication of a campaign that has already produced guilty pleas from such leading Wall Street figures as former arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky and former takeover specialist Martin A. Siegel. &quot;This is tremendous news,&quot; says Gary Lynch, the head of enforcement for the Securities and Exchange Commission. &quot;It's an affirmation of our insider-trading program.&quot;    The decision &quot;lays out a whole theory of future prosecution for this type of criminal behavior that is very secure,&quot; says Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Manhattan U.S. attorney heading the insider-trading investigation. &quot;It gives prosecutors a very clear road map on how to proceed.&quot;    The Supreme Court's opinion, which surprised many court observers, is as important for what it doesn't do as much as for what it does. In upholding Mr. Winans's conviction for securities, mail and wire fraud, the Supreme Court didn't reject the so-called misappropriation theory, a doctrine that has been the legal backbone of insider-trading prosecution. And in reinterpreting the law of mail and wire fraud, the Supreme Court handed prosecutors a powerful new weapon, one that could easily eclipse misappropriation as the dominant theory of insider-trading prosecution.    The high court voted 8-0 to uphold the mail- and wire-fraud convictions. It was split, 4-4, on the securities-fraud issue, but the tie has the effect of affirming that count. Although a tie vote has less value as precedent than a majority vote, as a practical matter the split isn't expected to impede the precedent-setting consequences of the decision.    For Mr. Winans, the decision marks the end of a long criminal process that took on unexpected significance when high-profile insider-trading cases proliferated following his 1985 conviction. &quot;We had hoped to prevail,&quot; says Don Buchwald, Mr. Winans's lawyer. &quot;We're very disappointed.&quot; Mr. Buchwald says that he will move to have Mr. Winans's 18-month prison term reduced but that Mr. Winans probably will be reporting within 30 to 60 days to the federal prison where he will be assigned. Defense lawyers aren't expected to petition for a rehearing.    Reached at his home in Jersey City, N.J., Mr. Winans would only say: &quot;I'm not making any comment.&quot;    From the time criminal charges were first lodged against Mr. Winans in 1984, the facts have never been in serious dispute: Mr. Winans, a former writer of the Journal's &quot;Heard on the Street&quot; stock-market column, leaked advance information, usually from pay phones, about the timing and the content of those columns to Peter Brant, a former stockbroker at Kidder Peabody andamp; Co.    Mr. Brant used the information to trade in the stocks mentioned in the columns, later enlisting a Kidder Peabody colleague, Kenneth Felis. Both agreed to give Mr. Winans a stake in the profits. All told, the scheme netted $690,000 in profits, of which $31,000 went to Mr. Winans.    Mr. Brant pleaded guilty to two counts of securities fraud and became the government's star witness against Mr. Winans and the two co-conspirators -- Mr. Felis and Mr. Winans's former roommate, David Carpenter, a former Journal news clerk, who also shared in the profits from the scheme. The three were convicted after a trial before federal District Judge Charles E. Stewart in New York.    Mr. Felis, who now runs a family-owned labeling company in Bridgeport, Conn., didn't return phone calls. Former associates of Mr. Carpenter say he has moved to the Midwest. His lawyers declined to disclose his whereabouts.    It was the legal theory supporting the criminal charges against Mr. Winans and his co-conspirators that immediately attracted attention. The government alleged that Mr. Winans had misappropriated, or stolen, confidential information entrusted to him about the contents and the timing of columns that potentially could have affected securities prices. This misappropriation constituted fraud, both under the securities laws and under the mail- and wire-fraud statutes, the government argued.    Others have been convicted of insider trading on similar theories, most notably Adrian Antoniu, a former Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. investment banker, whose 1982 case gave rise to the doctrine. But the theory is judge-made law never legislated by Congress, and it had never been explicitly approved by the Supreme Court. In the past, the high court had simply refused to hear the petitions of those convicted. Nor had the doctrine ever been used to indict a newspaper reporter, someone who wasn't directly involved in the securities industry.    Some lawyers had feared that government prosecutors were risking a reversal of the entire misappropriation doctrine by stretching too far to indict Mr. Winans. And those fears were heightened when, within months of Mr. Winans's conviction and while the case was on appeal, the biggest insider-trading cases in Wall Street's history started breaking. Suddenly it wasn't just the fate of Mr. Winans and his co-conspirators that seemed at stake, but those of a new, far more powerful generation of insider traders: Dennis B. Levine, Mr. Boesky, Mr. Siegel and those they have implicated.    The pendency of the Winans case cast such a pall over the government crackdown that, just last week, Mr. Giuliani, the Manhattan U.S. attorney, was reported to have said that all insider-trading indictments arising from the government's current huge investigation were being put on hold until the Winans case was decided. Earlier this year, Mr. Lynch said that any reversal of Mr. Winans's conviction that threw out the misappropriation theory would cause &quot;massive problems&quot; for enforcement officials.    Those concerns appear to have vanished with yesterday's decision and the affirmation of the securities-law violation, the aspect that most directly threatened the doctrine of misappropriation.    While the effect of the tie vote is to uphold the securities-law conviction, the continued uncertainty about that aspect of the case is likely to spur legislative proposals that would incorporate the misappropriation doctrine into an insider-trading statute. It is &quot;essential that the Congress act quickly to clarify and tighten the laws prohibiting insider trading,&quot; says Sen. Donald Riegle of Michigan, the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee's securities subcommittee. Chairman David Ruder of the Securities and Exchange Commission last week endorsed a broad definition of insider trading covering not only trading by corporate employees but also trading by other people who misappropriate information for their own benefit.    The court's ruling was probably most surprising for its sweeping endorsement of the use of mail-fraud and wire-fraud statutes to combat insider trading. Just last June, the court had sharply restricted the scope of those laws, limiting such prosecutions to cases of misuse of tangible assets like money or property. That narrow view would have hampered a wide range of federal prosecutions, including insider trading, according to Justice Department officials.    But yesterday, the high court wrote that last June's ruling wasn't limited to &quot;tangible as distinguished from intangible property rights.&quot; The Supreme Court said that &quot;here, the object of the scheme was to take the Journal's confidential business information -- the publication schedule and contents of the 'Heard' column -- and its intangible nature does not make it any less 'property' protected by the mail and wire fraud statutes.&quot;    The court added that there needn't be proof of &quot;monetary loss&quot; for wire fraud. &quot;It is sufficient,&quot; the court said, &quot;that the Journal has been deprived of its right to exclusive use of the information, for exclusivity is an important aspect of confidential business information and most private property, for that matter.&quot;    Defense lawyers involved in current and prospective insider-trading cases found scant encouragement in the court's opinion. &quot;It's a tremendous victory for the government,&quot; said Harvey Pitt, a partner at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver andamp; Jacobson in Washington, who represents Mr. Boesky. &quot;Most insider-trading cases can be brought as mail- and wire-fraud cases. I know of no cases that can't go forward. This will embolden prosecution, both civilly and criminally.&quot;    A defense lawyer representing a person currently under investigation said that &quot;it's not good for any defendants who were hoping for a break. It leaves misappropriation alive and well.&quot; He adds that if the Supreme Court &quot;wouldn't overturn this conviction, they're not going to be sympathetic to anyone in the securities industry, like an investment banker.&quot;    The persons most likely to be immediately affected by the court's ruling are three prominent Wall Street officials arrested last February: Robert Freeman, the head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., and two former Kidder Peabody arbitragers, Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor. Their indictments last April relied on the misappropriation theory and other doctrines, but were dismissed after government prosecutors said they needed more time to prepare the case. Prosecutors vowed to seek new indictments, but haven't yet done so, most recently citing as their reason the uncertainty caused by the Winans case.    Mr. Giuliani declines comment on any specific cases or pending investigations. He confirms that his office had implemented a &quot;general rule&quot; not to go forward on any insider-trading cases until after the Winans decision, but he adds that &quot;somebody should not interpret that to mean that that was the only factor&quot; that would determine whether his office would seek indictments.    In fact, some people familiar with the Freeman-Wigton-Tabor matter say that the government still isn't ready to go forward because it hasn't finished its investigation. &quot;It was a two-year investigation when they arrested them {in February 1987}, and it's still a two-year investigation,&quot; says one lawyer. Nonetheless, uncertainty about the law that might have impeded the investigation (the reluctance of potential defendants to plead to charges that might be rendered invalid, for example) has now been removed.    The investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and its junk-bond chief, Michael Milken, could also be facilitated by the decision, according to people familiar with the matter. They note that while the Drexel and related investigations have always involved far more than insider trading, the possible misuse of confidential information forms an important part of the suspected larger conspiracies under investigation.    &quot;Having this decision is another arrow in their {the government's} quiver,&quot; says one lawyer involved.    Speaking generally, Mr. Giuliani says that &quot;this certainly makes the government's task in investigating and prosecuting these cases and considering these cases for prosecution considerably easier.&quot;    There was jubilation at the SEC, where Paul Gonson, the SEC lawyer who was the chief author of the government's Winans brief, let out a whoop of joy when he heard the news. &quot;We're thrilled,&quot; said SEC spokeswoman Mary McCue.    Mr. Lynch, the SEC's enforcement chief, discounted speculation that the court's emphasis on mail and wire fraud rather than securities fraud, the usual basis for SEC jurisdiction, would diminish the SEC's role in insider-trading cases. &quot;It's clear the court believes misappropriation of information is a fraud,&quot; he says. &quot;That's what's important&quot; for SEC jurisdiction. Mr. Lynch says the SEC &quot;will continue to have a very active, aggressive program.&quot;    Academic experts were quickly parsing the opinion for future hypothetical cases, but there was widespread agreement that the government's hand has been greatly strengthened for the kinds of cases that have recently dominated the headlines. Noting that the court didn't overturn the misappropriation theory even when stretched to include a reporter, they say that it is highly unlikely the court would do so in a case involving stockbrokers, arbitragers or other Wall Streeters.    Says Harvey Goldschmid, a professor and securities-law expert at Columbia University: &quot;If I were an investment banker involved in one of the potential cases, I'd be very worried.&quot;    ---   Bruce Ingersoll in Washington and William Power in New York contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>