<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0033 </DOCNO><HL> Politics '88 (A Special Report)---Just Don't Be Yourself:Our Running Man TriesPolitics On for Size---By James P. Sterba</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   It was about halfway through the Seven Dwarfs Debate at the Iowa State Fair last August when I first heard a little voice whisper, &quot;Run, Sterba, run.&quot;    I had been thinking maybe I was ready for a new line of work anyway. And there was no sense in thinking small. Look, this is America. And America was facing the prospect of four years of convulsive boredom in the hands of one of these peewee Democrats or some four-letter Republican like Bush, Haig, Kemp, Dole, or this guy Pont.    So I called David Garth, the New York-based political consultant extraordinaire. He obviously sensed the morass into which this proud nation was about to lurch, because he invited me to come right over.    I hung up and started thinking. Could somebody like me actually run for president of the United States? With a name like Sterba? Having been a college classmate of Bubba Smith? Could I be warm on TV, beg for money, look sincere, and encapsulate an entire foreign policy in one 20-second TV sound bite?    The next day, Mr. Garth ushered me into his office, gave me the once-over, and said: &quot;Go to your doctor, get a physical and lose 10 pounds. The media will scream 'cosmetics.' Let them. Campaigning is hard work. You'll feel healthier. The discipline will boost your ego. Without ego, you'll never be able to stand the pain.&quot;    Pain?   &quot;Listen,&quot; he said. &quot;Your looks won't help. Being a newspaperman, you obviously don't have any money. Unlike a labor leader or a TV evangelist, you have no built-in constituency. You have no political performance record to run on either. And you have no national name recognition.&quot;    Pretty bleak stuff. But then he looked me in the eye and said: &quot;You know, compared to the current crop, you might actually be an interesting candidate.&quot; He imagined a future broadcast of the CBS Evening News: &quot;Nobody in politics takes Sterba's candidacy seriously,&quot; says Dan Rather, &quot;but he does.&quot;    I got a lump in my throat.    The more he talked, the more I realized that I didn't know a campaign nut from a bolt in this new age of imagery. How do you really do it? Do you have to sign up somewhere? Do you just start showing up at factory gates and shaking hands? Should I start putting Vaseline on my teeth like Miss America contestants? Should I start right out slinging mud? How do you sling modern mud? What if the mud's aimed at me? That really worried me.    So I said: &quot;Look Dave, why don't I just turn myself over to you and let you mold me into a presidential candidate?&quot;    He almost threw me out of his office. &quot;Look, wise guy,' he said, &quot;that's myths and the movies. You can't be molded. Blue smoke and mirrors don't do it.&quot;    Presentation he could help me with -- that is, if he decided to help me at all. But I couldn't simply walk into his office and hire him, even if I had the $25,000 a month his company charges. He had to choose me as a client. And he wouldn't do that unless he thought I was worthy. To be worthy I had to have -- get this -- substance. In this election especially, I had to have character. And commitment. I had to stand for things. But what could I stand for that wasn't already being stood for?    I said, &quot;OK, you take some polls and find out where the voters stand and then I'll simply reprogram myself to be just what they want.&quot;    He boiled. &quot;Polls don't tell you where to stand on issues. You're supposed to stand for something already. Polls help you understand the universe you're operating in -- and very few people understand.&quot; I was going to mortgage my apartment to pay for this kind of advice?    &quot;People who haven't been through it can't possibly understand how much pain there is,&quot; Mr. Garth said. &quot;But forget that for now. You've got special problems because you're a journalist. The voters may love you. You might even raise $10 million. But your journalist friends are going to kill you. Hell hath no fury like journalists who see one of their own kind getting uppity.&quot; He added, less than reassuringly: &quot;Once they perceive you are serious, they're going to tear you apart.&quot;    My friends would do that?    &quot;Absolutely,&quot; he said. &quot;To them it will be a special calling.&quot;    Ego fights pain, Mr. Garth had said. So all the way home that day, I practiced thinking what a great guy I was.    The next day at work, I looked at my fellow reporters with a new-found suspicion. Instead of as colleagues, I saw them as potential saboteurs. But I decided to test the newsroom waters.    I asked an editor if he thought someone named Sterba could be president.    &quot;Sterba sounds foreign,&quot; he said. &quot;Bad foreign.&quot;    But I knew different. Dukakis was running. Cuomo was credible. So a Sterba might slip in. But when I mentioned to Mr. Garth that the name Sterba was of Bohemian origin, he said: &quot;No, no, no. Bad connotations. Sterba is a fine Czech name, not a Bohemian name. Think Martina Navratilova, American citizen. Think Ivan Lendl, who wants to be.&quot;    My name problem was minor, he said. All of a sudden, my entire record as a human being was open to scrutiny.    &quot;Do you realize that everything you have ever said or written will be used against you?&quot; Mr. Garth said. I thought about my story about Australia's 12-foot-long endangered earthworms, my defense of sharks as victims of media hype, and my investigation of America's national frog shortage. How could I come across as serious?    Not easy, he said. I had to get serious people to say I was serious, and that they were seriously looking me over. How? With good, well-thought-out positions on the issues.    This was a problem, I confessed. On a lot of issues, I want to say &quot;I don't know&quot; and &quot;I don't care.&quot; But I've never heard a candidate say those things. They have to know and care about everything.    Small potatoes, Mr. Garth said; that's what issues-people are for. I had more important things to worry about, namely television. I hadn't been on television in 20 years. If I couldn't come across on TV, I might as well save my money and his time.    So I wrote a little test speech and prepped for some Qandamp;A. The studio people were friendly enough. They powdered my face, sat me down, pointed at the camera and TelePrompTer and told me to take a deep breath. I tried to sound firm and authoritative. I answered questions forcefully. I muffed some answers, but the studio people said I looked and sounded terrific.    Not Mr. Garth. &quot;You're hostile,&quot; he said. &quot;There's no feeling there, no goodwill. You're locked in a journalist's posture -- questioning and cynical. Politicians meet people 50-50. Not you. You got mad. You knew it was practice, that 13 million people weren't watching. But you blew your cool.    &quot;Imagine what real candidates go through day after day, trying to make a point without sounding dumb or contradicting themselves. No wonder they begin to sound bland. No wonder they repeat the same answers like tape-recorded announcements over and over.&quot;    In my TV test, I quoted the British magazine, the Economist, about America's flagging spirits.    &quot;Sounds like Pat Caddell's 'malaise speech' that got Jimmy Carter in trouble,&quot; Mr. Garth said. &quot;You're castigating the entire country, quoting a foreign magazine. What kind of an American are you?&quot;    I was feeling like a bad American.    But then he said I wasn't all bad. &quot;You could be a candidate,&quot; he said. &quot;You look like a guy I could sit down and have drink with. It's a quality George Bush doesn't have, Al Gore doesn't have. Your answers were awful, like somebody who hasn't been through two or three campaigns. But you can learn.&quot; Yeah, I thought, I can learn.    Needed next was a maiden testing-the-waters speech to some real people to gauge my wowability on the stump. But since Mr. Garth hadn't yet formally committed to my campaign, I was on my own. So with Sorensenian zeal, I revised and rerevised draft after draft of my vision for America: &quot;. . . working together under competent leadership to build . . . we are better than the few among us who would . . . restoring our vitality . . . fulfilling our great potential. . . .&quot; You get the drift.    I practiced in front of a mirror. I read my inspiring words over and over into a tape recorder.    My advance team scientifically selected Michigan, the second weekend of October, as the venue (because I grew up there, not because I had tickets to the UM-Michigan State University game that Saturday). I glad-handed my way through East Lansing on game day, then headed for a Monday date with destiny in Ann Arbor.    My team cunningly chose a small lecture hall at the University of Michigan that might overflow, instead of a big auditorium that could look half-empty. Inside, on the main bulletin board, was a big poster advertising my speech: &quot;Running for President: Why Not a . . .&quot; My jaw dropped. The next word was misspelled, &quot;. . . Newpaperman.&quot; And somebody had scrawled, &quot;because he can't spell.&quot;    Showtime was 4 p.m., but the hall was empty. My advance person was soothing. &quot;It really means 4:10 p.m., when classes start,&quot; she said. At 4:10 p.m., my crowd had swelled to four -- three friends and the man who said he'd have to introduce me and then run to another appointment. At 4:20 p.m., that's what he did -- to an audience of exactly 10 people.    I slogged through, feeling broken and humiliated.    Afterwards, applause was polite. One listener came up and introduced himself as a reporter for the Ann Arbor News. I was heartened, until he said he wasn't working. He came because we had a mutual friend.    I was beginning to understand the pain, not to mention the virtues of good advance work.    A week later, some Clemson University professors -- my new Southern strategists -- revealed the secret of packing the house: compulsory student attendance. The tactic worked later at Michigan State too. But since my luggage was lost the night before, I was out buying a shirt and tie when the morning show host on Detroit's WJR phoned for an interview and, not finding me, told listeners in at least 16 states that the &quot;candidate was missing.&quot; The crew from Channel 2 couldn't find me either.    Later, in New York, Mr. Garth commiserated with me. I asked him: &quot;Would you run?&quot;    &quot;Me? You couldn't get me to run for office in this country for all the tea in China,&quot; he said.    That did it.    So I am using this paragraph to declare that I am not a candidate for president of the United States. Even if the polls were to show that the American people, with their great generosity, their yearning for a new vision, for a fresh and inspiring path to greatness . . . even if I had their blessings and encouragement, I would bow out.    I'll continue to work quietly, once again, as a simple note-taker on the sidelines of history -- and, of course, dream about what might have been.    ---   Mr. Sterba is a senior special writer in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>