<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871119-0058 </DOCNO><HL> The Iran-Contra Report:Reagan Administration Broke Laws in PursuitOf Secret Policy, Agents Profited, Panels Say---By Edward T. Pound and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Iran-Contra congressional committees allege the Reagan administration violated at least six laws in its secret foreign policy adventures, and they describe huge profit-making by private agents recruited by the White House.    The panels' long-awaited report focuses on many of the same legal issues under investigation by a special court-appointed federal prosecutor, who is expected to seek indictments within the next few months. It provides the most details yet disclosed about the flow of money that fueled the Iran-Contra operation, and it shows in detail how former White House aides, in trying to cover up their actions, manipulated and lied to federal law-enforcement agencies.    After the Iran-Contra affair was exposed last November, President Reagan denied there were any violations of law and praised officials who carried out the secret policies. But at the same time, some of these same officials were &quot;engaging in a cover-up&quot; of their actions, the report said.    &quot;The Iran-Contra affair was characterized by pervasive dishonesty and inordinate secrecy,&quot; the report concludes.    Congressional investigators said private agents pocketed at least $6.6 million in commissions and other profits for helping arrange the sale of U.S. weapons to Iran and for providing arms to the Nicaraguan rebels known as Contras. The investigators said there was virtually no government control over the money generated by the Iran-Contra operation, and that the agents decided how much profit they would take.    Despite controlling tens of millions of dollars, the report concludes, the private middlemen diverted only $3.8 million from the $16 million in Iran arms-sales profits to the Contras.    How the money was disbursed is an important legal matter. Both the majority of the House and Senate committees and the federal special prosecutor contend that the proceeds from the Iran arms sales, including profits and commissions, belong to the U.S. government.    Retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and Iranian-American businessman Albert Hakim headed the private covert operation, which they termed &quot;The Enterprise.&quot; Gen. Secord testified repeatedly before the committees last summer that he never profited from the Iran-Contra operation -- an assertion clearly disputed by the panels' findings.    The so-called enterprise used a maze of shell companies and secret bank accounts from Switzerland to the Caribbean to conceal its operations. The committees said that beginning in mid-1985, the Secord-Hakim organization was intended to be a &quot;self-financed entity capable of conducting covert actions for the U.S.&quot; without congressional appropriations or oversight. A former White House aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, the key figure in the Iran-Contra scandal, told the committees last summer that William Casey, the former director of the Central Intelligence Agency, wanted to establish such a &quot;stand-alone&quot; entity.    The congressional committees' report sharply criticizes &quot;lapses&quot; in Attorney General Edwin Meese's preliminary investigation of the scandal last November. It asserts that Mr. Meese, by failing to question some senior administration officials aggressively, take notes of crucial interviews or promptly safeguard documents to prevent their destruction, &quot;departed from standard investigative techniques&quot; and &quot;placed a cloud&quot; over his investigation.    The report concludes that Mr. Meese, when he announced during a nationally televised news conference last November that funds from Iranian arms sales had been diverted to the Contras, made &quot;mistaken and inconsistent&quot; statements that conflicted with some of the evidence his own investigators had found.    One section of the report reels off, in rather blunt terms, at least six separate statutes and two presidential executive orders that lawmakers contend were violated during the course of the Iran-Contra affair. Although it doesn't identify any individuals, the report asserts that participants in the Iran-Contra operation violated:    --The National Security Act and the Arms Export Control Act, which require that Congress be notified of covert U.S. operations.    --The Anti-Deficiency Act, which prohibits use of federal funds for purposes that Congress didn't intend.    --Laws that prohibit giving false or misleading statements to Congress, even if they aren't made under oath.    --The Presidential Records Act, which prohibits tampering with, or destroying, White House documents.    --The Boland amendment, which in various forms restricted the use of federal funds to provide military and other assistance to the Contras.    According to the report, one of the secret corporations set up by Messrs. Hakim and North to help the Contras and provide arms to Iran in exchange for American hostages &quot;was created for the very purpose of conducting government operations while evading the congressional appropriations power.&quot;    The report says that Col. North and his boss, former White House National Security Adviser John Poindexter, doggedly kept track of sensitive criminal investigations, and sought &quot;to delay or impede their progress&quot; if they threatened to expose covert operations. Citing seven instances of questionable White House interference in such investigations, the report flatly accuses Col. North of trying to &quot;compromise the independence of law enforcement agencies by misusing claims of national security.&quot;    In the summer of 1986, for example, the report asserts that Col. North persuaded top Customs Service officials to sidetrack for several weeks a criminal investigation of a Georgia firm that built aircraft later exported for use by the Contras. It says the former White House aide also sought to limit the scope of the inquiry. According to testimony received by the committees, Col. North based his request on the assertion that all of the individuals involved were &quot;good guys,&quot; and that one was &quot;a close friend of the president.&quot;    The report says Col. North also attempted to &quot;exploit his contacts&quot; with the Federal Bureau of Investigation &quot;to instigate or intensify investigations of people and organizations perceived as threats&quot; to his secret dealings. The report said these included a reporter and one of Col. North's fellow White House aides, but it didn't identify them.    The report issued by the majority on the committees stops short of openly criticizing the FBI or the Customs Service. But a separate statement signed by four of the panels' most senior House Democrats asserts that senior law enforcement officials &quot;exercised questionable judgment&quot; and &quot;went out of their way to provide North with&quot; information about criminal investigations.    Adm. Poindexter also sought to deflect or evade investigations, according to the report. It says he also destroyed important documents and encouraged others to do the same. Moreover, Paul Thompson, one of Adm. Poindexter's top aides, falsely told Justice Department officials last November that there weren't any documents in his or Adm. Poindexter's personal office files that would shed light on the Iran-Contra affair, according to the report.    The report also details how some conservative activists in Washington raised money to aid the Contras and pocketed large sums for themselves.    Working closely with Col. North, who briefed potential contributors at the White House and other locations, Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell raised more than $10 million from private contributors, most of it for the Contra cause. But less than half of that -- $4.5 million -- actually went to the Contras or was spent in their behalf, according to the congressional report. It said the rest was kept by Mr. Channell and a public relations associate, Richard Miller, to cover their fees and expenses.    The report said Mr. Miller, his principal company and a partner received $1.7 million. It said Mr. Channell personally took $345,000 in compensation plus other funds for expenses. The two men pleaded guilty earlier this year to tax-related conspiracy charges relating to their Contra fund raising.    The report said David Fischer, a former presidential aide who acted as a consultant to Mr. Channell, and an associate shared $650,000 in payments. Mr. Fischer has acknowledged that, among other things, he arranged for contributors to Mr. Channell's organization to meet with President Reagan.    The report discloses that Mr. Channell arranged for Col. North to brief wealthy Texan Nelson Bunker Hunt in September 1985 on the Contras' needs. It says that after meeting with Col. North and others in Dallas, Mr. Hunt contributed and lent $475,000 to Mr. Channell's principal fund-raising organization, the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty. Mr. Hunt told the committees that he didn't recall his conversation with Col. North.    The report says that funds to help the Contras were disbursed primarily by Mr. Miller at Col. North's direction. It says that about $1.7 million of the money raised by Mr. Channell was &quot;washed&quot; through a Cayman Islands company owned by Mr. Miller to bank accounts in Switzerland controlled by the Secord-Hakim enterprise. Congressional investigators said that the money was commingled with funds contributed to the Contra effort by third countries and proceeds generated by the sale of arms to Iran.    The report says that &quot;every single source&quot; of income to the Secord-Hakim enterprise &quot;involved (Col.) North and the use of U.S. government resources.&quot;    The report says the enterprise established by Gen. Secord and Mr. Hakim diverted only $3.8 million from the Iran arms-sales profits to the Contras, though Col. North hoped that much more would be used to help the rebels.    Altogether, the report says, the enterprise took in nearly $48 million and spent almost $35.8 million, leaving a surplus of $12.2 million. The committees estimate that $7.8 million of the $12.2 million has been located and frozen in European accounts.    The report says Gen. Secord, Mr. Hakim, and an arms broker, Thomas Clines, a former CIA official and close Secord associate, took $4.4 million as commissions on arms sales to the Contras and the CIA. They took an additional $2.1 million as profits from their enterprise. Messrs. Secord and Hakim also set aside $4.2 million in reserves for other enterprise operations. A further $1.23 million is described as cash on hand.    Of the $48 million in revenues, $31.2 million was generated by the sale of weapons to Iran that the enterprise helped arrange. An additional $11.3 million was paid by the Contras for arms; $2 million came from Taiwan; $1.9 million, including the funds from the Channell operation, came from private donors; and $1.2 million came from the sale of arms to the CIA.    The report shows that of the nearly $35.8 million spent by the enterprise, $12.2 million was paid to the U.S. for the arms that were resold to Iran at huge markups; $8.8 million went to purchase arms for sale to the Contras; and almost $6 million was spent on the enterprise's air operation to resupply the Contras, including the purchase of small aircraft and the construction of an airfield in Costa Rica. There were many other expenditures for legal fees, air transportation costs, and other covert operations.    The enterprise's complex operations were concealed by a maze of offshore companies and accounts set up by Mr. Hakim's longtime financial adviser, Willard Zucker, a former Internal Revenue Service lawyer who operates a fiduciary company in Geneva, Switzerland. &quot;Zucker was a discreet, efficient, and rapid channel for moving money,&quot; the report says. &quot;By merely telephoning Zucker in Switzerland, Hakim, and later Secord, could order the movement of funds from Swiss bank accounts to the destination of their choice without a paper trace to either of them.&quot;    Investigators said Mr. Zucker also funneled large sums of cash to Messrs. Secord and Hakim through associates of his in the U.S. Mr. Zucker refused to be questioned by Congress, and the report concludes he &quot;was a covert operator's model banker, accountant, lawyer, and money manager.&quot;    ---   From the Investigating Committees' Report:    The president created or at least tolerated an environment where those who did know of the diversion believed with certainty that they were carrying out the president's policies. This same environment enabled a secretary who shredded, smuggled, and altered documents to tell the committees that &quot;sometimes you have to go above the written law;&quot; and it enabled Admiral Poindexter to testify that &quot;frankly, we were willing to take some risks with the law.&quot; It was in such an environment that former officials of the NSC staff and their private agents could lecture the committees that a &quot;rightful cause&quot; justifies any means, that lying to Congress and other officials in the executive branch itself is acceptable when the ends are just, and that Congress is to blame for passing laws that run counter to administration policy. What may aptly be called the &quot;cabal of the zealots&quot; was in charge.    From the Minority Report:   President Reagan and his staff made mistakes in the Iran-Contra Affair. . . . The bottom line, however, is that the mistakes of the Iran-Contra Affair were just that -- mistakes in judgment, and nothing more. There was no constitutional crisis, no systematic disrespect for &quot;the rule of law,&quot; no grand conspiracy, and no administration-wide dishonesty and coverup. </TEXT></DOC>