<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0133 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:Gallery: Form and Fiber---By Barbara Jepson</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE><TEXT>   My mother's favorite cure for rainy-day restlessness was to put her three young daughters to work making potholders. Our efforts with loom and looped yarn constituted a kindergarten-level form of weaving -- the same warp-and-weft method that yields hand-made tapestries and mass-produced textiles alike.    Yet weaving is but one example of a process the noted fabric designer Jack Lenor Larsen calls &quot;interlacing&quot; -- any type of fiber construction in which each element passes over and under the others. Indeed, he believes that the interlacing techniques of plaiting, braiding and some knotting developed before the loom's invention during the Neolithic and Bronze ages. How articles fashioned with these less commercially oriented methods evolved in various cultures and subsequently influenced contemporary fiber artists is the subject of a rewarding exhibit here at the American Craft Museum called &quot;Interlacing: The Elemental Fabric.&quot;    Curated by Mr. Larsen, who recently co-authored a book of the same title (Kodansha International, 278 pages, $60), the show presents more than 160 objects from 40 countries. Most of the works, on view through July 17, are from his extensive private collection. All reveal a keen eye for imaginative examples of fiber art in the broadest sense, from hammocks, Panama hats, and a lifesize Mexican bandolero to a &quot;Silver Diamond Quilt&quot; (1985) of painted aluminum and vinyl acrylic by Barbara MacCullum, which uses empty wall space as part of its modernistic pattern.    There are even three intricately &quot;plaited,&quot; gently distended nests by the weaver birds of India and Africa. Those who have followed the sculptural exploration of basket forms in recent decades will be reminded of Seneca's observation that all art is but imitation of nature. In these nests, however, the elongated tunnels that distort their classically round shapes have a functional purpose -- to discourage snakes and other predators intent on bird's eggs for breakfast.    The instructive text and illustrations that accompany the show help reveal the connections among works from different cultures and different times. We learn, for example, that the Bobo tribes of Upper Volta traditionally give newlyweds a nested basket filled with enough seed varieties to start a farm. An example of their handiwork in palm fiber and leather is displayed next to a contemporary interpretation of the genre in mulberry bark by an American artist, Dorothy Gill Barnes.    &quot;Interlacing&quot; also points out the similarities between utilitarian and decorative objects. The sailor's breastplate knot used by seamen in their nets becomes a structural and aesthetic element in a graceful rattan rug-beater from the Philippines. The plaiting method used in tennis rackets is echoed in the construction of a sieve of bast-cellulosic fibers from the stem, bark or leaves of various plants.    Most of the ethnic fiber objects in the exhibit were made by anonymous crafters within the last 50 to 100 years. Their tradtional forms, which have changed little over the centuries, are now being reinterpreted by individuals who use fiber as a medium for artistic expression.    Some of them favor unconventional materials. Susan Jamart fashions a container of hexagonally plaited, grosgrain ribbon, worked multidirectionally to give a three-dimensional effect. Olga de Amaral plaits a lusciously textured wall hanging, &quot;Tejido Policromo 2&quot; (1985) from woven horsehair tapes gilded with gold leaf. In &quot;Folded Square Faltungen,&quot; Roland Jung creates a minimalist sculpture out of polyester film worked over and under a grid.    Others use traditional materials in an innovative manner. Six stunning works by John McQueen, as pivotal a figure in contemporary basketry as Harvey Littleton is in glass, fall in this category. His objects are characteristically strong in textural interest, simple and uncontrived in form.    A white birch-bark basket of flattened spherical shape with a narrow rectangular opening reverses the usual relationship of aperture to exterior walls. Mr. McQueen's plaited vessel of spruce root and cherry suggests nature's imprisonment in a cagelike container. (In the interests of full disclosure, it should be noted that I purchased a McQueen basket in 1976 from a now-defunct gallery, and it is the second thing I would save in a fire, after my cat.)    The only drawback to this otherwise exemplary exhibit is the absence of a catalog. Presumably, this reflects an attempt to stimulate sales of Mr. Larsen's book, written in collaboration with weaver and New York Times crafts reporter Betty Freudenheim, which is available at the museum. While many of the helpful photos and technical diagrams of show are drawn from the book, the book does not include everything in the exhibit. Moreover, given its steep price, it contains surprisingly few color photos -- only 53 out of 303.    Still, the book is not intended as a coffee-table display piece. It attempts to bring order to the myriad fiber techniques currently described by a welter of conflicting terminology. As such, it is of most interest to scholars, collectors and practitioners of the fiber arts, yet its text is largely accessible to the non-specialist. Most importantly, the book, like the exhibit, presents an engaging survey of interlaced forms through the centuries -- one we can learn from and enjoy.    ---   Ms. Jepson is a free-lance writer based in New York. </TEXT></DOC>