<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0029 </DOCNO><HL> Superconductivity Race Shows How Japan Inc. Works---Government Coordinates CrashProgram On Research, Applications---By Stephen Kreider YoderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN HIT KYO NIPNYELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan's moves in the superconductivity race provide a look at how the nation builds competitiveness in a new technology.    On one hand, companies vie to beat each other to the patent office and marketplace. But at the same time, archrivals join forces on certain tasks when speed is essential and the research is risky. And the Ministry of International Trade and Industry orchestrates it all.    &quot;We just can't get all our work done during the day,&quot; says Hidehiko Nishiyama, a MITI deputy director, describing the frenzied atmosphere as the ministry races to draft an action plan on the new technology to meet an August budget deadline. Many MITI and corporate planners have been missing their last trains home since Feb. 15, when a Houston laboratory announced the discovery of a new superconducting ceramic, capable of working at much higher temperatures than previous superconductors.    The news sent the Japanese into a near panic and since then they have been working frantically to keep pace. Today, Japanese companies have established their own mechanisms to exploit the new technology and are firing off a barrage of patent applications. All eyes are now on MITI, which will announce its superconductivity plans and budget later this month, though the exact date hasn't been disclosed. Those plans will set the tone for basic research here as well as spreading development money among corporations.    Superconductors are important because they can carry electricity without the resistance that causes heat loss in normal conductors such as copper. In theory, superconductors could enable computers to perform much faster, home appliances to use almost no power and cables to carry electricity around the globe.    The dream has moved closer to reality with the discovery of a superconducting ceramic. Older, metal-alloy superconductors had to be cooled with expensive liquid helium to nearly minus 270 degrees Celsius. The new ceramic superconductors work at cheaper-to-maintain temperatures.    By the year 2000, Japanese companies expect superconductivity will be an industry amounting to $20 billion annually world-wide, according to a recent survey.    The Japanese, however, are anxious not to be seen setting out to dominate the new industry. MITI's new superconductivity programs won't even start until the fiscal year beginning in April 1988 and the ministry says it may not even be able to coax sufficient funds out of the Finance Ministry. Furthermore, MITI officials fear that U.S. alarm over Japan's superconductivity advances could spark a new wave of Japan-bashing.    &quot;MITI knows that it can't take the nationalistic ways of the past,&quot; says Shoji Tanaka, a University of Tokyo professor and vice chairman of an advisory committee to MITI. &quot;Otherwise, this could get a lot more serious than even the semiconductor problem.&quot;    But before Japan need worry about the consequences of winning the superconductor race, there are many hurdles that researchers must overcome to form the brittle ceramic superconductors into products. And the Japanese concede they have formidable competitors from abroad, especially from such U.S. giants as International Business Machines Corp. and American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.    Nevertheless, policies laid out today in Japan's huge corporations and in MITI's back rooms could lead to tomorrow's trade imbalances. Japan's opinion is clear: The country expects its manufacturing know-how to put it in the lead in taking superconductors from the lab to the factory.    &quot;Economic friction is almost bound to happen,&quot; says Kiyoshi Taketoh, a research-and-development manager at Mitsubishi Electric Corp. &quot;America may have been the one that sparked the fire under this technology, but Japan will probably lead in applications.&quot;    Loose interpretation of antitrust laws and a tradition of benevolent government-industry relations allows Japan to form the powerful joint efforts that the U.S. is just now starting to push for. Last month President Reagan announced his &quot;superconductivity initiative,&quot; a package of government research funds, legislative changes and a call for joint research to keep America competitive in making products using superconductors.    There was no need for such a call here. Consider MITI's new advisory committee on superconductivity. Executives from Mitsubishi Electric, Toshiba Corp. and Hitachi Ltd. sit on the committee, as do officials of Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp., Tokyo Electric Power Co., Kyocera Corp. and two Sumitomo group companies. They are all helping steer MITI policy and probably will be the main benefactors of the ministry's projects.    &quot;It isn't enough for the bureaucrats to think things out alone,&quot; says MITI's Masatoshi Urashima. &quot;We want to combine the research strength of private industry with the research strength of the government if that helps advance this technology.&quot;    Advancing technology is Mr. Urashima's job. He oversees the work in the ministry's Room 613, the Office of Basic Technologies for Future Industries, where a group of elite bureaucrats identify promising technologies and help industry move into them. Past programs include the integrated-circuit project that helped Japan's electronics giants take over the world market for memory chips. Superconductivity is the office's No. 1 priority this year.    The first fruits of Room 613's efforts are shaping up just down the hall in Room 627, the Moonlight Project Promotion Office. This office runs energy-conservation projects and has spent two years drawing up blueprints for an electricity generator that uses conventional superconducting coils. Now the priority is to see whether the new superconductor can be used instead of metal alloys.    &quot;If high-temperature superconductors are developed, we could simply rewrap the coils with it and take a few seals out,&quot; says Shinichi Nakayama, who directs MITI's generator program. Such a generator would be half the size and weight of today's generators and save millions of dollars a year by conserving power that is usually consumed by resistance.    A MITI-backed consortium is now being formed to develop a 70-kilowatt prototype generator next year. The consortium's cast is familiar: Hitachi, Toshiba, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd., Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd. and about 30 other electrical and power companies. The same companies are expected to be involved in several other MITI projects, one of the most important of which will be to find ways to use the new ceramic superconductor in chips that could provide the brains of a new generation of supercomputers.    Room 613 started studying superconducting ceramics in December, when a Tokyo University lab duplicated the discovery earlier last year by IBM that a certain ceramic was superconductive at about minus 240 degrees Celsius, a higher temperature than conventional metal-alloy superconductors are capable of. Then, in January, MITI's electronics lab found superconductivity in a ceramic at even higher temperatures.    &quot;By February we were saying among ourselves: 'We've got something here,'&quot; says Mr. Urashima. &quot;We saw this was a vital technology for MITI.&quot; But it was the Feb. 15 announcement from Houston that galvanized the ministry. The University of Houston had produced a ceramic superconductor that worked at minus 178 degrees Celsius, well above the temperature of liquid nitrogen. Within days of the announcement, Room 613 was compiling lists of academic and industry specialists to form its superconductor-advisory committee. Meanwhile, MITI's electronics lab formed a 40-member superconductor-research team.    Japanese news reports last month claimed MITI's lab achieved superconductivity near room temperature. But while the lab and advisory group grab headlines, much goes on behind the scenes.    Few MITI bureaucrats are specialists and they rely on extensive networks of informal advisers. After the ministry identifies a promising field, its officials ask industry specialists to make informal proposals for projects and policies that MITI should take. &quot;MITI managers have tremendous power and they may look like Superman,&quot; says Hajime Karatsu, a Tokai University professor, who advises both government and industry. &quot;But they're actually very talented amateurs.&quot;    Tapping Japan's corporate and academic brains also helps MITI to quickly build a consensus in industry. &quot;The government should sponsor the very basic and the high-risk research,&quot; says Takashi Hirayama, manager of Tokyo Electric Power's research planning department, adding that industry should concentrate on application. &quot;And naturally, where the two meet is where we cooperate.&quot;    MITI isn't the only government body involved. The Science and Technology Agency will spend about $100 million on superconductivity research over the next five years and the Ministry of Education has its own superconductivity programs. Tokyo's municipal government plans to set up a team to help small businesses apply superconductivity research to products.    Japan's industry, meanwhile, is pushing ahead with its own plans. Toshiba engineers, who have worked on superconductors for 20 years, have produced wire incorporating the new superconductor. So far, however, the wire is too rudimentary for industrial use.    NEC Corp., which kept working on computer chips using conventional superconductors even after IBM quit doing so in 1983, has now built a chip using the new superconductor. And Mitsubishi Electric built a generator using old metal-alloy superconductors and expects to do the same with the new ceramic conductors.    Companies, eager to stake out territories, are taking the scattershot approach to patent applications. Mitsubishi Electric, for example, formed a special strategic patent-application committee in April and has filed more than 130 patents.    Sumitomo Electric's executives have ordered company divisions to dream up as many superconductor uses as they can, no matter how far-fetched. So far this year, Sumitomo has filed for 700 patents on superconductors in Japan, most of them for applications. Sumitomo, a big exporter of conventional superconducting wire, is planning to file for U.S. patents as well.    Like U.S. researchers, Japanese specialists caution that it could be five to 10 years before the new ceramic superconductor finds its way into products. In its present form, it is still proving hard to form into the wire needed for many applications and it can't handle large electrical currents or magnetic fields.    That hasn't stopped superconductivity from becoming a national obsession. Shares of superconductor-related companies have boomed on Tokyo's stock market. A major Tokyo bookstore stocks 45 titles in a new superconductivity section.    And superconductivity even has its first murder mystery. A Hiroshima University superconductivity specialist was found dead from stab wounds in his office last month, his body sprinkled with a mysterious yellow powder. Hiroshima police won't comment, but newspaper reports speculate that the powder was a superconductor ingredient and that the murder was related to fierce research rivalry. </TEXT></DOC>