<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880322-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Confronting the Soviet Financial Offensive </HL><AUTHOR> Judy Shelton </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Since Mikhail Gorbachev took over three years ago, total Soviet indebtedness to the West has increased dramatically -- rising about 50%. Under Mr. Gorbachev's direction, total Soviet debt has gone to about $37.5 billion from about $25.6 billion.    The Soviets owe $25.9 billion to Western commercial banks, compared with $11.3 billion about three years ago. Moscow also owes nearly $12 billion in trade credits backed by Western governments.    Besides these traditional sources of financing, Mr. Gorbachev has opened up Soviet borders to permit foreigners to invest in joint ventures and is receiving numerous propositions. He settled with Britain and Switzerland on czarist debts to clear the way for Soviet Eurobond offerings -- and proceeded in January to float the Soviet Union's first public bond offering on international capital markets. Now the Kremlin is making noises about wanting to join the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.    Western governments so far seem dazzled by all this fancy Soviet footwork in the financial markets. Mr. Gorbachev's comprehensive campaign to obtain outside funding to help salvage the internal Soviet economy has met with little resistance. But it's time now for the West to shake off its stupor and confront the Soviet financial offensive. We need a strategy of our own, an objective approach that avoids political traps and maintains proper perspective on Western economic relations with the Soviet Union.    (1) Don't lose track of Moscow's fundamental problem. The Soviet government is grappling with a massive internal budget deficit. For years, government expenditures have grossly exceeded the revenues from the Soviet economy. Though official Soviet statistics attempt to obscure this fact, the Kremlin has had to resort to printing money to paper over chronic revenue shortfalls. Even communists understand that this is a recipe for inflation -- which, under fixed prices, shows up in the form of widespread shortages. In negotiating with the West, Mr. Gorbachev's primary objective is not aimed at reducing nuclear stockpiles; this would have only a negligible impact on defense spending. His real goal is to create a political atmosphere conducive to obtaining Western economic assistance to ease the Soviet budget crisis.    (2) Don't underestimate the importance of Western trade for the Soviet Union. People who argue that trade with the West can exert only marginal influence on Soviet economic prospects do not fully appreciate what Mr. Gorbachev seeks to accomplish through &quot;perestroika.&quot; There are only two ways to enhance economic productivity: by improving the productivity of labor or by improving the productivity of capital. Western consumer goods provide the incentive for getting Soviet laborers to work harder and longer. Western technology saves internal resources and accelerates Soviet efficiency overnight. In short, Mr. Gorbachev needs imports from the West to jumpstart the Soviet economy and sustain it during this crucial transition period.    (3) Don't be excessively flattered by Soviet moves toward capitalism. Note that Mr. Gorbachev has not opted to cut military spending or fixed capital investment as part of his program of economic reform, but has chosen instead to focus on the consumption sector. What he aims to do is reduce overall wages for Soviet workers so state-owned firms can be more profitable and remit more revenues to the government. He also intends to raise the prices of consumer goods so the Soviet government won't have to pay as much for subsidies out of its budget. For the average Soviet worker, perestroika is one tough squeeze. Throw in bankruptcy, unemployment and the prospect of forced relocation and you have the Kremlin's version of capitalism.    (4) Don't promote a personality cult for Mr. Gorbachev. It's bad enough that the Soviet people have a tendency, perhaps a vestige from czarist times, to deify their leaders. But it is very disturbing when Western citizens elevate the personality of the current Soviet leader above the more significant factors bearing on the relationship between the superpowers. Would Americans be so enthused about reciprocal summits if Mr. Gorbachev were suddenly replaced by, say, the Soviet minister of defense? Would corporate chiefs be as eager to rub elbows and set up U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint ventures? Deal with the system, not the man. Mr. Gorbachev could be gone tomorrow.    (5) Don't trade economic and financial assistance for Soviet political concessions. Example: awarding the Soviet Union most-favored-nation trade status and access to government-backed credits in exchange for Soviet improvement on human rights.    This is a tough one because Americans are eager to provide relief to victims in the Soviet Union who are suffering from discrimination and political intolerance. But paying off the Soviets with financial favors to get them to comply with standards of basic human decency is not the right way to go. It amounts to paying ransom for the release of hostages. Indeed, to the extent that economic assistance from abroad frees up Soviet internal resources and increases the amounts available to the Kremlin to fund its military activities, extending trade benefits is akin to trading arms for hostages -- a policy that has proved disastrous in the past.    (6) Don't get confused over labels; it's all a transfer of capital. The key concept here is fungibility. Stipulations that specifically limit what goods can be purchased with particular funds are easily accommodated within an overall Soviet plan for obtaining Western products; that is, there is no real qualitative distinction between tied credits and general-purpose loans. From the Soviet perspective, joint ventures offer the best of all worlds because they provide financial capital without imposing a debt obligation.    (7) Our monitoring capabilities are limited. Transfusions of capital from the West play a critically important role in propping up the Soviet internal economy -- they should thus be accorded strategic significance. Yet our monitoring capabilities are distressingly inadequate for keeping track of West-to-East financial flows.    We have no way of knowing, for example, where the money came from that bought into the Soviet bond offering in Zurich two months ago. The Johnson Debt Default Act prohibits private parties in the U.S. from purchasing or selling general-obligation bonds issued by the Soviet government. But if transactions are handled outside the U.S., who knows if Americans are involved and whether the law applies? There are major leakages, too, in monitoring commercial loans and interbank deposits. And there is no mechanism for tracking capital channeled through joint ventures.    (8) The U.S. must take a leadership role. It is ironic that the country most loath to impose capital controls is now in the position of having to persuade its allies to refrain from indiscriminately funding the Soviet Union. But this is an area in which national-security interests should take precedence over the profit motives of businessmen and bankers. The sanctity of unfettered commerce has already been subordinated, with extremely worthwhile results, to prohibit the transfer of Western technology that can be used by the Soviets for military purposes. What the U.S. needs to do now is initiate a joint effort among Western allies to impose parallel restrictions to limit the transfer of financial capital. As a good first step, the U.S. could solicit Western cooperation in establishing a comprehensive monitoring system to track financial flows to the Soviet Union -- as a sound business practice, if nothing else.    Responding to Mr. Gorbachev's financial foray is an issue that warrants bipartisan attention. After all, the bill for defending the West is footed by all U.S. taxpayers. Sen. Bill Bradley (D., N.J.) has stated: &quot;I question the wisdom of helping the Soviets avoid the choice between civilian investment and military buildups.&quot; Rep. Jack Kemp (R., N.Y.) has gone so far as to introduce legislation to give the president discretionary authority to prohibit loans that oppose the national-security interests of the U.S.    But in these days of summits and signings, the connection between Soviet economic strength and Soviet military power has been played down in the broader debate over U.S.-Soviet relations. There seems to exist a subconscious make-loans-not-war attitude that none dare call detente. We need to remind ourselves that, in seeking financial assistance from the West, Mr. Gorbachev's motives may be less than honorable.    ---   Ms. Shelton, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University, has written a book on Soviet borrowing to be published by The Free Press this fall. </TEXT></DOC>