<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0081 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. to Seek Concessions From CanadaOn Autos; Move Could Complicate Talks---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDAMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)PUBLISHING (PUB)MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. is preparing to press Canada for major concessions in automobile trade, a move likely to complicate free-trade talks between the two countries just a few weeks before their Oct. 5 deadline.    Negotiators, who held a weeklong session in Canada late last month, have made significant progress in agreeing to knock down tariffs, eliminate barriers to cross-border investments and trade in services, and provide greater protection for intellectual property, according to sources on both sides.    But the talks, which resumed here yesterday, remain deadlocked over Canadian insistence on a new, binding mechanism for resolving trade disputes that would spare Canada from traditional remedies and penalties under U.S. trade law. The Reagan administration and key members of Congress oppose the idea, and the U.S. has offered Canada only a nonbinding, consultative mechanism.    Canada also is still resisting U.S. pressure to sweep away most of its indirect government subsidies, which are a key feature of the Canadian political system.    For its part, the sources said, the U.S. has flatly rejected a Canadian offer to remove nearly all trade barriers affecting the two nations' transportation industries, for fear Congress and maritime interests would never agree to amend the Jones Act, which limits U.S. domestic water commerce to American vessels. And the American side has rejected a Canadian offer to fully open government procurement in the two countries to the other nation's companies, again because the administration believes that would face overwhelming political opposition in the U.S.    The U.S. has also rebuffed Canadian proposals that would do away with agricultural export subsidies, or at least require prior consultation between the two nations before major subsidized grain sales. American negotiators have offered only to hold general, periodic discussions on the issue.    The U.S. demands for changes in the auto trade system, which has great political significance in Canada, could come as early as today. American negotiators held off raising the issue until after yesterday's provincial election in Ontario, the center of Canada's auto industry. Ontario's premier, David Peterson, has taken the position that any new free-trade pact shouldn't alter the U.S.-Canadian auto agreement, which was signed in 1965 and currently works in Canada's favor.    Under the agreement, cars can be shipped across the border duty-free if certain conditions are met. As a result, auto trade now accounts for roughly a third of the $124 billion in U.S.-Canada merchandise trade. But the U.S. argues that Canada has used the pact to woo overseas auto and auto-parts companies at U.S. expense, and that Canada now runs nearly a $4 billion surplus with the U.S. in automotive goods.    The U.S. will demand that Canada drop a program under which it offers foreign companies refunds of duties on auto shipments into Canada if they buy Canadian-made parts for export, including duty-free export to the U.S. In addition, the U.S. will seek to remove Canadian regulations that make grants of duty-free status on car imports to Canada contingent on their being at least partly built in Canada.    The U.S. also intends to press hard shortly on another sensitive issue in Canada: it wants Canada to ease restrictions on U.S. trade and investment in so-called &quot;cultural&quot; industries, such as broadcasting, publishing and films. Ottawa fears removing such controls could result in Americans overwhelming Canadian culture.    The persistence of these tough issues has cast a cloud of pessimism over the negotiations, but progress has been made in some areas of special importance to the U.S.    The two sides are close to an agreement to eliminate by the year 2000 most tariffs, which currently are roughly twice as high in Canada as in the U.S. Ottawa also has tentatively agreed to eliminate restrictions on most new U.S. investments north of the border, and to significantly raise the threshold for Canadian government review of U.S. takeovers of Canadian companies.    Sources on both sides agree that in many areas of trade in services, the two countries are close to a pact that could be a model for world trade talks. And Canada has agreed to strengthen its laws on the protection of copyrights and other intellectual property issues so they are close to the tougher U.S. approach.    But any agreement is likely to fall far short of free trade in agriculture, a sensitive political issue in both countries. Though both countries strongly support a world agreement to end all farm subsidies, they appear reluctant to tackle the issue in these bilateral talks. </TEXT></DOC>