<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0145 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Marxist Guerrillas Strike Out at Colombia's Jugular---By Peter Nares</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> BOGOTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   After years of staging headline-grabbing operations that have gained them notoriety but little else, Colombia's Marxist guerrillas may have finally found this nation's jugular. Members of the pro-Castro National Liberation Army (ELN) have unleashed a scorched-earth campaign against petroleum multinationals in the country's Eastern Plains, and the authorities fear that the insurgents may soon be in a position to paralyze oil production in zones near the Venezuelan border.    Numerous attacks have been launched on Colombia's main petroleum-export outlet, the 500-mile $500 million Cano Limon pipeline linking the Eastern Plains and the Caribbean coast. The rebel incursions have caused damage estimated at nearly $50 million, and they have frequently disrupted the flow down the pipeline, which is jointly owned by Occidental, Shell and the Colombian state oil corporation, Ecopetrol.    The army has been unable to counter the guerrillas effectively, and today the security situation in the eastern oil fields is such that multinationals could in time be forced out of the region. Ecopetrol President Francisco Chona has warned that oil engineers cannot work in &quot;total insecurity,&quot; and he has acknowledged that Colombia's plans to maintain its petroleum self-sufficiency may be undermined unless the military can restore order in the Eastern Plains -- the country's main oil-producing zone.    ELN guerrillas in the region threaten both Colombia and neighboring Venezuela, whose Guafitas and Victoria oil fields are near the two countries' border. Shorter-term, the rebels could reduce or even halt output at Colombia's largest oil field, Cano Limon, with probable reserves of more than one billion barrels, and they could cripple light crude exports, which totaled nearly five million barrels in the first half of 1986. Long-term, the guerrillas could extend their operations to the nearby Venezuelan fields.    Alive to the threat, Venezuela has intensified vigilance of border districts where Colombia's ELN guerrillas have staged isolated raids. Last June, for example, Colombian insurgents killed three Venezuelans when they attacked a National Guard unit at Cutufi. In another incident, rebels, believed to belong to the ELN, kidnapped a Venezuelan regional legislative deputy, Hernan Gonzalez, and two farmers in Apure, near the Colombian border, shortly before Christmas.    In Colombia itself, the guerrillas have burned eight helicopters at Eastern Plains petroleum camps and have blown up pumping and pipeline installations on more than 20 occasions, according to Defense Minister Gen. Rafael Samudio. They have destroyed three petroleum camps, machinery, a communications tower and two oil stations, and have kidnapped both Colombian and foreign petroleum engineers.    The guerrillas' prime targets have been American multinationals such as Occidental, which discovered the Cano Limon field in 1983. Colombian officials have denied unconfirmed reports that Occidental is now so perturbed by lawlessness in the Eastern Plains that it may contemplate withdrawal from Colombia.    Notwithstanding, oil-company representatives have met with military chiefs to express anxiety over the situation, and the army has responded by reinforcing its detachments guarding the Cano Limon pipeline. But as army officers privately admit, the pipeline is all but indefensible. It traverses remote plains and mountains that are ideal guerrilla terrain.    With an estimated strength of fewer than 80,000 men, the army has the virtually impossible task of protecting more than 1,000 miles of pipelines throughout the country. Also, it has to keep the peace in other regions hundreds of miles from the Eastern Plains, such as Cauca, where radical nationalist M-19 insurgents are active. In addition, the army is charged with the protection of vast border regions.    Against this background, Gen. Samudio has urged multinationals to improve their own security arrangements to ensure the internal safety of eastern petroleum camps. To a considerable extent, then, multinationals will have to fend for themselves because the army lacks the manpower and funds to provide them with round-the-clock security.    An alternative, however, is open to multinationals. In some areas, they can attempt to reach accord with the guerrillas. In the Eastern Plains, though, multinationals are unable to negotiate with insurgents to ensure the continuing operation of the Cano Limon pipeline. Under recent legislation, the line's maintenance has been taken over by the government, which would not tolerate an under-the-table deal with the ELN.    Hence the scene is set for further hostilities. At little risk and at minimal cost, the ELN will doubtless continue to destroy oil facilities. Founded in the wake of the Cuban 1959 revolution, the ELN, with an estimated 2,500 combatants, takes its ideological inspiration from Havana. But because of its revenue from kidnappings, extortion and bank robberies, the movement is believed to be financially self-supporting. Reportedly it purchases black-market weapons, without direct Cuban assistance.    The ELN was a major guerrilla movement before it was eclipsed in the 1970s by the larger, Soviet-aligned FARC guerrilla organization, most of whose 12,000 or so members have accepted government cease-fire terms and have hung up their arms. Colombia's third-largest guerrilla force, the M-19, also gained precedence over the ELN in the 1970s.    But today the ELN has made a comeback and it is once again vying for the leadership of Colombia's guerrillas. The surprising aspect of the current situation is that it has taken the insurgents so long to realize that economic warfare, on the lines of the current ELN campaign, can reap such handsome dividends. Prior to its truce with the government, FARC raided countless rural towns and villages, while in cities the M-19 staged James Bond-style attacks. But such tactics brought scant returns. Swiftly the army recaptured rural centers stormed by FARC, and the M-19 sustained heavy casualties with its stunt attacks.    Now, however, the ELN, with its focus on economic targets, has changed the situation. For the first time, Colombian guerrillas are today inflicting major damage on a national scale.    ---   Mr. Nares is a free-lance writer based in Bogota. </TEXT></DOC>