<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0141 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:  Puerto Rico's Primary Blues </HL><AUTHOR> Roland I. Perusse </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> SAN JUAN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Like their fellow citizens on the U.S. mainland, voters in the U.S. Caribbean territory of Puerto Rico soon will cast their ballots in U.S. presidential primaries. On Sunday, Puerto Ricans will choose 56 Democratic and 14 Republican delegates to this summer's national conventions. But any similarity between what is happening in Puerto Rico and what is happening on the mainland ends there.    The vast majority of U.S. voters are Democrats, Republicans or independents. Voters in Puerto Rico (or more correctly, those so inclined) become Democrats or Republicans for only a short time once every four years. They will vote for one or the other party and its candidates if their leaders urge them to do so, but they will turn out in large numbers only if they can be convinced that the process has some relevance to local politics.    The foundations for Puerto Rican political-party structure are the different conceptions of current and future political status. Puerto Rico still is searching for its ultimate political identity. The options are a continuation or modification of the current free-association arrangement with the U.S., or a shift to statehood or independence. Puerto Ricans consider themselves to be Populares (supporters of free association), Penepeistas (proponents of statehood) or Independentistas (advocates of independence).    Independence advocates would like to sever Puerto Rico from the U.S., so they want no part of presidential primaries. Statehood proponents always have sought closer U.S. ties, so they turn out at the polls in large numbers. Supporters of free association have been ambivalent. In the past, some have become involved while others have viewed such participation as a step toward statehood, which they feel should be avoided.    This year Gov. Rafael Hernandez Colon and his Popular Democratic Party made a stunning about-face. After shunning the last three presidential primaries, the governor has thrown the full force of his party -- which is for improving the current commonwealth status -- into the fray. The reason? Fear that statehood forces might control the Democratic as well as the Republican parties in Puerto Rico. But more important is Mr. Hernandez Colon's felt need to deal a mortal blow to the political career of former Gov. Carlos Romero Barcelo, a statehooder who wants to return to the governor's mansion.    Thus, the presidential-primary contest in Puerto Rico has turned into a trial heat for the position of governor in the next quadrennium on Nov. 8. Both are leading uncommitted slates of Democratic delegates. The names Dukakis, Gephardt, Jackson, Simon, Gore or names of any other presidential aspirants seldom are heard. Publicity is concentrated on the race for governor. The issues are local. Messrs. Hernandez Colon and Romero are politicking as if their political lives depended on the outcome of the primary, and they could be right.    The Republicans, all statehooders but fewer in number, are trying to run a primary on the U.S. model but have been overshadowed by those who want to turn the primary into a test for governor. The larger Republican group has endorsed George Bush, the other Robert Dole. But even here, position with respect to political status is a determining factor. Messrs. Bush and Dole both favor statehood for Puerto Rico. But the key issue on the minds of Republicans in Puerto Rico this Sunday will be whether it is Mr. Bush or Mr. Dole who is more strongly in favor of statehood, recent swings in favor of the vice president notwithstanding.    All of the above would be amusing if it were not tragic. First, it represents a gross distortion of the U.S. presidential-primary process. Second, it is symptomatic of an increasing malaise in Puerto Rico with respect to its political future. Both the Popular Democratic Party and the Puerto Rico Independence Party have pledged not to talk about status during this election year, but it has proved to be a promise impossible to keep. Recently a group of &quot;Autonomists&quot; within the Popular Democratic Party endorsed Jesse Jackson who, 19 months ago, called for the immediate transfer of all political power from the U.S. to Puerto Rico.    The U.S., which has played a useful role in helping other peoples of the world resolve their political differences (in the Philippines, Haiti and Panama, for example) has a responsibility to try to help the 3.2 million U.S. citizens in the territory of Puerto Rico reach a solution to its identity crisis. It is irresponsible and shortsighted for the U.S. to permit the Puerto Rican status question to fester. It is sapping Puerto Rico's energy and paralyzing social and economic progress. It is against American interests and principles of civil and human rights to keep fellow Americans in Puerto Rico in a perpetual state of political and economic inferiority.    The next U.S. president should nudge Puerto Rico toward a final decision on status. Congress, which has oversight responsibility for the territories, should recommend a status plebiscite. The last one, which served to legitimatize the current commonwealth arrangement, was held more than 20 years ago. Puerto Rico has reached a level of economic and political maturity that justifies either full statehood or full independence.    ---   Mr. Perusse is author of &quot;The United States and Puerto Rico: Decolonization Options and Prospects&quot; (University Press of America, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>