<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. PRESENTED a new arms proposal to Soviet negotiators in Geneva.    The plan calls for the elimination of all U.S. and Soviet short-range and medium-range nuclear missiles. The U.S. also said it wouldn't convert its European missiles into other weapons, reversing an earlier position. However, the Reagan administration rejected a Soviet demand that 72 Pershing 1A missiles be removed from West Germany. As the proposal was submitted, the White House announced that Shultz would hold talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze in September.    Reagan expressed optimism about the possibility of an arms treaty, saying the &quot;climate is now receptive to an historical proposal of this type.&quot;    ---   MEESE SAID Reagan &quot;was quite surprised&quot; about the Contra fund diversion.    The attorney general, in testimony before the congressional committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, said he conducted his early inquiry into the initiative as the president's principal legal adviser. Meese denied that he had been slow to recognize the potential for criminal wrongdoing and the misleading statements of high-ranking officials, and said he had &quot;competent people&quot; assisting in the Justice Department probe of arms sales to Iran and the diversion of profits to Nicaraguan rebels.    Nicaragua's Contras have executed prisoners, forcibly recruited soldiers and killed civilians, according to a human-rights report mandated by Congress.    ---   The Reagan administration asked European allies and Mideast states to help the Navy clear mines in the Persian Gulf. As Pentagon officials said tanker escorts would begin soon, Kuwaiti shipping sources said they expected to send the crippled oil tanker Bridgeton back down the gulf by Friday with a partial cargo.    Iraq anti-aircraft batteries downed a Syrian MiG-21 jet fighter that flew into Iraqi airspace. Baghdad said it was prepared to hand over to Damascus a pilot captured in the incident. Meanwhile, Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini threatened to attack U.S. and Kuwaiti targets in the gulf area.    ---   The EPA was ordered to change its procedure in regulating emissions of vinyl chloride to consider the chemical's health risks. Supreme Court nominee Bork led the full 11-member court in Washington, partly reversing a ruling that he himself wrote for a panel of the court.    The White House pledged to press for Senate confirmation of Bork, but refused to rule out the possibility that the president might put Bork on the court temporarily without the chamber's approval.    ---   Hundreds of businesses remained closed in Panama during the second day of a strike called to demand the ouster of military chief Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. In Panama City, judicial sources said retired Col. Roberto Diaz Herrera, arrested Monday, hadn't any evidence to support allegations that Noriega was involved in murder.    ---   The Soviet Union has charged West German teen-age pilot Mathias Rust with three crimes, including violation of Soviet air space and hooliganism. Rust, who landed his light plane in Red Square following an unauthorized flight from Helsinki in May, could be put on trial as soon as September, Moscow's Foreign Ministry said.    ---   Italy's prime minister-designate formed the country's 47th postwar government, becoming Rome's youngest-ever premier and ending a five-month political dispute. Giovanni Goria, 43, a Christian Democrat, informed President Cossiga that the coalition would comprise the same five parties that have governed Italy since 1981.    ---   A Japanese appeals court upheld former Prime Minister Tanaka's bribery conviction and four-year prison term. Tanaka was convicted in 1983 of accepting about $2 million in bribes from Lockheed Corp. in Japan's biggest postwar political scandal.    ---   Sinhalese demonstrators clashed with Sri Lankan police in Colombo during a rally against a proposed peace plan to end the ethnic war with the nation's Tamils. As many as 19 people were killed. A dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed to prevent further riots prior to Indian Prime Minister Gandhi's visit today to sign the accord.    ---   The nation's governors urged schools to provide more information about AIDS and said prevention efforts must begin before young people become sexually active. In the closing session of their annual convention in Traverse City, Mich., the governors also said increased federal spending is needed for AIDS prevention and education.    ---   Japanese authorities are investigating the possibility that additional exports of militarily sensitive technology were made by a Toshiba unit to Moscow. The firm was found to have exported sophisticated tools to the Soviets between 1982 and 1984; the latest inquiry focuses on the possibility that similar shipments were made before 1982.    ---   Philippine President Aquino said her criticism Monday of foreign creditors was meant to inform the public about why Manila accepted the debt repayment plan rather than repudiate the accord. Aquino's remarks prompted several lawmakers to call for a halt on payments.    ---   Authorities in Athens said nearly 800 people have died in a nine-day heat wave that has struck Greece and much of southern Europe. Temperatures reached as high as 113 degrees Fahrenheit before dropping into double digits. Officials said corpses were being stored in refigerated railroad cars because mortuaries were overcrowded.    ---   Riots flared in Port-au-Prince amid mounting criticism of the military-civilian government for failing to prevent a massacre in a farming district last week that left at least 100 people dead. Haitian troops clashed with several hundred demonstrators, but injuries weren't reported.    ---   Died: Roland F. Marston, 63, chairman of State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co., in Peoria, Ill., of cancer. . . . Henry Hirsch, 84, ex-chairman of Welbilt Corp., in New York City. . . . Jacob S. Seidman, 85, a founding partner of Seidman andamp; Seidman/BDO, Monday, in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>