<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890906-0054 </DOCNO><DD> = 890906 </DD><AN> 890906-0054. </AN><HL> Law -- Legal Beat:@  Court Rules Reporter's Promise@  To Source Constituted a Contract@  ----@  By Jeff Bailey and Wade Lambert </HL><DD> 09/06/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> LAW AND LEGAL AFFAIRS (LAW)MEDIA, PUBLISHING, BROADCASTING, ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (MED)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   A Minnesota state appeals court ruled that a news reporter's promise of confidentiality to a news source can constitute an enforceable contract. The court upheld a $200,000 verdict against that state's two biggest newspapers, whose reporters promised a news source that he wouldn't be identified and then were overruled by their editors.    However, in a 2-1 decision, the court tossed out $500,000 in punitive damages that had also been awarded to the news source, public relations man Dan Cohen. The court said the two papers weren't guilty of misrepresentation, which might have warranted such additional damages.    The issue in the case -- whether a source can collect for breach of contract if a newspaper breaks a promise not to name the source -- is important to news organizations' ability to gather information, but it isn't often put to the test.    Mark Nadler, managing editor of the St. Paul Pioneer Press Dispatch, said he did not know of any other instance in which the newspaper overruled a reporter and ordered a source identified. The 1988 verdict in state court did, however, temporarily make certain news sources reluctant to provide information to some of the paper's reporters, Mr. Nadler said. &quot;Some of their sources were feeling shaky.&quot;    The case arose from stories in 1982 about the gubernatorial race in Minnesota. Mr. Cohen, then working for one campaign, told reporters on the condition he not be named that a candidate in another party had previously been arrested for shoplifting. Editors at the two papers overruled the reporters on the belief that readers had to be told the damaging information came from the rival camp.    Mr. Cohen sued the Pioneer Press Dispatch and Minneapolis Star Tribune, saying he'd lost his job because he was revealed as the source of the stories. Mr. Cohen's lawyer, Elliot Rothenberg, said he may appeal the decision tossing out the punitive damages.    Neither paper has decided whether to appeal the state Court of Appeals ruling to the state's Supreme Court. Both papers said their reporters are allowed to enter into confidentiality agreements with sources under certain circumstances, although at times they are encouraged or required to seek an editor's approval.    ---   BIG CHICAGO LAW FIRM of Winston andamp; Strawn bails out of Arizona market.    The 400-lawyer firm is abandoning its Phoenix outpost, with 18 lawyers, despite the protests of partners there. Gary L. Fairchild, managing partner of Winston andamp; Strawn, said the firm wants to focus its energies in its offices in Chicago, Washington, D.C., and New York -- and possibly to open a branch in Los Angeles.    The Phoenix office generated $6 million in billings last year, or about 6% of the firm's gross revenues, Mr. Fairchild said. &quot;The office was profitable, but Phoenix wasn't generating the type of client referrals we got with the other locations.&quot;    The Phoenix office has remained intact and formed a new law firm, Johnston Maynard Grant andamp; Parker, after efforts to get Winston andamp; Strawn to reconsider its decision failed.    &quot;We don't understand why the decision was made and we don't agree with it,&quot; said Logan T. Johnston III, managing partner of the spinoff. He had been with Winston andamp; Strawn for 16 years.    ---   FREEMAN ENTERS GUILTY PLEA: In keeping with his prior agreement, Robert M. Freeman, formerly head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., pleaded guilty to mail fraud in an insider-trading scheme. Last month, Mr. Freeman, 47 years old, agreed to plead guilty to the felony count in federal court in Manhattan and resigned from Goldman Sachs. He admitted that on January 8, 1986, he traded on inside information from Martin Siegel regarding the leveraged buy-out of Beatrice Cos. Mr. Siegel, formerly a takeover strategist with Kidder Peabody andamp; Co., pleaded guilty to insider trading in 1987. U.S. Judge Pierre Leval set Mr. Freeman's sentencing for Nov. 16. Mr. Freeman, who is free on his own recognizance, faces a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a fine of $1.86 million.    ---   SPY MAGAZINE'S PARODY of Cliffs Notes Inc.'s study guides won a reprieve from a federal appeals court in Manhattan, which threw out a preliminary injunction that had banned Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group Inc. from distributing the parody, known as Spy Notes. The book, which was written by Spy, a humor magazine based in New York, will be shipped to bookstores this week, said Graydon Carter, co-editor of Spy. In issuing the injunction last month, U.S. District Judge Shirley Wohl Kram had said that because of the books' similar covers, consumers shopping for Cliffs Notes study guides, which include synopses of famous works of literature, might be misled into buying the parody. The appeals court panel hasn't yet released an opinion explaining why it vacated the injunction. Kathy Trager, an attorney for the Doubleday publishing division, said Doubleday had urged the court to lift the injunction on the ground that &quot;parody has a wide scope of protection under the First Amendment,&quot; and that there was no likelihood that the products would be confused. William M. Hart, an attorney for Lincoln, Neb.-based Cliffs Notes, said he couldn't yet comment on whether the decision will be appealed.    ---   A 156-year-old Georgia law stirs furor over role of state in intimate relations.    In February 1988, James D. Moseley, a 35-year-old carpenter, was charged by his wife with multiple counts of sexual assault. Mr. Moseley was acquitted of all the original charges, but he was convicted on one charge of simple sodomy after he testified that he engaged in oral sex with his wife with her consent. (His ex-wife -- the couple are now divorced -- disputes that she gave her consent.)    In Georgia, sodomy -- even between a consenting wife and husband -- is a felony, punishable by a maximum 20-year sentence. Mr. Moseley was sentenced to serve two years in prison.    His conviction and subsequent jailing sparked a bitter debate over the constitutionality of Georgia's sodomy statute and the apparent severity of Mr. Moseley's sentence. His attorneys went so far as to suggest that state prosecutors should be required to disqualify themselves from the case if they had engaged in oral sex.    The law &quot;makes outlaws of all of us in our homes,&quot; says Hilary Chiz, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Georgia, which is representing Mr. Moseley. &quot;A significant percentage of the population of this country participates in consensual oral sex, which is defined as sodomy in Georgia.&quot;    Last week, after Mr. Moseley had served 18 months, Judge Robert J. Castellani in DeKalb County court ordered him released, pending a review of the ACLU's petition for habeas corpus.    If the petition is granted, Mr. Moseley's conviction could be voided.    ---   ELLIS RUBIN, the splashy Miami trial attorney, was publicly reprimanded by the Florida Supreme Court for refusing to represent a murder defendant. Mr. Rubin said he rejected the court-ordered assignment because the defendant told him before the 1987 trial that he planned to lie on the witness stand. Mr. Rubin was cited for contempt of court and jailed for 30 days when he withdrew from the case over the trial judge's objection. In a 5-1 decision, the Florida Supreme Court wrote that attorneys cannot be &quot;permitted to ignore and refuse to follow a court order based on personal belief.&quot; Mr. Rubin, famous for the unsuccessful &quot;television intoxication&quot; defense of a 15-year-old Miami youth accused of murdering a neighbor in the mid 1970s, said he would seek review by the U.S. Supreme Court. &quot;This order,&quot; said Mr. Rubin, &quot;makes it permissible for jury trials to be giant lying contests.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>