<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Do-It-Yourself Takeover Curbs </HL><AUTHOR> Ennius Bergsma </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Academics several years ago coined a phrase -- the market for corporate control -- to describe the growth in unsolicited and, from management's perspective, unfriendly attempts to take over established companies. Many executives (particularly in large, diversified companies) need to become better competitors in today's market for corporate control -- not by adopting poison pills or promoting legal/regulatory barriers such as Delaware's new law, but through better investment decisions.    Mature companies typically throw off enormous amounts of cash. Bad decisions about reinvestment and diversification have opened the door to raiders and only better decisions will close the door.    The oil industry is a good example of what's been going on. In 1984 the industry's asset value exceeded its market value by $191 billion. More than 80% of this discount was found in the 10 largest companies. The reason was bad investments. The 1979 oil price shock had greatly increased cash flow. All the way up to 1982, when it became clear that every dollar put in a U.S. drilling program was probably going to be worth 60 cents, oil companies were nevertheless investing billions in exploration. Also, several of them diversified into unrelated areas. The market reacted negatively to both kinds of moves.    The discount was concentrated in the large companies because sheer size prevented the market from disciplining them until the emergence of junk bonds, which facilitated large, hostile takeover attempts. From 1981 to 1986, $86 billion in cash was returned to shareholders by takeovers and share repurchases. It represented 68% of cash returns to shareholders in that period.    Why do companies pour money into the wrong places? One reason is that it is very difficult for corporate management to tell a business unit that delivers 90% of the profits that it doesn't get any of the cash to reinvest. Further, bigness used to make lot more sense and thus so did reinvestment. But scale advantages in Randamp;D, production, distribution, access to capital and recruiting are all rapidly diminishing. So is the value of both horizontal and vertical integration. Structural changes that occurred in crude markets in the 1970s and 1980s, for example, including increased spot and net-back pricing, substantially reduced the benefits of integration for major oil companies.    Mind you, nobody expects the next generation of commercial aircraft to emanate from a Silicon Valley garage or a wide array of small, undercapitalized investment banks to operate our financial markets. But the assumption that size is good has changed to one that is neutral. The new rule seems to be this: Own only those assets that enable you to create value. Control the others. Steel companies, thus, buy rather than make semifinished products, and personal-computer makers purchase key electronic components. But more than simple outsourcing is involved: Research partnerships, joint ventures, cross-licensing, selling and leasing back facilities are all examples of this new approach to constructing vs. owning a business.    Some asset decisions that were once right are now wrong in the eyes of the market. For example, real estate. The stock price of retailing companies, particularly the big department stores, reflects the fact that in the 1920s and 1930s it was very important to put your store in downtown areas. Today, more-affluent people in the U.S. are not living downtown. Many of the big downtown stores are ailing economic properties that barely break even. On the other hand, many office developers would love to put up a tower where the store is. If the company, instead of managing the value of the enterprise, insists on looking at itself as a retailing concern and continues to sit on valuable real estate, it's no surprise that somebody comes along who knows better. Raiders didn't cause this &quot;problem,&quot; and legal protection isn't needed to fix it.    We may be getting close to the point where just the cost of being a large diversified enterprise is starting to outweigh the benefits of scale and synergy. If you were to look at headquarters as if it were a portfolio manager, you would relate its costs to the market value of the equity that it oversees. McKinsey did that for the Fortune 25 using the &quot;unallocated costs&quot; in the companies' 10Ks. These pretax expenses on average represented almost 2% of market equity value. (This doesn't even include a number of related allocated costs -- for meetings, reports, etc.)    For the major mutual equity funds, the management fee on average is 0.7% of net assets, the market value of the portfolio of investments. In other words, the corporate center at a minimum of 2% is at least three times as expensive. In reality it's probably six times as much. This does not necessarily mean that headquarters is wasting money. It may well be involved in value-adding activities. The point is, it had better be at these costs.    Certainly, moves by raiders and restructurers suggest that reducing the size of the corporate center -- for example, in the SCM/Hanson Trust case from 250 to 25 -- is a major source of value enhancement. Contrary to popular belief -- that restructuring is merely paper shuffling and financial legerdemain -- our analyses show that more than 80% of the gain from restructurings is generally attributable to improved performance, i.e. to better managed companies with less overhead and more efficient asset use.    In a study of 16 transactions completed between 1977 and 1986 in the U.S. paper and forest-products industries, McKinsey found that only 16% of the $6.5 billion in additional value generated in those deals could be attributed to finance-driven changes, such as increased leverage. The remainder -- 84% -- stemmed from operating changes. We find roughly the same results when we work with clients on voluntary restructuring programs.    Refinancing alone is unlikely to be effective. Share purchases not accompanied by operating restructuring result in only modest gains, for example. And restructuring lies in management's domain, not the raiders' or the financiers'. In many cases it means getting back to basics and building a more focused company. If the competitive advantage of a division is big market share, an established position and low cost, that division can be spun out because headquarters adds nothing.    The only legitimate reason for a multibusiness enterprise is the presence of a peculiar skill that can be applied to more than one business unit. Industry categories have nothing to do with that. A well-run conglomerate may be involved in very different industries because what really counts is commonality among critical skills. The Limited, for example, can take a design, knock it off, get it to the Far East, get the product back and get it through its distribution systems to 2,000 stores in days. Now that's a skill. Does that mean that it is a superior &quot;retailer&quot;? No, if The Limited went into washing machines it would lose its shirt. The Limited would be better off getting into making and distributing sweet baked goods.    Skills are relevant only to a specific situation, however, and situations change constantly. Thus there is a new set of questions for corporate management. They no longer should ask is the portfolio balanced, are we diversified, how much dividends do our competitors pay, how fast will per-share earnings grow? The right questions today are, what value do we create and where, are we the best owner, do business units have the right size and scope, are management incentives consistent with our goals, and is our financial structure consistent with business objectives/characteristics?    None of this requires legislation or a poison pill. And value enhancement can be more advantageous to all stakeholders when it is conducted by existing management, because the benefits don't have to be shared with raiders.    ---   Mr. Bergsma heads McKinsey andamp; Co.'s practice in corporate finance. </TEXT></DOC>