<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:A Striped-Pants Cover-Up at Foggy Bottom?---</HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Washington is still struggling to assess the full implications of the dramatic disclosure that Secretary of State George Shultz has a tattoo of a tiger on his buttock. Reports of this appeared last week in the Spectator of London and were confirmed &quot;privately&quot; by State Department sources in the current issue of Newsweek.    Coming as it does after revelations about the administration's disinformation campaign against Col. Moammar Gadhafi, the controversial exchange of American journalist Nicholas Daniloff for accused Soviet spy Gennadi Zakarov, and the continuing controversy over the Iran-contra arms deal, this latest news is thought by many in the capital to further weaken the administration's credibility at a time when it faces renewed challenges in the areas of trade, human rights and arms control.    The White House yesterday was referring all inquiries about the secretary's rear end to the State Department. Officials at Foggy Bottom were discouraging speculation about how the tattoo got there and what its significance might be. Senior aides whose views are known to reflect the secretary's thinking were reported to be getting out of his way when they saw him coming down the hall . . . I mean, they were expressing confidence that this development would be understood by the American people in the larger context of the adminstration's efforts for peace and against communist subversion, especially in Central America. Among members of the foreign diplomatic corps, however, there were attempts to hide in the seventh-floor State Department men's room in order to get a peek . . . I mean, there were concerns being raised about the effect this new blow to the administration's credibility might have on U.S. influence in crucial world trouble spots such as the Middle East.    The view of many experienced foreign-policy hands is that a consensus is in the process of being formed that there are no easy answers concerning the relationship between the secretary of state's posterior decorations and American foreign policy. Only time will tell, say these experts, what effect this week's developments will have on the future of the Western alliance. One senior official listed the situation in Afghanistan as an important source of obscurity and confusion. Sources reached yesterday at the National Security Council, the Pentagon, the Central Intelligence Agency, the leading foreign-policy think tanks and on Capitol Hill were in general agreement, however, that at present there is no way of knowing how long this sudden anatomical revelation will distract administration policy makers from urgent issues of state. Several pointed to Third World debt, the Iran-Iraq war and the leadership changes in China as matters that may not get the attention they require in the present atmosphere of hilarity, er, uncertainty.    Nevertheless, although many questions remain, seasoned observers of the Shultz backside . . . I mean, of the Washington scene, were saying that the following areas of inquiry will draw increased interest in the days -- or perhaps months -- ahead:    --Will Attorney General Edwin Meese feel compelled to appoint a special prosecutor? Some administration officials are known to feel that this is the best way to &quot;get this matter behind us.&quot; Others are said to believe that a special prosecutor's report would not be helpful in planning for an expected superpower summit.    --In the inevitable congressional hearings, is a witness's rear end protected under the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution? Legal scholars are divided on this question. Some in the Justice Department take the view that protection of tattoos is not within the &quot;original intent of the framers.&quot; A spokesman for the American Civil Liberties Union, however, argued that tattoos are a form of expression deserving of full constitutional protection, even when the subject is a drawing of an animal rather than a conventional message such as &quot;I Love You, Mother.&quot;    --Alternatively, is a cabinet officer's buttock protected under the doctrine of executive privilege? According to Prof. Laurence Tribe of Harvard, democratic governance requires that all operations either by or on the secretary of state be subject to full congressional review, if only in hindsight. Solicitor General Charles Fried insists that the executive branch cannot perform its constitutional function if senior officials cannot cover their backsides.    --Should the president, as several senior Republicans are known to be urging, summon Mr. Shultz to the Oval Office and demand that he present the evidence for Mr. Reagan's own personal assessment? Some political analysts express the concern that this scenario may backfire. The president himself, they say, has lost so much credibility in recent months that only a presentation to the full cabinet, assembled in the Roosevelt Room, will assure skeptics that the secretary of state has &quot;made a clean breast.&quot;    Should Mr. Shultz be forced to resign over what some are calling &quot;rumpgate&quot; or &quot;tattoo-scam,&quot; officials agree that it is too soon to say with any degree of certainty what effect this might have on the structure of foreign-policy making, the future of the Philippines, deployment of the Strategic Defense Initiative (or &quot;Star Wars&quot;), aid to the Nicaraguan rebels (or &quot;contras&quot;), the success of President Reagan's war on drugs, the stability of the ANZUS alliance, the dismantling of apartheid, the price of oil, relations between the Vatican and the emerging states of Africa, and the outlook for the 1988 election.    ---   Mr. Kinsley edits the New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>