<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880801-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Activity at Two More Firms Questioned As Business Week Trading Case Widens ---- This article was prepared by Bryan Burrough, Steve Swartz And Daniel Hertzberg in New York </HL><SO> </SO><CO> MHP DNY MER IRE PWJ SLH AXP ADV BQR SCH </CO><IN> STK SCR PUB </IN><G> SEC </G><TEXT>   Trading at PaineWebber Inc. and Integrated Resources Inc. has come under investigation as the rapidly expanding Business Week insider-trading inquiry erupted with a series of stockbroker firings and suspensions at other firms on both coasts.    Officials working on the Business Week investigation, which is spearheaded by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the three major exchanges, widened their review of unusual trading linked to Business Week magazine articles to include an unspecified Integrated Resources office in Connecticut. The nature of the PaineWebber trading was unclear.    A senior PaineWebber official said he knew nothing about the investigation. Integrated Resources officials couldn't be reached for comment over the weekend.    The latest disclosures bring to eight the number of Wall Street firms where investigators have uncovered suspicious trading in advance of the &quot;Inside Wall Street&quot; column of Business Week, a McGraw-Hill Inc. publication. On Friday, three securities firms, Advest Inc., Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said they had linked employees to the Business Week trading. Suspicious trading also has been detected at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., where a broker was fired last week, and two discount brokerage firms, Quick andamp; Reilly Inc. and Charles Schwab andamp; Co. Much of the trading has been tied to information allegedly leaked to brokers from R.R. Donnelley andamp; Sons Co. printing plants in Old Saybrook, Conn., and Torrance, Calif.    The Business Week investigation threatens to become one of the largest and most widespread insider-trading reviews ever, with at least seven individuals implicated in the last week and many more under investigation. Evidence unearthed so far indicates that improper trading in Business Week-related stocks may be far wider than previously believed and may have existed for two years or more.    Merrill Lynch officials have discovered evidence that William Dillon, the New London, Conn., broker it fired last week, traded in Business Week-related stocks before joining the big brokerage firm in 1986, people familiar with Merrill's investigation said. Meanwhile, Business Week editors said they first noticed suspicious trading in advance of the magazine's &quot;Inside Wall Street&quot; column as early as January 1987. The latest developments:   --Advest suspended a broker in its New London office for possible trading in stocks linked to Business Week articles. In Hartford, Conn., an Advest spokeswoman declined to identify the broker or elaborate on the suspension, except to say that the company's investigation is continuing.    People familiar with the investigation identified the broker as Thomas Griffin. Advest's New London office is on the same floor as Merrill Lynch's, leading to speculation that Mr. Griffin may have known Mr. Dillon, the Merrill Lynch broker. Mr. Griffin couldn't be reached for comment.    --An internal investigation at Shearson discovered that as many as three brokers at E.F. Hutton's Hartford, Conn., office may have handled trades in advance of Business Week articles, Shearson officials said. The brokers weren't identified, and Shearson, which acquired Hutton last year, said they had left the company &quot;some time ago.&quot; Shearson said it believed the trading, which it described as &quot;minimal,&quot; took place prior to August 1987.    --The investigation of Mr. Dillon also uncovered trading in Business Week-related stocks in accounts listed in the name of his mother and that of a friend, people familiar with the investigation said. These people said Mr. Dillon's mother, Elizabeth Baird, traded through an account at Quick andamp; Reilly. The people also said trading in Business Week-related stocks has been detected in an account maintained at discount brokerage firm Charles Schwab by Francis Roche, a friend of Mr. Dillon. Mr. Roche couldn't be reached for comment. Ms. Baird declined to comment, as did Mr. Dillon and the Schwab firm.    People familiar with the investigation said trading in Business Week-related stocks has been discovered in at least two other Quick andamp; Reilly accounts in the names of people believed to be friends of Mr. Dillon. A Quick andamp; Reilly spokesman said the firm is cooperating fully with the SEC, but he declined to comment further.    --Prudential-Bache Securities fired Brian Callahan, a 28-year-old broker in its Anaheim, Calif., office, after uncovering suspicious trading in Business Week-related stocks. People close to the investigation say Mr. Callahan handled trading for an employee at Donnelley's Torrance plant who hasn't been identified but is believed to be a technician. Mr. Callahan couldn't be located over the weekend.    Investigators haven't uncovered any improper trading in Mr. Callahan's personal account. The Securities and Exchange Commission and Prudential-Bache are examining whether Mr. Callahan may have shared information on Business Week articles with friends outside the brokerage office, people familiar with the investigation said.    Officials at the Orange County Register in Anaheim, where Mr. Callahan wrote a stock-analysis column, said Mr. Callahan had been suspended from his job there. Mr. Callahan also compiled statistical information on local stocks that the newspaper published twice weekly, and coordinated the Register/Prudential Bache Stock Market Challenge, a stock-picking contest.    Meanwhile, the SEC continued its investigation of Donnelley employees. People familiar with the investigation said employees at the Old Saybrook plant were apparently able to leave work with advance copies of Business Week and other publications.    In Chicago, a Donnelley spokesman said the SEC had subpoenaed the names of all 1,300 employees at the company's Old Saybrook and Torrance plants. The spokesman declined to say whether Donnelley had suspended or disciplined any of its workers in connection with the inquiry. Donnelley plans an announcement on its investigation this morning, he said.    Business Week officials said they first noticed the unusual trading in January 1987. When the activity continued, and after consulting with McGraw-Hill attorneys, Stephen Shepard, the magazine's editor in chief, said security was tightened around the column, including limiting the number of editors that read it. He said a letter was sent to Donnelley and other printers to remind them to restrict access to advance copies of Business Week. The letter, however, didn't mention the suspicious stock activity.    At the same time, Mr. Shepard directed that advance copies not be distributed to Business Week staff members until after 4:30 p.m. Thursday. Previously, staffers could routinely read the column during the trading day Thursday, the day before publication.    &quot;The trading sort of petered out and stopped after that,&quot; says Mr. Shepard. &quot;We didn't see any evidence that it happened again.&quot;    Business Week again noticed the suspicious trading in April 1988. When the trading grew heavy in June, company officials called in Kroll Associates, a leading New York detective firm. Mr. Shepard says editors didn't contact the SEC until later; the agency, in fact, learned of the suspicious trading from an anonymous caller weeks before it spoke with Business Week editors, say people who have spoken with the SEC.    Asked why he didn't notify the SEC of the problem, Mr. Shepard said: &quot;We wanted to make sure there was a real problem, then develop the case a little more, then tell them. It's not the first thing you want to do, to bring the government into the newsroom . . . {In retrospect} we feel we did everything right.&quot;    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: The Orange County Register&quot; -- WSJ Aug. 5, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>