<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871119-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Devious Tactics:As Lawmakers DeviseWays to Trim Deficit,Backdoor Projects Rise---Pressures for Added ServicesCause Congress to SneakPlans Around the Budget---Shifting Loads of Employers---By Jeffrey H. BirnbaumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Many are hoping that the impending deficit-reduction package will strike a blow for cutting the size of government or at least checking its growth.    What the deficit-reduction agreement is all about, says Democratic Rep. Butler Derrick of South Carolina, &quot;is to make government not as large and cumbersome, and to cut back on it.&quot;    But even as lawmakers and the administration work out a package they say will reduce the budget deficit by about $30 billion in the current fiscal year, they are expanding the role of government in less visible ways. They are doing this through &quot;backdoor&quot; spending that doesn't show up in the budget but will eventually increase government outlays, and through increased regulation and other steps that shift some of the burdens of government onto the private sector.    &quot;There's a demand both for more deficit cutting and for expanding government services,&quot; says Rep. Charles Schumer of New York, a member of the House Budget Committee.    The upshot of this ambivalence in public opinion, says Rep. Tony Coelho of California, the third-ranking Democrat in the House, is that &quot;you're going to find Congress being more and more creative, doing more things that aren't budgetary items.&quot;    Amid the current deficit-cutting round, for instance, Congress is also working on plans for catastrophic health insurance, welfare expansion and AIDS research. In addition, legislators are considering a plan to compel employers to provide a minimum level of fringe benefits for their workers -- a step vigorously opposed by major business groups.    The impetus for such efforts comes, ironically enough, from the same Reagan administration that was swept into office on a pledge to cut government down to size. Seven years of budget austerity have created a pent-up demand for additional government services. But on the other hand the administration's budget deficit also creates a huge incentive for Congress to find someone else to foot the bill wherever possible.    Even while the public, politicians and the financial markets clamor for a reduction in the deficit, it is clear that &quot;the revolt against government is over,&quot; says William Schneider, a political analyst at the American Enterprise Institute. &quot;Support for increasing domestic spending and increased government has risen year by year,&quot; he says. The problem, he adds, is that &quot;there isn't any money&quot; to carry out the public's wishes.    Examples of the ever-increasing use of the fiscal back door:    --Coupling new spending programs with tax increases, a strategy hailed by Democratic leaders in Congress as &quot;pay as you go.&quot; To pay for the proposed $6 billion catastrophic health insurance, for instance, Congress plans to raise Medicare premiums, considered by many a tax on middle- and upper-income elderly people.    --Shifting the dates of government outlays into later years to make it seem that current costs are less. Military spending in fiscal year 1987 was sliced by about $2 billion by the simple step of changing the date of the year's last paychecks from Sept. 30 to Oct. 1, the first day of the new fiscal year.    --Expanding the use of government loan guarantees and other &quot;off-budget&quot; mechanisms. From student loans to home mortgages, the government works through private lenders to help finance hundreds of millions of dollars in loans -- activities that are counted as a cost to the government only if or when borrowers default. Last year, for example, the volume of federally guaranteed mortgages more than doubled as a result of a rush by homeowners to refinance. Yet this increase wasn't recorded in the budget as a cost to taxpayers.    --Pushing the cost of expanded benefits onto private companies. This year, with the backing of organized labor, lawmakers want to force employers to provide a minimum amount of health-insurance coverage. A year ago, Congress enacted a requirement that employers continue to make health insurance available to fired or laid-off workers.    Many lawmakers defend these and other efforts to expand government services and influence. Liberals contend that the sharp cutbacks during the Reagan years for social-spending programs have harmed the people who need government help the most. &quot;The gap between the rich and poor has gotten greater,&quot; Oregon Democratic Rep. Ron Wyden says. &quot;There are lots of people falling between the cracks, and there are more of them now than in 1981,&quot; when President Reagan took office.    Such fiscal conservatives as Republican Sen. William Armstrong of Colorado say the lengths to which lawmakers are now going to expand government amount to &quot;falsehood in budgeting&quot; and &quot;a counterattack that the liberals are trying to wage on President Reagan's effort to downsize government.&quot; Yet conservatives also sometimes cooperate with such subterfuges when it suits their aims -- making paper cuts in the Pentagon budget, for instance.    &quot;The more rigid are the restraints put on the budgeting process, the more is the motive to be imaginative,&quot; says Roy Ash, a White House budget director in the Nixon administration, who is now a private investor in Los Angeles. &quot;There is no end to the possibilities.&quot;    One is the use of trust funds. Although the $87.5 billion highway and mass-transit construction bill passed over President Reagan's veto was one of the most expensive authorization bills of the year, its advocates claimed it didn't cost the taxpayer a dime. That's because the money came from a trust fund financed by gasoline-tax revenues. In reality, however, such trust funds are little more than rhetorical devices. The budget is a single entity, and even trust-fund expenditures can sooner or later affect the deficit.    Elaborate paper transactions are another favorite tactic for hiding budgetary effects. Earlier this year, Congress voted to allow the insolvent Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. to recapitalize itself by selling $10.8 billion in bonds backed not by Treasury funds but by the thrift institutions themselves. Many experts say that the maneuver merely disguises the government's liability. They say the money isn't adequate to prop up failing Sandamp;Ls, so taxpayers will still end up footing the bill.    Sometimes, as in the case of the Pentagon paychecks, such tactics take on the appearance of a high-stakes shell game. Currently, for example, the House Agriculture Committee is proposing to delay for six months certain farm-subsidy payments. Budget experts say the effort is simply an attempt to push about $1 billion in current fiscal-year spending into next year. Yet it was counted as a saving in the deficit-reduction package recently passed by the House.    &quot;The most brilliant and devious&quot; of the backdoor budgeting efforts, says the American Enterprise Institute's Mr. Schneider, is the effort to compel private employers to do what the government can't afford to do: ensure that workers have a minimum level of health-insurance benefits. National health insurance is a long-cherished goal of liberals, but the deficit problems of the 1980s seemingly ruled it out. Now, though, advocates of the new proposal, led by Democratic Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts, say it would accomplish a first step toward that cherished goal at no cost to the taxpayers. But businesses, especially small ones, despise the proposal, arguing that they can't absorb the cost.    In addition to the health proposal, Congress is working on a number of other measures to increase social benefits without direct federal spending: an increase in the minimum wage from the current $3.35 an hour; requiring employers to give workers time off to care for their newborn children; and compelling companies to give advance word to employees of plant-closing plans.    These proposals are all part of a broader trend toward using federal regulation as a method of expanding government. President Reagan took office in 1981 vowing to get government off the backs of Americans. After seven years, however, both the country and Congress want more regulation in some areas -- particularly those affecting the public health and safety, such as consumer protection, the environment, and air and railway service and safety.    In an effort to prod airlines into providing better service, for instance, the Transportation Department has begun requiring airlines to make public information showing which of their flights are chronically late and the number of complaints received because of lost or mishandled bags. Later this year, airlines will have to begin giving travel agents a code that will show, on computerized reservation screens, the on-time performance for individual flights, and both the House and the Senate have passed bills that would impose even tougher disclosure requirements.    The stock-market crash has also led to stepped-up regulatory efforts in the financial sector. Congress and the Securities and Exchange Commission are considering a variety of regulatory crackdowns on program trading and stock-index futures, which some people blame for having increased the severity of the crash. Meanwhile, a deregulation bill avidly sought by the banking industry is stalled.    To counter the twin demands for both budget cuts and consumer protection, the Agriculture Department has proposed that meat companies bear all costs of federal meat inspections. Currently, the companies pay only for overtime for federal inspectors.    Regardless of how well-intentioned or needed such steps are, critics complain that this trend only appears to save taxpayers' money. Foisting costs on businesses leads to higher prices for the consumer, they assert, which is an indirect kind of levy that is difficult to detect. &quot;You're hiding the true cost,&quot; says Allen Schick, a professor of public policy at the University of Maryland.    While using such backdoor methods, Congress still manages a considerable amount of spending through the front door. Pork-barreling remains a way of life on Capitol Hill. So is the adding of extra spending -- often, ironically, as part of so-called deficit-reduction packages.    An early version of the House's deficit-reduction bill, for example, contained billions of dollars of extra spending for welfare and food stamps. The final version of the House-passed bill even contained language authorizing a pay increase for federal workers, including members of Congress.    Aiding the process of spending increases is Congress's habit of passing huge, catchall spending bills in a rush at the end of each year. In bills so large, special favors often are quietly placed. This year is expected to be no different.    &quot;What we're headed for is this huge megabucks bill which includes everything from soup to nuts,&quot; says Rep. Robert Michel of Illinois, the House Republican leader. Mississippi Rep. Trent Lott, the House's second-ranking Republican, refers to the upcoming catchall bill as &quot;the bomb,&quot; and adds: &quot;It'll be so loaded down {with spending programs} it will take 17 Mack trucks to move it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>