<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0051 </DOCNO><HL> Making Perestroika Work for the West </HL><AUTHOR> Bill Bradley </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><TEXT>   The biggest challenge for new President Bush will be to seize the opportunity presented by the proposed reforms of General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev. I believe the president must engage the leaders of the Western Alliance, by the time of the Allied summit next summer, in developing a strategy for economic relations with the Soviet bloc. Without such a strategy, Mr. Gorbachev's dextrous diplomacy could endanger Alliance cohesion and impede sensible burden-sharing.    Mr. Gorbachev is committed to reform because without it the Soviet Union will remain a third-rate economic power and could become a second-rate military power within his lifetime. As reformers say to Americans, &quot;We are doing this for us, not for you.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev currently copes with an internal budget deficit that is, in relative terms, bigger than the U.S. budget deficit. He cannot finance that deficit through the international capital markets because the ruble isn't convertible. Moreover, without reform, the pent-up inflation and persistent shortages threaten the Soviet economy with a continued productivity crisis.    Reform in the Soviet Union could serve Western, as well as Soviet, interests if it means Moscow chooses butter over guns and if it produces political liberalization and respect for human rights. According to reformers themselves, their success means that economic criteria become dominant in the allocation of resources in the Soviet Union. If that is true, the need for a reallocation of manpower and investment toward the civilian sector will exceed the need for massive, highly threatening conventional forces in Eastern Europe. So if reform works, according to the expectations of its proponents, we should expect the Soviets to propose big cuts in conventional forces and perhaps even a timetable for removal of Soviet forces from Eastern Europe. When these proposals are offered, we and our allies should be ready to respond seriously. Until then, we should proceed with caution.    It would be a tragic mistake if the level of, and conditions for, resources from Western depositors, shareholders and taxpayers allows Soviet conservatives to avoid the choice between guns and butter. Since the U.S. has no monopoly on technology, capital or trade, we need allied cooperation. A shared understanding of perestroika's implications for Western security and a plan for collective action might enable Western nations to reinforce Soviet reforms. Such a plan requires Allied agreement in five key areas of commercial dealings with the U.S.S.R.:   Multilateral export controls on military and industrial technology (COCOM). COCOM will remain vital to Western security. But maintaining an effective regime will be more difficult as Western investment in the U.S.S.R. increases. Presidential leadership will be needed to strike the right balance between selling no technology at all to the Soviets and giving away the store.    Soviet activities in Western capital markets. The Soviets are moving into Western capital markets, often on very favorable terms. This will be bad if it produces a Soviet crisis on top of the one in Latin America; or if Western capital frees up funds that allow the Soviets to send weapons to their clients in the Third World or to bankroll their own military establishment.    Governments and banks need to monitor Soviet debt accurately so that no one underestimates the risks of lending by ignoring the facts. The Soviets should offer a true picture of their financial position, including information on internal budget deficits, inflation, unemployment and shortages as well as Soviet foreign-exchange reserves, gold holdings, Eurobond issues, bank loans to Soviet subsidiaries operating in third countries, and the amount of credits extended through non-bank companies. Without precise numbers, there is no way to know when total debt levels are too high.    The problem is not debt itself, but debt extended in excessive amounts without rigorous analysis of Soviet ability to repay. To service a greatly expanded debt requires an increase in Soviet exports, and no one knows how fast they will grow. At a minimum, the West needs an agreement not to provide preferential credit terms, government loans, government guarantees or other government subsidies to the Soviet Union. Such favored treatment delays the hard choice of reform. In addition, lenders assessing risk would be well advised to ascertain that reformers' efforts are in fact leading to the reallocation of resources essential for growth and possible only by conventional force reductions.    East-West Trade. If the Soviets are serious about reform, they will get serious about emigration and human rights. If they do, we should be prepared to re-evaluate our policy toward U.S.-Soviet trade. It is better for us and for reform if the Soviets finance legitimate imports by increasing their exports rather than by borrowing more from the West. To finance trade through borrowing alone implies imports without immediate cost. To earn hard currency from non-energy, non-weapon exports, on the other hand, requires the Soviets to improve the quality of their products. Better quality goods probably necessitate economic decentralization, flexible labor markets, and prices that reflect demand as well as cost. Spreading economic power, including consumer power, supports movement toward decentralized political power as well. Dispersing economic power increases efficiency, strengthens consumers and supports movement toward decentralized political power.    GATT. The Soviets seem genuinely interested in joining GATT. They have already sought observer status, which was denied. We should anticipate a renewed request. In responding, we have to make it clear that radical reform, not diplomacy, is the key to acceptance in GATT and other Western economic institutions. We should not undercut Soviet reformers who advocate an honest price system and a convertible currency by granting GATT membership on the cheap.    Even observer status should depend on Soviet willingness to provide GATT with comprehensive data on their external debt and their pricing structure for all non-military goods and services, including those produced by defense industries. Such information would help Western countries evaluate the costs, benefits and terms of eventual Soviet membership in GATT.    Joint Ventures. The Soviets are actively encouraging joint ventures. Contacts with Western investors can help perestroika by confronting the Soviets with the realities of participation in a competitive world marketplace and by pushing entrenched bureaucrats to make needed changes. But there is also the danger that Western businessmen will not urge decentralization because it is easier for them to deal with a powerful, centralized bureaucracy that gives their needs priority. In this case, joint ventures could retard, not accelerate, reform.    Investors in the Soviet Union need to avoid romantic illusions about making foreign policy and instead make rational calculations of profitability the same way they do with investments in Belgium or Brazil. We should recognize that joint ventures give the Soviets foreign capital and technology at little cost unless Soviet policies on prices, taxes, exchange rates and capital repatriation allow rational capitalists to maximize profits.    Managing East-West economic relations requires coordination among our allies. Without an accepted strategy, each Western country might race blindly to corner the Soviet market, however illusive that might be in real terms. The result could be misunderstanding and division in the Alliance, which in the U.S. could lead to backlash against defense expenditures for NATO or Japan. That kind of development could endanger Western security and allow the Soviets to avoid the tough questions that are central to their own reform.    President-elect Bush must be clear-sighted and persistent. He should applaud perestroika but not pay for it. Above all, he must put the forging of an alliance strategy at the top of his agenda from his first day in office.    ---   Sen. Bradley (D., N.J.) is a member of the Finance Committee and its International Trade Subcommittee. </TEXT></DOC>