<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis Makes Modifications for Super Tuesday, But His Isn't a Traditional Southern Campaign </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis, the Harvard-trained lawyer from the Boston suburbs, is confronting the South.    This isn't a textbook Southern campaign. The schedule isn't jammed with pig roasts in chilly winter fields, pot-luck dinners at rural crossroads or rallies in regional high school gymnasiums. Country music seldom strays into hearing distance. The photo opportunities occur in downtown hotels and at universities.    But with the struggle between Mr. Dukakis and Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri becoming the centerpiece of the Democratic presidential race, the Massachusetts governor has targeted several areas of opportunity. Mr. Dukakis, the best-financed and best-organized candidate in the Democratic field, is focusing on the condominiums and liberal enclaves of South Florida, pockets of the suburban New South around the big cities, the Research Triangle area of North Carolina -- which is a Southern version of Massachusetts' Route 128 high-technology corridor -- and on places with crowds liberally sprinkled with Northern refugees wearing Boston Red Sox baseball caps.    At the same time, he is braced for rivals' charges that he is inexperienced and irresolute on matters of national security and foreign policy.    With the 20-state Super Tuesday balloting only a week away, Mr. Dukakis is still stressing economic development and his record as steward of Massachusetts' economic rebirth. But now, reflecting the concerns of departed campaign chief John Sasso, whose views still get a hearing among some in the campaign, Gov. Dukakis is talking more of &quot;a strong foreign policy.&quot;    He is, moreover, speaking less about restraints on U.S. behavior in Latin America under the Rio Treaty and struggling to dispose of charges by Democratic rival Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee that he would tolerate a Soviet client state in Central America.    If the Dukakis campaign emerges from Super Tuesday with the largest share of Democratic delegates, it will have been done through a sort of electoral sleight of hand, combining victories in contests outside the South with strong showings in selected places in the South.    Mr. Dukakis, as a Northeastern Democratic reformer in the liberal tradition, seems slightly out of place in most of this region. His Florida campaign chief, Stephen Rosenfeld, acknowledges that the governor is often greeted here with &quot;skepticism.&quot;    Merle Black, a University of North Carolina specialist on Southern politics, says: &quot;He's a little strange to a lot of native Southerners. It's part ideology, part accent and part style. He doesn't quite fit our image of a politician.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis's main challenge in the week ahead will be to project enough strength on national security issues to reassure Southerners that he would protect U.S. interests abroad.    &quot;The primary voters in the South aren't looking for an assertive military posture,&quot; Stanley Greenberg, a Democratic pollster who has studied Southern voters, says. &quot;But they want to feel confident they don't get someone who will weaken American defenses -- and that's where Dukakis has gotten himself in some trouble.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis opposes the MX and Midgetman missile programs, wants to trim back the number of U.S. carrier task forces from 15 to 13 and calls for cutting back research on the &quot;Star Wars&quot; space-based missile defense program to pre-1983 levels. And he compounded his problems when he left himself open to charges that he might tolerate a Soviet client state on the mainland of the Western Hemisphere.    Late the other evening, as his chartered jet flew from West Palm Beach, Fla., to Houston, Mr. Dukakis said, &quot;Obviously we're not going to tolerate a Soviet satellite,&quot; suggested that the Democrats don't differ substantially among themselves on such questions and said, &quot;Is Gore going to send the Marines into Cuba? Of course not.&quot;    Both Sen. Gore and Rep. Gephardt have detected that, like all governors, Mr. Dukakis is vulnerable to charges that he hasn't any experience in foreign affairs. The Dukakis campaign, in fact, still is smarting from Mr. Gephardt's remark that the governor's &quot;foreign-policy&quot; experience consists almost entirely of negotiating with New Hampshire Gov. John Sununu over the Seabrook nuclear power plant.    But there is a dichotomy in Mr. Dukakis's evolving views on national security. His own instincts are liberal, while his chief advisers tend to be more moderate.    These advisers include Madeleine Albright of Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service, a former middle-level official in the Carter administration, and three mainline Democratic national security specialists from Harvard: Albert Carnasale, a one-time U.S. delegate to the strategic arms control talks with the Soviet Union who is academic dean of Harvard's Kennedy School of Government; Joseph Nye, a Carter administration State Department official who is director of the Kennedy School's Center for Science and International Affairs; and Robert Murray, a former undersecretary of the Navy who is director of the Kennedy School's national security program.    Gov. Dukakis's advisers have urged him to favor continued development of the Stealth radar-avoiding aircraft and the D5 Trident II submarine-launched ballistic missile, but to put off deciding whether to buy the weapons and to stress the importance of beefing up U.S. conventional forces.    &quot;The key thing,&quot; Mr. Nye says, &quot;is to play this in a way so it doesn't look as if we're turning inward or cutting back on alliances.&quot;    As Super Tuesday nears, the irony is that in the next week, this candidate, who plays down the importance of regional politics and whose campaign is best structured to operate nationwide, must prove that he isn't a regional politician himself.    Mr. Dukakis, who in recent days has taken the offensive against his rivals, isn't taking a page from the Republican book. The candidate who pronounces &quot;vista&quot; to rhyme with &quot;blister&quot; and who wears ties from the Crimson Shop in Cambridge, Mass., isn't telling campaign audiences in the Old Confederacy that he's one of them.    So far, he has remained on familiar ground, treading often in regions populated by people known -- not often charitably -- as transplanted Yankees.    &quot;You hear the Boston accent wherever you go here,&quot; says Hanna Cralle, a former resident of Falmouth, Mass., who was among scores of former New Englanders in an audience at Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton. &quot;We're not really Southerners.&quot;    Dukakis strategists, meanwhile, are seeking to popularize a candidate who has about him a whiff of the faculty commons room. The other night, they scheduled a labor rally in a union hall in Palm Beach County. The United Association of Plumbers and Pipefitters served crackers and three wheels of Brie. </TEXT></DOC>