<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870417-0154 </DOCNO><HL> A Case of Mistaken Identity---By Peter L. Bernstein</HL><DD> 04/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Some economists have latched onto a mathematical certainty -- an &quot;identity,&quot; if you will -- that leads them to recommend policies with very uncertain results. The equation is as follows: The smaller the domestic savings rate relative to the investment rate, or the larger the budget deficit, the worse the trade balance is going to be and the more the U.S. must borrow from foreigners -- all other things being equal.    That qualifier at the end is critical. Overlook it and you proceed naturally to the notion that the solution to the trade deficit is to cut the budget deficit, so that total domestic savings more closely match domestic capital formation. Another solution is to consume less, thereby raising the private savings rate. In fact, if we take this statistical identity at face value, there are no other acceptable solutions to America's predicament.    Before getting to the heart of the economists' misperception, some observations are in order about the equation's parts:    The private savings rate has been historically high, not low, in the economic expansion since 1982, thanks to an impressive volume of saving in the business sector. With business saving more than a full percentage point above its postwar average, total private saving has averaged 17.3% of the gross national product vs. a postwar average of 16.7%.    Furthermore, if consumers are on a spending spree, it is surely an odd-looking one. Draw a trendline through the logarithm of real personal consumption expenditures since the end of World War II. You will find the current level of real spending below that trendline, not above it. In fact, consumption has averaged nearly 4% below that trendline since 1981.    Remember that personal saving is a residual. It is what is left over from income after consumption. If the savings rate is low, that could be as much because income is low as because consumption is high. Not only has the growth in real income been slow since 1981, but the tax burden has been rising in recent years, cutting into take-home pay. Taxes, including Social Security taxes, took 12.2% of personal incomes in 1986, up from 11.7% in 1984 -- and the highest percentage for any year other than the period 1980-82, when bracket creep was at its most intense.    Finally, let us take a critical look at the facts determining America's huge trade deficit. Once again, I suggest that you draw a trendline through the logarithms of real exports and real imports over the past 30 or 35 years. Over the long run, U.S. imports have grown on a steeper trend than U.S. exports have grown. Nevertheless, the picture that emerges is surprising. U.S. imports -- including oil -- were right on that trendline in 1986, the year of America's biggest import surplus. Exports, however, were clearly below their trendline.    Is the glass half full or half empty? I would deduce from those patterns that the major cause of the U.S. trade deficit is lack of demand abroad rather than an excess of demand at home.    If you want further proof of that statement, a disaggregation of U.S. export figures is worth the effort. U.S. exports to the industrial world, and especially Japan, are higher than they were in the peak export years of 1980-81. Just about the entire decrease over the past five years is in U.S. exports to the lesser developed countries and to OPEC members. Thus, the export problem primarily has to do with the financial problems of those countries, not with the U.S. budget deficit. Yet the conventional view I noted at the outset persists.    The conventional view is not only sloppy about the facts, but sloppy in interpreting the same fact at different times.    We were told that the dollar rose because the budget deficit was so big. Now we are told that the dollar can go into freefall because the budget deficit is so big.    We were told the budget deficit made interest rates go up and thus made the dollar go up. If we could cut the budget, interest rates would fall and the dollar would fall. Now we are told a weaker dollar is making interest rates rise.    Furthermore, the whole structure of the conventional view, which relates the budget deficit directly and intimately to the current-account deficit, takes three or four years of unique experience and builds an entire theory on them. Have we forgotten all our tests of statistical significance, which require more than just a few observations before inferring generalized causal relationships?    A careful look at history demonstrates that, unlike the budget deficit, the current-account deficit does not correlate with the business cycle. Therefore, the two deficits do not characteristically correlate with each other. Indeed, there is no clear-cut, strong, or universal pattern of movements between budget deficits and real exchange rates in the U.S. or in any of its major trading partners.    One final point that relates to the savings data: They are all ex post facto. We see what happened, not what was intended. As John Maynard Keynes taught us a long time ago, the measured savings rate is not at all the same thing as the propensity to save. All sorts of surprises get in the way of making the two come out to be the same number. One person's spending is the other person's income. My decision to save or spend is going to affect the size of your income and your ability to save, but you have no foreknowledge of what my decision is going to be.    This means the gloomy conclusions about the U.S. household propensity to save are based on flawed data. The problem could be -- and I suspect actually is -- one of unexpectedly low income growth, rather than too much consumption.    The most profound error in the conventional view is not the messy fit with the facts and not with the inconsistencies in the application of the facts. The real difficulty is in the theory.    The problem goes back to that statistical identity: The trade deficit is equal to the nation's gross domestic investment minus its domestic private savings plus the budget deficit (or minus the budget surplus). Like all statistical identities, this statement tells us nothing about cause and effect.    For example, we have the trade deficit on the left-hand side of the equation. This implies that the trade deficit is caused by the elements on the right-hand side. Nevertheless, one could make a plausible case that the trade deficit, by depressing the real economy and by pressing down on the price level, is in fact the cause of the budget deficit. This is precisely the opposite of the conventional argument.    More important, the identity is limited to its specific elements. It is silent on the subject of forces other than savings and investment. What about monetary policy? Monetary policy has an influence on every one of these elements; co-movements among them may be the result of an exogenous factor like monetary policy, rather than the consequence of one of them, like the budget deficit, causing the trade deficit.    Most important, the identity is static. It describes a moment in time. It tells us nothing -- absolutely nothing -- about change. If you hold time constant, then clearly the simple arithmetic of the thing tells you that you can cut the trade deficit by reducing the budget deficit.    In the real world, these things do not stand still for us. Cutting the budget deficit affects domestic savings and investment. History suggests that higher taxes or spending cuts reduce take-home pay somewhere and tend to reduce domestic savings, so your net gain is nil.    If cutting the budget deficit does not reduce domestic savings, then it is likely to reduce domestic spending. If you reduce domestic spending, the odds are that investment spending -- which you want to increase -- will fall along with consumption. Of course, if you reduce domestic spending you will probably reduce imports, which is some help, but what will happen to our exports if we buy less from our trading partners abroad?    Admittedly, the lower interest rates that would result from all of this would be some help. On the other hand, we have no evidence to assure us that the lower interest rates would do the full job of offsetting the demand losses stemming from the cuts in government spending or increases in government tax rates. Rather, the available evidence indicates that easier monetary policies in this environment have all the impact of pushing on a string.    One wonderful solution to the loss in domestic demand from cutting the deficit is to increase U.S. exports. Let foreign demand replace domestic demand. This is the game America's trading partners have been playing to a fare-thee-well. They follow policies of fiscal rectitude, cloaked in unctuous virtue, along with relatively restrictive monetary policies. The production they do not sell at home goes happily to the U.S., where Americans have been willing to buy more than they produce.    Should Americans therefore learn to emulate these wise policies of the Japanese and the West Germans? I am all for it. The only hitch is that the Japanese and the Germans don't want to play. Everybody cannot be a net exporter. Mercantilism, as Adam Smith taught us 211 years ago, is a zero-sum game at best, a game of beggar-thy-neighbor at worst. In a world of Calvinists, everybody is a beggar.    ---   This is adapted with permission from a speech Mr. Bernstein, a New York-based economics consultant, gave last month. </TEXT></DOC>