<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880427-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Peace Still Depends on the Two Palestines </HL><AUTHOR> Eugene V. Rostow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   To make sense of the prolonged conflict over Israel's right to exist requires the West to accept an unpalatable fact: Most Arabs believe what they frequently say -- that they will destroy Israel as the Turks destroyed the Crusader Kingdom, even if it takes them a century. Unless the Arabs can be induced to compromise, and accept the repeated decisions of the world community as binding international law, the future of the area is grim.    In this perspective, the present round of the struggle is much like the others -- serious, but less dangerous than some, because neither Egypt nor the Soviet Union seems to be directly involved.    Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir is widely accused of blocking peace between his country and Jordan. Critics urge him to accept the Soviet-American proposal of an international conference as the setting for peace negotiations. And they say he claims that the territorial provisions of Security Council Resolution 242 -- adopted after the 1967 Six-Day War -- do not apply to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.    Both charges are unjustified. An international conference would be a trap for Israel and the U.S., as President Johnson saw in 1967, when he refused to meet Aleksei Kosygin, Charles de Gaulle and Harold Wilson at the United Nations. And there is no sign that any Arab state or group is willing to follow Egypt's example and make peace with Israel in accordance with Resolution 242. Jordan's King Hussein hopes a conference might put irresistible pressure on Israel and the U.S. to give him (or the Palestine Liberation Organization) the West Bank, Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip -- a solution no Israeli government could accept. Alternatively, if the conference fails, King Hussein thinks the world would conclude that the absence of peace is the fault of Israel and he could continue to enjoy what has been until recently the relatively comfortable Jordan-Israeli condominium on the West Bank.    Although the territorial provisions of Resolution 242 apply to the problem of Israel's boundaries as a whole, they were designed with the complex issues of an Israeli-Jordanian settlement very much in mind. All the resolution says on the subject is that in exchange for peace Israel would withdraw its armed forces from territories -- not &quot;the&quot; territories -- occupied in the course of the Six-Day War.    Resolution 242 was adopted five months after the Arab governments rejected Israel's offer to return to the Armistice Demarcation Lines in exchange for peace. Reinforced in 1973 by Resolution 338, which was adopted after the Yom Kippur War, Resolution 242 establishes three principles about the territorial aspect of the peacemaking process:   1) Israel can occupy and administer the territories it occupied during the Six-Day War until the Arabs make peace.    2) When peace agreements are reached, they should delineate &quot;secure and recognized&quot; boundaries to which Israel would withdraw.    3) Those boundaries could differ from the Armistice Demarcation Lines of 1949. The resolution specifies that in drawing new boundaries, the parties could take into account, among other factors, guarantees of security, including the establishment of demilitarized zones; achieving a just settlement of the refugee problem; and guarantees of free navigation through the international waterways of the region.    So far as I know, Mr. Shamir has never denied that the territorial provisions of Resolution 242 apply to the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. What he says is quite different: 1) that under present circumstances the parties should carry out the autonomy provisions of the Camp David agreement as a first step toward facing the issues of sovereignty posed by Resolution 242; 2) that the return of the entire Sinai Peninsula to Egypt pursuant to the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty more than satisfies the legal requirements of Resolution 242; and 3) that the territorial question between Jordan and Israel is therefore a political matter.    He could have gone further. The territorial provisions of Resolution 242 are entirely political in character, to be settled by agreement among the parties, not by legal fiat. Although the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty restored to Egypt the entire Sinai, which constituted 91% of the occupied territory, it also would have satisfied the standards of Resolution 242 if it had transferred part of the Sinai to Israel. Similarly, a settlement between Jordan and Israel would satisfy the guidelines of Resolution 242 if it provided for the annexation by Israel (or Jordan) of some or all or none of the territories occupied by Israel in the course of the Six-Day War. Of course Mr. Shamir wants the whole of the West Bank, just as King Hussein does. These are not, however, their final positions.    In 1967 and 1968, it was the general expectation both in the Israeli and Western governments that a peace agreement between Jordan and Israel would transfer most of the West Bank to Jordan, and establish security arrangements in the West Bank and a special regime for Jerusalem. But both King Hussein and the Soviet Union were firmly and repeatedly warned that prolonged delay and further hostilities would inevitably alter such expectations. As Golda Meir said publicly at the time, aggression should never be costless, and the Arabs could not expect the territorial settlement that was available in 1967 to remain on the table forever.    The public debate about the future of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is confused by the common assumption that those areas are somehow &quot;Arab&quot; territories. This is not the case. They are parts of the Palestine mandate that have not yet been generally recognized as belonging either to Jordan or to Israel, the Arab and Jewish Palestinian states into which the mandated territory has been partitioned. Jordan's attempt to annex the West Bank in 1951 was recognized only by Pakistan and, in part, by Britain. None of the Arab states accepted the annexation.    In the end, a territorial settlement between Israel and Jordan will be governed more by human, demographic and security considerations than by legal claims. For Israel, the negotiations will be dominated by two overriding considerations: its immense yearning for peace, and its desire to remain a predominantly Jewish state.    If Jordan will not or cannot obey the command of Resolution 338, Israel can, of course, modify the occupation regime on its own authority. Peace between Israel and Jordan is the only way, however, to provide Jordanian citizenship for those Arab residents of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip who elect it.    One fact about the Palestine problem remains what it was 20 years ago: The key actors are still the two Palestinian states, Israel and Jordan. Their decision to go forward on the path of peace will necessarily depend upon the interaction of many complex variables. What would Syria do if they decide to make peace? Saudi Arabia? Iraq? The Soviet Union? The array of terrorist organizations? Iran and the fundamentalist movement within Islam? What are the counterforces that might help Israel and Jordan succeed? Can they rely on full American and NATO support and the support of Egypt?    These questions underscore what is in any event apparent: Jordan exists because it is under the tacit protection of Israel and the U.S. That natural alliance becomes visible from time to time when Jordan is threatened, as it was in 1970 by a Syrian attack that was called off after it began, in the shadow of Israeli and American power.    If the leaders of Jordan and Israel reach the conclusion that the conjuncture of these variables is favorable, there are many possible ways of going forward. The best is still the official proposal made in 1967 by Abba Eban, then Israel's foreign minister. The proposal rests on the twin principles of the mandate and the partition plan of 1947: the right of the Jews to a state in Palestine coupled with full respect for the civil and religious rights of the non-Jewish population.    While the Eban proposal would require revision, its grand strategy is still sound. What it proposes, fundamentally, is an economic union or federation between Jordan and Israel, as much political cooperation as circumstances will allow, and special arrangements for Jerusalem.    Perhaps an idea that was nearly adopted in 1947 and 1948 could be revived as a vital feature of the federation: offering Palestinian Arabs living in Israel, Jerusalem or the occupied territories the option of Jordanian citizenship. There would be free movement of people and trade within the federation, and presumably the security arrangements for the area would be unitary.    The recent riots in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank may make a solution of the Palestine problem along the lines of the Eban proposal more remote. On the other hand, they may serve as a catalyst, stirring King Hussein to take a long if cautious step toward peace.    It may be that the essential features of the Eban plan could be achieved de facto between Israel and Jordan without the hazardous drama of a formal treaty. One step in such a process could be placing the Gaza Strip under Jordanian administration. The French say nothing is so permanent as the provisional, but provisional arrangements need not be immobile.    Until Jordan and Israel conclude that it is feasible to achieve a decisive solution for the Palestine problem in accordance with Resolution 242, the present Israeli-Jordanian condominium in the West Bank and the Israeli administration of the Gaza Strip will continue. Resolutions 242 and 338 will wait in the background, along with the other key legal documents that frame the problem of Palestine. They will survive because they correspond to reality.    ---   Mr. Rostow, visiting professor at National Defense University, was undersecretary of state for political affairs, 1966-69, and chairman of the interdepartmental control group on the Mideast crisis. </TEXT></DOC>