<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890831-0082 </DOCNO><DD> = 890831 </DD><AN> 890831-0082. </AN><HL> A New Front:@  The Military Enters@  The War on Drugs,@  And Finds Elusive Foe@  ---@  Its Early Sorties Are Hobbled@  By Costs and Bureaucracy,@  But It Hones New Tactics@  ---@  Smugglers That Got Away@  ----@  By John J. Fialka@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/31/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> LATAM CANDA </CO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><GV> DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><TEXT>   On the morning of March 12, a sleek, twin-engined executive turbojet took off from a small airfield in Colombia. Although its two pilots didn't know it, the flight marked the beginning of a new and difficult chapter in the U.S.'s increasingly desperate war against drugs.    In its nose, the aircraft carried a number of large duffel bags, which law-enforcement officials now believe contained at least half a ton of cocaine. In its rear cabin was a stack of 38 seven-gallon cans of fuel, waiting to be poured into a jury-rigged internal refueling system. It gave the plane a range far beyond ordinary small aircraft.    The flight plan was simple: Through the Windward Passage and then straight north, circumventing the entire land-based, electronic &quot;fence&quot; of radar beacons the U.S. uses to spot incoming drug traffic over the Caribbean and the Bahamas.    During the early days of the drug war -- in the 1970s -- a few daring pilots used this risky technique to make nonstop marijuana deliveries to New York. U.S. Customs Service officials, whose small planes and limited radar couldn't reach that far out into the Atlantic, came to call the route &quot;the New York Express.&quot;    In the intervening years, this game has grown more sophisticated and much, much richer. While U.S. officials have been beefing up surveillance along the southern border, Colombian drug lords have been rerouting shipments directly into small airfields in eastern Canada. From there they are trucked south to New York City, where a half ton of pure cocaine can fetch $25 million on wholesale markets.    But on the day the executive turbojet took off from Colombia, the drug lords were, for the first time, up against a more potent foe: U.S. military forces. Thus began an 18-hour drama that ultimately involved law-enforcement agencies and armed services of both the U.S. and Canada. It would, however, end in frustration, and would give both countries a bracing first lesson in the tricky art of joining civilian and military agencies in a drug-fighting role: Cumbersome bureaucracies -- no matter how well equipped -- are no match for agile, airborne drug traffickers. To play in this game, you have to be agile yourself.    It has taken Congress a long time to drag the reluctant military into the war against drugs. For years, the services argued that drugs are an issue for the police and other agencies to contend with. Some in the armed forces also worried that a drug role would expose troops to bribes and other corrupting influences, a problem police forces now face.    But last fall, desperate to do something about the ceaseless flow of drugs into the country, Congress passed a law that earmarked $300 million of the defense budget for drug interdiction. That started the huge military bureaucracy moving.    The cutting edge of the Air Force's entry into the new drug mission is the E-3 Airborne Warning and Control System, or AWACS, the far-seeing, computerized radar plane designed to orchestrate air battles. Last year, AWACS planes were available only occasionally for anti-drug missions. For two days in May, however, the service assembled enough AWACS planes to watch the whole southern border, from Florida to California, at once. It saw nothing.    &quot;Nobody flew into the U.S. because they knew we were there,&quot; Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Kelly, director of operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told the Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Gen. Kelly believes that pilots for the drug cartels use radar detectors to spot the AWACS, and turn around and wait until the planes go away.    This year, the Air Force is expanding the amount of time AWACS will be on patrol. The Navy is also assigning 13 P-3 antisubmarine aircraft with similar radar capabilities to the mission, and is examining ways to use high technology to see into shipping containers. And a joint task force in the Pentagon is about to buy two new radar-carrying balloons -- one tethered to a submersible oil platform, another attached to a ship -- to plug radar gaps in the Caribbean. The Army, meanwhile, is studying the topography of the southern U.S. to see how many electronic sensors, radars and human patrols it will need to close all the gaps in the land border.    The Colombian plane that took off in early March flew along a path outside the range of land-based radar, but well within the range of airborne surveillance.    It first appeared off the East Coast as a blip on a radar screen aboard an AWACS plane, which was flying lazy circles during a training mission over Florida. &quot;It was sheer luck,&quot; explains Frank Kapitan, director of the Custom Service's aviation operations. Judging the speed and the direction of the blip, a Customs agent aboard decided the plane might be on a drug mission.    The North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) launched two Air National Guard F-16 fighters from a base in Maine. What the lead fighter saw as he approached the vicinity of the blip was a Commander 980 executive jet. It was heading toward Nova Scotia without running lights as dusk approached. It had not filed a flight plan.    The F-16s shadowed the Colombian jet until their fuel ran low, staying far enough away to avoid alerting the drug runners. Then the planes were replaced by two more Air Guard F-16s summoned by NORAD from Vermont. Under the rules of this new phase of the drug war, the military may follow drug smugglers, but it doesn't have the authority to stop or arrest them. NORAD needed somebody to hand the mission over to.    Once again it was lucky. A U.S. Customs Service &quot;interdiction unit&quot; -- a specially equipped turbojet and a Blackhawk helicopter -- were sitting in Bangor, Maine. Normally assigned to the Caribbean, they were spending a few weeks working with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, checking out rumors of increasing drug traffic going through Canada.    Three Customs officers piled into the plane and joined the chase. Meanwhile, the Blackhawk crew waited in the gathering darkness at Bangor airport for a team of Mounties. They would be needed to make arrests if the plane landed in Canada.    This first leg of the chase underscored perhaps the biggest problem the U.S. faces in its enlarged air war against drug traffickers: expense. It costs $3,000 an hour to operate an AWACS plane, and $2,300 an hour to send an F-16 after a suspicious flier. What's more, there aren't enough fighter planes to chase after every blip, and the government's hugely expanded radar surveillance system will soon generate a great many blips to worry about.    While U.S. authorities seized over 55,000 pounds of cocaine from private aircraft last year, more than from any other means of conveyance, the General Accounting Office worries that launching fighters to examine every suspicious aircraft will cost more money than it's worth. It found that most of the 1,443 suspicious planes the Customs Service chased in the last two years were on legal trips. In 23% of the cases, Customs landed next to the suspect plane and confronted the crew. Nine percent of the pursuits resulted in arrests, seizures of drugs or other legal action. Another GAO study found that, in 1987, the Air Force spent $2.6 million flying AWACS planes on anti-drug missions, which resulted in six drug seizures and 10 arrests.    A cheaper way to sort out the blips, the U.S. Customs Service has suggested, would be to require planes flying in drug traffic areas to use special air corridors to enter the U.S. Planes traveling outside the corridors without proper identification would be the ones to home in on.    Some Congressmen, such as South Carolina Republican Arthur Ravenel Jr., want to go further. He would empower the military to make arrests and stop incoming planes that fly outside proper corridors and don't identify themselves. &quot;The real meat of my amendment is to shoot the bastards down. They're killing our children,&quot; says Rep. Ravenel, a former Marine.    This idea rattles John L. Baker, president of the 291,000-member Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association. &quot;We call this the Strangelove proposal,&quot; he says. &quot;We lobbied to kill that thing last year and we'll kill that S.O.B. again.&quot; Mr. Baker says the members of his group worry about mistakenly getting shot down by a zealous fighter pilot and chafe at having their flight paths prescribed. Instead, the association is launching a volunteer effort to report suspicious activity at airports.    The luck that had graced the U.S. pursuers as they chased the Colombian plane began to run out a couple of hours before midnight. The Commander 980 flew a meandering course over Maine, first on one side of the U.S.-Canadian border, then on the other. Meanwhile, the Blackhawk crew was unable to locate the Mounties who had spent the day with them in Bangor. Worrying that Customs might need plenty of backup when the plane landed, the chopper crew took off to join the chase.    At around 11 p.m. the Colombian plane headed back into Canada and approached a tiny airfield at Sorel, 50 miles northeast of Montreal. The normal procedure for a U.S. Customs intercept is for the helicopter crew to land and make the arrest while the Customs jet circles overhead, watching the scene with special night-vision equipment.    But the helicopter was still on its way. Worse, the Canadian authorities, who had been informed by NORAD of the chase into Canada, hadn't given Customs permission to land. &quot;There was a lack of communication on the situation,&quot; admits Supt. Neil Pouliot, head of the Mounties' Drug Enforcement Directorate.    The Colombian plane touched down in the darkness at Sorel. The pilot of the Customs jet circling overhead saw through his night-vision goggles that a small truck pulled immediately alongside the plane. People began to unload the duffel bags into the truck. According to Mr. Kapitan, it was ten more agonizing minutes before a &quot;senior Canadian police official&quot; gave Customs permission to land.    As the Customs jet was landing, the small truck sped away. Rifle-toting Customs officers forced the two pilots and the airport manager to lie face down on the runway as they searched the plane. They were lying there when the Blackhawk landed.    First the local police, then the Mounties arrived. Confusion over what had happened and who was in charge mounted. The next day Canada filed a diplomatic protest with the U.S. for a possible &quot;violation of Canadian sovereignty.&quot; It was later quietly withdrawn.    Law enforcement agents in both countries are still investigating how at least half a ton of cocaine disappeared into the night. But that wasn't the only loss. Absent the evidence, the pilots of the Colombian plane were merely charged with a variety of minor infractions, including bringing a stolen plane into Canada. They were fined $23,000, which they paid from a large wad of cash, and were deported a few days later. Nobody went to jail.    What is believed to be the next flight of the &quot;New York Express&quot; bumped down on a tiny airstrip near Fredricton, New Brunswick, on April 3, three weeks later. It would prove that -- high-tech radar and firepower notwithstanding -- the war on drugs still largely depends on old-fashioned, gumshoe detective work.    Spotted by AWACS and chased by U.S. jets up the East Coast, the plane was easy prey. It's pilots, dizzy from gasoline fumes wafting through the craft, made a shaky landing and then crashed into a snow drift. Quickly, a ground crew materialized and transferred a half a ton of cocaine from the plane into a small truck, which again sped away.    This time, though, the bureaucracy was prepared. Undercover Mounties had already penetrated the drug ring, and were behind the wheel of the truck. Eleven hundred pounds of cocaine, intended for delivery to New York, were seized, making it the most valuable drug bust in Canadian history. The two pilots and three other Colombians on the ground were arrested and are awaiting trial in Canada.    &quot;You make your own luck in this business,&quot; says one Canadian official. </TEXT></DOC>