<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0085 </DOCNO><HL> AIDS: A Presidential Issue---By Woodrow A. Myers Jr.</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   We have a right to expect leadership of those we elect to office, and in a crisis we expect our leaders to guide us to safety. But because of a lack of leadership, we have not reached anything close to a national consensus on the moral and ethical dimensions of the AIDS epidemic. Perhaps we never will.    The problem stems from how AIDS is known to be transmitted. It is forcing our society to confront our most difficult and divisive issues -- our sexual behavior, drug abuse and increasingly the issue of who pays the high cost for the behavior of others. The cost of care of an AIDS patient from diagnosis to death routinely exceeds $30,000 and not infrequently $100,000. Approximately 50,000 americans with AIDS have been identified thus far.    AIDS provides a platform for two ends of the social spectrum: the morally indignant, who now feel scientifically and medically justified in writing their prescription for monogamy and marital fidelity, and the sexually unconstrained, who demand compassion and play upon guilt to induce tolerance for their life styles.    Most Americans believe that the activities that are primarily responsible for spreading the virus are morally wrong, and to varying degrees they believe that homosexuals and intravenous drug abusers should &quot;suffer the consequences&quot; of their actions. At the same time we also are compassionate as a nation and believe that those who cannot pay for their own care should not be denied care and that the pursuit of a cure for human disease is an appropriate, important government responsibility.    This leaves John and Jane Doe with a bewildering array of choices of whom to believe about what -- on the facts, on the right things to do as individuals, on the right things to demand of their leaders. John and Jane also want solutions and guarantees. We don't have them.    Last month I spent a morning in Williamson, W.Va., surrounded by 500 of the town's 5,000 residents during a taping of the &quot;Oprah Winfrey Show.&quot; I provided the medical expertise as we discussed why the town shunned, humiliated and ultimately rejected its only known person with AIDS. The town was particularly disturbed when one hot summer afternoon this young man took a dip in the city pool. The mayor responded by closing, draining and &quot;disinfecting&quot; it.    The town's reaction was based on fear and ignorance of the facts I attempted to provide, facts that they refused to acknowledge. Every statement I made was challenged. &quot;Can you give a 100% guarantee?&quot; &quot;When it's my child, a one-in-a-million chance is too great.&quot; &quot;The doctors have been wrong before, they'll be wrong again.&quot; My decade of clinical and health policy experience meant nothing compared to what the mayor and local opinion leaders thought, and they thought that swimming in the same pool, sharing eating utensils and breathing the same air spreads the disease.    Can these problems in leadership be surmounted? I believe they can. What we need is a transcending leadership, a voice that cannot be dismissed with ease, a leadership that is neither &quot;left&quot; nor &quot;right,&quot; technical nor humanistic, but all of these things. That's a tall order, but &quot;tall orders&quot; are what stature is for.    President Reagan has been at his best when he has listened to the best minds in the country and interpreted their advice for the American people. His ability to both reflect and model the best aspirations of the American character has been the source of his strength. The president must now find the courage to discuss human sexuality with the American people. He must convince us that casual contact does not spread this disease. He should ask us to read and accept the information provided by the Public Health Service and state and local health departments. He should ask us to discuss these issues with our children, and he should be our best example of compassion and concern.    The American people want the government to spend money to educate and to cure. The president should respect and support, not cut, the budget requests of his own Department of Health and Human Services. He will not please everyone, but then he never has -- and he has never lacked the courage to lead in spite of it.    What of the President's Commission? Given the scientifically unsupportable ideas and rigid ideologies of some of its members, I can only suggest a wait-and-see attitude. If science and valid data triumph over political expediency, the commission will move us forward on this issue. But the mandates of reason, compassion and political courage must come from the top to ensure that the commission's report is worth waiting for.    In the interim, expert advice is far from lacking. The National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control, as well as the major university medical centers, should be at full throttle on this epidemic. The wait for voluntary counseling and testing in state and local programs should be measured in hours instead of the current six or more weeks in some locations. Every intravenous drug abuser who desires treatment, or for whom therapy can be mandated or coerced, should have treatment without delay. All health-care professionals, beginning with physicians, must be given the latest information on AIDS. School districts (with substantial local control) must include AIDS risk reduction with reading, writing and arithmetic.    The AIDS issue demands presidential leadership now. The year that remains to this president should not be fiddled away. But if not this president, then the next.    AIDS has all the elements necessary for political melodrama -- sex, drugs and money -- and it has become an issue on which the presidential candidates of both parties must be well-versed. How the candidates frame their AIDS policies will tell us much about their stature. It is interesting that the Democratic candidates seem closer to the position on AIDS of the Centers for Disease Control and Surgeon General C. Everett Koop than do their Republican counterparts. For example, in the Brokaw debate, Albert Gore and Michael Dukakis seemed far more responsive to mainstream public-health thinking than did Jack Kemp and Al Haig.    Because some of the &quot;nuttier&quot; proposals, such as mandatory annual AIDS testing, are also astronomically expensive, the burden must fall on those candidates who promote them to justify them, since they deviate from the mainstream of biomedical and public-health thought. The burden will be on all candidates to discourage outrageous and dangerous disease-transmitting behavior, as well as to show appropriate compassion toward those Americans who continue to die slow and painful deaths from this disease.    ---   Dr. Myers, Indiana's health commissioner, resigned in October as vice chairman of the president's AIDS commission. </TEXT></DOC>