<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870129-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Commission on Criminal Sentencing Is TangledIn Controversy About Its Makeup and Its Mission---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Congress voted to overhaul the system for sentencing criminals in the federal courts, nobody thought it would be an easy job. But the seven-member U.S. Sentencing Commission has been embroiled in controversy since President Reagan signed the law creating it in October 1984.    The arguments have ranged from who would be appointed to the commission, to the latest flap over whether the death penalty should be included in sentencing guidelines being drafted. Some observers say the death-penalty dispute could topple the panel's entire effort.    The commission was created by Congress as part of a sweeping reorganization of federal criminal laws. Its aim is to reduce the wide disparity in criminal sentences by issuing guidelines that spell out a range of prison terms for different offenses. Federal judges will be required to stay within the guidelines or explain in writing their reasons for departing from them, and parole will be abolished.    &quot;We're going to reduce disparity, that's our main purpose,&quot; says the commission's chairman, Judge William Wilkins of the U.S. Court of Appeals. &quot;Similar defendants who commit similar crimes will get similar sentences.&quot;    Another goal is to get tougher on certain types of criminals, such as drug dealers and violent offenders. White-collar criminals also are targeted. &quot;In general, the commission believes the current level of punishment for many antitrust, insider-trading and other securities violations is too low,&quot; says Judge Wilkins. The guidelines may lead to the increased use of prison terms for white-collar criminals.    These goals were widely endorsed in Congress. When the law creating the commission was passed, says Appeals Court Judge Stephen Breyer, a commission member and former chief counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee, &quot;It was like God, apple pie and motherhood. Everybody was for this improvement. There is disparate sentencing and it's a problem.&quot;    But consensus, which is often elusive in complex judicial issues, didn't last long. First, nearly a year went by before members were appointed and the commission began work. The law required that at least three commissioners be federal judges, and then-Chief Justice Warren Burger balked at taking judges away from active service in the overloaded courts. Six months after the commission was established, Congress approved the use of senior or semi-retired judges, but two of three judges who were appointed -- Judges Wilkins and Breyer -- were in active service anyway. The Reagan administration dragged its feet on the appointments for six more months, until the commission was completed in November 1985.    Since then, its efforts have been marked by disarray, personal rivalries and a lack of direction, according to several sources close to the commission.    Last September, the commission completed a draft that created 73 different levels of sentencing based on a point system. The system assigned numerical values to each crime and to a variety of other factors.    In a series of public hearings, the draft was widely criticized by federal judges and other witnesses, who said it was far too complex, relied too heavily on rigid mathematical formulas and left too little discretion for judges to vary sentences or use probation.    &quot;Justice is not the product of bureaucratic, mechanical application of mathematical formulas or models,&quot; said one witness, John Greacen, of the American Bar Association's criminal justice section. Justice &quot;requires human appraisal of the facts and circumstances&quot; of each case, he said.    Another witness, U.S. District Judge Mark Wolf of Boston, testified, &quot;The problem is these are not guidelines, they set up mandatory requirements.&quot; He warned that the draft would cause a &quot;litigation explosion&quot; because a judge would have to hold a hearing for every dispute over a particular factor in the point system that would increase the numerical total and the resulting sentence.    Commission members say the draft was only intended as a vehicle for public comment. But some observers say that when an earlier proposal proved unworkable, Judge Wilkins and his staff prepared the draft hurriedly because they were worried about a deadline. The commission must submit guidelines to Congress by April 13. Congress then has six months to disapprove or amend the guidelines, or else they become law.    A new, simpler draft is in the works, and is likely to be released for comment next week. Commission members say it is based on analysis of how sentences are currently imposed and gives judges some discretion to use probation and to accept guilty pleas in exchange for lighter sentences, as long as they give written reasons.    But a new controversy, the most volatile yet, has erupted over suggestions by the Justice Department that the commission adopt guidelines for use of the death penalty for some federal crimes, such as treason, espionage and assassination of top officials.    Part of a compromise between Sens. Strom Thurmond (R., S.C.) and Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) when the legislation was passed was that the commission wouldn't include any death-penalty provisions, over which there were sharp disagreements. But the Justice Department concluded in a recent memo that old death-penalty laws that haven't been used for years are still on the books and that the commission has an obligation to issue guidelines so that the death penalty can be imposed.    The commission will hold a hearing on Feb. 17 on whether it has the legal authority to set death-penalty guidelines. Some commissioners say that if the authority exists, such guidelines should be written. But Kenneth Feinberg, a lawyer who worked on the legislation for Sen. Kennedy, warns: &quot;It would be a political blunder. Opponents of the death penalty in Congress might hold all of the guidelines hostage over this issue.&quot;    If these hurdles are overcome, a very basic one remains. When the first sentence is imposed under the guidelines, the commission itself almost certainly will be challenged. Alan Morrison, a lawyer for the Public Citizen Litigation Group, argues that the makeup of the commission violates the Constitution's separation of powers among the branches of government. </TEXT></DOC>