<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0158 </DOCNO><HL> Labor Discontent Rocks Mexican Politics---New Militancy EmboldensOpposition to Ruling Party---By Matt MoffettStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM LABOR </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For more than five decades since the end of the Mexican Revolution, government and union leaders have collaborated to produce a remarkable record of labor harmony: no national strikes ever and no major industry shutdowns since the 1950s.    But Mexico's prolonged economic slump has shaken the old labor-government partnership to the core. In five years, real wages have been chopped in half, provoking great bitterness among workers. The government's cure for the crisis, modernizing Mexican industry, has only increased labor's discontent by imperiling thousands of jobs. Meanwhile, the reinvigorated political left is campaigning to turn the workers' resentment into rebellion against the old system.    While chances of an open revolt are almost nonexistent, the discontent is clearly strengthening organized political opposition to the ruling party and making some unions more militant. In charting a course through this harsh new environment, labor leaders face a formidable dilemma. &quot;If they do nothing, they continue to lose ground,&quot; says Rene Arce, an official from the union of airline ground-crew workers. &quot;But if they try to mobilize all of the dissatisfied workers, they might not be able to control them afterwards.&quot;    The government has a lot riding on which road labor takes. Stable labor relations are essential to its strategy for paying Mexico's $110 billion debt by transforming the weak industrial sector into an internationally competitive force. Yet President Miguel de la Madrid's recent choice of a successor has already intensified, rather than eased, tensions.    In Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the 39-year-old former budget minister, Mr. de la Madrid could hardly have found a sharper contrast to the crusty octogenarian who leads Mexico's labor unions, Fidel Velazquez. As the designer of the austerity program that has so severely strained workers, Mr. Salinas was labor's last choice of the six candidates in contention for the presidential nomination of the Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI. &quot;His selection means a continuation of the same policies that have oppressed us,&quot; said Felipe Hermosa Torres, a member of the Mexican Electrical Workers union.    Though Mr. Velazquez has adhered to tradition by publicly praising Mr. Salinas, he has found it difficult to conceal his distaste. He created something of a scandal in Mexico's genteel political circles by walking out of Mr. Salinas's nomination-acceptance speech early last month.    A reconciliation attempt by Mr. Salinas's camp only made matters worse. His advisers announced that their boss had gone to Mr. Velazquez's home for dinner and that the two men had ironed out their philosophical differences. All untrue, retorted Mr. Velazquez, who declared that the dinner hadn't even taken place, even though several witnesses saw Mr. Salinas entering his house.    Privately, union leaders say that Mr. Velazquez was sending government a message: If it wants to maintain their cooperation, then workers are going to have to get some concessions.    The central issue is wages. Despite emergency wage increases this year, inflation of 130% has eroded workers' purchasing power. The squeeze has already triggered unrest among the militant electrical and telephone workers unions, which launched strikes that could have devastated the country. The government was able to crush the strikers only because Mr. Velazquez declined to lend them the backing of the other unions under his control.    Mr. Velazquez has hinted that unless the government loosens its purse strings, he may not be so cooperative the next time a union walks out. The government has indicated it is simply unable to grant significant wage increases and will likely try to appease the labor leadership with offers of governerships or seats in the legislature.    Industry's drive to make operations more efficient is only complicating the conflict. &quot;The government says modernization will make life better here, but it isn't going to help the people it puts out of work,&quot; says Eduardo Torres, an official for the telephone workers union.    Ironically, the labor leadership's ability to defend itself is limited by the tactics it has used for decades to keep the rank-and-file under control. In many industries, workers find it difficult even to threaten strikes because they are scattered throughout so many unions -- 300 in the textiles sector alone, for example. And aggressive labor leaders have sometimes been made to pay a high price for their activism: When a militant faction arose not long ago within some southern locals of a national teachers union, some of its partisans wound up dead under mysterious circumstances.    &quot;The leadership has trained workers not to be combative and not to use the electoral process in any way but to support the PRI,&quot; says Raul Trejo Delarbre, a political scientist at the National Autonomous University of Mexico. &quot;Now that labor is being pressed into a fight with the government, it suddenly finds it doesn't have the experience or the tools.&quot;    Mexico's political left, bolstered by a recent merger of five parties to form the Mexican Socialist Party, is trying to teach workers a lesson in political activism. &quot;The generals of the labor movemente have decided for the PRI, but the captains and sergeants haven't made up their minds who they're going to support,&quot; says Heberto Castillo, the presidential candidate for the Socialists. Mr. Castillo says he has spent much of his time since Mr. Salinas's nomination meeting with disillusioned middle-level union members.    The most notable break in union ranks occurred a few weeks ago when a large contingent of regional members of the oil workers' union -- long stalwarts of the PRI -- appeared at a rally in support of Mr. Castillo. But the oil workers leadership has denounced the dissidents, and even the Socialsts are uncertain how committed they are to abandoning the ruling party. &quot;They might be using us to blackmail&quot; the PRI, says Mr. Castillo.    Potentially more serious than political jockeying are the increasing signs that the old-line labor bosses are out of touch with the workers. From the Mexico City headquarters of the National Mineworkers and Metalworkers Union, the political path seems clear to Secretary General Napoleon Gomez Sada, who is steeped in the tradition of alliance with government. &quot;All the workers will be with the party's candidate next year, as always,&quot; he says, displaying a photograph of himself and Mr. Salinas.    Several hours outside the capital at a steel plant in the state of Michoacan, the election picture is vastly different. Local union leader Salvador Alvarez says the preference of many of his workers is the state's former governor, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, who was recently booted out of the PRI after he accepted a presidential nomination from another party. &quot;People here remember that when Mr. Cardenas was governor, he showed a lot of respect for the labor movement,&quot; says Mr. Alvarez. </TEXT></DOC>