<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Trade Pact Would Give Canada a RightTo Contest U.S. Law Before Arbitrators---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CANDAMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)FOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)PETROLEUM (PET)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The proposed U.S.-Canadian trade agreement would give Canada the right to challenge before a bilateral arbitration panel any future U.S. trade legislation it believes violates the purpose of the pact.    This provision, which wasn't disclosed by either country in the initial announcement of the deal, was a last-minute concession the U.S. made after Canada threatened to torpedo the whole agreement about five hours before the midnight deadline last Saturday. The clause also would give Canada the right to ignore future U.S. trade laws that don't specifically state that they cover Canada.    Because it would empower an arbitration panel to review congressional actions, the provision could raise hackles in Congress and pose an obstacle to approval of the agreement. But the administration, which will brief the Senate Finance Committee on the pact today, argues privately that even if Canada were to win an arbitration ruling against a future U.S. law, the U.S. still could refuse to change the law. In that event, they say, Canada's only recourse would be to take its own retaliatory action or to terminate the trade agreement -- actions already available to Ottawa under world trade pacts.    Meeting a Canadian demand, the proposed accord would provide for a bilateral arbitration panel to hear appeals of individual cases involving alleged unfair trade practices in either country. But U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter told reporters that after most of the pact was set last Saturday, an &quot;enormous debate&quot; arose among the negotiators over Canadian fears that Congress could reverse the arbitrators' decisions in such cases. The Canadians, he said, wanted to &quot;freeze&quot; American law on trade as it applies to Canada.    In response, he said, the U.S. bargainers, led by Treasury Secretary James Baker, &quot;decided to be creative&quot; and propose the legislative review mechanism, which would apply to U.S. trade laws involving anti-dumping provisions and countervailing duty provisions.    Canada's ambassador to the U.S., Alan Gottlieb, said the legislative provision -- which also would give the U.S. the same right to challenge laws passed by Canada's Parliament -- was &quot;unique&quot; and &quot;uncharted territory.&quot; He urged Congress to show &quot;courage and farsightedness&quot; and approve the pact.    Stressing that Canada had made gains in the pact, Simon Reisman, the chief Canadian negotiator, said that some provisions had pushed the U.S. so far they had &quot;raised questions&quot; in U.S. officials' minds about their constitutionality.    Rep. Jim Leach (R., Iowa), a strong supporter of a U.S.-Canada trade agreement, said the legislative review provision &quot;without a doubt will be a ground for opposition&quot; to the deal in Congress. &quot;It is, in a sovereignty sense, a bit unseemly,&quot; he said. But he noted that the U.S. had agreed to similar provisions with respect to the World Court, and said the provision probably would be constitutional if approved by Congress.    Disclosure of the legislative-review provision came as both sides held news conferences and released further details of the deal, which took 16 months to negotiate and was still being altered in some details yesterday.    In another disclosure, Ambassador Gottlieb said a &quot;standstill&quot; provision in the agreement would give Canada the right to withdraw from it if the U.S. passes laws, including the pending trade bill, that Ottawa considers so detrimental as to undermine the foundation of the pact.    In Ottawa, the Conservative government of Prime Minister Brian Mulroney kicked off a campaign to win public support for the agreement. Mr. Mulroney told the House of Commons: &quot;This is a path for the daring, the innovative, the nationbuilders.&quot;    The prime minister will try today to get unanimous backing for the agreement from the premiers of Canada's provinces. The premiers' support is required because some areas of the agreement, including proposals to provide more generous market access in Canada to sellers of U.S. wines and other alcoholic beverages, need provincial support to be implemented.    Additional details disclosed about the tentative pact included:    --On investment, Canada agreed to make permanent its policy of not screening U.S. investments in new plants or new companies, and to gradually raise to $150 million from $5 million the minimum size of Canadian concerns whose takeover by Americans would trigger a government review. U.S. officials said that would limit such takeover reviews to the 500 biggest Canadian companies.    --On financial services, Canada agreed to treat U.S. companies that purchase shares of Canadian financial institutions as if they were Canadian. Ottawa also said it would exempt U.S. banks from limits on how many Canadian assets foreign banks may hold. The U.S. agreed to permit American banks to deal in Canadian government debt issues to the same extent they can deal in U.S. government issues, and to treat U.S. and Canadian banks equally under federal law.    --In &quot;cultural&quot; industries, such as broadcasting, the Canadian government could buy Canadian subsidiaries of companies acquired by U.S. concerns as part of larger deals. But the price would be set independently.    --A U.S. ban on use of foreign ships in domestic American trade wouldn't be changed. Trucking and most other transport rules also wouldn't be affected.    --Beer wouldn't be included in provisions for improved treatment of U.S. liquor exports to Canada, partly because the U.S. refused to allow Canada a broad exemption from its sugar import quotas.    --The current treatment of long-distance telephone service would stand, but the U.S. would gain new entry into data transmission over telephone lines in Canada.    --Restrictions would be lifted on uranium trade and most other trade in energy commodities, but not on investment in energy resources.    --Each country agreed to exempt the other from import limits imposed in cases where domestic industries are harmed by surges in imports, such as so-called Section 201 cases in the U.S., unless imports from the other country are solely at fault. Even in such instances, penalties would be limited.    Under the pact, the two countries would try, within the next five to seven years, to draft a new joint code that would replace the proposed dispute-settlement mechanism for anti-dumping and countervailing duty matters.    Under the legislative review provision, no future changes in one country's anti-dumping or countervailing duty laws could apply to the other unless the law specifically says so and there had been prior consultation between the two governments. Even then, if one country believes the other's new law violates either world trade agreements or the &quot;object and purpose&quot; of the new trade pact, it could ask for binding arbitration to review the statute.    If an arbitration panel issues a &quot;declaratory opinion&quot; saying the law conflicts with the agreement or with world trade rules, the two governments would have to consult for 90 days.    Mr. Yeutter said the administration would submit &quot;corrective&quot; legislation if the arbitration panel rules against an American law. But if Congress or Parliament don't alter an offending law within nine months, the other country could either retaliate with &quot;comparable&quot; legislation or terminate the entire trade pact on just 60 days' notice.    Rep. Leach predicted that the U.S. might get more use out of the legislative review provision than Canada, by applying it against acts of Parliament, which he contended &quot;is often more capricious than the American Congress.&quot;    The legislative review panels, and the separate panels that would hear appeals in normal trade cases, would consist of two members from each country and a fifth member appointed by a new joint-trade commission to be created under the agreement.    ---   John Urquhart in Ottawa contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>