<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: How to Lose the U.S. Military Technology Edge </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST GOVMT </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> EXE DEF CNG </G><TEXT>   A widely accepted theory about the U.S.-U.S.S.R. strategic balance holds that the Soviets have greater numbers of weapons but greater innovativeness gives the U.S. a permanent technological edge. Theoretically, the proposition is valid, but it has one worrisome flaw.    Clearly U.S. democratic capitalism is far superior to Soviet statism in generating the wealth and creative energy needed to explore the frontiers of science and technology. New vistas in biotechnology, high-energy physics and computerization open up every day in U.S. laboratories.    President Reagan's science adviser, William R. Graham, estimates that total U.S. research and development spending will reach $132 billion this year, continuing the steady growth of the 1980s. The president's fiscal 1989 budget calls for $64.6 billion in federal Randamp;D, a 4% increase from this year. Aside from laser technology and other elements of a future strategic defense, it will include money for NASA's space station and the huge new Superconducting Super Collider to advance particle physics. Defense Randamp;D is budgeted to rise 9.6% even though total defense procurement was slashed this fiscal year and will remain lean in fiscal 1989.    By contrast, the Soviet Union, even with its command economy applying large sums and the nation's best brains to weapons development, traditionally has lagged. Innovation does not flower in a state bureaucracy. The Soviets have attempted to compensate by assigning their world-wide state security apparatus, better known as the KGB, to comb advanced nations for scientific data, stealing it where necessary and possible. Prodigious diplomatic efforts are directed toward arms-control treaties designed to slow down U.S. weapons modernization with no effect on Soviet development.    The Russians know that U.S. technological superiority is of no military importance until it is translated into actual military hardware. And indeed, the lengthening time it takes the U.S. to deploy technologically superior weapons is the flaw in the theory that the U.S. will maintain technical superiority over the Russians.    U.S. weapons development projects today can drag on for as much as 15 years, notes Barry M. Blechman, president of Defense Forecasts Inc., in Washington. He was part of a Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) team that issued a first-rate critique of Pentagon procurement last year. &quot;It doesn't matter how good we are in the labs,&quot; he says. &quot;If it takes that long to get it out into the field it isn't worth much.&quot;    Science adviser Graham concurs. He notes that Boeing needed only 28 months to take the admirable 707 from the drawing boards to the flight line and just over three years to develop the more advanced 747. The corollary is that the military should specify what it wants, put it out for bids and let a private firm take charge of developing and producing it.    But military contractors say working for the government is becoming more risky and cumbersome, not less. In part, this results from this year's sharp Pentagon budget cutback, which scrapped 18 weapons programs and undoubtedly will bring further costly write-offs and stretchouts. But there also is an endemic problem in the way the U.S. political system comes to bear on weapons procurement.    Military officers constantly complain that they are forced to waste huge sums on unwanted bases and projects simply because key Congresspersons block phaseouts affecting their districts. The 1986 Packard Commission report chided Congress for its scapegoating of contractors and the CSIS study was even more to the point, citing the incredible growth of &quot;micro-management&quot; of defense procurement by 29 committees and 55 subcommittees in Congress that oversee defense activities.    But the criticisms of Congress were largely deflected by a flurry of &quot;waste, fraud and abuse&quot; charges aimed by politicians at contractors. It was this, not the better documented and more reasoned findings of the Packard and CSIS studies, that mainly influenced legislation. Last year, the Pentagon, in response to directives in the fiscal 1987 defense appropriation bill, lowered its ceilings on profits contractors are allowed to earn. It then reduced profit possibilities even further by shifting various costs from the government to contractors. Included were borrowing costs for capital equipment, some work-in-progress payments and, most significantly, certain research and development costs that contractors must necessarily incur in bidding for projects.    Jerry Junkins, chief executive at Texas Instruments Inc. is pretty sure what the outcome will be. &quot;Risks are going to go up. I think you're going to see people take some pretty strong lickings and I think possibly you're going to find you've got less competition rather than more as a result of the shakeout.&quot; Major contractors, to cut their risks, simply will have to pass up opportunities to bid on some projects.    Mr. Junkins sees the policy as shortsighted. &quot;It is saving this year's dollars by forcing back into the contractors substantial sharing in the development costs. So you've got in effect firm-fixed-price development contracts that knowingly have large investments on the contractors' side.&quot;    For example, Mr. Junkins notes that by some estimates, losing bidders on the advanced technology fighter plane, which will be the first-line U.S. fighter plane of the 1990s, probably will lose more than the winning bidders will make. &quot;The point is, this can't go on forever. You're already seeing cost adjustments, quarterly write-offs and so forth that you never saw before in the defense industry. We're going to need to be very careful that some of those financial baths are not so great that it really does pull people back to where they're no longer going to bid on the business.&quot;    Hughes Aircraft Chairman Albert Wheelon told Industry Week magazine late last year that his advice to his contractor colleagues is to turn down defense business as a signal to the nation's leaders of the industry's unhappiness. Contractors are seldom so bold in criticizing their huge customer, which is one reason procurement problems don't receive the airings they deserve.    Gen. Louis C. Wagner Jr., commanding general of the Army Materiel Command and therefore a man with very large procurement responsibilities, said at a meeting with Journal editors not long ago that he is sympathetic to the complaints about burden shifting. It certainly doesn't make his job any easier. But even four-star generals work within a military-congressional complex where authority is tightly circumscribed by the laws, rules and direct interventions dictated by Congress, so it is by no means certain that contractors will get the relief they are seeking.    The bluntest assessment of the situation comes from the irrepressible Gary Reich, defense-industry analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton: &quot;The government is doing its damnedest to put the defense industry out of business. Congress doesn't understand procurement and the Pentagon is too stupid to explain it to them.&quot;    Even allowing for Mr. Reich's hyperbole, the problem of defense procurement appears to be getting worse. It is a very expensive problem, both in terms of money and national security. </TEXT></DOC>