<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0132 </DOCNO><HL> A Year Later, Latin Debt Crisis Deepens --- If Loans Dry Up, So Will Interest Payments </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Truell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM CCI FORGN JPM GOVMT </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><G> TRE FED </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A year ago today, Citicorp shocked the banking world by effectively conceding that $3 billion of its loans to Third World countries, mostly in Latin America, probably never would be repaid.    The Citicorp action, in the form of additions to loan loss reserves, was quickly followed by dozens of other major banks, and has markedly altered the international lending situation in the year since then. Banks, led by Citicorp and J.P. Morgan andamp; Co., have increasingly cut back lending to Latin America, a trend that could bode ill for developing nations and, ironically, for the banks themselves.    Several developing nations say that, without a steady stream of bank lending, they won't be able to continue servicing the bank debt they already owe. That would severely affect the financial results of the lending banks, which already have been ravaged by 1987's loan loss reserves. Last year's bank losses were the worst since the Depression.    Many bankers and analysts expect that some big banks may yet have to reserve more against their Third World loans. Most big U.S. banks so far have reserved only for about 25% of their total loans to debt-troubled developing countries. After subtracting trade credits, which usually are unaffected by debt problems, that percentage rises to about 33% of such banks' shaky Third World credits.    In the growing secondary loan market, bank credits to troubled debtors now trade at an average price of around 50 cents on the dollar, which would imply banks should raise their reserves to about half of their loans to these countries.    John S. Reed, Citicorp's chairman, the prime mover behind the reserving concept, said in an interview that Citicorp has reserved enough. &quot;My belief is we have provided enough for the economic risk. It appears the reserve was about the right level,&quot; he said.    Citicorp, Mr. Reed added, remains committed to continued lending to such heavily indebted countries as Brazil and Argentina. &quot;I am not trying to minimize our exposure, I'm trying to maximize the value of our exposure for our shareholders,&quot; he said.    Meantime, the past year has been difficult for Latin American debtors. &quot;If we can't get loans, we won't be able to carry on servicing our debt,&quot; says Argentina's treasury secretary, Mario Brodersohn. Argentina, with $54 billion in foreign debt and low foreign exchange reserves, now is getting by on its second-quarter harvest exports, but unless it gets further credits it will run out of money later this year.    Brazil, while declaring its desire to bring interest payments up to date, still hasn't cleared its interest arrears to banks. It won't be able to do so until it gets a projected $5.2 billion bank loan, now being torturously negotiated.    Ecuador is more than $400 million in arrears on interest payments on its foreign bank debt. A recently proposed $350 million loan, which would have cleared up most of these overdue payments, had to be scaled back to $330 million and is in danger of foundering, partly because banks have been slow to respond to the call to lend.    &quot;Fewer and fewer of the big banks see a future in lending to the Third World in general, and Latin America in particular,&quot; says Alan Stoga, senior associate at Kissinger Associates Inc., a New York political and economic consulting firm.    Regulators, the U.S. government and international agency lenders -- some of whom disliked Citicorp's reserve move -- are increasingly concerned at banks' desire to swiftly reduce, or cut altogether, loans to developing nations. They resent the new, more complex market-oriented approach many banks have adopted to the Third World debt problem in the past year.    Assistant Treasury Secretary David C. Mulford, International Monetary Fund Managing Director Michel Camdessus and New York Federal Reserve Bank President E. Gerald Corrigan all have recently warned banks of the dangers of shunning lending to troubled debtor countries.    Bankers retort that they are being unfairly singled out for criticism and point to the IMF's reduction in its net lending to debt-troubled countries.    Mr. Reed said such speeches are &quot;part of the pyrotechnics necessary to get the market moving.&quot;    Banks also say they get contradictory messages from regulating agencies. For example, the General Accounting Office this month said U.S. banks need to increase loan loss reserves to at least $49 billion from about $21 billion currently. But the Federal Reserve Board has said further reserving may be counterproductive.    In cutting back Third World loans, big banks are being led by Citicorp, too. Over the five most recent quarters, the nation's largest bank reduced its net lending to developing countries with debt problems by 13%, or $1.9 billion, to $13 billion. According to its annual report, Citicorp during 1987 made its biggest reductions by slashing credits to Brazil by $300 million, to the Philippines by $400 million, and to Venezuela and Mexico by $200 million each.    These reductions have been achieved by a combination of swapping debt for local currency or equity, loan sales and other transactions, Citicorp officials say.    But Mr. Reed insists that this doesn't necessarily represent a pullback because in many cases loans have been replaced by long-term investments.    Other big banks have followed similar strategies. Earlier this year, J.P. Morgan used a debt program it devised with Mexico to swap $400 million of its Mexican government debt for $263 million of bonds, reducing its loans to that country by $137 million. Morgan also maintains that such bonds will reduce its obligation to pony up money for future loans for Mexico.    Citicorp's 1987 bombshell &quot;gave us a lot more freedom&quot; to explore different ways of managing developing country loan portfolios, says John C. Getzelman, executive vice president at Los Angeles-based Security Pacific National Bank, a unit of Security Pacific Corp. &quot;It sort of unlocked the process,&quot; adds Pedro-Pablo Kuczynski, a managing director of First Boston Corp., who adds that the action by Citicorp's Mr. Reed was inevitable: &quot;If he hadn't done it, somebody else would have.&quot; U.S. banks' failure to reserve properly for some years made a sudden reserve action inevitable, Mr. Kuczynski says.    Mr. Reed said he thought his reserve move had &quot;clearly introduced some flexibility&quot; to the management of the Third World debt problem. He said he believed it had been favorably received by the Treasury, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and among major domestic and foreign banks. The fact that so much activity followed the move showed that it was an idea whose time had come, he said.    But there were some negatives, he conceded. &quot;Clearly, some of my colleagues (at other big banks) were unhappy with me personally&quot; for not having consulted with them more. &quot;I regret that.&quot;    Also some had taken it to mean banks should get involved in debt forgiveness, which wasn't what he intended, he said.    Some large banks have taken relatively more drastic measures than Morgan and Citicorp. Bank of Boston has led a growing number of institutions that have vigorously reduced their developing country loans through sales, swaps and write-offs. In December, Bank of Boston wrote off $200 million of Third World loans and said it had altogether reserved or charged off 63% of loans in that category.    Clark Miller, executive vice president in Bank of Boston's international department, says he questions whether Mr. Reed has done enough by reserving for only about a quarter of Citicorp's Third World loans.    Mr. Miller acknowledges that there is a threat to the financial system in cutting back sharply in bank lending to developing countries. But he asserts: &quot;We also have an obligation to our shareholders, and we can't be influenced by political obligations to other countries.&quot; The obligation to holders is easier to quantify, he says.    Many other regional U.S. banks, such as First Wachovia Corp. in North Carolina, have in recent months written off and sold all their credits to troubled Third World borrowers. Such moves are likely to make it extremely difficult to raise the projected $5.2 billion new bank loan for Brazil, and a large loan for Argentina that banks expect to start negotiating soon.    Aware of these impending difficulties, and impatient for the banks to resume lending, regulators are trying to rally the troops. &quot;In an ironic and worrying way, the . . . commercial bank financing process has been weakened in part because bank exposures have been reduced so dramatically,&quot; Mr. Corrigan of the New York Fed told the recent annual meeting of the Bankers Association for Foreign Trade. &quot;The one thing we do not need, is to have the debt problem again take on the characteristics of a debt crisis because of a crisis among the creditors,&quot; Mr. Corrigan added. &quot;To avoid that, we need a strong reaffirmation of the commitment of the creditor banks to the bigger picture.&quot;    But banks have yet to give such a strong and timely reaffirmation. That, bankers say, is because it now takes much longer to hammer out the more sophisticated and complex debt rescheduling and new loan agreements that are needed to draw in sufficient bank lenders. Negotiations over Brazil's bank debt settlement have already dragged on for weeks longer than expected, postponing debt talks with Argentina. Squabbling between creditors -- particularly between commercial banks and government lenders -- has also slowed the Brazil talks.    Some analysts maintain that the banks are trying to extract consessions from government creditors and debtors by dragging their feet. &quot;This is a bargaining game and (the banks) think playing hard to get is the right strategy,&quot; says Kissinger Associates' Mr. Stoga.    The delays over the Brazil settlement may be partly bargaining by the banks. But the forthcoming attempt by banks to gather $5.2 billion in loans for Brazil will be the acid test for whether the present U.S. strategy can survive the banks' recent aggressive reserving and writing-off of Third World loans.    That strategy, the so-called Baker plan announced in 1985, calls on debtor countries to restructure their economies in return for continued bank lending and increased World Bank credits. When banks lent sufficient money to finance a good portion of interest payments, developing countries could afford to service their debts. Banks in turn won time to build their capital, and gradually reduce their loans to developing countries relative to their equity and reserves. As one lender sums up the approach: &quot;We put in two and got out three.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>