<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880711-0074 </DOCNO><HL> The Decline of Drugged Nations </HL><AUTHOR> Gabriel G. Nahas </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Americans seem agreed today that the rise in consumption of tobacco and alcohol, two legal addictive drugs, is associated with such staggering individual and social costs that restrictive measures to limit their consumption, especially by the young, should be considered. At the same time some prestigious opinion-makers suggest that illegal addictive drugs, such as marijuana, heroin and cocaine, be made available commercially as well.    In this verbal tug-of-war it seems that opinions have replaced established facts derived from pharmacological, epidemiological and historical studies.    First, the distinction between licit and illicit addictive drugs is not arbitrary, as we might be led to believe. While both types of drugs have properties in common, they also have basic differences. In terms of similarities, they both induce certain biochemical changes in the brain that are usually pleasant and lead to a repeat experience; eventually, their use leads to daily drug-seeking and drug-consuming behavior. Once instilled, this behavioral pattern is difficult to alter. In the case of illicit addictive drugs, however, the pleasant experience is associated with a temporary impairment of brain mechanisms that results in distorted perceptions.    While the legal, addictive drugs tobacco (nicotine), alcohol (in small amounts), and coffee (caffeine) do not impair mental acuity, cocaine, heroin and marijuana do, even in minute quantities. Furthermore, the addictive potential of illicit addictive drugs is greater than for licit drugs. It takes very low exposure to cocaine or heroin to become dependent on these drugs, as reported in epidemiological studies of drug-consuming populations.    Among those who drink alcoholic beverages world-wide, 8% consume daily amounts that are damaging to their health and to society. Epidemiological studies of the populations of marijuana and hashish, cocaine and opiate consumers show that about 50%, 90% and 95%, respectively, of the consumers will use these drugs daily, in doses damaging to their health and to society, when they are readily available. Finally, history shows that when illicit addictive drugs are socially accepted and easily available, they are widely consumed, and their use is associated with a high incidence of individual and social damage.    The use of cannabis in the Islamic-dominated world surfaced in the 11th century, when the Moslem Empire extended from the Atlantic to the Indian oceans. Historians of the 12th to the 16th centuries have documented the damage done by the widespread use of hashish in Moslem medieval society. (An account of their writings has been compiled by Franz Rosenthal of Yale University in his book, &quot;Hashish vs. Moslem Medieval Society.&quot;)    In the 15th century all restrictions against hashish were set aside. As a result, according to the contemporary historian Al Magrizi, a general debasement of the people was apparent. A large number of people from all walks of life were in a constant state of intoxication. All the scholars and religious leaders of the time condemned the weed -- but the habit of hashish-taking had become ingrained in society and could not be eliminated.    In ancient Peru, the chewing of the coca leaf, which began 1,500 years ago, was restricted by the Inca leaders to religious ceremonies. After the Spanish conquest in 1554, this habit spread among the farmers and laborers, who were paid in coca leaves, which they chewed nearly continuously. As a result they were in a state of continuous low-grade intoxication. This drug use continues today. The farmers and miners of the Andes thus are able to work under the most adverse conditions with limited food intake. As a result, their social condition has not changed in centuries; their general health and life expectancy are poor.    In 1858, the legal trade of opium and the Opium Wars were imposed on China by British mercantilism. By 1900, 90 million Chinese were addicted to opium. It took a national revival at the turn of the century that stressed traditional Chinese values to stem the tide. The support of the U.S. and the international community stopped the international opium trade. But it took 50 years of coercive measures for the country to become opium-free. Today, opium and other dependence-producing drugs are banned from China, as well as from Taiwan and Singapore.    In Egypt in the 1920s, the unrestricted commercial availability of cocaine and heroin resulted in an epidemic use of these drugs. This use was curtailed in the 1930s following national and international interdiction, and punitive measures meted out to all addicts.    In the 1950s, Japan experienced a major epidemic of intravenous amphetamine use involving half a million addicts. A national campaign aimed at restricting demand and supply with sanctions applied against users and traffickers brought the number of addicts down to a few thousand within four years. A heroin epidemic was curtailed in the same manner in the 1960s, reducing the number of heroin addicts from several thousand to a few hundred.    In contrast, the British in 1925 adopted a medical model allowing physicians to prescribe heroin to heroin addicts. This &quot;British system&quot; worked satisfactorily as long as addicts were few in number and all registered: 500 a year between 1930 and 1960. It became unmanageable after 1960, when heroin had to be dispensed to more than 1,000 users of the drug. Each addict had to be provided with daily doses of heroin, as well as the equipment required for the injection of the drug four to six times a day.    Because of this logistical problem and because of the potential for diversion of the drug to nonregistered addicts, heroin began to be progressively replaced by methadone maintenance. (Methadone, a long-lasting opiate, needs to be absorbed only once a day, by mouth.) But the number of registered British addicts had grown by 1980 to 2,800, double the total seeking treatment seven years earlier. In 1985 there were an estimated 80,000 heroin addicts in Britain, most of whom were not in drug-treatment programs. Despite this failure of the British system, it is still advocated by some in the U.S.    These scientific and historical facts demonstrate that supply and demand reduction are needed in the U.S. to control the present epidemic of illicit drug use.    Supply reduction will require national and international interdiction measures. The gradual eradication of coca-bush plantations must be initiated in the producing countries, together with a program for planting basic food crops. Such a scheme calls for a new multibillion-dollar, ecologically sound United Nations assistance program (with the cooperation and contribution of the U.S.S.R.) staggered over many years.    At the same time, the consuming country must lower its demand by more strictly enforcing existing laws that ban use and possession of cocaine. Dealers should be subjected to the same sentences imposed on murderers; users should be forced to enter rehabilitation programs, as is currently done in Japan.    Such measures rely upon a strongly expressed sentiment of societal disapproval of cocaine and other illicit drug use by all segments of society. Prohibitive measures cannot be effective in a climate of cultural acceptance of &quot;recreational&quot; drug use, which has led some opinion makers to advocate the legalization of all drugs. Only when the vital grass-roots forces of America, feeling their existence threatened, become determined to fight drugs will they be able to wage a war and win it.    The battle primarily will be one of the mind -- for the constraints that have to be accepted by a progressive and free society. Americans need to know the truth about our common enemy and must be encouraged, as they were during the great wars, by the same unambiguous media that helped the nation to victory.    ---   Dr. Nahas, a pharmacologist at Columbia University's College of Physicians and Surgeons, has studied the effects of addictive drugs over the past 20 years. </TEXT></DOC>