<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871015-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Phone Companies Ought to 'Bundle'---By David L. Wenner</HL><DD> 10/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AITTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Judge Harold Greene has now given the regional Bell companies freedom to use their networks to distribute information services provided by other companies and has removed all constraints on their entering non-telecommunications businesses. But he continues to prohibit them from manufacturing equipment and providing long-distance services.    His key argument is that the local loop (the line that connects the customer with the telephone company's switches) is still a &quot;bottleneck,&quot; a natural monopoly with few competitive alternatives. The regional Bells could use this bottleneck to discriminate against competitors in other telecommunications businesses, which must go through it to reach nearly all customers. Therefore, he reasons, the regional Bells must be constrained from participating in those businesses.    The judge is right about the bottleneck. Indeed, the bottleneck remains three years after he issued his ATandamp;T breakup decree and is likely to stay in place for most customers. The local loops of the future will consist of optical fiber. The regional Bells, which are beginning to install the fiber, are the probable owners and operators of this network. And there are even fewer competitive alternatives to a local fiber network than there are to today's copper one. If Judge Greene were to review the ATandamp;T divestiture agreement in the year 2020, he might well arrive at the same conclusion: The Bells control the bottleneck.    This prospect argues for reducing, not increasing, constraints on the regional companies. If the bottleneck is going to stay there, then the services we receive are going to be constrained by the capabilities the companies put in their networks. We should be paying more attention to motivating them to provide the services the public wants at the best possible price.    This is an important issue. Over the next decade telephone companies could have the technology to give their networks more than 100 times their current capability for carrying services. And well before then, the phone company could offer the average residential customer a broad range of revolutionary new services, such as high-speed facsimile transmission that can replace first-class mail. These services, and many others for business customers, will require massive investment.    But the regional Bells may not make this investment even though it is clear that they could. These are huge companies, together having 2 1/2 times the assets of IBM and an annual cash flow of over $20 billion. However, if they continue to be constrained from providing new telecommunications applications (as they are by Judge Greene's ruling on information services and by FCC rulings in similar areas), or have little incentive to take risks on speculative new capabilities (as is currently the case under rate-of-return regulation), they will spend their money on diversification. And they have already begun to do so. If the Bells do not continue to invest aggressively in their core business, many of the most basic new services won't be widely available until well into the next century.    Recent history shows us how constraints on the regional Bell companies have worked against the general public. For a number of years, they have had the capability to offer such information services as &quot;voice mail&quot; (a way of storing, sending and receiving spoken messages) at relatively low incremental cost, if built into their networks. But regulators have not allowed them to do so, in the hopes that competitors would emerge. As it turned out, few did, and regulators are finally realizing they made a mistake.    The same kind of problem exists on the incentive side. The lengthy, cumbersome and unpredictable regulatory process is a powerful disincentive for telephone companies in pursuing new initiatives, and current rate-of-return regulation is another.    Rate-of-return regulation limits prices by holding down telephone company profits to something like those that would be achieved in a purely competitive market. It has become clear, however, that this type of indirect price regulation provides inadequate incentives for phone companies to reduce their cost or take risks in the introduction of new services.    An alternative under consideration is to negotiate the phone service prices directly and let phone companies share the benefits from more aggressive cost reduction and investment. Customers could benefit by not only getting guaranteed commitments for price declines (at least in real terms), but could also end up with lower prices and more services than they would have under rate-of-return regulation.    Under today's regulatory system, however, such new approaches are very difficult to negotiate. And once agreed upon, they may not last long, due to political pressures. For direct price regulation of intrastate services a phone company would need to negotiate an agreement acceptable to both the public service commission and the legislature in each state in which it operated -- an average of seven states for each regional Bell company. In some states, the public service commissions are highly political, and in others have been known to disagree with legislatures not only on the basis for pricing, but on fundamental regulatory philosophy. In addition, the regulation of interstate services is determined by the FCC, which, in turn, often has had to deal with a balky Congress. Piecemeal approaches to pricing are much more likely to emerge from this process than is any consistent new mechanism.    It is easy to see how the prospect of continued rate-of-return regulation or piecemeal changes to it, coupled with the uncertainty of whether such changes will &quot;stick,&quot; provide an inappropriate environment for innovation and risk taking.    Regulation must provide some constraints on the phone companies to ensure that they don't use their strong positions to the detriment of customers. But with equal fervor we should use regulation to motivate these same phone companies -- the crucial bottleneck. The objective behind regulatory decisions should be the creation of &quot;value&quot; for the customer -- the benefits offered above and beyond the costs of the service. Instead, regulators often use narrower objectives, such as limiting profits or creating competition for its own sake. Telephone companies should be allowed to enter businesses where they are likely to add significant value, even if this does not maximize competition; they should also be given greater incentive to perform, even if this means the most successful ones make more money than they now do.    France's Minitel experiment shows how an appropriate regulatory environment coupled with a clear national policy can yield great value to customers.    The French telecommunications authority (the phone company in France) established a national program that provided information terminals to all telephone subscribers free of charge, ostensibly to automate directory-assistance requests but in reality to create a broad infrastructure for the spread of information services. Because the terminals were free, the subscriber population grew explosively. With millions of accessible subscribers, information providers rushed to develop services for the system -- by the thousands. And with many services available, and many other subscribers for each subscriber to communicate with, network usage grew even more explosively. Profits have increased but, more important, so has the value for the whole country.    Compare this with the chicken-and-egg problem that would have occurred had France had the same situation we face in the U.S., even with the freedom granted under Judge Greene's recent ruling.    First, the regional Bells are constrained in practice from &quot;bundling&quot; equipment and services. Therefore, customers themselves would have had to pay a substantial up-front price for the terminal. Initially, with few other subscribers to communicate with and few services to use, those customers would have decided that the terminal wouldn't provide enough value to justify buying (or even renting) it. Knowing this, information vendors would not have seen enough potential to justify developing new services. As a result, the whole industry would never have gotten off the ground. In fact, the chicken-and-egg problem is not purely hypothetical -- it has already led to the failure of several videotex experiments.    This problem is not limited to videotex services. Most of the revolutionary new services would run into similar problems.    We need a new national policy on the role telecommunications should play in our society. Our current policy is still based on the Communications Act of 1934, framed when the electronic computer was still a dream. The act provided the impetus for achieving the overriding telecommunications objective of that time -- universal service. But this objective has, for all practical purposes, been fulfilled. With no new objective to focus on, policy has drifted, with each regulatory body defending the interests of its own constituency.    A basic policy change would probably require the passage of a new Communications Act. That is not unthinkable: Japan and Britain have, for reasons of national interest, recently made major shifts in their governments' role in telecommunications, and changes are being debated in West Germany, France and Holland.    Somehow we are going to have to get coherent action by Congress and reforms in the regulatory apparatus to enjoy the full benefits of the information age.    ---   Mr. Wenner is a senior partner in the Atlanta office of McKinsey andamp; Co., whose clients include a range of telecommunications companies. Jeffrey Katz of McKinsey also contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>