<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870909-0095 </DOCNO><HL> 'Regulation' Isn't a Dirty Word---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 09/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Every time I leave my house I seem to fall into a web of regulation. If I drive, the township tells me how fast I'm allowed to go, ranging from 25 to 35 miles per hour. If I leave town, the state steps in. On most roads the permissible speed is 55, while it now ranges up to 65 mph on what are called rural interstates. And I'd better watch out for cars with flashing lights watching out that I don't break the regulations.    If I go afoot I don't escape. At the intersections there are those signs reading &quot;walk&quot; or &quot;don't walk.&quot; Car drivers at the same corner are regulated by red, yellow and green lights, sometimes with little arrows pointing left or right. I once got pinched for violating the regulations although a kindly cop excused me on account of my advanced age.    I suppose I should object to all this since the cry of our time is for &quot;deregulation.&quot; Deregulate everything. The airlines. The banks. Stockbrokers. The drug companies.    The theory behind this is that the marketplace will do the regulating. Banks or airlines that don't behave themselves will find their customers going elsewhere. If the customers don't pay attention, caveat emptor.    Much of this cry for deregulation is justified. Much regulation is unnecessary, some actually harmful. The Food and Drug Administration is notorious for its over-caution in protecting us from possibly harmful drugs even at the cost of depriving us of new drugs for many ailments; sometimes it lets a few people have them but prohibits them to the rest of us.    The classic example of too rigid regulation is the Interstate Commerce Commission. In the long ago days of my youth I once took a train from Raleigh, N.C., to Morehead City on the coast. On departure I was the only passenger. On arrival I was the only passenger. Along the way one or two people got on for short trips between towns. The trip took 12 hours. It was gruesome for me and for the railroad. Although the bus, as I learned later, did the trip faster and in more comfort, the railroad had to keep the train running for years because the small towns along the way demanded it and the ICC complied.    If I hesitate to join the hue for deregulation, even when much of the regulation is misguided, it's because I shudder at the thought of a wholly deregulated society. I prefer knowing my pharmacist has to be licensed and that somebody checks on him; so also with the butcher so that I have some assurance his scale registers a true measure.    As a matter of fact, regulation to protect consumers is almost as old as civilization itself. Tourists to the ruins of Pompeii see an early version of the bureau of weights and measures, a place where the townsfolk could go to be sure they weren't cheated by the local tradesmen. Unfortunately a little larceny is too common in the human species.    So regulation in some form or other is one of the prices we pay for our complex civilization. And the more complicated society becomes, the more need for some watching over its many parts. We shouldn't forget that a great deal of the regulation we encounter today in business or in our personal lives arose from a recognized need in the past.    Take the drug companies. It wasn't so very long ago that the countryside was flooded with snake-oil salesmen hawking cures for every ailment and bamboozling credulous folk with worthless nostrums. The Food and Drug Administration Act in 1906 was the outgrowth of a real need, as was the Meat Inspection Act the same year.    Or take banks. Once anybody could start one and run it as the owner pleased. The result was a good bit of carelessness, some clear fraud and several unnecessary banking crises. My own bank today is run by sterling people, but I still feel more comfortable because its activities are subject to periodic inspections, even though I agree that these days banks may be hampered by an excess of regulations and restrictions. Better too much than too little.    I would be happier today with a little more regulation of the airlines and the air lanes. The deregulation that let more lines into the business and let the marketplace set fares has been a boon to travelers. We have cheaper fares and more choice of carriers. But the result has also been more crowding of the air lanes and, quite possibly, some cutting of the corners on maintenance and pilot training.    Anyway, when I take off for some distant place I would feel more comfortable with more restrictions on who can fly where when, with more reassurance on equipment upkeep and more confidence that the pilots up front are well trained and kept up to snuff.    As society (our way of life) gets more complicated there will be newer areas calling for some kind of regulation. The whole area of genes research and genetic manipulation, for example. Or the development of surrogate motherhood. Or the growing use of organ transplants, such as the transplant of adrenal glands as a possible treatment for Parkinson's patients. In The Wall Street Journal last month there was a thought-provoking article by Emanuel Thorne calling for some regulation of this trade in human tissue, especially the use of fetal tissue, which already has been transplanted in West Germany.    The nub of the question, of course, will be, as it is now, what kind of regulation? Once government begins to regulate anything there must be some sort of agency to do it, and that inevitably means a bureaucracy that, like the ICC of old, gets stultified. That in turn means regulating the regulators lest they become sovereign unto themselves. The logical place for overseeing this is in Congress, which creates the regulating agency to begin with. But Congress is itself a bureaucracy of 535 members with different constituencies and different ideas.    The last recourse is us, we the people, who must collectively decide not only what should be regulated but how. If, as I think, the drug industry is being handicapped by too rigid rules on the discovery and use of new drugs for disease, the remedy lies with Congress -- and Congress responds to what it discerns as the public sentiment. But in this, as in other examples, we must take care not to throw out the baby with the bath water.    In short, regulating the regulators is a political question and therefore not likely to be settled beyond cavil, and certainly not forever. But however we deal with the questions, now and in the future, we should never make the mistake of thinking that &quot;regulation&quot; is a dirty word.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>