<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870316-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Kidder Stays Clear of Insider Charges,At Least Temporarily, Sources Assert---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GE GOVMTSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK </DATELINE><TEXT>   Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. has staved off criminal insider-trading charges, at least temporarily, according to people familiar with the government's insider-trading investigation.    Kidder Peabody feared that the government might seek to indict the firm along with three Wall Street executives arrested and charged last month with an insider-trading conspiracy, the people said. But the firm helped arrange a postponement, announced Friday, of the government's deadline for indicting the three individuals, thereby obtaining time to try to persuade U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani not to pursue an indictment against the firm, the people added.    Criminal charges against Kidder Peabody, one of the country's most prestigious investment banking firms and a unit of General Electric Co., would be a dramatic development in what is already Wall Street's worst insider-trading scandal. Despite the numerous individuals charged, no criminal charges have so far been filed against any firms.    As a result of an agreement between the defendants and the government, announced by the government Friday, the government now has until April 10 to return indictments against the three men arrested last month. They are Robert Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs and Co.; Richard Wigton, head of arbitrage and over-the-counter trading at Kidder Peabody; and Timothy Tabor, a former arbitrager at Kidder Peabody.    Meanwhile, the government disclosed additional evidence it has obtained against Mr. Freeman. In a search warrant unsealed in federal court, the government alleged that Mr. Freeman told former Kidder Peabody takeover specialist Martin A. Siegel that he had &quot;sources of inside information&quot; at other investment banking firms besides Kidder Peabody. The government also alleged that Mr. Freeman told Mr. Siegel that he created &quot;padded&quot; research files at Goldman Sachs to disguise his insider trading.    The search warrant asked for the research files of Goldman Sachs's arbitrage department covering 43 stocks. All are companies that were the subjects of successful or attempted takeovers in which Kidder Peabody was involved as an investment banker from June 1984 through January 1986.    As previously reported, Mr. Freeman was implicated by Mr. Siegel, who pleaded guilty to two felony counts last month and agreed to cooperate with the government. Mr. Siegel has testified that Mr. Freeman leaked confidential information about Goldman Sachs clients to him. Mr. Siegel also has testified that in return he leaked confidential information about Kidder Peabody clients to Mr. Freeman.    The government alleged one instance in which Mr. Freeman traded in his personal account using inside information obtained from Mr. Siegel. The government also has charged that Mr. Siegel passed inside information from Mr. Freeman to Messrs. Wigton and Tabor, who used it to trade in Kidder Peabody arbitrage accounts.    As previously reported, the government has obtained Goldman Sachs trading records indicating that Mr. Freeman engaged in massive trading in his personal account, trust accounts and the firm's accounts, in advance of takeover announcements or in advance of significant developments in pending takeover deals. The search warrant is asking Goldman Sachs for its files relating to Mr. Freeman's trading. While the government might also decide to seek criminal charges against Goldman Sachs, people familiar with the case said the firm hasn't been given any indication that such a step is being considered by the U.S. attorney.    Paul J. Curran, a lawyer for Mr. Freeman, said that the warrant &quot;contains additional false allegations by Mr. Siegel. The falsity of these allegations will be established and Robert Freeman will be exonerated.&quot;    Friday's postponement capped several days of intense negotiations among lawyers for Kidder Peabody and Goldman Sachs, the three executives and government prosecutors. According to the people familiar with the case, the government had already presented its evidence before a federal grand jury here and was prepared to announce the indictments Friday. In a statement, the U.S. attorney's office said that it and the three individuals arrested had agreed that a postponement would be in the best interests of both the defendants and the government.    According to the people familiar with the case, however, it was Mr. Wigton, acting at the urging of Kidder Peabody, who sought a postponement. After the government agreed, it notified lawyers for Messrs. Freeman and Tabor, and they, too, agreed to the delay.    Andrew Lawler, attorney for Mr. Tabor, said the delay is &quot;strictly procedural&quot; and declined to comment further. Stanley S. Arkin, attorney for Mr. Wigton, said &quot;the fact of an adjournment shouldn't be taken as meaning anything.&quot; Lawrence Pedowitz, a lawyer representing Mr. Freeman and Goldman Sachs, declined to comment, as did a lawyer for Kidder Peabody.    According to the people familiar with the case, officials of Kidder Peabody and GE want more time to pursue their own investigation and to try to persuade Mr. Giuliani not to indict Kidder Peabody. While neither Goldman Sachs nor Mr. Freeman initiated the delay, Goldman officials were said to be eager not to have Mr. Freeman be the sole individual indicted Friday.    A Kidder Peabody spokesman said only that the firm &quot;is not a party to the extension or any such agreement.&quot;    In Fairfield, Conn., a GE spokesman said it would be inappropriate for the company to comment while its own and government investigations of Kidder Peabody are in progress.    From the government's point of view, the delay gains time and preserves an incentive for the defendants to enter guilty pleas, the people familiar with the case said. Under procedures followed by the U.S. attorney's office, a defendant who pleads guilty before being indicted gains some flexibility in determining which judge handles the sentencing. Some federal judges are known to be more lenient than others.    So far, there hasn't been any indication of a crack in the defendants' ranks. Kidder Peabody is understood to be paying for both Messrs. Wigton's and Tabor's legal expenses, even though Mr. Tabor hasn't been employed at the firm for about a year. People familiar with the government's investigation said that on the afternoon of his arrest last month, the government tried to persuade Mr. Tabor to make and record phone calls to other suspects. They said Mr. Tabor refused after consulting with his lawyer.    In an affidavit supporting the search warrant, Robert H. Paschel, a U.S. postal inspector assigned to the insider-trading investigation, describes some of the information supplied by Mr. Siegel against Mr. Freeman.    According to the affidavit, on several occasions &quot;Freeman made comments which indicated that he had other sources of inside information besides Siegel. For example, on more than one occasion, during a discussion with Siegel, Freeman told Siegel not to 'worry,' because he could talk to certain investment bankers at other firms who, he asserted, would 'help him out.'&quot;    Mr. Freeman also told Mr. Siegel &quot;that he was careful to create and maintain padded research files with respect to the risk arbitrage positions as to which Siegel provided inside information. In other words, even when his risk arbitrage trading decisions were based on inside information misappropriated by Siegel, Freeman created and maintained research files so that the decisions would appear to have been based on such research, and not on inside information,&quot; the affidavit said.    According to the affidavit, Mr. Freeman also told Mr. Siegel that he invested in takeover stocks in his own trading account. And the affidavit indicates that Mr. Freeman traded certain takeover stocks both in the firm's account and his own. It said that in certain instances Mr. Freeman explained that &quot;there was no conflict of interest&quot; in his trading because Goldman had finished accumulating securities for the firm's account.    A Goldman Sachs spokesman said, &quot;We are as anxious as anyone to have the truth determined, but we believe allegations of this sort should be resolved in court. As we are being confronted piecemeal with a series of allegations, we will say that based on an investigation by independent counsel, we have no reason to believe that these allegations are in any way correct.&quot;    According to people familiar with the government's investigation, the 43 stocks mentioned in the warrant were among those that Mr. Siegel has told the government he leaked inside information about to Mr. Freeman. However, these people said that the government's investigation has expanded to involve additional stocks.    The stocks mentioned in the warrant are:    Cole National Corp., SCA Services Inc., Malone andamp; Hyde Inc., Amerace Corp., Sargent Industries Inc., Avco Corp., REDM Industries Inc., Monchik-Weber Corp., Pay 'N Save Corp., Carnation Co., Midlands Energy Co., Tri-South Investments Inc. and Alaska Pacific Bancorp.    Also, Prentice-Hall Inc., Energy Reserves Group Inc., Avco Corp., Datapoint Corp., NI Industries Inc., Western Casualty andamp; Surety Co., Hook Drugs Inc., JM Tull Industries Inc., Frontier Holdings Inc., Storer Communications Inc., Gulfstream Land andamp; Development Corp., Communications Industries Inc., Shop andamp; Go Inc. and Portec Inc.    And Dyco Petroleum Corp., Van Dusen Air Inc., Franklin Bancorp, Transway International Corp., IVB Financial Corp., Richardson-Vicks Inc., Cessna Aircraft Co., Edgcomb Steel of New England Inc., Great Lakes International Inc., Beatrice Cos., Pittsburgh Brewing Co., Trans Louisiana Gas Co. Inc., Provident Institution for Savings, Union Carbide Corp., Citadel Holding Corp. and Pioneer Corp.    ---   William Power contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>