<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870623-0102 </DOCNO><HL> At Night to Avoid Heavy Chinese Shelling---By Barry WainStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> HA GIANG, Vietnam  </DATELINE><TEXT>   To avoid being targeted by Chinese gunners, we set out from Ha Giang for the front under cover of darkness in a dark-green, Soviet-made, four-wheel-drive vehicle, with headlights extinguished. The road, designated No. 2, follows the Lo River through open terrain for most of the 13 miles to the border.    The vehicle lurches, bumps and sways over ruts and around craters from yesterday's bombardment. One shell managed to cut the army's communication lines, strung loosely in the grass at the roadside. The Chinese have a good fix on the road: They built it as an aid project in 1963, when China and North Vietnam were allied against the U.S.    A checkpoint looms. Behind it sit 76.2mm and 105-mm artillery pieces, silent as usual. The Vietnamese talk about not returning fire because they believe in settling things peacefully, but the fact is that they find it too expensive to shoot back indiscriminately. They wait until they are being attacked or have a specific target.    Three miles from the frontier, the vehicle starts to wind and climb as it swings westward onto a secondary road, part of a network built for military operations. One-person bomb shelters have been cut in the hillside every few yards.    Fighting between Vietnam and China has sputtered along their ill-defined, 680-mile border since early 1979, when China invaded its neighbor for a month to &quot;teach it a lesson&quot; for toppling the Beijing-backed government in neighboring Cambodia.    It isn't always clear what is happening on the frontier. Each side claims that most incidents are provoked by the other. For example, China says that last year the Vietnamese military made more than 1,000 &quot;armed provocations,&quot; which included incursions into Chinese territory, the firing of 400,000 rounds of artillery and the killing or wounding of 1,000 civilians. On the Vietnamese side, 15,000 people from three border villages, mostly old men, women and children, have been resettled away from danger.    Most Western diplomats and independent analysts believe China is usually the instigator; it often has threatened to teach Vietnam a &quot;second lesson.&quot; China turns up the heat on the border when Vietnamese troops launch their annual dry-season offensive against Chinese-supported resistance forces in Cambodia, observers say. The hot spot in recent years has been the Ha Giang area of Ha Tuyen province, opposite China's Yunnan province.    Hanoi says Chinese troops have engaged in &quot;land-grabbing&quot; thrusts and now occupy 10 positions as far as 1.2 miles inside Vietnam. At one point, Chinese and Vietnamese soldiers are dug little more than 20 yards apart, sheltered in limestone caves separated by deep ravines. They snipe at each other with barbs and bullets, according to Vietnamese officials, hurling political slogans, leaflets and food parcels as well as grenades.    The skirmishing sometimes flares into open battle. In early January, the Vietnamese say Chinese forces attacked in regimental strength, sending human waves across the border. Hanoi said it killed 1,500 Chinese. Beijing said it killed and wounded 500 Vietnamese in repulsing an attack.    Amid the conflicting claims, one thing is certain: China continues to pound Vietnam relentlessly with artillery and mortar fire. Local Vietnamese count at least 400 rounds a day, every day. The tally reached 62,000 at the height of the three-day battle in January, they say.    Our destination this day is H'ring, once a prosperous village that was destroyed by fighting more than three years ago and is now the site of an army camp. About a mile away is the peak named 1509 by the Vietnamese -- for its height in meters above sea level -- from which Chinese guns control traffic on route No. 2.    Huts with thatched roofs and walls made of loose rocks and ammunition boxes are tucked against a sheer cliff for protection. Nearby hills are scarred in white where shells have struck, exposing the limestone. Trees and untended paddies have been burned.    The mountains in the background are dark, shrouded in pre-dawn mist that thins as it reaches the valley floor. The haze softens the landscape and contributes to a picture of deceptive tranquility.    Soldiers emerge from their rough quarters, barefoot and wearing undershirts and shorts or baggy trousers, to wash in a stream. Some brush their teeth at what an officer calls an &quot;open bathroom,&quot; a cement strip encircling a well. One of them exercises by running on the spot.    The soldiers are part-time farmers, keeping the camp self-sufficient in vegetables, chicken and pork. Farming comes easy to them since most are the drafted sons of peasants.    From the camp, the Vietnamese patrol the mountains to guard against Chinese encroachment. They also send supplies to their colleagues holed up in the caves, using secret routes and even tunnels to get there undetected. A more subtle challenge for the Vietnamese is to retain the loyalty of the 20 ethnic groups, including Hmong, that inhabit the hills.    Vietnamese patrols intercept all sorts of people: smugglers; tribesmen from both sides visiting relatives; Chinese soldiers in civilian dress, some claiming to be lost, some asking for asylum, some insisting they are Sino-Vietnamese who fled to China before 1979 and now want to return. Prisoners are exchanged periodically.    According to Vietnamese officials, the Chinese spread propaganda by loudspeaker and in leaflets delivered by artillery shell or floated down the Lo River in packages of food and luxury items. Sometimes the packages contain a more lethal message: they explode in the face of the person trying to recover the goods. (Beijing denies the charge. If there are explosives in the river, says the official Xinhua news agency, the Vietnamese put them there to hurt their own people who cross the border to buy daily necessities.)    For the soldiers at H'ring, it all adds up to danger. &quot;Some of my troops are killed or wounded daily,&quot; says Nguyen Van Thanh, the local commander. &quot;Usually they are caught by artillery or mortar fire, though sometimes they are shot&quot; at close range. He won't specify casualties.    Pham Van Thu, a 20-year-old farmer from Vinh Phu province who was drafted two years ago, has seen a friend from his village killed and four others wounded in a mortar attack. How do he and his friends feel about the conflict? &quot;I would say that we aren't afraid,&quot; he says, blushing. A civilian interpreter from Hanoi says Pvt. Thu is probably more nervous about being interviewed than fighting the Chinese.    Light is coming to the mountains, and it's time to go -- time to retreat to Ha Giang before the mist lifts from the peaks and the Chinese gunners resume their target practice. </TEXT></DOC>