<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Trade SanctionsExpected to LastAt Least to June---U.S. Imposes 100% TariffOn Some Japanese-BuiltElectronics Gear, Tools---By Eduardo Lachica and Ellen HumeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN HIT MC SANNY CANNY SNE MKTAY NIPNYELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The stiff tariffs President Reagan imposed on certain Japanese electronic consumer goods are likely to remain in effect until at least mid-June and maybe longer, according to U.S. officials.    The president, who was vacationing in Santa Barbara, Calif., imposed 100% tariffs, effective last Friday, on three types of Japanese imports: certain portable and desktop microcomputers -- the more advanced models that process data in units consisting of 16 bits of information -- color television sets whose diagonal screen sizes range from 18 to 20 inches, and three types of power hand tools. The three groups represented annual imports of $180 million, $90 million and $30 million respectively.    The tariff decision was designed to send a strong signal to other countries that the U.S. won't tolerate infractions of trade agreements. At the same time the president was trying to convince Congress that he can get tough on trading partners, without being compelled to do so by legislation. But Mr. Reagan measured his action to hit American producers and consumers as lightly as possible.    Mr. Reagan said the sanctions will be lifted as soon as the U.S. has &quot;firm and continuing evidence&quot; that Japan has started complying with the semiconductor agreement reached between the two counties last summer. In the accord, the Japanese agreed to stop &quot;dumping&quot; their goods -- that is, selling at prices below production costs or less than those in their home market -- in third-country markets. In addition, the Japanese had agreed to give U.S. chip-makers a larger share of their domestic market.    As a practical matter, it will take at least two months for the U.S. to obtain new statistical information on Japanese semiconductor sales. &quot;We just can't phony up the figures,&quot; said a senior trade negotiator. &quot;And as for dumping, it just has to stop.&quot;    Moreover, Reagan administration officials said they are separating the semiconductor issue from other trade issues with Japan -- including getting Tokyo to open its markets to U.S. farm products, construction and telecommunications companies, and increasing Japanese public-sector purchases of U.S. supercomputers.    As a result, officials suggested there is little chance that Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, who is scheduled to begin an official visit to Washington April 29, will be able to persuade Mr. Reagan to dismantle the penalties immediately in exchange for other trade concessions.    &quot;We aren't thinking about making concessions in exchange for lifting of the sanctions,&quot; said Japanese Special Envoy Shintaro Abe in a Tokyo news conference on Friday. Mr. Abe is expected to work on a package of trade accommodations beyond the chip dispute in a trip to Washington this week, in preparation for Mr. Nakasone's state visit.    Mr. Abe declined to discuss what specific proposals he would make to President Reagan and other top U.S. officials. He said he wants to emphasize the broader U.S.-Japan relationship. &quot;I want to ensure it isn't undermined, but is enhanced,&quot; he said. &quot;The trade issue has become so serious that the relationship of trust and confidence that we have been building with the U.S. is being aggravated.&quot;    Despite the severity of the sanction decision, both countries sought to handle the issue gingerly. &quot;The president is very concerned about having to take this action,&quot; said White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater, adding, &quot;We don't want a trade war or anything that could even come close to that.&quot;    Japan issued a statement through its embassy in Washington saying it was &quot;deeply disappointed&quot; by Mr. Reagan's action. But Japan's decision to bring its case through the obscure workings of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva suggests that Tokyo wants to let tensions cool a bit and allow Messrs. Reagan and Nakasone some time to patch up the relationship between the two countries on trade issues.    Yesterday, U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter said on the nationally syndicated &quot;John McLaughlin: One on One,&quot; television program that the U.S. would abide by whatever GATT decides. But he said it is highly unlikely that the international body would rule in Japan's favor. If it did, it could order the U.S. to compensate Japan for the higher tariffs.    The Japanese insist they have lived up to the accord. But the dispute is complicated by the fact that the two governments don't agree on a common method for calculating the extent to which Japanese semiconductors are being dumped in foreign markets. U.S. officials complain that Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry hasn't put enough effort into monitoring Japanese semiconductor sales in Asia and Europe.    The Reagan administration hopes the tough new sanctions against Japan will dissuade Congress from approving an amendment sponsored by Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) to require presidential retaliation against countries that have huge trade surpluses with the U.S.    Rep. Gephardt, a presidential contender, called the action &quot;an important step in breaking down the impression that Americans are patsies in the trade field.&quot; But he said he would push ahead with his amendment, asserting that it would provide a standard of accountability for trade agreements as well as predictability in trade relations.    The additional 100% tariffs, which would effectively double the price of the affected goods if passed on to consumers, were designed to effectively shut the products out of the U.S. market. The tariffs will apply to goods imported or removed from warehouses beginning last Friday. The previous tariffs were 3.9% for small computers, 5% for color TV sets, and 2.2% for power tools.    The choice of products was tailored to inflict severe penalties against six Japanese electronics firms that the U.S. alleges breached the semiconductor accord. They include Mitsubishi Electric Corp., Toshiba Corp., Hitachi Ltd., NEC Corp., Fujitsu Ltd., and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co.    At the same time, the U.S. tariffs were calculated to minimize the adverse effects on American consumers and producers. Since equivalent products in all three categories are available from both U.S. and non-Japanese foreign suppliers, the impact on consumer prices will be &quot;minimal,&quot; according to Mr. Fitzwater, the White House spokesman.    The White House also dropped from its list of potential targets those products in which Japan has a dominant U.S. market share. &quot;If they included video tape recorders and compact-disk players, we might've had an open rebellion,&quot; said Alan Schlosser, a spokesman for the Electronic Industries Association.    The U.S. computer industry had protested when an early list of possible products for retaliation included Japanese imports of floppy disks, high-resolution screens and other parts regularly supplied to U.S. computer makers.    The White House responded by targeting only finished microcomputers. &quot;We aren't as badly hit as we expected,&quot; acknowledged Vico Henriques, president of the Washington-based Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association.    The targeted products also excluded less powerful microcomputers as well as mainframe and supercomputers. Television sets produced in the U.S. -- including most of Sony Corp.'s popular color sets -- and television set parts were also excluded.    While intended to punish Japanese companies for failing to comply with the semiconductor accord, the tariffs will hit some Japanese companies that weren't part of the pact. &quot;That can't be helped,&quot; said a U.S. trade official, noting that the government can't single out individual companies when setting tariff levels.    Japanese companies that weren't part of the semiconductor accord but are subject to the duties include Sanyo Electric Co., Canon Inc., Sony Corp., Sharp Corp. and Epson Corp., all producers of desktop computers. In addition, Makita Electric Works Ltd. faces the higher duties on the 10% of its U.S. power tools sales that are imported from Japan. The rest of the power tools the company sells in the U.S. are produced in Georgia, and thus won't be subject to the tariffs.    The tariffs will apply to power hand tools of three types: rotary drills that aren't battery powered and that have a chuck size of a half inch or more; electro-pneumatic rotary and percussion hammers; and certain grinders, sanders and polishers, except for angle grinders, sanders and polishers, belt sanders, and orbital and straight-line sanders. </TEXT></DOC>