<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:When Picking a Personal Computer, FirstBe Prepared to Be Overwhelmed; Then...---By Paul B. CarrollStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAN CPQ IBM AAPLCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   The personal-computer industry says it is moving toward making the machines as easy to use as toasters, but purchasing one still is more like buying a jet fighter than a household appliance.    Personal-computer advertisements -- touting such features as 10 MHz speed, 20 meg capacity and an 80286 chip -- appear to be aimed at those with a degree in electrical engineering. Comparison shopping can be difficult because manufacturers' prices often reflect different amounts of equipment. And the landscape has become much more cluttered in recent months with product announcements by International Business Machines Corp., Apple Computer Inc., Tandy Corp. and others.    &quot;When I think about it, I get really appalled,&quot; says Jonathan Rotenberg, president of the Boston Computer Society, the nation's largest user group.    Yet hundreds of thousands of people will decide to buy a personal computer for the home this year. So, how best to approach the market?    If a buyer needs a computer compatible with a machine at the office or with the kids' computers at school, the choices immediately narrow. Because IBM dominates the business market in personal computers and Apple is No. 1 in education, most people will want to buy an IBM or IBM-compatible machine for office-related work, or an Apple II for the kids.    Many schools and companies make such purchases easier these days by selling new machines to students or employees and passing along volume discounts of 25% to 45% that they get from the manufacturer. In addition, some companies that bought PCs and PC XTs a few years ago and are now replacing them will sell the machines -- the low end of IBM's original line of personal computers -- to employees for a song.    If compatibility isn't an issue, the array of choices can be overwhelming. In general, industry executives, analysts and members of user groups say someone who wants business software will want to look at IBM-compatible machines, and particularly at Tandy models introduced last month. A consumer who doesn't know computer basics and wants a machine that's especially easy to use may want to look at the Apple line, including one of the Macintoshes introduced in March.    The new Tandy products are attractive mainly because they are backed by a big name at prices more commonly associated with the bit players in the industry. The Tandy 1000 HX, compatible with the IBM XT, costs just $699, including circuit boards that let the computer talk to a monitor and a printer. That's hundreds of dollars less than an actual IBM XT and only slightly more than most comparable no-name clones.    IBM has stopped producing PC XTs as part of a bid to get the world to shift to the line it introduced in April. But the risk of machines compatible with the XT becoming orphans appears small. XT-compatible computers can run all existing software for IBM-compatible machines and can be upgraded to run software written for an operating system that Microsoft Corp. is close to shipping for the new IBM line. In any case, that software won't start to reach the market for another year or so, and most will be aimed at business.    In the meantime, prices of PC XTs and XT clones have dropped about 15% since the first of the year, and analysts expect them to fall further. Richard J. Matlack, president of Infocorp, a research firm, says XT-class computers are &quot;reasonably powerful machines, and the prices are quite good right now.&quot;    For someone seeking more power -- to handle a spreadsheet or a big data base, for example -- many specialists recommend Tandy's 1000 TX. This computer is compatible with the PC AT, which represented the high end of IBM's old personal-computer line. The 1000 TX, like Tandy's 1000 HX, costs only slightly more than most no-name clones: $1,199, including monitor and printer circuit boards.    Speed freaks may prefer machines from Compaq Computer Corp. IBM's new machines also operate faster than Tandy's, and the graphics are snazzier. But the Compaq and IBM machines respond more to the needs of business than of home users. The IBM line, for instance, is designed to make it easier to link personal computers with each other and with a mainframe -- hardly an issue in the home. Even a low-end product that IBM announced last month is aimed at the education market more than the home. IBM has shied away from the home market since its PCjr, targeted for that niche, flopped two years ago.    In any case, the benefits of the IBM and Compaq computers carry a hefty price: The machines cost several hundred dollars to $1,000 more than the Tandy 1000 TX.    &quot;The performance of all the machines is pretty much the same, and the average consumer doesn't need the architecture of the new IBM line,&quot; says Michele Preston, an analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc.    A couple of notes of caution, though, about the IBM-compatible world: Software comes in a confusing array these days. It can come on floppy disks that are either 3 1/2 or 5 1/4 inches in diameter and that hold anywhere from 360 kilobytes of data to 1.44 megabytes. If compatibility with an office or school personal computer is an issue, a buyer must match not only the size but also the storage capacity of the floppy disk drives. If, say, an executive uses a 1.2-megabyte floppy disk at work, he or she won't be able to use a 360-kilobyte disk in that machine.    In addition, assembling a system that can do any useful work generally costs several hundred to a thousand dollars more than advertised prices. Most prices, for instance, don't include a monitor, a circuit board that controls the monitor, a modem and a printer.    If the IBM world seems too confusing, a consumer might look at the new Macintosh SE. It and the Macintosh II are aimed primarily at the business market and are a bit pricey, but their ease of use has attracted some people buying for the home. Because they have sold well, software companies have released more programs for the Macintosh line, including some solid business software.    The Macintosh II, which is roughly equivalent in power to the high end of the new IBM line, is overpowered for the home market. And, at up to $10,000, it's probably too expensive, like the high-end IBM models. But the Macintosh SE and its predecessor, the Macintosh Plus, which use an older chip than the Macintosh II, are more affordable, at $1,600 to $3,000. The Macintosh SE doesn't go much beyond the Plus, but it offers an optional 20-megabyte hard disk drive, and it has an expansion slot. Most of the circuit boards that fit into the slot play to businesses' needs, such as networking, but the slot also gives home users the option of upgrading the machine later.    Whatever a consumer decides, analysts say the best deals are likely to be available late in the year, because manufacturers and dealers typically offer discounts around Christmas. </TEXT></DOC>