<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880707-0139 </DOCNO><HL> A Serious Threat to HMOs' Health </HL><AUTHOR> William B. Schwartz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS PHA </IN><TEXT>   Health-maintenance organizations are in trouble. Recent reports indicate that HMOs, long hailed as the path to cost containment, are in financial distress. Seventy-one percent faced deficits in 1986, the latest year for which data are available, according to a study by Jurgovan andamp; Blair, a Potomac, Md., consulting firm.    Explanations abound. High start-up costs, poor management, inadequate market research and insufficient payments by Medicare have all probably played a part. Resolving these difficulties could put HMOs on a sounder footing, but a more serious threat to their competitive position has gone undiagnosed. HMOs are vulnerable because their one cost advantage over traditional fee-for-service care -- the use of fewer hospital days -- is eroding.    In all other areas of patient care, HMOs differ little from the competition. To begin with, the annual rate of rise in HMO costs has been indistinguishable from that in the fee-for-service sector. For example, a study that I conducted with three colleagues indicated that from 1976 to 1981 costs in both sectors rose about 75%. A 1980 study by economist Harold Luft of the University of California also indicated that the rates of increase were almost equal during the period 1961 to 1974.    This parallel growth is not surprising, because both HMOs and the fee-for-service sector have had to face the same dramatic increase in new and expensive technology. Coronary bypass surgery, hip replacement and intensive-care units are but the tip of the iceberg. Moreover, accelerated technologic innovation over the next decade will aggravate this problem for all providers. If HMOs, as they promise, continue to make available the benefits of expensive diagnostic and therapeutic advances, they will inevitably face the same financial pressures that affect other providers.    What of the saving from health maintenance? Although some HMOs make more vigorous efforts at preventive medicine than do fee-for-service providers, there is no evidence that such efforts have had an appreciable impact on costs.    Finally, HMOs have differed little from their competitors in the provision of ambulatory care. The per-capita number of ambulatory visits in HMOs and in fee-for-service controls, according to a variety of studies, has been almost equal.    Rather, HMOs have been less costly than other providers because, as Mr. Luft has shown, for many years they have used an average of 30% fewer in-patient hospital days per enrollee than in the fee-for-service sector. But this margin is eroding because the pressures of rapidly rising costs are forcing fee-for-service insurers to emulate HMOs. Based on figures provided by the American Hospital Association, inpatient days fell 18% in the U.S. between 1982 and 1987.    Fortunately for HMOs, some of the saving in the fee-for-service sector has not reached the bottom line of the fee-for-service insurer. Many patients not admitted to the hospital seek care instead in clinics, doctors' offices and ambulatory surgical facilities. The resulting increase in ambulatory care will, in the short term, help HMOs maintain their cost advantage. But competition and the pressure on all providers to contain costs can be expected to largely eliminate whatever unnecessary ambulatory care is being provided in the fee-for-service sector, just as is occurring in the case of hospital days. And at this point much of the competitive edge of the HMO will have disappeared.    As HMOs lose their edge in hospital days, what are their options for a new competitive strategy? Once they have squeezed out any last vestige of inefficiency, the only tactic that can allow HMOs to remain the low-cost provider will be through a cutback on provision of beneficial care. HMOs can limit consultations by specialists, trim back on expensive tests such as magnetic resonance imaging, and hold off on open-heart surgery except in the most disabling cases of angina.    The patient will, of course, have little or no hand in making these investment decisions. When choices on tests and treatment must be made, the physician will decide. The patient, having ceded his authority to the HMO, must settle for what is offered to him, unless he wishes to pay the cost of obtaining care outside the plan.    At least for a time, HMOs will probably be able to compete by reducing service without the patient's knowledge. Most patients will not be aware of an expensive test forgone or a consultation not provided -- omissions that can readily escape detection if they are limited in scope.    But when the outer bounds of this strategy have been reached, HMOs almost certainly will become more forthright about what they are offering. To meet the test of the marketplace, they are likely to openly differentiate themselves according to price, range of services, and quality.    In the highly competitive marketplace that is now evolving, many health maintenance organizations may well be impelled to change their style from lean to mean. But most important, it now seems clear that employers and government must give up their fantasy that HMOs have some magic that can provide a painless path to fiscal salvation.    ---   Dr. Schwartz is a professor of medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine. He is the principal adviser to the Health Policy Program at RAND Corp. </TEXT></DOC>