<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Lack of Commitment: Home Buyers Find'Locked-In' Mortgage Rates Often Aren't---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LNF WY CCIBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Angry mortgage applicants across the country are discovering that the loan rates they thought were &quot;locked in&quot; really weren't locked in at all.    The sharp rise in mortgage rates of as much as two percentage points in recent weeks is leading many lenders to trigger escape clauses written into their rate commitments. When rates were falling, borrowers tended not to notice such clauses, but now they are getting a crash course in reading the fine print.    Many borrowers also are complaining to state regulators that lenders slowed the processing of applications or suddenly tightened credit standards so that they could back out of low-rate commitments.    A few states are considering legal action against lenders; others have passed or are debating bills to regulate the way rate commitments can be made. And Sen. William Proxmire, the Wisconsin Democrat who heads the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, is studying whether federal legislation is needed.    In Maryland, William A. Fogle Jr., secretary of the department of licensing and regulation, says his office has received more than 2,000 telephone calls and more than 200 written complaints since mid-April about lenders backing out of rate commitments. About 15 have been resolved in favor of the borrower so far, he says. An additional eight have been settled in favor of the lender, and the rest are pending.    Other states have had similar experiences. &quot;When rates took that big jump, we started getting phone calls,&quot; says Douglas Blanke, who runs the consumer protection unit of the Minnesota attorney general's office. He says his office and another state department that regulates real estate and banking have received several hundred calls complaining about rate commitments that aren't being honored.    One caller was Gregory Burns, who produces videotapes for St. Mary's Hospital in Minneapolis. On March 9, he signed an application with the local office of Lomas andamp; Nettleton Co., a unit of Dallas-based Lomas andamp; Nettleton Financial Corp., to refinance his Federal Housing Administration-guaranteed loan at 8.5%, plus a fee of 3% of the loan amount. He was told the rate would be locked for 60 days.    But in early April, he says, his loan officer called and said the rate would be increased because the Veterans Administration had raised the maximum rate on loans that it guarantees. When Mr. Burns protested, he was told that the back of the rate-lock form contained a clause allowing an increase if the VA rate changed.    Mr. Burns says that he wasn't given a copy of the rate-lock agreement in March and adds that it was the only one of eight or 10 forms he signed that day that had anything written on the back. He eventually accepted a loan at 9.5% plus a 3.5% fee. &quot;I lost $60 a month&quot; by taking the higher-rate loan, Mr. Burns says.    Lomas andamp; Nettleton, the nation's second-largest mortgage banker, says the VA-rate escape clause is standard in its rate commitment letters. The VA rate ceiling is used because the FHA no longer sets a ceiling rate.    In Texas, however, the state attorney general's office says it may sue the company over the clause. &quot;We believe that practice in this instance is a violation of our state deceptive trade practices act,&quot; says Stephen Gardner, an assistant attorney general.    James Wooten, president of Lomas andamp; Nettleton, says the commitment letter is &quot;clear, concise, well-written, and in the opinion of our law firm, completely legal.&quot; He admits, however, that &quot;there are a lot of people that are upset about the increase in rates.&quot;    Mortgage bankers acknowledge that the alleged failures to honor loan-rate commitments are causing problems. &quot;It's certainly an issue I've become aware of over the past few days,&quot; says Warren Lasko, executive vice president of the Mortgage Bankers Association of America. He contends that &quot;any reputable lender is going to live up to the letter of the commitment contract they have made.&quot; But he adds that &quot;there's a lot of misinformation and misunderstandings.&quot;    To reduce the confusion, the Minnesota legislature is considering a bill requiring that all rate commitments be made in writing. Any commitments made over the telephone would have to be confirmed within 72 hours.    Legislatures in Connecticut and Maryland have approved bills requiring mortgage-rate commitments to be in writing. The Connecticut bill, which has been signed by the governor and takes effect Oct. 1, requires that if a rate commitment is made, it must be for a period at least as long as the lender expects it will take to process the application.    In Maryland, a bill that the governor is expected to sign would require lenders to put the terms of a rate commitment into writing within four days of receiving an application. Terms of the commitment, however, could allow the rate to float.    Because of the recent volatility of rates, many lenders have shortened the time for which they will lock in a rate. Until late last year, Pacific First Mortgage Corp., a unit of Pacific First Federal Savings bank in Seattle, offered a rate lock of 45 days, says Richard Anderson, a senior vice president. Last November, the mortgage company began charging a separate fee equal to 0.5% of the loan for a 60-day lock.    But Pacific First abandoned its rate-lock program last month &quot;as rates started moving quick and furiously,&quot; Mr. Anderson says. Today, the company offers only a 15-day rate lock between the time a loan is approved and it actually closes. The company says that period is usually sufficient to close a loan in its markets. Such rate locks are common among major mortgage bankers and thrifts.    Still, some rate locks are available for a price. Weyerhaeuser Mortgage Co. and Republic Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association, both units of Weyerhaeuser Co., Tacoma, Wash., offer a 75-day rate lock for a fee of 0.5% of the loan amount. And Citicorp Savings, the Oakland, Calif.-based thrift unit of Citicorp, offers a 90-day rate lock for a 0.75% fee. In each case, the borrower still gets the benefit of any decline in rates.    Weyerhaeuser Mortgage and Republic Federal also offer a 75-day rate lock for no additional charge. Under that program, however, the rate can't decline.    For customers who are willing to take a little more risk, Citicorp Savings offers free a 90-day guarantee that the rate on a mortgage won't be more than one percentage point higher than the rate in effect when an application is filed. As with the paid rate lock, the customer will get a lower rate if rates decline while the application is being processed. </TEXT></DOC>