<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Hungary Must Press on With Reforms---By Peter Lorincze</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> BUDAPEST  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Hungarian economy has been the focus of international attention since its reform process began in 1968. Years of economic growth have been followed in the past two years by deterioration. New reforms could bring tensions and risks but are inevitable.    In the early 1980s observers paid particular attention to us because we succeeded in turning around our hard-currency trade balance from a $1.2 billion deficit in 1978 to a $500 million surplus in 1984. This $1.7 billion swing was achieved while the growth rate of the economy averaged 1.8% a year, equal to that of the Western European developed market economies, and while the standard of living was maintained at a level similar to that in Mediterranean countries.    In the past two years, this process unfortunately was interrupted, with current account deficits of $457 million in 1985, $1.4 billion in 1986, and $484 million in the first three months of this year. The 1986 economic results were especially disappointing: There was an over-distribution in the Hungarian economy -- meaning that the value of consumption exceeded that of production. Thus, the budget deficit for the year exceeded the planned limit of 24 billion forints by 23 billion forints ($510 million at the official exchange rate), and this could be covered only by a rapid rise of our convertible currency indebtedness, which had eased in net terms by about $2 billion from 1982 through the end of 1984.    At the same time, however, Hungary's international reserves rose from more than $2 billion at the end of 1984 to $3.5 billion a year later and stayed roughly there throughout 1986. The structure of our debts also improved. Average maturity of the new medium- and long-term loans taken in 1985-86 means a two-year improvement over the same type of loans taken in the 1982-84 period, while the average interest on total external debt outstanding in convertible currencies declined to 8% last year from 11% in 1984.    Many of the causes for the economic deterioration were beyond our control. Our exports were hard hit as imports of the oil-producing countries fell drastically within a short time because of the fall in oil prices. The depreciation of the dollar also had an unfavorable effect on our balance of payments. Sixty percent of our convertible currency exports are settled in dollars, while only one-third our imports are. The fall in agricultural prices and the collapse of oil prices on the world markets resulted in losses amounting to several hundred million dollars since 1984. All these factors undoubtedly dwarfed the effects of Chernobyl. Calculated at 1984 world market prices and international exchange rates, our balance of trade in convertible currencies would have improved by $70 million from the 1984 surplus were it not for the slumps in oil, farm prices and the dollar.    We nevertheless do not blame only external factors for the past two years' setbacks. The share of our exports in world trade is falling, and the exports' composition may even be deteriorating. It is true that discriminatory quotas and unfavorable tariff treatment due to the Western European integration process have made it more difficult for our goods to gain access to Western European markets, which account for 55% to 60% of our convertible currency exports. But the structure of our exports has also made us more vulnerable: Many of our products are in categories (steel, textiles and agricultural products) where restrictions and protectionism are more likely to appear.    The Hungarian economy also faces problems connected with slower growth and with its structure. We may now have to settle for a growth rate of 2.5% to 3%, compared with the 5% rate of the 1960s and early 1970s. Additionally, the weight of manufacturing should increase at the expense of the primary materials and energy sectors, and changes should take place in the internal composition of the output of individual industrial branches as well. There is no sense in accelerating growth when in the given economic structure it could lead only to a marked increase of imports and, consequently, to a worsening balance of trade.    Hungary's evolutionary reform process is designed to make the country more competitive economically. Monetary instruments are gradually gaining ground in demand management over the fiscal methods that have often proved inflexible in the past and have led to an overtaxation of the corporate sector in Hungary. The number of companies participating directly in foreign trade was tripled in the first half of the 1980s from the level of the late 1970s.    A new reform package instituting a value-added tax and a personal income tax is likely to be introduced soon. Although the package is not final yet and the proposals are now being discussed by organizations representing different interests and professional groups, it is expected that the tax burden on the business sector will be alleviated. This measure is probably the most important reform step since the new economic mechanism was introduced in 1968, and is a natural successor to the earlier ones.    The benefits of the structural adjustment and the reform steps can, of course, unfold only in the longer run. Temporarily we have to accept the risk of negative effects, such as a short-run increase in imports. This is because imports are needed to introduce products and to replace necessary items lost in closing inefficient operations.    The changed attitude toward direct foreign equity investment is a significant new feature of our economic policy. On Jan. 1, 1986, a streamlined licensing procedure and preferential tax treatment -- including a five-year tax holiday in priority areas followed by 20% corporate income tax thereafter, and tax rebates on profits reinvested -- was introduced for investors. The National Bank of Hungary guarantees the transfer of profits and, in case of liquidation, of the share of the residue assets due to the foreign partner.    Hungary has so far concluded investment protection agreements -- corresponding to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development recommendations of 1967 -- with Belgium, West Germany, Britain, Luxembourg, Italy, Sweden and France, and has also joined the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency established by the World Bank.    In better times we thought that the evolution would require but a couple of years. Today, the universal conviction in Hungary is that we have entered a period of difficult adjustment that may take a decade, and that the inevitable steps cannot be implemented without social tensions. But there is no other way. For the sake of the future, the tensions and risks must be faced.    ---   Mr. Lorincze is secretary general of the Hungarian Chamber of Commerce, which represents 1,500 state-owned and cooperative enterprises and advises the government on economics and management. </TEXT></DOC>