<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Thoughts on Our 'Flawed' Constitution---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall is correct when he says that the original Constitution of 1787, whose bicentennial we mark this year, was a &quot;flawed&quot; document. He is surely right in saying those who drafted it would be surprised to see today that the Supreme Court they created numbers among its justices a woman and &quot;a descendant of a black slave.&quot;    As Justice Marshall says, the framers of the Constitution shared the common view of their time that accepted slavery in the social order and did not treat women as full citizens with the right to vote.    But the justice errs, I think, when he uses this to denigrate &quot;the wisdom and foresight&quot; of those who wrote the document and to suggest we should therefore be restrained in our celebration of their work. He is missing the true wisdom and foresight of those men in Philadelphia 200 years ago.    For one thing, he overlooks the fact that the Founding Fathers themselves saw the original Constitution as a flawed document. Several of the drafters and many of those called upon to accept or reject it were dissatisfied. That is why the very first Congress under this Constitution, in 1789, drafted 10 amendments known today as the Bill of Rights. Several states refused to ratify the document until these amendments were added.    Moreover, the men who debated among themselves those long days and nights in Philadelphia were quite conscious that they could not anticipate the future or the needs of the future. So the original Constitution provides something unique in the political organization of nations: an orderly method of changing the government's charter to meet changing times and the changing desires of citizens.    That provision is the most profound testimony to the &quot;wisdom and foresight&quot; of those original drafters. They did not think what they wrote was engraved in immutable stone.    We have since used the amending method to make 26 changes in our rules of government. Not all of them have been wisely conceived; the 18th Amendment gave us Prohibition, a grevious mistake that had to be rectified 14 years later by the 21st Amendment.    The 22nd Amendment, limiting presidents to two terms, is of dubious wisdom -- why should the people not be able to elect whomever they wish for as long as they wish? -- and there is a growing sentiment for repealing this limitation. There are some people, myself included, who doubt the wisdom of giving the vote to 18-year-olds of uncertain maturity and judgment.    No matter. The amending process has also been used to extend the voting right to women and blacks as the nation has undergone immense social changes. Justice Marshall surely approves of both these changes.    It's true, as Justice Marshall says, it took a great civil war to end slavery and give blacks voting rights; even today the civil rights of blacks are not totally accepted. But the change that has been made, and which now permits Justice Marshall to sit upon our highest court, has come only through a sweeping change in the social outlook of the people -- unforeseen, perhaps, by the Founding Fathers, but provided for nonetheless.    So I, for one, will not fault the original Constitution drafters for not including voting rights for women and blacks in their document. Given the social and political attitudes of their time, had they done so their Constitution would not have been accepted. We would have no Constitution at all. The true measure of their wisdom is that they provided a way for the country to adapt its government to changing social and political mores.    The changes we've been free to make, thanks to those Founding Fathers, haven't been limited to enlarging the electorate or to what we recognize as &quot;civil rights.&quot; Since 1787 we also have altered the way we choose our senators and the way we elect our presidents. These changes aren't merely technical. They broaden the power of all citizens to choose how we shall be governed and by whom.    But the foresight of those drafters in providing for orderly change isn't the only thing remarkable about that original Constitution. The basic structure of the government then formed -- the division of powers among the executive, the legislature and the judiciary -- has endured unaltered. Indeed, the basic form of our government is the only one in the world that has endured unchanged as it was 200 years ago. That, too, is a remarkable tribute to the men who created it.    Justice Marshall might well have noted that because of that, the court upon which he sits has powers unknown in other countries. Our Supreme Court is not subject to the wishes of those who from time to time are chosen to govern us. This court has the power to overrule not only our elected chief executive but also our Congress when it believes either has overstepped its authority. This independence has frequently been decried by critics, in and out of government, sometimes with reason because judges, too, are fallible people. Yet the court's independence remains.    So while I agree with Justice Marshall that the original Constitution of 1787 had its flaws, I think him mistaken when he denigrates the whole of the work done that summer by those extraordinary men and suggests the credit for its two centuries of endurance &quot;does not belong to the creators.&quot; What they wrought was truly a miracle in the political affairs of mankind and should be honored among us.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>