<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Outspoken Agent Is Focal Point in BattleBetween Baseball Owners and the Players---By Hal LancasterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> PACIFIC PALISADES, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>    From the beach, a visitorwinds his way up the hill, then ascends the steep front stepsto the stark aerie of Dick Moss, baseball player agent. It isnot unlike scaling the Himalayas in search of a guru, andthere are those in the sport who say that's pretty much theway Mr. Moss sees it.   As the current economic war between baseball owners and players escalates, Mr. Moss has become a focal point for controversy and an all-around pain in the neck to the game's establishment. This past winter, he haggled with clubs on behalf of some of the most prominent free agents available. Along the way, he negotiated with owners through the news media, leveled accusations of conspiracy and generally angered team executives. It was a &quot;perfect example of why so many people in baseball intensely dislike the man,&quot; fumed Dallas Green, Chicago Cubs president, during the talks.    Mr. Moss, looking tanned and comfortable in an open-necked shirt, says he is taken aback by such criticism, which he sees as another front in management's battle with labor. That battle has been highlighted by owners' almost total refusal to bid on other teams' high-priced free agents. To Mr. Moss, this smacks of collusion among owners to reduce payrolls by preventing an open market. The players have filed grievances to that effect.    This spring, however, an apparent victory by the owners has left Mr. Moss and other agents worried about their livelihoods. In 1986, agents argued that a few coveted players could have broken owners' resistance if the players had simply extended their holdouts. This year, some players did just that -- but owners didn't budge. Today, the first day that unsigned free agents can legally return to their old teams, most will, proving that agents were wrong.    Now, some agents are discussing the possibility of forming a new league to spur bidding for players. Mr. Moss hints that some &quot;substantial people&quot; are talking about starting the rival league as soon as next year.    He insists that owners are trying to drive a wedge between players and their representatives with vitriolic personal attacks. &quot;I've seen the minutes of general managers' meetings where they're asking, 'How do we make the agents look bad?'&quot; Mr. Moss charges. (Bill Lajoie, vice president and general manager of the Detroit Tigers, insists that &quot;I've never attended a general managers' meeting, to my recollection, where that took place.&quot;)    It's easy to see how the 55-year-old Mr. Moss could raise hackles. He is anything but shy about his accomplishments and loves to incite the opposition with calculatedly inflammatory remarks, the residue of a life on the labor battlements. The Harvard-educated lawyer spent six years on the legal staff of the Steelworkers Union in his hometown of Pittsburgh before joining the Major League Baseball Players Association as general counsel in 1967. The association was little more than a &quot;company union&quot; then, Mr. Moss recalls. All that changed in the next turbulent decade, with Mr. Moss in an instrumental role as the lawyer who won arbitration cases that abolished baseball's reserve clause, which bound a player to one team.    He left the union in 1977 &quot;just to show all those agents how it should be done,&quot; he says with a defiant smirk. And, by his own account, he has done just that, negotiating the first $1 million contract (for pitcher Nolan Ryan of the Houston Astros in 1979) and winning the first $1 million arbitration award (for pitcher Fernando Valenzuela of the Los Angeles Dodgers in 1982).    &quot;There's no question he's a bright person,&quot; says Barry Rona, executive director of the Player Relations Council, the owners' labor arm. &quot;He's also a bigger pain and more annoying to the players union than he is to the clubs.&quot; Because of his historic union role, Mr. Rona says, &quot;Dick believes he's entitled to preeminent treatment from the players union; he's constantly reminding them that he's the champion of free agency. In scheduling arbitration hearings, he wants certain dates, certain places, certain arbitrators and God forbid if they don't cater to his desires.&quot;    Mr. Moss responds that he is only fighting for his clients. Donald Fehr, the union's executive director, adds: &quot;Barry (Rona's) view of the world is that if you're vigorously representing your client, you're a pain in the neck.&quot;    Team officials, of course, are less than enamored of Mr. Moss. Sandy Alderson, vice president of baseball operations for the Oakland Athletics, was quoted as saying, &quot;If Dick Moss represented Babe Ruth I wouldn't talk to him.&quot; Mr. Alderson cites Mr. Moss's unsuccessful grievance on behalf of former outfielder Steve Henderson, in which he accused the team of conspiring to lock the player out of the market.    To Mr. Moss, all this is part of the game he loves, haggling for an edge, any edge, with management. And he was never in finer form than this past winter, when he presided over veritable media caravans on behalf of pitcher Jack Morris and outfielder Andre Dawson and perhaps, brought the owners' lockout into sharper focus. Although Mr. Moss insists he is simply trying to get his clients the best contract, Mr. Alderson echoes the belief among owners that &quot;Dick has a broader agenda.&quot;    After four teams rejected Mr. Moss's offer to pick their own terms, Mr. Morris eventually resigned with his old team -- the Detroit Tigers -- for $1.85 million a year, almost double his 1986 pay. But Mr. Moss wasn't as successful in the Dawson case. Mr. Dawson wanted to move from the Montreal Expos' artificial turf to the Chicago Cubs' softer natural grass to preserve his gimpy knees. After contentious negotiations prompted Cubs President Green to demand an apology from Mr. Moss for accusing Cubs management and baseball commissioner Peter Ueberroth of conspiring to prevent the team from signing Mr. Dawson, Mr. Moss finally offered him a blank contract and told him to fill in whatever salary he deemed fair. Mr. Green deemed $500,000 fair -- almost half what the star outfielder made in 1986 -- and threw in an extra $150,000 if Mr. Dawson's knees hold up. Mr. Moss hopes to make up for the cut next year, when the player is eligible for arbitration.    Clearly, Mr. Moss says, the owners are &quot;teaching free agents a lesson: If you become a free agent, nobody will make you an offer, and it might end your career.&quot; And next year, Mr. Moss says, there are rumors that owners will attempt to gut the despised salary-arbitration process by refusing to offer contracts to those eligible for it. That would make them free agents with nowhere to go.    Hope lingers, he says, in hearings on the players' grievances, which are proceeding this week. The arbitrator could award damages, order salary arbitration for free agents or void the labor agreement, among other things. Mr. Moss, with his eye ever on the big jackpot, at least hopes for a finding that the owners violated the agreement, which would allow the players to file an antitrust suit. Baseball's long-held exemption from antitrust laws will be overturned someday, he says, and &quot;maybe this is the right case.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>