<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Moscow's Double-Dealing in the Gulf---By Dilip Hiro</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FREST FORGNPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><TEXT>   In its official response to the recent United Nations Security Council resolution on the Gulf War, Iran asked the secretary general to prevail upon the U.S. to stop its naval buildup in the gulf, and France to cease its arms supplies to Iraq. This, Tehran argued, was in line with Clause 5 of the resolution, which calls upon &quot;all other states to exercise the utmost restraint and to refrain from any act which may lead to further escalation and widening of the conflict.&quot;    It is significant that Tehran made no reference to the Soviet Union, which is the principle source of weapons for Iraq. This is the latest sign of improved ties between Tehran and Moscow and fits a pattern that has emerged since Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979: Deterioration in relations between Iran and the West results in tightening of links between Tehran and Moscow.    The Soviet Union and Iran are united in their condemnation of Washington's current policy of increasing its military presence in the gulf, and wary of the war spilling over into other parts of the region. Iran sees America's high profile in the gulf as a direct challenge to its claim to be the regional superpower and its often-repeated assertion that the security of the gulf is the sole responsibility of the countries of the region. Moscow visualizes the American moves as part of a grand design to establish land bases in the gulf states and draw the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, singly or jointly, into a tight military alliance. Not surprisingly, the Kremlin has vehemently denounced the Reagan administration's determination to escort 11 Kuwaiti tankers as rechristened American ships.    Compared with the American armada of 15 warships, soon to be supplemented with 10 more, the Soviets have five naval vessels, three of which are minesweepers. This, and the Soviets' recent offer to withdraw their naval craft from the gulf if the U.S., France and Britain do the same must seem reasonable to Tehran. So, too, must appear Moscow's response to the Kuwaiti request for protection of its oil shipments. The Soviet shipping authority chartered three of its tankers to Kuwait -- a modest commercial deal.    Moscow is opposed to Iran's fundamentalist Islamic ideology as well as its resolute commitment to keep on fighting until the overthrow of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. It is as anxious to forestall Iranian victory in the Gulf War as is Washington and voted for the recent U.N. Security Council resolution demanding a cease-fire in the conflict.    Where the Soviet Union differs from the U.S., however, is that it has considerable geopolitical leverage over Iran. This has enabled it to offer a reassuring hand to Tehran whenever the latter has found itself in a tight corner.    When the U.S. and the European Community imposed an economic embargo against Iran in April 1980, the Soviet Union stepped in to offer extensive transit facilities to Iran across its territory. The two governments signed a protocol whereby Moscow pledged aid to Tehran &quot;in extreme conditions,&quot; such as a naval blockade.    An extreme condition of another kind emerged in March 1983 when Iraq declared Iranian air space a war zone and thus forced all non-Iranian airlines to cancel their services to Iran. To help Iran Air, the state-owned carrier, maintain its crucial flights to and from Western Europe, the Soviets offered Iran the use of its air space. This allowed Iran Air planes to stay far away from the Iraqi borders by flying over Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, the Black Sea and the Soviet Union before turning southward to Tehran.    Such concessions, however, do not offset the Soviet role as the major source of arms for Iraq since July 1982, when the Iranians, having expelled the Iraqis from their soil, attacked Iraq. Moscow justifies its conduct in the context of the Friendship and Cooperation Treaty it signed with Baghdad in 1972. According to this treaty, the two parties are required to contact each other in case of &quot;danger to the peace&quot; of either party and to refrain from joining an alliance aimed against the other. The treaty also calls on the signatories to &quot;develop cooperation in the strengthening of their defense capacity.&quot;    Moscow has considerable influence in Baghdad and it has used this leverage at least twice in Iran's favor. In March 1985 and early this year Iraq bombed Iranian cities with a view to demoralizing the civilian population. The Kremlin reportedly disapproved, particularly when air raids on Ahvaz and Isfahan -- where hundreds of Russian technicians were employed in Soviet-aided industrial projects -- resulted in Moscow recalling all of its 1,200 technical advisers in Iran and causing deep resentment in Tehran. It succeeded in pressuring Baghdad to stop such attacks.    To pacify Tehran, the Soviets are known to have sold advanced weapons, including SAM-7 surface-to-air missiles and launchers, to Iran. One such deal consummated last December was reported to be worth $18 million. Just before the Gulf War erupted in September 1980 the Soviets offered to sell arms to Tehran, but were rebuffed. During the war Moscow has turned a blind eye as its allies -- Syria, Libya and North Korea -- have sold Soviet-made or designed arms and ammunition to Iran. The Kremlin's overall objective seems to be to reassure Iran that in its hour of dire need it will find a helpful hand in Moscow.    When oil prices nose-dived in the spring of 1986, the Soviets stepped in to aid Tehran by signing a contract to buy Iran's natural gas. Later they cooperated with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries after it had adopted Iran's recommendation of raising oil prices by cutting their oil sales on the spot market by 100,000 barrels a day -- a sacrifice of $500 million in hard currency a year.    At present, against the background of sharply rising tensions in the gulf, which may culminate in the closure, however brief, of the Strait of Hormuz, Moscow has made a dramatic offer to Tehran. On July 19 the Iranian premier, Mir Hussein Mousavi, declared that Iran and the Soviet Union had held &quot;positive talks&quot; on a plan to ship Iranian oil across Soviet territory and via the Black Sea.    This was a clear signal to the Reagan administration that were the U.S. to destroy Iran's Kharg oil terminal and bring about the blocking of the Strait of Hormuz (as an Iranian retaliation), the Soviets would step in to enable Iran to continue selling its oil and thus financing its war machine.    What is more, by making the Kharg oil terminal redundant the Soviets would rob Iraq of the only trump card it possesses: its ability to hit Kharg and Iranian oil tankers with virtual impunity. This must make Saddam Hussein think twice before vigorously pursuing his strategy of getting the U.S. deeply embroiled in the gulf conflict.    It seems most likely that, having backed the U.S.-sponsored resolution at the U.N. on a mandatory cease-fire in the Gulf War, the Soviets will distance themselves from the Americans. The most obvious way would be to withhold support if the U.S. proposes a follow-up resolution at the Security Council calling for an arms embargo against the party that refuses to cease fire. Since Iran is unwilling to end the conflict, it would treat the Soviet decision as a friendly gesture.    In short, the Soviet Union is following a complex and subtle set of policies in the gulf in order to maintain close contacts with and influence over the warring parties. It is the only superpower with direct lines to Tehran and Baghdad, and wants to derive maximum advantage from this privilege.    The Soviets are aiming to act as mediators between the belligerents at a peace conference to be convened in Moscow. The U.S. would be justified in blocking such a development by insisting that the U.N. is the proper forum for peace between Iran and Iraq. On the other hand, Washington may well recall its singular achievement in the eastern Mediterranean in September 1978. Then President Jimmy Carter reconciled Egypt, America's newly acquired friend, with its erstwhile enemy Israel, a longstanding strategic ally of U.S., without reference to the United Nations.    ---   Mr. Hiro is a London-based journalist who writes frequently on Iran. </TEXT></DOC>