<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880321-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   AN ISRAELI SOLDIER WAS KILLED in unrest in the occupied West Bank.    Military officials in Bethlehem said the reservist was shot with a pistol while standing guard near a Palestinian refugee camp. It was the first Israeli army fatality since violence erupted in the occupied territories nearly four months ago. The army's chief of staff said the shooting could augur greater use of guns by Arab activists, who have mainly hurled stones and bottles at Israeli troops during the continuing clashes.    Shamir, speaking in New York, called on America's Jews to stop criticizing Israeli policies, particularly those concerning Mideast peace efforts.    ---   SHULTZ WARNED Noriega to accept an asylum offer before it is withdrawn.    The secretary of state, insisting that the U.S. wouldn't drop drug charges against the Panamanian military chief, said he should accept &quot;the opportunity&quot; to go into exile in Spain before the bid &quot;should disappear.&quot; But a defector said it was unlikely that Noreiga would relinquish power. Over the weekend, Noriega rebuffed a plan for his removal, reportedly telling U.S. officials that he wanted to remain in Panama.    Opposition leaders urged Panamanians to observe a nationwide strike today. Noriega declared a &quot;state of urgency&quot; Friday throughout the country.    ---   COMBAT APPEARED to be subsiding along the Nicaraguan-Honduran border.    As Managua protested weekend bombing raids by Honduras, U.S. National Security Adviser Powell said the fighting was &quot;rapidly disappearing&quot; and that the chance of involvement in the hostilities by U.S. troops was unlikely. The soldiers were engaged in maneuvers about 21 miles from the border. Tegucigalpa warned that it would launch fresh sorties against any Sandinistas on its territory.    Nicaragua and the Contras prepared for direct cease-fire talks in Sapoa, about 90 miles south of Managua. The talks are the first inside Nicaragua.    ---   Shevardnadze arrived in Washington for three days of talks with U.S. officials. The Soviet foreign minister is expected to discuss proposals to reduce the number of U.S. and Soviet long-range missiles, as well as the Afghan peace process. Shultz said a pact on the strategic arms could still be concluded by a summit expected in May.    ---   Salvadorans voted in legislative and municipal elections despite guerrilla bomb attacks that left most of the country without electricity and kept private traffic off the roads. The anti-government rebels have called the balloting a &quot;farce.&quot; Army trucks and transportation provided by political parties ferried voters to polling stations.    ---   Bush won the 14 GOP delegates in Puerto Rico's winner-take-all primary. Jackson led the Democrats, but the U.S. commonwealth's delegation was expected to stay uncommitted. Meanwhile, Dukakis remained the Democratic leader after delegate counting in Kansas, Texas and South Dakota.    ---   Police in Northern Ireland searched for the killers of two British soldiers, who were attacked Saturday by a mob at the funeral of an Irish Republican Army guerrilla in Belfast. The soldiers were beaten and shot by members of the funeral procession. The British army said they had ignored orders to stay away from the rites.    ---   Lt. Col. North announced that he was retiring from the Marine Corps to devote himself to a &quot;vigorous defense&quot; against charges of conspiracy, fraud and theft related to the Iran-Contra affair. He was indicted last week. North suggested Friday that the &quot;highest-ranking officials of our government&quot; would be subpoenaed in the case.    ---   Iran and Iraq reported heavy ground fighting and air raids on their central war front, and shipping sources said an Iranian gunboat attacked a Liberian tanker in the Persian Gulf. Iran also fired at least one missile at Baghdad. Each side reported hundreds of casualties in the assaults.    ---   Philippine President Aquino said she doesn't plan to seek re-election in 1992. In a radio interview in Manila, Aquino said she lacked political ambition and dismissed any suggestion of entering a presidential campaign because of a popular draft similar to the one that swept her to power in 1986.    ---   Malaysia's Parliament approved a bill that threatens to transfer to Parliament the judiciary's constitutional role as the sole arbiter in the legal process. A second bill passed by the lawmakers would strengthen the claim of Mahathir's political faction as the rightful heir to the ruling party, which was declared illegal by the High Court.    ---   Jacques Parizeau was acclaimed as leader of Quebec's Parti Quebecois, succeeding Pierre Marc Johnson, who resigned last fall. The selection of Parizeau, an economics professor and former Quebec finance minister, had been expected.    ---   China's Zhao urged faster and bolder changes in the country's government and economy, making clear his opposition to recent calls for caution by some Beijing officials. The Communist Party chief's remarks, in a speech to the Central Committee, came as China's parliament prepared for an opening session this week. </TEXT></DOC>