<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. ARRESTED another Marine guard on suspicion of espionage.    The Pentagon said Sgt. John Joseph Weirick was jailed in California, accused of spying for the Soviets and of failing to report contacts with Soviet women while assigned to the U.S. consulate in Leningrad in 1981. He was questioned as part of the sex-spy probe of Moscow embassy ex-guards. Secretary of State Shultz said the arrest casts &quot;a heavy shadow&quot; on his talks set for next week in Moscow. Though U.S. officials are talking tough about security breaches, Shultz said the U.S. wants constructive and stable relations.    Bills were introduced in Congress to set the death penalty for espionage and to make the Soviets abandon their new U.S. embassy pending renegotiation.    ---   WEBSTER ADMITTED he may have been &quot;negligent&quot; in the Iran-Contra affair.    The FBI director, at a Senate hearing on his confirmation as CIA chief, acknowledged his failing to pursue early hints of possible criminal violations by fired NSC aide Lt. Col. North. Webster said he deferred to Attorney General Meese and reined in the FBI for nearly a month, until the suspected funds diversion was disclosed and the FBI began a criminal inquiry. Separately, the White House agreed to review three years of Reagan's personal notes and make parts relevant to the Iran-Contra affair available to congressional panels.    Reagan retains final discretion over disclosure of the information, but investigators expressed confidence they would get full access to the entries.    ---   Two research teams reported further evidence that a new type of cancer therapy using interleukin-2 can produce some successful results against otherwise untreatable forms of cancer.    ---   Salvadoran rebels began a three-day national transportation stoppage, the fourth this year, transportation officials said. The guerrillas set fire to five buses, wounded a civilian and blocked traffic across most of the country.    ---   A House panel voted to permit tests of anti-missile systems that might be deployed in space during the next decade. The Armed Services Committee overturned a subcommittee decision blocking tests of a weapon being studied as the basis for the first stages of the Strategic Defense Initiative.    ---   Prime Minister Chirac presented plans for a major upgrading of France's nuclear strike force. Warning of dangers to Europe without nuclear arms, he unveiled in Parliament the five-year, $77.5 billion military spending plan that also would launch a military satellite and a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, and develop a new fighter jet.    ---   New engine problems are delaying further the plans to restart the European Space Agency's program of Ariane rocket launches. The fresh delays mean that both major Western commercial space programs, Ariane and the U.S. space shuttle, remain out of service.    ---   Two South Korean dissidents formed a new political party, joined by 74 National Assembly members, to oppose President Chun Doo Hwan. Kim Young Sam cited a need for a stronger opposition &quot;to attain democratization&quot; and direct presidential elections. The nation's other leading dissident, Kim Dae Jung, is under house arrest.    ---   The pope condemned divorce and warned that a bill in Argentina's senate to legalize it would undermine society, loosen morals and encourage disrespect for the law. John Paul II, addressing the controversial issue for the predominantly Roman Catholic nation, devoted his entire sermon to the theme of the family in an open-air Mass in Cordoba.    ---   Italy's five-party coalition crumbled after Christian Democrat ministers, a majority in the caretaker cabinet, resigned. The move seems certain to topple Prime Minister Craxi's Socialist-led government and usher in early parliamentary elections this spring of the 46th post-war government.    ---   Divers off Belgium recovered 104 bodies from the British ferry that capsized March 6, officials said. About 30 more are believed still inside the vessel. The death toll is expected to total about 195. Victims' relatives and the 348 survivors will get at least $128,000 each, the ferry's owners said, aside from $5.2 million collected by a disaster fund.    ---   Syrian troops took control of a second Palestinian refugee camp in Beirut, Bourj al-Barajneh, after evacuating 23 wounded residents of the Shatila camp, where they lifted a siege by the Shiite Moslem Amal militia Monday. In southern Lebanon, heavy Shiite-Palestinian fighting was reported.    ---   Paraguay's President Stroessner lifted a decades-old state of siege, as extraordinary powers are no longer needed to maintain peace, ruling party politicans said. Asuncion officials didn't confirm the report. When the powers expired, the government didn't renew them as it has every three months since taking power in a 1954 military coup.    ---   New Zealand agreed to let U.S. military planes use its bases without declaring whether they are carrying nuclear arms, government sources said. The U.S. denied reaching the pact. Wellington earlier banned visits by nuclear-capable U.S. warships.    ---   A U.S. sentencing panel has scrapped its most recent public draft of guidelines for criminal sentences. The commission is racing frantically to adopt a new approach in time to file a report that Congress ordered by Monday.    ---   President Mubarak's party got at least 70% to 75% of the vote in Egypt's parliamentary elections, incomplete returns showed. Two dozen independent candidates loyal to Mubarak were declared elected, bolstering the party's majority. A shift in the opposition indicates its interest may focus on Islamic law and relations with Israel.    ---   Aquino commuted to life in prison the death sentences -- now banned -- of 525 people, most of them sentenced during Marcos's Philippines rule. Separately, 42 military officers and enlisted men were charged in an aborted January coup try. Meanwhile, a fourth round of talks with Moslem rebels was set for today.    ---   Iranian forces attacked Iraqi troops defending Basra and smashed two Iraqi battalions in the second day of a ground offensive on the southern front that pushed total casualties to 4,100, Tehran said. But Baghdad said Iraqi troops foiled a second Iranian attack after recapturing territory lost earlier. Neither side's claim was confirmed.    ---   Japan plans to hunt whales in the Antarctic for research and eventual consumption under a loophole in the international ban on commercial whaling, Japanese officials said, acknowledging this could provoke U.S. retaliation. The loophole in the moratorium allows whale catches for research. </TEXT></DOC>