<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870731-0022 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A NAVY HELICOPTER CRASHED while on a mission in the Persian Gulf.    Pentagon officials said one man was killed and three others were missing as a result of the crash, which occurred as the aircraft was trying to land on the USS LaSalle, the command ship for the Navy's convoy operations in the gulf. Five others aboard the chopper, which was ferrying personnel and equipment from a land base, were rescued. In Stockholm, the U.S. asked Sweden to prevent further exports to Iran of a type of high-speed motorboat used in raids on gulf shipping.    The Reagan administration wants the oil tanker Bridgeton to begin its return voyage down the gulf as early as today, despite concern over mines.    ---   REGAN SAID the U.S. arms sales to Iran were, in retrospect, a &quot;horrible idea.&quot;    The former White House chief of staff told the congressional panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair that Reagan administration officials were &quot;led down the garden path&quot; in pursuing the &quot;bait&quot; of freeing American hostages. Regan portrayed a White House in confusion as the operation unraveled last November and the diversion of arms sales profits to Nicaraguan insurgents was discovered.    The Army wasn't part of a plan to overcharge Iran for missiles and to use the profits for the Nicaraguan rebels, a House Armed Services report said.    ---   Reagan will enter Bethesda Naval Medical Center today to have more tissue removed from his nose following the discovery of skin cancer. The White House said a biopsy of the lesion removed Wednesday indicated basal cell epithelioma. Reagan twice had cancerous cells removed from his nose in 1985.    ---   Kenneth Adelman resigned as director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, a post he has held for more than four years. Adelman, who is to step down later this year, expressed confidence that the U.S. and Soviet Union would conclude a disarmament agreement soon.    Shultz and Shevardnadze will meet in Washington Sept. 15-17 in an effort to narrow differences on a superpower arms agreement and to discuss arrangements for a possible Reagan-Gorbachev summit in the U.S. this year.    ---   Reagan said he would propose new regulations barring the use of federal funds for family-planning programs that do abortion counseling. Groups advocating such services indicated that they would challenge the new rules.    ---   Legislation was introduced to expand federal resources for voluntary AIDS testing and protections against bias. The bill authorizes as much as $400 million for AIDS testing and counseling in each of the next three fiscal years, and also gives some doctors the authority to notify patients' sexual partners.    ---   A Sri Lankan guard clubbed Gandhi with a rifle as the Indian prime minister prepared to leave Colombo after signing a disputed peace pact aimed at ending ethnic violence between the Sinhalese majority and Tamil separatists. Gandhi wasn't seriously hurt. Thousands of Indian troops arrived in Sri Lanka to enforce a cease-fire today.    ---   Norway has ordered a Soviet diplomat and a trade delegate out of the country and has banned two other Soviets, accusing the four of industrial espionage. Norwegian officials denied that the actions were tied to recent disclosures that a state-owned arms firm illegally exported sensitive equipment to the Soviets in 1982.    ---   A propeller-driven cargo plane crashed onto a highway in Mexico City, killing at least 33 people. Officials said the Belizean plane, with eight people aboard, was bound for Miami when it crashed shortly after takeoff from the Mexican capital.    ---   Crimean Tatars demonstrated in Moscow's Pushkin Park to again demand that they be allowed to return to their homeland, from which they were expelled by Stalin. The Soviet government later accused the protesters of collusion with U.S. diplomats, the news agency Tass reported.    ---   A Soviet space capsule landed safely in the republic of Kazakhstan, and medics immediately examined one of the cosmonauts because of heart problems. The three-man Soyuz team had been in space for nearly six months. Details of the cosmonaut's medical condition weren't disclosed.    ---   A car bomb exploded near a military headquarters in central Johannesburg, injuring at least 68 people and damaging buildings in the area. Responsibility for the blast wasn't immediately claimed, but the South African government blamed members of the outlawed African National Congress.    ---   Riot police in Brazil crushed a two-day rebellion in a Sao Paulo penitentiary. Authorities said as many as 30 people were killed in rioting that followed an escape attempt at the maximum-security prison.    ---   Anti-government groups in Haiti staged a general strike to protest the army's killing of at least eight people Wednesday and to demand that the military-dominated government resign. Businesses were closed and transportation halted in Port-au-Prince.    ---   Opposition lawmakers in Seoul blocked the first scheduled meeting of a bipartisan panel charged with drafting a new South Korean constitution. The lawmakers from two small political parties demanded a role in writing the document. Meanwhile, about 17,000 factory workers walked off their jobs or took control of plants in a wage dispute. </TEXT></DOC>