<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881104-0017 </DOCNO><HL> Uneasy Revival: Big Steel Is Back, But Upturn Is Costly And May Not Last --- Foreign Makers, Other Metals, Minimills Are All Threats, And Workers Want Raises --- A Radical Drop in Capacity </HL><AUTHOR> Rick Wartzman and Carol Hymowitz (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> MIN MON </IN><DATELINE> DRAVOSBURG, Pa.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   To understand Big Steel's revival -- and its dilemma -- take a half-hour drive along the Monongahela River, past four sprawling mills built by USX Corp.    Two that once dominated this landscape -- the Duquesne Works and the National Works -- are rusting hulks, shuttered reminders of the industry's depression, which cost 40,000 valley workers their jobs earlier in this decade. The two other plants -- Edgar Thomson and Irvin -- are belching the familiar plume of smoke that signals full production and healthy profits.    &quot;Everyone is feeling great that we're producing,&quot; says Tom Martin, a maintenance crew member at Irvin for 25 years. &quot;We've come through some lean times.&quot;    The comeback at Irvin -- the nation's leading supplier of metal sheet to makers of household appliances -- can be explained in large part by the idleness of its neighbors. The nation's major producers, once plagued by overcapacity, have finally brought supply in line with demand.    Six years ago the top eight producers were turning out half the metal they were capable of producing. Today, they are running flat out, and that is the result of trimming 42 million tons, or 27%, of capacity. Steelworkers have declined in number to 280,000 from 560,000 in 1981. &quot;It's been a complete transformation,&quot; says John Jacobson, an analyst at AUS Consultants in Philadelphia.    Also vital to this cyclical industry's recovery have been the weak dollar, the general economic rebound and help from the government, which has erected restraints against lower-cost imports. &quot;Steel executives will tell you it's their management genius that has turned things around, when they've been benefiting from a lot of externals,&quot; says Donald Sayenga, a management consultant and former Bethlehem Steel Corp. executive.    How long will the good times last? Perhaps not long. Next year seems secure, even in the event of a budding recession. The 1990s, however, promise renewed volatility. Steelworkers will press for a share of the higher profits; lower-cost minimills and emerging Third World producers will grab markets of integrated U.S. steelmakers, and alternative materials -- aluminum, ceramics and high-tech metal composites -- will wrest away business.    Moreover, steelmakers aren't generating the huge pools of capital they need for the costly modernization that would keep them competitive. &quot;You'll never see another integrated steel mill built in the U.S.,&quot; predicts Walter Williams, the chief executive of Bethlehem. &quot;There are a lot of things we can do about improving products, but there won't be any growth in steel.&quot; USX Chairman David M. Roderick is similarly pessimistic: &quot;Rebuild steel mills to do what?&quot; he asks, &quot;Sit and rust again?&quot;    What the chief executives of the No. 1 and No. 2 domestic producers envision is Not-So-Big Steel. Steel usage has been steadily shrinking, and that trend isn't likely to reverse itself. Consequently, steelmakers are playing down the low-quality, low-priced products -- such as the steel bars used to make door handles on cars -- in order to concentrate on newer, technologically advanced steels, as well as on new markets abroad. Mr. Williams expects &quot;more attention to finding niches.&quot;    For now, though, steelmakers are relieved that they have stanched the flow of red ink -- and are alive to tell about it. Two of the nation's eight top producers and 23 smaller ones have been forced to file for bankruptcy-law protection in the past 15 years. Overall, major steelmakers lost $12 billion between 1982 and 1986.    By pleasant contrast, producers enjoyed profits of $1 billion last year and should more than double that in 1988. And while none of this erases past losses, the rebound has improved stock prices and dividends (USX last week increased its dividend for the first time in three years).    Like many Rust Belt manufacturers, the steel industry -- once fat, complacent and arrogant -- has transformed itself into a far nimbler, more efficient and humbler world competitor.    Consider Bethlehem, which just last year was rumored to be near bankruptcy. Unlike those producers that diversified, Bethlehem sold off its nonsteel holdings to concentrate on its traditional products for the auto and construction industries.    Streamlining, Bethlehem has shed 27% of its capacity since 1981, shutting parts of several major plants and laying off 59% of its work force. Where employment costs ate up 50 cents of every sales dollar in 1982, the figure is 35 cents now. Altogether, steel production costs have dropped 24% in the past five years.    With what cash it had, the company invested in two state-of-the-art casters in 1983, to make steel slabs more efficiently. And thanks in part to Bethlehem's training programs, automakers are now rejecting less than 1% of the steel they buy from the company; the rate used to be as high as 8%.    Bethlehem last week reported that it earned an impressive $82 per ton of steel shipped in the three months just ended.    Other steelmakers aren't far behind. Inland Steel Industries Inc., which doubled its dividend earlier this year, just posted a 996% increase in third quarter profit. Armco Inc. has so improved the quality of its steel sheet that it has won contracts to supply two Japanese auto makers known for their exacting standards -- Honda Motor Co. and Nissan Motor Co.    And here at USX's Irvin Works, which five years ago ran only about eight shifts a week, glowing 10-ton slabs of steel now move down the production line round the clock, seven days a week. As many as 18 shifts of hourly workers each week transform the slabs into coils of steel sheet.    Despite the incessant pace, more attention is being paid to detail. For instance, finished coils used to be stacked on the plant's concrete floor, which often caused nicks and dents; now they are placed in special wooden troughs to avoid marring.    &quot;The industry as a whole has done a lot of things right,&quot; asserts William Lane, a trade specialist who monitors steel for Caterpillar Inc., the big farm-equipment maker. Daniel Marion, a steel buyer for Ford Motor Co., agrees: &quot;They're lean and mean, and competitive with anyplace in the world.&quot;    But producers say they still aren't competitive enough to combat foreign steel's penetration of the domestic market. The government's so-called voluntary restraint agreements, or VRAs, were negotiated in 1984 and set quotas on the steel 20 countries, including Japan and South Korea, can sell in the U.S. So far this year, foreign steel has accounted for 18% of U.S. consumption, down from a peak of 30% four years ago.    Steel users such as Caterpillar argue that the quotas have hurt them, causing delays in shipments. &quot;We've had to go from just-in-time inventory to just-in-case inventory,&quot; says Mr. Lane, who contends that the restricted steel market &quot;has burned us once or twice with short supplies.&quot;    Nevertheless, steel producers are lobbying hard for an extension of the VRAs, which otherwise are to expire next September. While Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis has already pledged to support the trade barriers, Republican George Bush has been noncommittal. &quot;If we don't get the extension, we're prepared to file massive anti-dumping lawsuits,&quot; Bethlehem's Mr. Williams says.    Whatever the outcome, Big Steel can't win protection against domestic minimills, which are an increasing threat. These rapidly growing companies enjoy substantial cost advantages because unlike the major producers -- which use a complicated, time-consuming process to make steel from iron ore and coke -- they make steel quickly from melted scrap.    Already the minimills have captured 25% of the domestic steel market by virtually taking over the production of small, lower quality goods. And now, with the introduction of newer technology, they are moving toward producing the premier products, such as sheet for the auto industry.    Nucor Corp. is leading the charge. Next year, the company will start rolling coils of sheet -- a minimill first. Though its quality isn't expected to rival that of the big producers for a while, Nucor's chairman, F. Kenneth Iverson, thinks it is only a matter of time before &quot;that sheet is used for the skin of a car.&quot;    Others agree. Michael Siegal, the president of Olympic Steel Inc., a sheet and plate distributor, now buys only from the larger companies. But he expects to be dealing with minimills &quot;a few years down the road.&quot;    The big disadvantage for major producers is capital costs. Nucor's new plant will cost altogether $260 million, which is about what big producers lay out for a single modern caster. Between 1982 and 1987, U.S. producers invested $9 billion in new equipment, without fully modernizing the industry. While 97% of Japanse steel mills use continuous casters -- a cost-saving one-step way of making steel slabs -- only about 60% of American mills do.    &quot;Steel still has the basic problem of being a very capital-intensive industry, whose costs for improvements are astronomical,&quot; says John Kirkwood, a Pittsburgh management and labor consultant.    Meanwhile, producers have been forced to siphon off cash to pay huge pension liabilities. Bethlehem, for instance, paid $200 million into its under-financed pension program in the just-ended third quarter. And if an economic downturn brings layoffs, pension costs will rise further, notes Kathleen Utgoff, executive director of the federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. &quot;All of them could get into real trouble again,&quot; she says.    Moreover, labor costs are likely to climb, given current pressures. The industry's employment costs today total about $24 an hour for a unionized steelworker -- reflecting no increase in six years. But the United Steelworkers union, whose contracts with several big producers will expire beginning next year, say the days of swallowing concessions are over.    &quot;Workers are entitled to their fair share&quot; of steel's turnaround, asserts Lynn Williams, United Steelworkers president. Says Larry Regan, a local union president at USX's big Gary, Ind., plant: &quot;Producers can't boast to Wall Street about the profits they're making and then tell us they can't afford to give us a raise.&quot; Currently, he maintains, if steelworkers'paychecks are fat, it is mainly because of hundreds of overtime hours. &quot;The company won't rehire laid-off workers, so some of our members have 900 hours' overtime since April,&quot; he adds.    Industry officials agree that the current revival does offer a little breathing room for further improvements in quality, customer service and development of advanced steels. It isn't enough to simply &quot;wash away excess capacity and keep the foreigners out,&quot; says Lou Schorsch of McKinsey andamp; Co.'s Pittsburgh office. Adds Bethlehem's Mr. Williams: &quot;We haven't arrived at the promised land where we can sit around and take it easy. That day will never come again.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>