<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0102 </DOCNO><HL> ...and in the Indian Ocean---By Sol W. Sanders</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTDEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The U.S. has deep strategic interests in the outcome of the civil war in Sri Lanka. This sideshow on world violence and politics is taking place at a time when the political structure of the Indian Subcontinent is under attack as never before. The climax could well be that scenario so often contemplated by pessimists: a further breakup of the old British Indian Empire into warring and unstable ethnic states, an expansion of the Indo-Pakistan feud that has resulted in three bitter wars and a continuing arms race on the Subcontinent.    Such an outcome might be the concern only of the Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Sri Lankans, Afghans, Burmese and others in the region who make up a billion of the world's people. But the Soviet presence in Afghanistan adds a new geopolitical dimension. For despite continuing negotiations for a Russian withdrawal, &quot;success&quot; promises little more than an exchange of Kabul's present regime for a Moscow satellite.    At the other end of the Subcontinent the six-year-old insurgency in Sri Lanka is crucial -- and classic: The Tamil minority, long the victim of discrimination, is pressing for legitimate political concessions. But the aims of the Tamil moderates increasingly have been enveloped by the more radical demands of Tamil extremists.    The paramount Tamil faction, one of an original four, is avowedly Marxist and has close ties to the international terrorist network allied to the Soviet Union. The Sri Lankan government of President Junius Jayewardene, rare among Third World states, has conceded the need for decentralization. But negotiations have foundered on the radicals' demands for an autonomous, Tamil-controlled entity in the north, where the population is 90% Tamil, and in the east, where Tamils constitute about a third of the population. The radicals' target is control of Trincomalee -- one of the best natural harbors in the world and the center of British naval activity in the Indian Ocean for almost 200 years.    Trincomalee in the hands of pro-Soviet forces would be a strategic disaster for the U.S. It would provide Moscow with one more stepping stone, extending its reach from Vladivostok in the Soviet Far East through Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam toward the vital oil routes out of the Persian Gulf, now again a major U.S. concern. Bear bombers and anti-submarine warfare operating from Trincomalee would further tilt the naval balance toward the Soviets.    The ability of Trident nuclear-powered submarines equipped with nuclear missiles to operate in the Indian Ocean is essential to U.S. naval strategy. Nuclear submarines have long been considered the surest part of U.S. defense against Soviet first-strike capability, since they are less vulnerable than either ground-based or bomber-based missiles. The ability of U.S. submarines to cruise virtually undetected in the Indian Ocean positions their missiles to strike at the heart of the Soviet Union from unknown launching points.    How strong is the possibility of a Soviet presence in Trincomalee?    State Department policy makers treat the threat lightly. But in doing so they ignore the fact that the origins of the radical Tamils' attack on the Sri Lankan government have much to do with the government's pro-West stand. The Jayewardene government, which came to power in 1978, has defended Western interests among the so-called nonaligned states headed by India, offered terrain for transmitters for the Voice of America, and turned its back on Third World socialism. All this infuriated India's late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and had much to do with her tolerance of the origins of the insurgency from Indian bases.    The Reagan administration has refused Colombo's repeated calls for arms and instruction in counterinsurgency tactics. It argues that Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi understands the threat that rampant Tamil nationalism in Sri Lanka would pose for New Delhi. It would be in India's own interest to quash the insurgency by cutting off its supply lines and negotiating a political settlement.    The southern Indian state of Tamil Nadu with its 50 million Tamils and historic connections to Sri Lankan Tamils has a long tradition of opposition to the Congress (I) Party governments of Rajiv and Indira Gandhi. An ultra-nationalist, legitimatized Sri Lankan Tamil entity agitating for union with the Tamils of southern India would be a major threat to Indian unity.    This makes excellent sense, but in truth India is both unwilling and unable to move effectively. Prime Minister Gandhi is in deep political trouble, and his personal popularity is sliding. The radical Sikh insurgency in the northern state of Punjab -- placed under central government rule by New Delhi earlier this month -- threatens India's political stability.    In recent weeks, Mr. Gandhi has reverted to his mother's technique of bashing the U.S. when the political clouds close in. It would be a sore temptation for New Delhi to take a swat at the Colombo government -- theoretically in defense of the Tamil minority, but tacitly on the side of the Tamil radicals. News reports from Colombo this week said this was exactly the threat India's high commissioner brought back from consultations in New Delhi.    Like his mother, too, Mr. Gandhi has chosen to appease the Soviets in Afghanistan, praising the Soviets for their phony troop withdrawal last fall. Nor has there been the break with Indian dependence on Soviet weapons that Pentagon policy makers hoped might come from a new Gandhi courted by Washington with offers of high-technology transfers.    Of course, the radical Tamil separatists are still a long way from victory in Sri Lanka. President Jayewardene threatens to pursue a military solution to the insurgency. But that is not likely to be successful so long as India refuses to cut -- or cannot interdict -- the supply lines across the straits that separate the guerrillas from their supporters in Tamil Nadu.    It is a troubling time for Pentagon naval planners, with their increasing concern about the renewal of the lease on the U.S. bases in the Philippines, with the U.S. decision that South Africa's racial policies make it impossible to use Britain's old base at Durban, and with the increasing Soviet presence at the entrances to the Persian Gulf from bases in Aden and Ethiopia.    At the moment, a continued, drawn-out struggle in Sri Lanka looks likely. But if Colombo is forced to make the concessions necessary to appease the Tamil radicals, they would almost certainly include Tamil control of Trincomalee. Not only would that be decisive for U.S. naval power in the India Ocean, it would also be a major move on the world strategic chessboard.    ---   Mr. Sanders, a free-lance journalist, has covered South Asia and other regions.    (See related story: &quot;The U.S. and War in the Persian Gulf...&quot; -- WSJ May 28, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>