<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880411-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   HIJACKERS OFFERED to trade passengers for jetliner fuel in Cyprus.    Negotiators, at Kuwait's urging, refused the trade. The hijackers of the Kuwaiti jet, who are demanding the release of 17 pro-Iranian terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait, offered to release 20 of the 53 hostages for the fuel. They threatened to crash the jet into Kuwait's royal palace. The hijackers killed a passenger Saturday and threatened a &quot;slow and quiet massacre&quot; if their demands weren't met. Yesterday they said they had begun to &quot;hurt&quot; a hostage, but several deadlines passed without more killings.    In Beirut, the pro-Iranian group Jihad threatened to kill its American and French captives if any attempt was made to storm the jetliner.    ---   AFGHAN REBELS SHOT DOWN a Soviet passenger plane, killing all 29 aboard.    The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the airliner, on a flight over northern Afghanistan, was hit by a surface-to-air missile. Moscow frequently has accused rebels of using U.S.-supplied Stinger missiles against civilian planes. Separately, Reagan praised Gorbachev's announcement that Soviet troops were likely to begin leaving Afghanistan May 15. The proposed accord to end the conflict, however, invites cheating and more fighting between the communist regime and rebels.    The State Department reported that the U.S. has received a formal response from Moscow on a proposed compromise crucial to the Afghan settlement.    ---   A Pakistani ammunition dump exploded, killing at least 70 people and wounding more than 800 as rockets showered the adjacent cities of Islamabad and Rawalpindi. A government minister said the explosion was accidental. The government said President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq was cutting short a visit to Kuwait and returning home.    ---   The U.S. froze Panamanian government assets in the U.S. and prohibited payments by Panama-based subsidiaries of U.S. companies, as well as U.S. parent companies and individuals. The moves, announced Friday, represent the most cautious proposals by Reagan aides in an attempt to topple Gen. Noriega.    ---   Israeli government ministers confirmed that a 15-year-old Jewish girl, killed in a West Bank clash last week, died from a gunshot wound from an M-16 rifle apparently fired by a settler who was guarding her. The Israeli Supreme Court issued an injunction against the army's destruction of houses in the village of Beita, site of the shooting.    ---   The U.S. Embassy in Honduras advised all U.S. citizens on nonessential business to leave the country or stay at home following anti-American riots last week that left as many as five Hondurans dead and the consulate in Tegucigalpa gutted. The riots were touched off by the U.S. seizure of a suspected drug trafficker in Honduras.    ---   A second Meese nominee belongs to an all-white country club, raising the prospect that both of the attorney general's choices for top Justice Department posts could face confirmation difficulties. A spokesman for the Tulsa, Okla., club confirmed that Francis Keating, named by Meese to the No. 3 post in the department, is a member.    ---   China's legislature approved Li Peng as premier, Yang Shangkun as president and former Vice Premier Wan Li as National People's Congress chairman Friday. The moves, which had been expected, are seen as strengthening reforms begun under Deng Xiaoping, who retained his post as head of the Central Military Commission.    ---   Nofziger was sentenced Friday to 90 days in jail and fined $30,000 for illegally lobbying senior administration aides after leaving his post as White House political director. He remains free pending an appeal.    ---   AIDS researchers reported that they have detected in urine the virus that causes the disease, a finding that could result in a simpler, faster and cheaper AIDS test. In a letter to a British science journal, New York University researchers said they detected the virus in 79 of 80 patients whose blood also tested positive.    ---   Jimmy Swaggart resigned from the Assemblies of God shortly after the church ordered him defrocked for refusing to stop preaching for a year. The television evangelist, head of a $140 million-a-year ministry, confessed in February to unspecified sins after reports linked him to a prostitute.    ---   Philippine soldiers went on full alert amid reports that Col. Gregorio Honasan, escaped leader of a coup attempt last August, would attempt to free other rebel soldiers from prison. On Friday, another leader of the failed mutiny against President Aquino's government escaped prison.    ---   Sandy Lyle won the Masters golf championship at the Augusta, Ga., National Golf Club by one stroke.    ---   Died: Brian R. Woolfe, 61, Magma Copper Co. president, Friday, in Tucson, Ariz. </TEXT></DOC>