<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880712-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Going for Broke: Hunt Brothers Pin Hopes for Comeback On 'Crapshoot' in Oil --- Creditors Have Little Faith, But Placid Oil Is Drilling In Deep Gulf Waters --- A Gusher Like Their Father's? </HL><AUTHOR> Leonard M. Apcar and Caleb Solomon (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PET LNG BCY </IN><TEXT>   GREEN CANYON, Gulf of Mexico -- As storm-driven 21-foot-seas rocked the Penrod 72 oil rig last winter, work had to stop for as long as a week at a time.    Every delay heightened fears that the well it was to drill in Green Canyon would never be completed -- and for the three Hunt brothers of Dallas, heirs and squanderers of an oil empire, completing the well was imperative. A deckhand recalls the order of the day: &quot;Move it, move it, move it!&quot;    Time was so much of the essence that welders worked as the rig was towed 500 miles to Green Canyon from a Brownsville, Texas, shipyard. Shipbuilders in Larose, La., improvised the construction of a specialized boat, the largest of its kind, needed to install a mooring system to keep the rig anchored in place. &quot;We built the boat and then made the drawing,&quot; says Lyman Martin, the shipyard's manager.    So goes the Hunt brothers' frantic effort to rebuild in oil a fortune largely lost in oil -- and in silver, sugar and real estate. The Hunts need the money to help pay people they owe and secure the future of their anemic former money-gusher, Placid Oil Co. It owes $1 billion and has been mired in Chapter 11 Bankruptcy proceedings in federal court in Dallas for nearly two years. The Hunts believe that the richest rewards of Green Canyon and nearby oil-and-gas reservoirs will go to those who exploit the area first.    Big rewards imply big risks, and in offshore drilling they aren't only financial: A stupendous explosion last week destroyed an Occidental Petroleum Corp. oil platform in the North Sea, killing more than 160 people.    The Hunts are betting the ranch, encumbered as it is, on one of the world's riskiest ventures. At 1,522 feet, Green Canyon's depth, this will be the deepest water off American shores that has ever produced oil. At a cost of $340 million, it is a high-stakes crapshoot.    The costs have discouraged some though not all of the country's biggest oil companies from drilling in these parts. But N. Bunker, W. Herbert and Lamar Hunt and their partners in the Green Canyon venture are relying on an untested, one-of-a-kind, floating drilling and production system to get oil and gas from a place that some specialists believe lies barely within the industry's technological reach.    In the best of circumstances the gamble on unproven technology would require the unwavering support of everybody concerned. Instead, the Hunts' bankers have tried to lace them into financial straitjackets, and their other creditors have dogged their every step. Placid's bankruptcy grew out of a bitter war with its banks over whether to pursue the Green Canyon project. At one point, banks even proposed that the bankruptcy court auction off the Hunts' flagship company, Placid Oil, to pay off its debts.    The Hunts still have managed to sink a huge chunk of their share of what's left of their father's fortune on what they believe is the Gulf's mother lode. They believe that discovering the treasure will make for a comeback every bit as celebrated as their father's gushers of the 1930s. Although the brothers themselves won't discuss the project with reporters, they permitted Placid officials to do so. C.D. Brown, Placid's president, says of the project: &quot;This will be one of the milestones in our future.&quot;    The water in Green Canyon's Block 29 is deeper than the Sears Tower is tall. Above the water, rigs must withstand hurricane gusts of up to 150 miles an hour. Below it, drilling and production grow more complex with every additional foot. There's no consensus among major oil companies about how to begin the effort, which in any case, some oil men say, isn't worth it. &quot;Green Canyon doesn't have enough oil and gas to fool with,&quot; says R. Paul Wickes, a lawyer for Placid's lead bank, First RepublicBank Dallas.    Five experts looked at Green Canyon Block 29, where the production apparatus is anchored, and at two nearby drilling blocks, the sites for satellite wells to pump oil to the main production center. Each expert had a different estimate of the oil and natural gas in these three blocks, covering 27 square miles. The lowest came from Netherland, Sewell andamp; Associates, a Dallas consulting firm hired by the Hunts' banks. The firm called Placid Oil's estimate of 70 million barrels of oil and its equivalent in natural gas -- medium-size, as oil deposits go -- wildly optimistic. As for drilling, says Frederic D. Sewell, an executive vice president of Netherland Sewell, &quot;going forward wouldn't be economically viable.&quot;    The banks' hired guns are out to torpedo the project by pooh-poohing it, Hunt men say. The Hunts believe that their three blocks plus huge additional acreage they have leased in the Green Canyon area all together contain way more than a halfbillion barrels of oil.    The Hunt brothers first learned about Green Canyon just five years ago, when oil sold for more than $30 a barrel instead of $15. William Feathergail Wilson, Placid's exploration vice president, told the Hunts of an ancient Mississippi River 50 miles wide and 200 feet deep, which buried a treasure of oil-forming debris in the vicinity of Green Canyon. In less than an hour, the brothers decided to go ahead. Within months, Placid purchased its Green Canyon leases.    Initial exploration was encouraging, and Placid kept the results quiet. To avoid tipping off rivals, Placid didn't fully test one well because the natural gas would have ignited a long yellow flame that could be spotted miles away. In 1984, its secret still intact, Placid leased surrounding blocks and ventured farther into the Green Canyon, making it the largest leaseholder in the area with 259,200 acres.    With very little money, tiny Placid concocted an oddball oil drilling and production system that floats, its main piece a converted drilling rig, the Penrod 72. While oil men admire Placid's derring-do, the bankers say Placid is out of its league in a game where its competitors have pockets dozens of times as deep.    Royal Dutch/Shell Group's Shell Oil Co., for instance, recently spent $390 million, an amount about equal to Placid's 1986 revenue, simply to acquire the right to drill wildcat wells in hostile waters off the coast of Alaska. Placid's Green Canyon design and management team consists of just a dozen people, about half the size of Shell's civil engineering department. For Placid, there is little room for error. All along, in court and in the Gulf, the industry has scrutinized Placid's every step and misstep. Almost every major oil company has sent representatives to tour the Green Canyon rig. Placid's presentations at industry conferences have lured huge crowds, as did its bankruptcy hearings. &quot;Everybody's watching,&quot; says Don Daigle, a veteran Houston oil scout.    Placid's aim was to put as little money up front as possible and hurry production so that later operating costs would be financed with cash flow from the sale of oil. This is akin to renting out the ground floor of a building to finance construction of the top floors. &quot;It's a poor boy's approach,&quot; says Hugh Kelly, president of Ocean Drilling andamp; Exploration Co. Placid's approach will produce oil faster, but with higher operating costs and more downtime.    Instead of building a conventional, and immense, $300 million oil platform fixed to the sea floor, like Shell's Bullwinkle platform in the Green Canyon, Placid completed a $20 million remodeling of a semisubmersible drilling rig and used so-called off-the-shelf technology for most of its system. Placid figures its total project will cost about $340 million, while Shell estimates it will spend $500 million. Also in Green Canyon sits Conoco Inc., a Du Pont Co. subsidiary, which will spend $400 million building a newfangled platform before it produces a drop of oil. Much of the complex piping, valves and other equipment that sit on the deck of a typical production platform is, in Placid's system, under water, and too deep for human divers to reach and repair. Skeptics are critical of the design. &quot;Things leak,&quot; says an engineer at a major oil company. &quot;Above water, if a valve doesn't work, it's no problem. There are things that are trivial on the surface that aren't trivial in very deep water.&quot; Says Mark Thompson, drilling foreman aboard the Penrod 72: &quot;The oil field is full of traps.&quot;    The well is still being drilled. After numerous delays, the Hunts now hope to get the system producing by August. If history is any guide, things will go wrong. In January, the specially built boat, the Damon Chouest, was towing a single piece of pipe as long as Manhattan Island along the sea floor. The Damon sailed smoothly until the captain felt a tug on the boat, saw his tow indicator drop to zero and then looked over his shoulder to see a 50-foot water spout.    The pipe, dragging the sea floor 500 feet below, hit a coral boulder eight feet in diameter and sprang a leak. Nitrogen inside the pipe, used to pressurize it, escaped to cause the water spout. Divers have just finished salvaging the damaged pipe.    On another occasion, the Damon was headed toward Green Canyon with a piece of pipe seven miles long when it encountered an Amoco Corp. drillship on its course. The Amoco vessel hadn't staked out its drilling site when the Damon's tow route was initially charted. Placid had to store several lengths of pipe on the sea floor for four months until the Amoco drillship moved on.    The cost of the delays, and a plunge in oil prices, have knocked silly the economics of the Green Canyon project. Placid's share of the venture's expense now stands at $130 million. But its share of the profits is projected at only $150 million over 15 years for a return on investment of a mere $20 million, around 1% a year.    &quot;If we knew in early 1986 we would have to spend the amount of money we spent, we probably wouldn't have gone forward,&quot; says Walter V. Fraker, a Placid vice president. But he says the remaining cost is relatively small and the project should be completed.    In the aftermath of the oil crash and Placid's bankruptcy filing, some suppliers quit work out of fear that Placid couldn't pay them, and others demanded million-dollar premiums to continue work. The resulting &quot;business-related delays,&quot; as Placid calls them, put the project more than a year behind schedule.    The Hunts have kept the project afloat with legal and financial sleight-of-hand. The day before its bankruptcy filing, Placid wired $27.5 million, primarily to Green Canyon suppliers, and hurriedly signed a $100 million contract to lease the drilling rig from its sister company, Penrod Drilling Co., which recently settled a $760 million loan dispute with its bankers. To get around court orders barring Green Canyon expenditures, Placid even had companies that owed it money make payments to suppliers for the Green Canyon project.    Placid men managed to sneak a huge structure of pipes, valves and connectors to the drilling site and lower them to the sea floor behind the backs of bankers, other creditors and the bankruptcy judge, who had ordered them not to lift a finger. Placid's bankers learned of the maneuver only when one overheard a company official mention it on a flight to Dallas.    &quot;When they went into bankruptcy they were spending money as fast as a herd of horses,&quot; says Mr. Wickes, the bank lawyer. &quot;We'd think we had built fences around them and then we'd find Placid out laying equipment in the Gulf.&quot;    The Hunts finally agreed last April to enter into a bankruptcy settlement that promises the banks a huge portion of what they are owed, fast. The settlement, expected to be completed within days now, would require Placid immediately to pay $663 million of the $803.5 million it owes to banks, clearing the way for it to wade even deeper in the Gulf. Placid agreed to give the banks a $140 million note for the balance, secured by liens on Placid assets and a large share of the income from its Dutch North Sea operations for 10 years. &quot;The true cost of pursuing Green Canyon,&quot; a bank official says, &quot;is the whole company.&quot;    The Hunts have been willing to sacrifice almost anything to keep the project alive. They have begged money from vendors and from good old boys among Texas oil-drilling friends. Among their Green Canyon partners are Edward Gaylord, the Oklahoma City media mogul and owner of Nashville's Grand Ol' Opry, and Donald Carter, owner of the Dallas Mavericks basketball team. The Hunts have agreed to forgo their share of production revenues until the venture's borrowings from its partners and others have been repaid. The late-payment penalties on $31 million in borrowings are so onerous that Placid figures it will have to repay the lenders $56.6 million over two years once Green Canyon production begins.    All along, however, the Hunts have acted as if time were dearer than money. A Hunt shipyard hired two 12-hour shifts to build a project boat. Racing the clock, workers installed critical production gear in foul weather.    Bankers see all this as a waste of time and money. &quot;The banks' view is that this is a conspiracy by evil-minded people,&quot; says Henry W. Simon Jr., Placid's bankruptcy attorney. Bankers say Placid could go broke again in 18 months, swallowed by the hole called Green Canyon. To Hunt men, that's just more banker talk. Says Phillip G. Clarke, Placid's Green Canyon project leader, &quot;They don't understand why we just don't take our money and invest it in CDs.&quot;  en</TEXT></DOC>