<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871026-0119 </DOCNO><HL> One More for a Distinguished Company---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 10/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The knowledge may not assuage his hurt, but Robert Bork has now joined a select group, all of them prominent in their time and some of them distinguished indeed. In all, 26 men before him have been chosen by presidents for the Supreme Court but failed to pass the Senate's political test.    Like so many things, it all began with George Washington. He was not only first in war, first in peace and first in the hearts of his countrymen, but also the first president to have his choice for the high court rejected by politically minded senators.    In 1795, having been reelected by acclaim, President Washington nominated John Rutledge of South Carolina to be chief justice. Rutledge had been a member of the Continental Congress that proclaimed the Declaration of Independence, of the Constitutional Convention in 1787, and an associate justice of the Supreme Court (confirmed by a voice vote). Subsequently, he resigned to become chief justice of the South Carolina Supreme Court. His legal training reached back to pre-revolutionary times at the Middle Temple in England.    So no one questioned his qualification when Washington nominated him for chief justice to succeed John Jay. Unfortunately, though, Judge Rutledge had had the temerity to oppose publicly the Jay Treaty with England.    That treaty, you'll remember, provided for the withdrawal of British forces from the Northwest. It also, though, recognized the pre-revolution-debts owed Great Britain by the states, which aroused opposition from Southern Federalists, including Rutledge. That criticism was enough to arouse 14 votes against Rutledge, with only 10 votes for confirmation.    The story is that after his Senate rejection, the proud John Rutledge attempted suicide, thinking it an insult after all his service to the new republic.    None of the others of that band of rejects carried their disappointment quite so far, and I trust Judge Bork will not. For, with two possible exceptions, those who failed confirmation did so for political reasons, not for any want of qualifications. The possible exceptions were George Williams, nominated by President Grant, and Harrold Carswell, nominated by President Nixon, both of whom had mediocre legal records.    It's interesting to note that 12 of the rejected were nominated by lame-duck presidents or when the party in control of the Senate was hoping for the victory of its presidential candidate in the upcoming elections. Here, President Tyler, who succeeded on the death of William Harrison, and served only part of a term, holds the record. He had five nominees rejected because the Senate felt, correctly, that he would not even be a candidate in the next election.    President Reagan, of course, is such a lame-duck president, being barred by the 22nd Amendment from another election. As such, his political bite can't match his bark.    Indeed, it's not unreasonable to conclude that the real target in the recent confirmation hearings was not Judge Bork but Mr. Reagan. Certainly the objections to Mr. Bork can't be any want of legal qualifications. He has practiced law, taught at Yale, served as solicitor general in the Justice Department, has been a judge on the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, for which post he was confirmed without difficulty. He is also the author of two books on antitrust policy.    If the Democrats in the Senate had their druthers they undoubtedly would prefer that the present court vacancy not be filled by President Reagan in hopes that the next president might be a Democrat. It wouldn't be the first time the Senate has played that game. It was played by the Democrats against Herbert Hoover and Richard Nixon, by the Republicans against Lyndon Johnson.    I wouldn't be surprised if the Democrats played it again with President Reagan's next nominee. This practice has been called the &quot;save-the-seat syndrome.&quot; The temptation certainly will be great with the presidential election barely a year away. The court thus will be left with an even number of members, eight, who might well divide equally on upcoming cases; many recent decisions have come on 5-to-4 decisions. Conceivably, this situation could last until a new president is inaugurated.    This wouldn't be the longest time the court has been short-handed. The longest vacancy lasted two years, three months and 23 days. During that period the Senate rejected four nominees by two presidents, Tyler and Polk.    Some of the nominees who were confirmed were also very controversial, notably Justices Louis Brandeis, Benjamin Cardozo and Hugo Black, and some of those rejected had long and distinguished careers afterward on lower federal courts. The classic example was Judge John J. Parker, a circuit court judge appointed by President Coolidge and confirmed easily. When President Hoover nominated him for the Supreme Court, however, he was attacked viciously by labor-union groups and was rejected in 1930. He continued on the bench, and years later, in 1943, he was honored by the American Bar Association for &quot;conspicuous service to American jurisprudence.&quot; He was likewise honored by the Inner Temple on the English Bar. Thus does time smooth out controversy.    Judge Bork is also currently a federal judge, and none of the attack on him had anything to do with his decisions as judge on the Court of Appeals. In fact, none of these decisions were ever overturned by the Supreme Court, a rare record for a lower-court judge. Instead, he was attacked for some of his writings as a law professor at Yale in which he dared criticize the legal reasoning in some Supreme Court decisions. That was the only argument his opponents could get hold of.    Whether Judge Bork will remain on the Court of Appeals or, in disgust, return to teaching or private practice, I don't know. But if he should choose to remain I've no doubt he will continue to serve with distinction, and in aftertime even some of his Senate critics will feel sheepish that they added him to the list of the rejected.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>