<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870707-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Japan Maps Out Remedy to Traffic Jams---Computer Screens in CarsWould Guide Drivers---By Elisabeth RubinfienStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN NSANY SNE NIPNY MITSYAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Following street directions around Tokyo can be like going on a treasure hunt: Go to the bank, look for a vegetable shop, take the left-hand fork and turn right at the tobacconist. In this and many of the world's cities, drivers must crawl and curse through a maze of roads.    Now Japan is working on a remedy. More than 50 Japanese companies have joined with the government to develop a behind-the-wheel computer system that will tell drivers their location and suggest alternate routes to avoid traffic jams.    U.S. and European companies are at work on similar products. But the Japanese hope to forge national standards and create a product more quickly by linking such diverse industries as autos and telecommunications at the research stage.    &quot;The government is giving out the basic data, university professors are consulting, electronics makers are cooperating on data-transmission systems and auto makers are working on applications,&quot; says Hiroshi Tsuda, senior vehicle-research engineer at Nissan Motor Co. &quot;Getting these four areas working together on one project -- that's Japan's strength.&quot;    But one of Japan's weaknesses -- the debilitating effects of government bureaucracy -- also has come into play. At least two ministries are pushing rival systems, despite the fact that they are tapping nearly the same pool of companies.    The Japanese hope to have a working system by the end of next year and command an annual market that they estimate at 300 billion yen ($2 billion) by 1998 in Japan alone.    In a test model of one system, a colorful map of Tokyo appears on a computer screen near the driver's seat. With the touch of a button, the map zooms in to cover a chosen area, and a yellow triangle traces the car's movement across the map. At least eight companies, including Nissan, have developed prototypes. America's Etak Inc., which has sold 2,000 units of a similar system in the U.S., has licensed its method for turning paper maps into digital information to Japan's Clarion Co., a maker of car audio systems.    Companies now are trying to work up-to-the-minute traffic information into the computer. The driver then will be able to choose a route that avoids heavy traffic, accidents and construction sites.    In the past 10 years, many Japanese companies have tried smaller joint efforts for such research, but technologies often weren't advanced enough to make it profitable. Honda Motor Co., for example, introduced a navigation system in certain models in 1981 that was &quot;technically very good,&quot; says electronics analyst John Hartley. But the units were cumbersome, and, at about 300,000 yen ($2,050) each, proved too expensive. They were withdrawn about a year later.    But advances in semiconductors, compact disks and display screens have made the idea more feasible. &quot;Technologically, we're in the era of the Strategic Defense Initiative {the so-called Star Wars anti-missile system} and soft landings on the moon, so this is easy,&quot; says Masami Tsuzawa, director general of the Japan Traffic Management Technology Association. &quot;We aim to join the car society with the information society.&quot;    All of Japan's auto companies and many other industrial giants, such as Sony Corp., NEC Corp., Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd. and Mitsui andamp; Co., are involved in the effort to come up with the best system and standards on which all future products will be based. The companies want to avoid the kind of problem that arose with incompatible BETA and VHS videotape recorders. &quot;We don't want a user to find that the maps from his car won't work when he borrows his father's car for the day,&quot; says an engineer.    Several methods exist to locate the car on the map and track its movement. Some companies, such as Sumitomo Electric, use magnets or gyroscopes in combination with the car's odometer. Others are working with the Construction Ministry to use location data transmitted by radio from roadside beacons. Still others, such as Mitsubishi Electric Corp., use signals from U.S. earth satellites.    Different ministries, notably the Construction Ministry and the National Police Agency, are promoting their favorite systems and have organized separate groups to pursue their research. The membership of the rival groups is almost the same, and companies say the bureaucratic competition delays progress.    Each method has problems. The magnetic system can be thrown off by a passing train or even a large van. The radio system requires setting up beacons throughout the country and most likely will fail to reflect area traffic completely, engineers say. The satellite system is costly, is hampered by tall buildings and relies on technology that Japanese manufacturers don't control.    Moreover, Tokyo's complex road system makes creating an accurate system all but impossible. The city's roads were laid out more than 200 years ago to include only a few broad boulevards and thousands of tiny back roads that circle and crisscross one another.    Engineers say a combined system will be best. Car-mounted gyroscopes will correct for errors in magnetic readings, occasional beacons will transmit location data for double-checking in local areas and satellites will be used for rural districts. A process called map-matching will keep the whole thing on course.    Drivers could receive traffic updates along with entertainment programs and even stock market news. Offices could track company vehicles and drivers could send messages to their office or home.    Some companies are urging the competing groups to take international systems into consideration as well. Early involvement of non-Japanese interests could be the most effective way to ensure access to Japan's markets for foreigners. Japan's system of setting domestic standards often serves as a &quot;technical barrier to trade,&quot; says a U.S. government official.    At the same time, Japanese makers want to ensure that they aren't locked out of foreign markets by setting a standard that is unique to Japan.    Indeed, international variations can rest on some fundamental matters. Thanks to a reading taken 150 years ago, Japan believes it isn't located where the U.S. reckons Japan to be on the globe. For most purposes, the difference is insignificant, about 1,300 feet. But for road locations determined by foreign satellites, it could mean a computer telling a driver the car is at 43rd Street when it is at 47th.    &quot;Such a thing doesn't matter as long as you're a closed country concerned only with yourself,&quot; says Nissan's Mr. Tsuda. &quot;But when an American satellite system is going to tell you where you are, then it makes a difference.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>