<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870615-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Thatcher Sets Out to Complete Britain's Turnaround---But Her Job Won't be Easy, as SharpSocial Divisions Will Spark Tempers---By James M. PerryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;We're rarin' to go,&quot; declared British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the euphoria of her stunning 101-seat victory in Thursday's general election.    Mrs. Thatcher is eager to complete the job she started when she was first elected in 1979 -- to turn Britain around from a torpid, fading welfare state into a prosperous, energetic free-market society -- and, in the process, to destroy socialism as a significant force in British political life. She plans to go on and on politically, perhaps into the next century, with this caveat: &quot;I might be twanging a harp.&quot;    Certainly, it won't be easy, and it may not be pretty to watch. For this election, more than the two that preceded it, demonstrated how divided this country is between those who are making it and those who aren't. Tempers will flare in the months ahead.    More and more, the people who are making it live in the south and the midlands, and they are content and voting Tory. Most of the others live in Scotland and Wales and in the depressed old industrial cities in the north. They are angry -- and are voting Labor.    The divisions are so sharp, and emotions have been so sharply brought into play, that there is no center in British politics. Hence the calamitous showing of the Alliance of the Social Democrats and the Liberals, which had hoped to stake out a middle position between the right and left. Even though the Alliance picked up 22.5% of the vote, it wound up with only 22 of the 650 seats in the new House of Commons, against 375 for the Conservatives and 229 for Labor (the rest went to minor parties).    During the campaign, the 61-year-old Mrs. Thatcher often appeared clumsy in the way she answered questions and downright weary physically. But she vows that she won't let up. She made modest changes in her cabinet over the weekend to help set her on course.    In a key move, Mrs. Thatcher switched her Department of Employment team, Lord Young and Kenneth Clarke, to Trade and Industry, where they will try to improve life in the rubble of the inner cities.    The hottest young Tory property, John Moore, was given the Health and Social Security Department. If he can sort out the troubles in the national health service -- Labor won support with complaints about long waits for hospital procedures -- he will become a man to watch.    Better-known politicians who may begin jockeying for position to succeed Mrs. Thatcher include Home Secretary Douglas Hurd, Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe and Education Secretary Kenneth Baker.    Norman Tebbit, who directed the campaign and who once was a favorite to succeed Mrs. Thatcher, retired from ministerial duties, saying he wants to spend more time with his wife, who was paralyzed in the 1983 Brighton hotel bombing that was aimed by Irish Republican Army terrorists at the prime minister herself.    Mrs. Thatcher, meanwhile, brought a personal favorite, Cecil Parkinson, back into government. He resigned after the last election after word leaked out that he had impregnated his unmarried secretary.    The Tory legislative program will be spelled out in the Queen's Speech on June 25. Mrs. Thatcher, in words to be spoken by the Queen, will propose what her advisers say will be sweeping changes in housing and education policy.    The education bill would allow individual state-maintained schools to operate independently by opting out of control by the local education authorities. The housing bill would permit public-housing tenants to swap their local government landlords for some kind of cooperative trusts that would be within the private sector.    Mrs. Thatcher also will push legislation early in the session to denationalize the water authorities, with electricity set for denationalization later.    Also planned is legislation to open up the housing rental market, now severely controlled, as well as legislation to restrict trade-union power even further.    The Sunday Times, a strong supporter of Mrs. Thatcher, urged her to put American-style tax reform at the top of her agenda. But it is not a reform she talked about at all following her victory.    As of now, little appears to stand in the way of the Conservatives. As Simon Hoggart wrote in yesterday's Observer newspaper: &quot;If the opposition at their best can't beat the Conservatives at their worst, what's to stop the Tories staying in power&quot; for years to come?    The Tories have staked out the territory where more and more people are living and prospering. Defectors to the Tories include skilled workers and trade unionists. People who have bought shares in the state industries that have been denationalized and tenants of public housing who have been permitted to buy their homes and apartments all lean toward the Tories.    Then, too, there is Labor's non-nuclear defense policy, which, by the party's own count, stripped away 3% of its potential vote last Thursday.    The good news for Labor is that it feels better about its leadership. Neil Kinnock did, after all, prove he's an agile campaigner.    But too many voters still are opposed to the party's defense position. And too many fear that the unions under Labor once again would become all-powerful, returning the country to the dreaded days of double-digit inflation. For Labor, the lesson is that if they are going to return to power, they need a new platform.    Hard-left socialists remain to be confronted by the party leadership. That won't be easy, for the new batch of Labor representatives in Parliament includes a number of militants, who believe the party's problem is that it hasn't been hard-line socialist enough.    Meanwhile, the Social Democrats, founded with such high hopes six years ago by Labor Party defectors, are down to their leader, David Owen, and five colleagues in the House of Commons. Dr. Owen may step down as leader of the party. The Social Democrats, or SDP, would then be merged with the Liberals and led, ultimately, by a single politician.    David Steel, the Liberal leader, called yesterday for &quot;democratic fusion&quot; with the SDP, but he is unlikely to get the leadership job. He probably will step down too.    The front-runner for leader of the merged party is Paddy Ashdown, a leftwing Liberal from Yeovil, in the West Country.    Down the road, some observers suggest, Labor and the newly merged party will talk about some kind of anti-Thatcher coalition. But that, for now, is simply talk. </TEXT></DOC>