<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Striking Out: Labor Unions' Chance For Gains in '88 Hits A Wall of Resistance --- In Year of Heavy Bargaining, Wage Gains Are Running Below Level of Inflation --- The New Focus: Job Security </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Karr (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> RUB TRA ELE MIN </IN><TEXT>   This might have been a big year for organized labor. More than 700 contracts, covering nearly 40% of unionized workers in America, were or are up for negotiation. The unions, worried over inflation, frustrated by job losses and long outmaneuvered by their foes in industry, have been hoping to show a few people what they could do.    Instead, they're starting to understand how Michael Spinks must feel.    Take the United Rubber Workers. The union charged into talks with tire companies vowing to win a &quot;meaningful&quot; pay increase. What it got was two bits an hour. At one threatened plant, the union agreed to a cut in pay.    So did the union representing workers at Safeway Stores in Oklahoma and Kansas City. The United Food and Commercial Workers, fearing members would be left with no pay at all because of store closings or sell-offs, has accepted a wage rollback of $2.50 an hour.    Even the mighty Teamsters union, while gaining modest wage and benefit increases, has agreed this year to a plan permitting pay givebacks under some circumstances.    How can the unions be so ineffective when the economy is growing steadily and living-cost rises would seem to justify raises of 4% or so? There are varying reasons, but the short answer lies in their adversary: industry that is determined not to let labor costs surge, and knows it doesn't have to.    This year 29% of employers are seeking to hold wage increases under 2%, according to a survey by the Bureau of National Affairs; that's nearly double the 16% of employers that set such a target last year. &quot;Having reformed its wayward past {of hefty labor contracts}, management is not about to dig itself into a hole again,&quot; says Mark De Bernardo of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.    Companies claim they can no longer afford to be generous. Competitive pressures, domestic and international, are growing, they argue. And they say the current takeover climate could leave them vulnerable if they offered workers too much and ran up their costs. Many managers, fearing that their own jobs would be in jeopardy in a merger or takeover, are tougher than ever about labor costs. At the same time, the growing use of temporary workers helps ease fears of strikes and reduces unions' leverage.    Labor agreements reached in the first quarter of this year reflect these attitudes. A few unions have made modest gains, and the average first-year rise, at 2.1%, is up a little from previous settlements. But the Labor Department says average increases over the lives of newly negotiated contracts are narrower than those in the preceding agreements.    The labor battle is being joined on many fronts this year. Bargaining is scheduled or under way with electrical-equipment makers, railroads, makers of men's shirts and pants, some airlines, construction companies and food firms, and a raft of state and local governments. In all, 732 industry contracts covering 3.4 million workers will expire or reopen this year, by Labor Department calculations.    Where job losses are a threat, unions are especially impotent. That was the problem for Safeway's Oklahoma and Kansas City workers. They knew the company had been closing and selling stores in another area, Dallas. &quot;We had a gun to our head,&quot; says William Olwell, an official of the United Food and Commercial Workers, which accepted a 20% pay cut. &quot;The alternative was unspeakable.&quot;    The layoff threat is also real in the tire industry. The result is that the United Rubber Workers union, in negotiations with some major tire makers earlier this year, didn't get any basic wage increases. It later managed 25-cent-an-hour raises from Goodyear and Firestone, but those stand to be deducted from later cost-of-living pay increases.    At Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Co., even the cost-of-living schedule negotiated this year is skimpy, and pension gains are delayed two years. The capper is a contract at Uniroyal's 71-year-old Eau Claire, Wis., plant, where the union has agreed to a 63-cent-an-hour reduction in pay, one less vacation week, three fewer annual holidays, no cost-of-living increases and extensive work-rule changes. In return, Uniroyal promises to avoid layoffs and plant closings.    The union complains it is bearing the brunt of Uniroyal's need to curb costs, including costs incurred in takeover fights. &quot;It's not the kind of agreement we cherish, but there's no point in negotiating a huge agreement and then having the plants close,&quot; says Curt Brown, a Rubber Workers spokesman.    In this atmosphere, strikes are becoming less and less fearsome a weapon. Major work stoppages, including walkouts and employer lockouts, fell last year to the smallest number in the four decades the government has kept track. The trend continued in the first five months of this year.    Nowadays, strikes are risky. Employers' increasing use of temporary, part-time and other so-called contingent workers means companies have a supply of willing help ready to replace union members who walk. &quot;People never expected to lose their job completely when they went on strike,&quot; notes a federal mediation official. &quot;They have to expect it now.&quot;    Despite their lack of leverage, workers are fed up with losing, and the result is some contentious bargaining-table battles. AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland told electrical unions negotiating this year to expect the toughest struggle since 1969, when the result was a 100-day strike. The talks involve General Electric and Westinghouse.    GE went into the talks insisting it needed labor flexibility and hoping to eliminate many job classifications. &quot;The imperative is much greater today, because now we're competing in a global ballgame,&quot; a spokesman says. A tentative agreement was reached Sunday, but already it's in trouble; the board of one union rejected it yesterday.    Unionized railroad workers are especially ready to stop losing and to start recouping some of what they have given up in recent years. A railroad-industry executive concedes that &quot;there's a feeling in labor circles that they have made their concessions, and going further would be turning the screws too far.&quot; Yet he says the carriers need still more cuts in labor costs, with perhaps a 20% reduction in work forces. Restrictive work rules are another target. &quot;There aren't many railroads that are prepared to increase wages without productivity improvements,&quot; says John Sweeney, a vice president of CSX Corp.    The unions may have better luck in the aluminum industry. &quot;Whenever the employer's situation has improved, the employees are saying, 'We want a piece of that pie,'&quot; notes Kay McMurray, the director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service. That's the situation at Aluminum Co. of America and Reynolds Metals Co., with which two unions, the United Steelworkers and Aluminum, Brick and Glass Workers, open talks Aug. 9. They accepted a wage freeze and benefit cuts in 1986. This time, amid a strong industry upturn, they hope to make a comeback.    One modest success for labor is that two-tier wage schemes, which set lower pay for new employees, are less in vogue this year. In the face of strong union opposition, many companies are trying other ways to hold down labor costs. What they are pushing is elimination or weakening of cost-of-living clauses, greater links between compensation and corporate performance, and more emphasis on lump-sum payments that don't step up the wage base.    Some labor leaders think the long decline in union power may be bottoming out. The Labor Department says 1987 wage contracts provided pay increases equal to those in the preceding accords, the first time since 1982 that new agreements didn't provide smaller increases. &quot;I think the worst is past,&quot; says Machinists president William Winpisinger. &quot;Managements are going to continue to be tough, but I don't think it's going to be quite as difficult.&quot;    In return for all the concessions they have to swallow, unions are determined to make sure their members at least have a job. A new coal contract, which raised pay but weakened benefits, gives laid-off miners hiring preference at new mines. A recently negotiated Chrysler contract also has provisions meant to limit layoffs. Also getting attention this year is the idea of &quot;employment security,&quot; in which a company that is laying off a worker would train him for another job and try to place him at another company.    Job-security clauses give unions something positive to take back to their members, at modest cost to employers. But they can look more generous than they are. Auto contracts provide for job security, but, because they limit the funds available for it, they haven't prevented sizable layoffs.    Says Richard Belous, an economist for the Conference Board: &quot;It makes good headlines, but when you start reading the fine print, you find it doesn't cover you.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>