<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0169 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Nixon's Struggle to Plug Security Leaks</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   In &quot;Presidents Need a 'Sheriff's' Help on Foreign Policy&quot; (editorial page, Jan. 8), Albert R. Hunt writes, in an effort to show that &quot;political insight in foreign policy making&quot; was missing during the Nixon administration: &quot;Consider, for instance, the reaction of Henry Kissinger . . . when the press revealed the secret bombing of Cambodia in 1969. Claiming that the bombing was saving lives, Mr. Kissinger later wrote: 'This is why the press leaks that came from American sources struck Nixon and me as so outrageous.' The result of their outrage was the infamous plumbers unit and the wiretapping of more than a dozen government officials and journalists.&quot;    The article leaves the erroneous implication that the leak of the Cambodia bombing led to the establishment of the plumbers unit in 1969. In fact, it was created in 1971 in the wake of the publication by the New York Times of top-secret documents, made available to it illegally by Daniel Ellsberg, that described the beginning and escalation of U.S. involvement in Vietnam under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson.    The disguising of this, if intentional, is consistent with standard journalistic practice. Even then the focus is on the sinister efforts mounted by the president -- wiretaps, plumbers and, under President Reagan, polygraph tests and threats of prosecution -- rather than the propriety of the leaks themselves or the question of whether these secret, mutually beneficial transactions between reporters and anonymous sources in the government -- frequently officials who oppose the president's policy -- serve the national interest.    The excerpt's focus is on the presumably pathological &quot;outrage&quot; of President Nixon and Mr. Kissinger, while its proximate cause -- the largest leak of classified national-security documents in American history -- does not merit mention. Perhaps the Journal's readers would better understand the anger if they were reminded about what had provoked it.    The Pentagon Papers were published a few weeks before Mr. Kissinger made his secret trip to Peking to arrange President Nixon's visit in 1972. Had those plans been leaked, the results would probably have been kudos for the reporter and curtains for the policy, no doubt amid reports of an administration's &quot;failed attempt to curry favor with a regime that supports our enemies in Vietnam.&quot;    What makes the plumbers &quot;infamous&quot; in Mr. Hunt's book is no doubt their unfortunate but well-meaning escapade at the office of Mr. Ellsberg's psychiatrist. For personal reasons FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover was not conducting an aggressive investigation of Mr. Ellsberg, so over Labor Day weekend in 1971 a plumbers group organized a break-in to see whether it could find out more about the motivations, contacts and intentions of the man who had already done so much to damage national security. Mr. Ellsberg was lionized by liberals and the left because of his theft, because they -- together with the New York Times -- determined among themselves that the laws he had broken had no moral authority. These same critics condemned the plumbers for their burglary.    The one thing the article got right about the Nixon administration is that the Cambodia leak led to its carefully restrained wiretapping program. (Until 1972 -- when wiretaps without warrants were declared illegal, some time after the last Nixon-era tap had been removed -- wiretaps were resorted to regularly by presidents for a variety of reasons. The Kennedys tapped newsmen. Attorney General Robert Kennedy authorized the first wiretaps on Martin Luther King Jr. President Johnson's attorney general authorized a tap on an author who had written a book about Robert Kennedy and Marilyn Monroe.)    But Cambodia was only one of an extraordinary series of unauthorized disclosures of national-security information. In the first five months of the Nixon presidency there were at least 21 major stories in the New York and Washington papers based on leaks from National Security Council files. According to the CIA, 45 newspaper stories that year contained serious breaches of secrecy.    It was this torrent, capped by the Cambodia bombing leak, that led President Nixon to authorize Director Hoover to take whatever steps were necessary, including then-legal wiretaps, to find the leakers. Seventeen people -- four newsmen and 13 government employees -- were tapped. In all, the average number of warrantless wiretaps per year under President Nixon was less than in any administration since FDR's. But unlike those in earlier administrations, all the Nixon-era wiretaps were national-security-related. President Nixon weighed the regrettable violation of the privacy of the tapped individuals against the damage that could be done to U.S. strategic interests, and U.S. soldiers fighting in Vietnam, if leaks continued unabated.    In the wake of Watergate and America's psychologically devastating loss in Vietnam, the notion of &quot;national security&quot; lost a great deal of its legitimacy, a development welcomed and encouraged by many in the media. Now and then there is a peep from somebody in the press, such as John Chancellor in a 1986 TV commentary, who says that maybe there are some things that presidents need to do in secret. But that cow has been out of the barn for years.    The sounds of Ronald Reagan's Washington are the constant, waterfall-like gush of leaks and occasional contrapuntal bursts from the White House. These periodic complaints are carefully analyzed by the media for what they show about the administration's &quot;frustration&quot; and &quot;paranoia&quot; or the president's &quot;state of mind.&quot; Never is there a Sunday Times magazine piece or a column by a major pundit about whether leaks and an administration's inability to do much about them hamper its ability to govern.    All in all, the faulty evidence Mr. Hunt draws from the Nixon administration is put to good use in service of an equally faulty premise. It is suggested that if some seasoned political minds had been permitted to apply themselves to the proposal that an Iran initiative be undertaken, then the Reagan administration would have decided to abandon it because the pols would have convinced the president that, whatever the initiative's conceivable merits, it wouldn't play in Peoria. You raise an appalling specter -- that of pollsters, consultants and assorted other political bean counters gathering in the Oval Office to tell a president whether he should deploy Star Wars, tilt to Pakistan or open diplomatic relations with China.    The issue appears to be less a matter of presidential insight than of journalistic hindsight. If the Iran initiative had freed all the hostages, toppled Khomeini or both, we would be reading about President Reagan's farsighted willingness to buck the anti-Iran political tide. Instead the initiative failed, and the president is expected to have anticipated the failure and therefore never made the try. The article's prescription is for political insight as an antidote to boldness and creativity.    John H. Taylor   New York   ---   The writer is assistant to Richard Nixon. </TEXT></DOC>