<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880808-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Britain Facing Fiscal Counterrevolutionaries </HL><AUTHOR> David Howell </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP TAXES </CO><TEXT>   Critics of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's tax-cutting strategy are again out in force. This time it is not just the big state spenders -- the ones who were so indignant when the chancellor, Nigel Lawson, announced in March his dramatic reductions, particularly in the top rates of income tax. They have been joined by conservative voices claiming the tax cuts were a terrible mistake because they are overheating consumer demand and adding to inflationary pressures.    So the argument seems to be that in addition to raising short-term interest rates the authorities should now claw back their tax concessions. Since the budget surplus for the current year is already set to exceed $8.55 billion, notwithstanding public pressures, this would send it, if it indeed produced revenues, to unheard of heights. Even if the critics are right that some further domestic action is needed -- or possible -- to cut back demand there is something defeatist about doing this through forced state levies rather than through encouraging higher personal savings.    The implication is that the Anglo-Saxons are an inveterate lot of feckless spenders who will never be guided into more bourgeois and thrifty ways. And the official figures for the personal-savings ratio in Britain do look low. But these figures could be wrong, mainly because of underrecording of income. Some analyses suggest that the true ratio could be nearer 12% than the official 5%. Besides, there is no guarantee that people in Britain will carry on with the same spending and savings habits as in the past. Other economic habits, such as investing in stocks, have already changed dramatically under Mrs. Thatcher. Estimates of what people will do with extra money not taken from them by the tax man might be better based on social surveys than on the unreconstructed views of macroeconomists about the way the aggregates are supposed to behave.    All this assumes that the worries about overheating and renewed inflation do have validity and that beyond the cooling measures already taken consumption must be checked by some further policy step. Is this correct? Or could it just be another confusion between the tricky but passing problems of short-term economic management and the strategy of longer-term supply-side reforms pursued with such success in the U.K., notably through a step-by-step advance toward the low-tax society?    Fortunately the chancellor, while willing to put up interest rates and let sterling climb, seems determined to stand firm against the short-termism of his tax opponents. He is stressing five points.    The first is that the current surge of consumer demand may well carry the seeds of its own solution. Not only could the savings ratio rise (or be rising already) but also the pace of spending on homes may be slowing. This is not so much because of high interest rates for home borrowing, where an immediate upward jump is unlikely to deter more than a few from a mortgage loan lasting 25 years, but because of an interesting psychological change in home buyers' attitudes.    Until recently the belief was that while houses in East Anglia, the Midlands and the North of England, and in Wales and Scotland, might be far bigger and nicer for the money, a smaller property in the crowded Southeast was essential to stay on the house-price &quot;ladder.&quot; To their delight, home buyers have now found that houses outside the Southeast have become part of the &quot;ladder&quot; as well. Better physical communications plus changes in the business structure that allow enterprises to be far more dispersed have transformed the housing market. Prices are coming off the boil as supply swells and demand spreads away from the crush around London.    The chancellor's second source of comfort is that a large part of the British boom is being driven by spending on new productive equipment. Recent rhetoric about Britain's superior growth has disguised the fact that it was coming from a long way behind. The country is going through its real catching-up phase years after its neighbors. Running up the trade deficit is normal for such phases because they stretch capacity. But capacity is being enlarged by the same process. The more this investment surge is allowed to go on, the faster the rate of growth Britain can sustain without inflation.    Third, Mr. Lawson has been pointing out to colleagues that the U.K. inflation statistics are peculiar. The year-on-year measure of inflation (the retail price index) includes mortgage interest payments. Canada is apparently one of the few other countries with this practice. The net result is that rising interest rates themselves create &quot;inflation&quot; and will duly do so, with a big leap due next December, since mortgage interest rates actually fell last December.    Fourth, some of the temporary strain of strong demand is undoubtedly being taken by the trade deficit. This is running much higher than forecast, but it stands no comparison with the large trade deficits of the 1960s and 1970s, when both public and private sectors were running heavily in debt. Today's trade gap can be easily financed by foreign capital or by running down a small part of Britain's vast accumulated stock of overseas assets -- so long as the process doesn't last too long.    Fifth, the Thatcher government, unlike its predecessors in the past decade, is looking out on a still disinflationary world. Despite small inflationary movements here and there, little sign is visible of commodity prices' rising. No sign indicates that the prices of the most extensively traded commodity, oil, will do anything but go on sagging. Oil traders harbored the brief illusion that peace in the Persian Gulf, when it comes, might rejuvenate the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. But gulf peace is more likely to add to oil production. Iraq is now talking about a production goal of more than twice its current output to help pay for reconstruction.    These may be factors of supreme irrelevance to those concerned only with the immediate overheating they detect in Britain. Their repeated prescription is another round of bloodletting, reminiscent of those 18th-century doctors who prescribed leeches. The idea is that taxes must be raised again to drain away demand. But if the authorities are wise they will keep their eyes on the broader scene and not be driven off their tax strategy by these dubious and short-term remedies.    The right instruments for the day-to-day management job are interest rates, as now being applied, plus measures to ensure reasonable exchange-rate stability, which in Britain's case would be less difficult to deliver were Mr. Lawson allowed to take the pound fully into the European Monetary System. The wrong measures for this task are up-and-down switches in personal taxes. The program in Britain of steadily reducing tax rates has been the central pillar of the nation's recovery and restored repute. It would be a tragedy if stop-go economics were now allowed to destroy that pillar's foundations.    ---   Mr. Howell, a Conservative member of Parliament, was formerly minister of transport in Britain. </TEXT></DOC>