<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0072 </DOCNO><HL> The Perils in Wish-Fulfillment---By Vermont Royster</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Do you remember this adage? Be careful what you wish for (or pray for) -- you might get it.    Most of us of a certain age have learned its lesson, and I suspect a number of other people have lately had their wishes come true but wish their wishes hadn't.    Take Treasury Secretary James Baker. Just two years ago when the U.S. dollar was a highly valued currency in world markets, Mr. Baker decided it was &quot;too high&quot; in relation to other currencies, particularly the Japanese yen. He thought the &quot;high&quot; price of the dollar was largely responsible for the big U.S. trade deficits.    That high price, he reasoned, encouraged Americans to buy foreign goods because their price in terms of dollars was cheap; it took fewer dollars to get the yen, francs, pounds or whatever to buy imported goods. At the same time he thought it discouraged foreign purchases of American goods because buyers had to come up with more of these foreign currencies to buy American. It all seemed quite logical, and many people, especially those in the export business, agreed with him.    So in conjunction with foreign central banks he campaigned to make the dollar cheaper. And he got his wish. The dollar began a steady decline relative to the currencies of most of our major trading partners, especially the Japanese yen.    Then a couple of unexpected things happened -- or didn't happen. What didn't happen was the expected increase in our exports or decrease in our imports. Our balance of trade kept right on being negative.    What did happen was that the dollar, once it began its planned decline, didn't stop declining even when it got down to the price Mr. Baker thought was &quot;right.&quot; Lately it has had its ups and downs, but mostly it has bumbled downward. So much so that Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker is alarmed, seeing in the decline a threat to all world trade, which is still conducted mainly in dollars.    All in all, I wouldn't be surprised if in the dark of the night (whatever he says publicly notwithstanding) Mr. Baker doesn't feel some rue that his wish was so well fulfilled.    Of course, Secretary Baker is not alone in learning the perils that lurk in wishing. For decades both people and politicians in Western Europe have wished they could rid themselves of all those American intermediate-range nuclear missiles. Indeed, there was political turmoil over their being installed in the first place and American tourists grew accustomed to those scrawled signs: &quot;Yankee go home!&quot;    The Europeans' nightmare was that the U.S. was preparing to fight World War III (against the Russians) on European soil with atomic weapons, with France and West Germany bearing the brunt of it. So the Europeans have fervently wished for an arms agreement between the U.S. and the Soviet Union eliminating, or at least reducing, atomic weapons on their soil.    Now there's a real possibility of such an agreement. Both Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev have talked of removing all the intermediates on both sides. Details are now being negotiated in Geneva, and there's a prospect of a summit meeting this year for a formal removal treaty.    So are the Europeans jumping with joy? Not at all. They've suddenly realized that Soviet &quot;conventional&quot; arms are far superior to NATO forces in guns, planes, tanks and troops. The new specter is that the European countries will have to increase their spending greatly on such conventional arms lest the Soviets easily overrun Western Europe.    Some commentators have even expressed a fear that a U.S.-Soviet missile agreement would foreshadow a withdrawal of this country from Europe, and there's some sentiment in this country for doing just that. The burden to us of being Europe's shield has long been wearying.    All of a sudden that longtime European wish of being rid of its atomic weapons doesn't seem as attractive as before. In any event, the prospect of a fulfillment of that wish isn't as alluring as it was when it was an unlikely wish.    There's another example looming where, I fear, a wish may prove father to regrets if fulfilled. Congress, like Mr. Baker, is upset by our foreign trade deficit and wishes to do something about it.    The House has just passed a bill that would strike out wildly at every country that has a surplus balance of trade with the U.S. Among other things it takes away from the president the authority to judge what are &quot;unfair trade practices&quot; and transfers it to the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR), an office now under the White House. If the USTR found &quot;unjustifiable&quot; trade practices by a country, then tariffs or quotas would be mandated in retaliation.    The bill would also transfer from the president to the USTR authority to determine remedies when imports have injured any domestic industry. Government agencies would be prohibited from buying anything from nations whose governments restrict purchases from U.S. businesses. One section (the Gephardt amendment) would require the president to impose tariffs or quotas on imports from such nations as Japan, South Korea and Taiwan whose exports exceed imports by 75%.    The bill is pretty muddled, of dubious constitutionality and may be modified by the Senate. But it is powerful evidence of the strong trade-restriction mood in Congress. Its objective is not unlike the one that motivated Secretary Baker to tinker with the currency -- a desire to find some way by government action to correct our trade imbalance.    But here, too, there may be unexpected and unwanted perils in the wish to punish countries that sell us more than they buy. It wouldn't be surprising or unnatural if those countries retaliated with their own anti-U.S. trade restrictions. Before long we could have a global trade war unleashed with dire consequences for all world trade including our own. Then Mr. Volcker's fear of a world-wide depression might well come to pass.    So I think that adage still holds an enduring truth. Before you make a wish, pause and consider what the result may be. You might get more than you wished for.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>