<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:U.S.-Israel Quarrel Gives Truth a Fighting Chance---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 01/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The volleys of recriminations now being exchanged between U.S. and Israeli players in the present scandal -- which a soothing message from President Reagan to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir earlier this week will scarcely suppress -- are not only unwonted in this era of rapturous complicity but also instructive. Just as police learn most when thieves caught in the night start denouncing each other the following morning, so now can we see in an unusually clear light some of the realities of the U.S.-Israeli relationship. In normal times the taboo in the U.S., both in Congress and in the press, against any frank discussion of this topic is virtually impossible to breach.    Fundamental to the whole affair is the fact that from the very start the Reagan administration envisaged and sanctioned a convergence of interest with Israel in which there was willing suspension of independent judgment. In this tolerant atmosphere, important sectors of U.S. policy were swayed by the initiatives of an alliance of arms dealers, lobbyists, free-lancing &quot;consultants&quot; and bagmen of well-stained international reputation. The result has been six years of ruinous diplomacy in the Middle East and the richly deserved decline of the Reagan presidency.    In tones of wounded outrage former Prime Minister Shimon Peres now claims that Israel undertook the arms-for-hostages initiative to Iran in 1985 only as a generous gesture toward a friend in need. It's hard to understand how he can say this without laughing out loud, just as it is hard to understand the endless chatter about what exact date in 1985 the U.S.-sanctioned arms trade with Iran began. There are numerous indications that Israel was selling arms to Iran as long as seven or eight years ago. On Nov. 22, 1986, for example, the Los Angeles Times's correspondent reported from Jerusalem that &quot;Israeli arms dealers, with the acquiescence of the government, have maintained a relatively steady supply of weapons to Iran since 1979.&quot; Six days later, this newspaper reported that the Reagan administration had known about this trade from the start and quoted a U.S. intelligence source as saying that any time the Israelis sent arms to Iran it was &quot;implicit&quot; that they would be compensated by the U.S.    By 1982 not only was the Israeli ambassador to the U.S., Moshe Arens, publicly admitting to the arms trade, but David Kimche and Yaakov Nimrodi were forthrightly discussing the real-politik of Israel's overtures to Iran on the BBC on Feb. 1 of that year. (Mr. Kimche is the former head of the Israeli foreign office, credited {against his denials} by Oliver North with having initiated the whole arms-for-Iran-money-for-contras shuttle. Mr. Nimrodi, formerly in the Israeli Mossad and foreign service in Tehran and London, is now an arms dealer.)    In the BBC program, Israel's last ambassador to Iran, Uri Lubrani, was hardly speaking in the idiom of humanitarian gestures to friends when he said that the purpose of the arms trade was to promote a coup. Nor did he seem to have the famous Iranian &quot;moderates&quot; in mind when he said, &quot;I believe that Tehran can be taken over by a relatively small force, determined, ruthless, cruel. I mean the men who would lead that force would have to be emotionally geared to the possibility that they would have to kill 10,000 people.&quot;    Not only was it a long-term Israeli diplomatic objective to cultivate friendships in Tehran and sustain Iran in its war against Iraq, it also was an enormously lucrative proposition for an Israeli arms industry crucial to the country's economic fortunes and well populated with Shimon Peres's friends. One of the most conspicuous failings of the mainstream U.S. press, with the exception of an admirable series in the Chicago Tribune, has been its coverage of the bountiful examples of vigor with which this industry, sustained by U.S. aid, has pursued its own self-interest.    For frank discussion of how policy was being set by arms dealers around the world we can turn to a December 1982 report in the Israeli paper Ha'aretz by Yoel Marcus. He writes: &quot;I have reason to believe that the whole idea was hatched during a conversation between Al Schwimmer, an arms dealer and adviser, and his friend Shimon Peres, then P.M. . . . Isn't it crazy that the whole affair originated with clever Israeli arms dealers? Not really. There is some logic to this madness. The logic begins with the fact that Israel has created a large weapons industry, which probably has no comparison in the world in per-capita terms. An industry which turned into a monster hungry for profits, which took us to all sorts of strange countries. . . . As the deals become less legitimate and the countries more problematic -- the profits grow.&quot; (This is of course an excellent description of the Israeli arms industry's parent, here in the U.S.)    This confluence of diplomatic and commercial self-interest found its reflection in the Reagan administration with its penumbra of such brokers as retired Gen. Richard Secord. Not insensible of Israel's enormous political clout in Congress, the Reagan administration was always eager to get Israel involved in the supply of arms to the Nicaraguan contras. According to the Jerusalem Post of April 22, 1984, Mr. Kimche was told by Reagan officials in the course of an official mission to Washington in that month that the White House wanted to see &quot;a higher Israeli political profile in support of U.S. policy in Central America&quot; and wanted Israel to encourage the U.S. Jewish community and the legions of its supporters in Congress to rally to the president's policies in Central America.    The sort of clout implied in this request was well illustrated by the vociferous denial, after the scandal broke, by so ardent a foe of the contras as Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.) that Israel's honor might in any way have been compromised. It's one thing to beat up on contras and quite another to take on the U.S.-Israeli lobby.    In this permissive atmosphere of political and personal self-aggrandizement, with &quot;consultants&quot; such as Michael Ledeen racing between Washington and Jerusalem in the semi-official twilight nurtured by the Reagan White House, all semblance of checks and balances, mature assessment of interest and risk vanished, nowhere more damagingly than for Israel.    Surely it was this atmosphere -- increasingly permissive since the 1967 Six-Day War -- that encouraged the recruitment of Jonathan Pollard after his first overture to Israeli Air Force Col. Aviem Sella. In the present exchanges, which are both hostile and placatory, Israel is acutely aware of the U.S. Justice Department's sentencing memorandum detailing Mr. Pollard's espionage activities -- and also of the immense damage to U.S.-Israeli relations that can be caused if Mr. Pollard continues to say, as he did to the Israeli correspondent Wolf Blitzer at the start of December, that &quot;I feel the same way as one of Israel's pilots would feel if after being shot down, nobody made an effort to come and get him, not even lifted a finger.&quot;    As Mr. Pollard awaits sentencing there's a tragic desperation, emblematic of the corrupted nature of the U.S.-Israeli relationship, in the remark in another of Mr. Blitzer's dispatches that Israel's Teflon shield may help the president in his hour of need and that &quot;White House officials want Israel to spread the word . . . that what the administration did was in Israel's own best interest -- and indeed in very close cooperation with Israel.&quot;    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>