<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Dravo Seeks Leadership to Pursue Turnaround Strategy---Chief's Downfall Shows How PerformanceIsn't Judged Only by Profit---By Seth H. LuboveStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DRVCONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> PITTSBURGH  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thomas F. Faught Jr. seemed to be doing things right. As Dravo Corp.'s president and chief executive officer, he had stemmed three years of losses and shed unprofitable businesses -- moves that helped push the company's stock price up more than 50% during the past 12 months.    But his unexpected dismissal last month showed that the 57-year-old executive, chosen for his ability to shrink the company, wasn't able to lead Dravo after rejuvenating it. Now the international engineering and construction concern must find a new chief executive who not only can energize a demoralized staff but try to renegotiate a web of unprofitable contracts that are a Faught legacy.    The downfall of Mr. Faught, who also was a director, illustrates how a top manager's performance can't be judged merely by profit-and-loss statements. Interviews with current and former Dravo executives indicate that Mr. Faught, aloof to all but a handful of the senior staff, concealed critical problems from other directors. For example, he didn't inform them that two premier waste-to-energy power plant projects were draining Dravo of millions of dollars. Erratic in his orders to subordinates, he also alienated and eventually lost several of Dravo's most prized engineers.    &quot;There was no single event&quot; that triggered Mr. Faught's ouster, says Robert Dickey III, 69, a director and retired chairman of Dravo who was brought back as interim chief executive. &quot;Tom did carry through with the shrinking process and getting us started on a turnaround,&quot; Mr. Dickey says. But &quot;the board felt a change in management style would enable the company to move forward and take even better advantage of the opportunities it saw in front of it.&quot;    Mr. Faught repeatedly turned down requests for an interview.    With operations spread around the world, Dravo is a familiar name in the construction and engineering fields. The company designed and built a 52-megawatt geothermal power station in Southern California, is helping to plan the U.S. Energy Department's underground nuclear-waste facility in New Mexico, developed a petrochemical complex in Saudi Arabia, and helped construct a $1 billion sewage treatment complex for New York City.    Mr. Faught bypassed other rivals to become chief executive in 1983, when Dravo was still reeling from the effects of a steep recession that had triggered the company's first annual loss since the Depression. He moved quickly to cut costs, ultimately reducing employment almost 50% from the 1980 peak of 14,158. He also pulled Dravo out of the barge business, for which it was well known, and turned to new ventures, including waste-to-energy technology, factory automation and limestone mining.    In 1985, Dravo eked out a $3.3 million profit on $892.7 million of revenue. The company's recovery continued last year, when it earned $34.9 million, after a one-time credit of $27.5 million, on revenue of $902.9 million. Dravo's stock has recently been trading near its 52-week high of $21 a share on the New York Stock Exchange, after having traded as low as $13.25.    But Mr. Faught's management style jarred and alienated a corporate culture that had been used to Mr. Dickey's easygoing and expansion-minded approach, which helped build up the company's revenue from $106.5 million in 1965 to a high of $1.25 billion in 1981. Mr. Dickey eagerly sought out and listened to employee suggestions, often making decisions by consensus. By contrast, managers who were outside a select circle of Mr. Faught's lieutenants complained that he gave contradictory orders and ruled by fear. One month he would be demanding from a subordinate completion of existing orders and the next fuming that the subordinate wasn't finding new business, recalls one executive.    Consequently, he drove away several of Dravo's most talented employees, including James P. Kelly, now rumored as one of several executives considered to be a potential successor to Mr. Faught. Mr. Kelly, who had turned around Dravo's once-slumping natural resources operations and, as a senior vice president, was assigned to do the same for engineering and construction, fought with his boss over executive appointments and office closings.    Mr. Kelly was especially incensed when he learned that Mr. Faught was getting a raise at the same time he was slashing or freezing the salaries of subordinates. Mr. Kelly left Dravo in 1984 for a Santa Fe International Corp. unit, eventually taking with him five other Dravo executives.    &quot;Tom was a good man, he tried really hard,&quot; Mr. Kelly says, now characterizing the disputes as minor. But he also notes that he &quot;was able to pick up the best Dravo people because they were so disenchanted. All of them were eager to leave right after I left.&quot; Mr. Kelly now heads Ultrasystems Inc.'s power and environmental systems unit in Irvine, Calif.    There were other indications of internal strife within Dravo. Retired Adm. Bobby R. Inman, a former deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency and a highly regarded technology expert, resigned from Dravo's board only 18 months after accepting a seat in June 1983. Mr. Inman says he quit the board because he was frustrated with Dravo's slow progress in new technological areas. &quot;When I didn't see strategic planning and the use of automation moving at a good pace, I decided to get off,&quot; he says.    Mr. Faught's touchiest problems occurred in a business he helped develop for Dravo -- the construction and operation of waste-to-energy utility plants. For example, in Mr. Faught's zeal to win a major contract in Portland, Maine, he underbid competitors, contends Eric Root, the project manager overseeing the plant's construction. Dravo earlier followed a similar strategy to land a contract for the Navy's Norfolk Naval Shipyard in Portsmouth, Va.    Both contracts were booked as profit and initially presented to the board as such. Subsequently, however, it became clear that Dravo couldn't complete the projects at the prices bid without incurring substantial losses, according to a company source familiar with them.    To win the Portland contract in 1985, for example, Dravo slightly underbid competitors for the construction work with a fixed price of $42.5 million, but its bid to operate the plant for 20 years on an escalating scale starting at $3.2 million a year was about $1 million a year below the next closest bidder, Mr. Root says. Construction costs have since increased to $45.6 million because of inflation and a delay in acquiring necessary permits.    Whoever is tapped as Dravo's next chief executive must seek to renegotiate both contracts, but undoubtedly will face stiff resistance from the projects' owners.    In Portland, &quot;We've got a fixed-price contract and we expect them to build it at the price they bid,&quot; Mr. Root says. &quot;We intend to hold them to it.&quot;    Dravo agreed in 1983 to build the Norfolk facility for $106 million -- expecting a $7 million profit, says the source familiar with the contract -- but a year and a half later, it was clear there would be a hefty loss. Navy officials acknowledge the project isn't profitable for Dravo. &quot;We have a lot of compassion for a company that's done a good job for us but so far isn't making any money (on that job), but we don't want to be responsible for any cost overruns,&quot; says Cmdr. Richard Carlson, the official overseeing construction of the power plant.    Mr. Dickey won't comment on the contracts, but he maintains that Dravo's policy on major projects is &quot;to avoid bidding at a loss.&quot; He adds: &quot;Historically, we never took a major job knowing we would incur a major loss. It's not a practice that I would recommend.&quot;    A former Dravo executive who still serves as a consultant to the company, Lloyd W. &quot;Pat&quot; Donnelly, had succeeded Mr. Kelly and oversaw Dravo's waste-to-energy project contracts. He says Dravo is holding talks with the Navy to try to recoup its losses. &quot;The Norfolk job will probably end up to be a winner, because we have negotiations with the Navy that will bring it back to a winning position,&quot; he says.    But when Dravo directors learned of the losses expected on the contracts, they were enraged and voted to withhold 60% of Mr. Faught's 1986 bonus -- which wasn't specified -- and put it into escrow, says a Dravo executive.    With a severance package said to be $1 million, plus a year's salary and the bonus held in escrow, Mr. Faught didn't leave Dravo empty-handed. Dravo hasn't disclosed whether the severance has been paid, pending publication of the company's latest proxy statement. In 1985, the last year for which figures are available, Mr. Faught was paid $450,298 in salary and bonuses.    Most analysts say they were all the more shocked by Mr. Faught's departure because he had put the company on what they consider a successful path. He had sold mature businesses that accounted for a total of $350 million in annual sales but that had been dragging down earnings.    Herbert Denton, a senior vice president of Jefferies andamp; Co., New York, says: &quot;The guy (Mr. Faught) made what we thought were some pretty tough decisions. He was going toward things that they were doing well in, like lime production.&quot; Daniel E. Noll of Derby Securities Inc., New York, says Mr. Faught had done &quot;a very credible job&quot; of steering Dravo toward a better future. &quot;He's sold the businesses that don't produce.&quot;    Dravo's lime business, for example, was the primary reason behind the record operating earnings of the company's natural resources division in 1986. At its million-ton-a-year limestone mine in Maysville, Ky., Dravo produces a proprietary lime compound that is considered an efficient scrubbing agent for the removal of sulfur dioxide from stack gases of coalburning power plants. Practically all of the mine's output is committed under long-term contracts to several electric utilities.    For the time being, Mr. Dickey says he doesn't plan to veer from Mr. Faught's strategy of steering Dravo toward markets in which it has a proprietary or technological niche. &quot;You pass the baton on a dead run and don't stop, and that's the way I intend to do it,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>