<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Politics '88 (A Special Report)---The Powers That (Might) Be:Some Potential Political StarsFor the Year 2000---By David Shribman</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   One has childhood memories of political caucuses occurring throughout her house, even in the bathroom. Another got into politics &quot;because I hated poverty.&quot; A third was drawn by the early romance of the supply-side movement. Still another is a black congressman representing a white district.    They may be among the political stars of the year 2000 -- these 10 young people who already are sending ripples through the political ponds and even changing political currents. They are legislators, operatives, image-makers. Some are playing major roles in the great national political drama of 1988, others are tending more modest gardens closer to home.    Some of the likely political luminaries of the next century are well-known already. San Antonio's Democratic Mayor Henry Cisneros, 40 years old, is on every political handicapper's list of future stars -- possibly even as a presidential candidate. Democratic Rep. Joseph Kennedy of Massachusetts, by sheer virtue of his political heritage, could become a leading figure before century's end. Republicans think Gov. Carroll Campbell of South Carolina, a symbol of the GOP's renaissance in the old Confederacy, is marked for big things. They believe that conservative Rep. Vin Weber of Minnesota may emerge as an important ideological force on Capitol Hill.    The names of Democratic political organizer Donna Brazile, Republican state Assemblyman Patrick Nolan of California and Democratic state Sen. Chet Edwards of Texas are less well known. But already they have had an impact -- and show unmistakable signs of political promise. Here, then, is a look at 10 people, none of whom will be 50 when the new century dawns, who seem certain to make a mark on politics:     TERESA VILMAIN    Chief Iowa organizer for the   Dukakis presidential campaign    Though her name is hardly known beyond political circles in Iowa, Teresa Vilmain may be the only 28-year-old in the state with a cult following. Phil Roeder, an Iowa Democratic Party official, says she has &quot;infectous energy and commitment.&quot; Former Rep. Bob Edgar of Pennsylvania, now working for the Paul Simon presidential campaign and thus a political rival, says she &quot;is visionary in terms of organization.&quot;    Her first political memories were of adults crowding into her bathroom at home during a particularly fractious political caucus. For years she watched her mother volunteering in political campaigns and was drawn into politics by a startling realization: It's relatively easy for one person to have a big impact. She comes from an organized family -- any family with eight children has to be organized -- and now is recognized as one of the top organizers in politics.    When the Gary Hart campaign collapsed, she signed on with the Dukakis campaign and in a short time provided him with a statewide presence and a small army of supporters. &quot;This is a person with enormous experience at a very young age,&quot; says former Rep. Edgar, who signed her on to run his unsuccessful 1986 Senate campaign. &quot;Most political professionals don't see what she's seen until they're 40.&quot;     PATRICK J. NOLAN    Republican leader of the    California state Assembly   He began as a young man volunteering in conservative political campaigns, including Ronald Reagan's 1966 campaign for governor. He was a leader of the Young Americans for Freedom. Today he is a fifth-term state assemblyman from the heart of conservative Southern California who has been able to unify the Republican minority and mold its members into a disciplined bloc sometimes known as the Nolanistas.    &quot;He has put together the most effective political operation and fund-raising program that Republicans have seen in California -- ever,&quot; says Robert Naylor, California's Republican chairman. In the process, he's emerged as an effective rival to Democratic Speaker Willie Brown and has been able to assure GOP Gov. George Deukmejian that his vetos are safe from override efforts.    Mr. Nolan, 37 years old, likes to say he went to Sacramento &quot;to break the chains of government.&quot; He wrote legislation -- unanimously approved by both houses -- calling for the establishment of enterprise zones to aid pockets of chronic economic distress. He has been at the forefront of efforts to retain capital punishment in California. Now his goal is to help the Republicans, outnumbered by only four Assembly votes, win enough seats so that he becomes speaker in time to redraw the state's congressional districts after the 1990 census.     DONNA BRAZILE    National Field Director,   Gephardt presidential campaign    Her father was a janitor, her mother a maid. &quot;I know homeless people, I know poverty, I know hunger,&quot; she says. &quot;I don't have to think hard about these things. I only have to think about my mother and father. I don't have to read about how bad things are. I only have to call home.&quot;    A former activist at Louisiana State University and a veteran of the 1984 Jesse Jackson campaign, the Mondale-Ferraro campaign, the Hands Across America movement and the effort to win a Martin Luther King holiday, Ms. Brazile is a battle-tested organizer at age 27. She's been at it since she was 10, when she organized the first female baseball team in her hometown of Kenner, La. By 16 she was organizing 18-year-olds to vote for the Carter-Mondale ticket. &quot;She has the ability to walk into a room of southern white male politicians and get results,&quot; says Mark Johnson, spokesman for the Gephardt campaign.    Today she's setting up a campaign organization across the nation, doing things like getting 5,000 signatures in 21 congressional districts in a three-week period and deciding which Gephardt offices get bumper stickers and which don't. This summer she drove a van full of students from Washington to Des Moines -- a 16-hour trip -- &quot;to make them survivors&quot; and to teach them some of the tricks of political advance work.     MARI MASENG   Press Secretary for Robert Dole's     presidential campaign   Ms. Maseng is an exotic political creature: an insider at age 33; and a female Republican from a state, South Carolina, where male Democrats controlled politics for decades.    She is already in her third presidential campaign, has worked as an aide to Nancy Reagan, a speechwriter for President Reagan, director of the White House Office of Public Liaison and a vice president of Beatrice Cos. &quot;Mari's a real pro who has earned a lot of respect in this town,&quot; says Senate Minority Leader Dole.    But it's in the service of the Dole family that Ms. Maseng has had her greatest impact. She was staff director for Mr. Dole's abortive 1980 presidential campaign and served as assistant secretary of transportation for public affairs under Elizabeth Dole. &quot;I was drawn into politics by the appeal of traditional values and free enterprise that Republicans espouse,&quot; says Ms. Maseng, who once covered the crime beat for the Charleston Evening Post. &quot;I get psychic reward from public service. You actually have a chance to serve your country and make it better.&quot;     ROBERT KERR III    Democratic Lieutenant    Governor of Oklahoma   Born to politics, the 37-year-old Mr. Kerr is the grandson of the late Sen. Robert Kerr, the uncrowned king of Capitol Hill, famed coalition builder, spokesman for big oil and architect of massive water projects that brought life to much of dry Oklahoma. The young Robert Kerr listened to his grandfather talk about politics and about building Oklahoma and apparently learned his lessons well.    He calls himself a &quot;fiscal conservative&quot; and speaks of the &quot;reality of economic life.&quot; He has a managerial mien, appropriate for a man whose first career was providing managerial consulting to businesses. Before becoming lieutenant governor, he had held only one political office -- a single two-year term in the Oklahoma House -- and even today has a business orientation to politics; his conservatism, in fact, could limit his role in the Democratic Party. Elected only a year ago, he has emerged as the state's point man on economic development, a critical role in Oklahoma, where the collapse of agriculture and oil have transformed the state's fortunes from prosperity to distress almost overnight.    &quot;My grandfather was a builder, and that allows me as an officeholder in 1987 to at least have a vision of my role,&quot; he says. &quot;I view myself as a full-time economic developer for this state.&quot;     JOHN ROWLAND    Republican Congressman    from Connecticut   He ran for his town GOP committee in 1979 -- and lost. But he impressed enough people that local Republicans asked him to run for state representative, and he became the first Republican in a century to represent his Waterbury district in Hartford. After two terms and his selection as minority whip, Mr. Rowland in 1984 took on Rep. William Ratchford, a three-term member of the Appropriations Committee, and upset him on a pro-life, anti-tax, strong-defense platform. At 30, he's still the youngest member of the House.    Today Mr. Rowland is the first Connecticut member of the Armed Services Committee in two decades, using his seat to examine the rate of casualties and fatalities among U.S. servicemen. He traveled to Vietnam last year and is urging the U.S. to use economic reconstruction, trade agreements or &quot;anything we can come up with&quot; to help win the release of Americans he believes are still being held in Southeast Asia.    He declined entreaties to challenge Sen. Lowell Weicker in a Republican primary but retains a sense of the brash new-breed young Republican lawmaker. &quot;We're a little different from the older Republicans,&quot; he says. &quot;We're more aggressive, we're impatient to see things done. The new breed is unfearing.&quot;     ALAN WHEAT   Democratic Congressman from Missouri    As a child he marched for civil rights. As a young man he ran for office in a white district and won. In the future, according to political analysts, there are no limits to his achievements. &quot;I think he's got a real shot at being a future member of the leadership -- maybe even a speaker,&quot; says Kirk O'Donnell, who served as general counsel for retired Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill.    Mr. Wheat, 36 years old, thinks of himself as a congressman who happens to be black representing a district that happens to be white. &quot;In the beginning, that description chafed on me,&quot; he says. &quot;But I began to realize that this sort of thing should become normal. When that becomes common, minorities won't have to feel that they have to be represented by someone just like them.&quot; He's even campaigned in front of a honky-tonk bar with a big Confederate flag.    Representing the Kansas City area and serving on the powerful House Rules Committee, Mr. Wheat stepped into the shoes of former Rep. Richard Bolling, himself a former Rules committee chairman. &quot;He is, above all things, a learner,&quot; says Mr. Bolling. &quot;He understands that you have a responsibility to a district but that his fundamental responsibility is as a member of the U.S. Congress.&quot;     SCOTT McINNIS    Republican State    Representative from Colorado   The first time this former policeman ran for office, he won by 13 votes, the closest legislative race in Colorado history. Two years later when he ran for re-election, the Democrats were so desparate they took out an advertisement in the newspaper to find someone to oppose him. And the third time he ran, the Democrats recruited a candidate with a name (McKinnes) that sounded just like his.    Now Mr. McInnis is, at age 33, the chairman of the House Agriculture, Livestock, Energy, Natural Resources and Wildlife Committee and one of the brightest stars in Colorado politics. &quot;We should groom him to run for Congress,&quot; says Kay Riddle, executive director of GOPAC, a Republican group trying to build the GOP in areas where it hasn't customarily been strong.    Mr. McInnis represents a district centered in Glenwood Springs, rich in oil shale and challenging skiing. He has handled the difficulty of keeping both the Aspen liberals and the more rural conservatives satisfied. At the same time, he is trying to mend fissures between residents of the state's eastern slope, which has much of the population, and the western slope, which has much of the water. A fourth-generation Coloradan, he has shepherded major water legislation through the state capitol and has managed to steer a center course through disputes involving the environmentalists, hunters and energy interests that claim his allegiance.     CHET EDWARDS   Democratic State Senator from Texas    As chairman of the Student Conference on National Affairs, Chet Edwards attracted the attention of the longtime congressman from College Station, Rep. Olin Teague. Mr. Teague invited the young man to Washington, gave him a job and suggested that Mr. Edwards, then only 25 years old, succeed him. The plan went awry when Mr. Edwards ran in a Democratic primary against one of his old economics professors at Texas Aandamp;M, Phil Gramm, who beat him into the runoff by a handful of votes.    Four years later, though, Mr. Edwards won a seat in the Texas Senate. At 36, he still is the youngest member of that body, using it as a forum for writing the bill placing Texas in the Super Tuesday round of political contests next March and for earning a reputation as an expert in research and technology issues. He fashioned a legislative package that restructured university research programs, encouraged women and minorities to enter engineering and clarified university intellectual-property and equity-ownership policies.    At the same time, he was the co-author of a state trucking deregulation statute and wrote a plan to encourage agricultural diversification in Texas. &quot;He's one of the most innovative lawmakers we've had around here in a long time,&quot; says state Sen. Kent Caperton.     ELISE PAYLAN   Executive Assistant to Federal Home Loan     Bank Board Member Roger Martin   Four years ago, when she was only 26, Elise Paylan found herself in the middle of an angry confrontation between powerful Republican Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas and her boss, Republican Sen. Robert Kasten of Wisconsin. Using a strategy Miss Paylan conceived, Mr. Kasten had bottled up the Senate for weeks in a dispute over whether taxes should be withheld on personal savings accounts.    The battle over withholding was the first time Miss Paylan, who speaks of conservatism and supply-side economics as &quot;the cause,&quot; emerged from behind the curtain that customarily keeps Washington staff members out of the public eye. Since then, she's been the staff director for the economic planks in the 1984 GOP platform, shaped the Kemp-Kasten tax overhaul plan that helped lead to the 1986 tax bill, worked as associate director of the White House's Office of Public Liaison and now is helping to steer the course of a Republican Federal Home Loan Bank member.    Miss Paylan, who remembers that supply-side economics comprised only a half-hour's worth of discussion in four years of economic study at the University of California at Davis, was drawn to Washington by this new way of looking at the economy. She hopes someday to bring that viewpoint to a seat on the Federal Reserve Board. &quot;Without question, she is one of the bright lights of the pro-growth economic movement,&quot; says Sen. Kasten. &quot;She's bright, but, more important, she's tough.&quot;    ---   Mr. Shribman reports on politics from The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>