<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870428-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Oil Industry Is Encouraged by Signs of Price Stability---Forecast for 1987 Is Steady $18 a Barrell,Then Rise, but Drilling Lags---By James Tanner and Youssef M. IbrahimStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Confidence is growing in the oil industry that some stability has returned to world petroleum markets.    Oil companies still are cautious about stepping up exploration spending -- reduced by 40% since last year's oil-price collapse -- but the consensus is that petroleum prices will hold around the current level of $18 a barrel and then rise before year's end.    &quot;There are encouraging signs that the worst times for our industry may be ending,&quot; says Richard M. Morrow, chairman of Amoco Corp.    Among the signs cited by Mr. Morrow and other oil executives and analysts are anticipated further gains in world petroleum demand this year, coupled with indications of rapid declines in excess petroleum inventories despite a lingering gasoline glut in the U.S. Even more important is the mounting evidence of a new-found discipline within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, whose push for increased market share caused oil prices to collapse last year.    Price projections by both OPEC and the oil industry have often been wrong in the past, of course. Thus, most oil companies plan to hold spending down for several more months until there is further proof that prices won't fall back to last year's $10 low. But if prices hold at the current level or rise, &quot;by later this year we'll see drilling beginning to recover and positive year-to-year comparisons in capital expenditures,&quot; says Paul Mlotok, international oil analyst at Salomon Brothers Inc. Many U.S. oil operators insist they won't resume much exploration in this country, however, until the price of oil again reaches $25 a barrel.    Senior OPEC officials aren't too eager to declare an end to their struggle to reverse the oil-market volatility of last year, which saw prices plunge to $10 a barrel from $28 at the beginning of 1986. So far, they say, OPEC has successfully passed the toughest test that was anticipated since its December decision to sell oil only at prices equivalent to $18 a barrel.    A widespread oil company boycott failed to sway the cartel from its resolve to stick with fixed prices, eliminate secret discounts and limit its 13 members' total production to less than 15.8 million barrels a day. Now, as demand for OPEC oil slowly returns, the danger is that some oil producers won't resist the temptation to sell more oil than their individual quotas permit.    &quot;We are now passing the danger mark,&quot; says a senior OPEC official who asked not to be identified. &quot;If everyone keeps output low we will be on much firmer ground for the rest of the year. It isn't unlikely that prices could go to the $20 level.&quot;    Industry sources say OPEC by and large stuck with the ceiling of 15.8 million barrels a day in the first quarter. But that may have been the result, at least in part, of a slackening in demand for OPEC oil since the new fixed-price schedule went into effect Jan. 1. Many petroleum refiners, particularly in the U.S., were hurt by shrinking profit margins because of higher crude costs and refused to commit to long-term contracts at OPEC's official prices.    But the refiners are beginning to run down their crude inventories to the point where they must buy oil again whatever the price. As a result, OPEC's production is rising above the first-quarter level. According to Oil Buyers Guide, a trade newsletter, OPEC output in the first three weeks of April averaged 16.4 million barrels a day.    Industry analysts say it is too early to suggest that OPEC is breaking discipline, because output figures tend to be higher at the beginning of the month, when producers are loading more tankers with exports. Another important barometer is what action OPEC will take at its June meeting. &quot;If OPEC raised the (production) ceiling starting July 1, it would be taken as a price-weakening move,&quot; notes Oil Buyers Guide.    Still, demand for OPEC oil is expected to be higher during much of the remainder of this year. Peter F. Holmes, chairman of Shell Transport andamp; Trading Co., the British partner of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, estimates the call on OPEC oil to average 16.9 million barrels a day for all this year and then increase further at a rate of around one million barrels a day each year after 1987.    &quot;OPEC just went through the worst,&quot; agrees Mr. Mlotok of Salomon Brothers. He looks for a 1.3% increase in 1987 petroleum demand in the non-communist world. OPEC should benefit from the increased demand because non-OPEC production is expected to remain flat at 28 million barrels a day.    The senior planner of one major U.S.-based oil company foresees a smaller increase in the non-communist world's demand -- only 1% -- to 47.7 million barrels a day for 1987 from 47.2 million barrels a day in 1986. But he expects a continuing drop in non-OPEC production, largely in the U.S. -- where output began falling sharply last year in the wake of the oil-price collapse -- and in the North Sea.    The planning official thinks demand for gasoline will rise faster than for other fuels, easing the burdensome buildup of motor-fuel inventories in the U.S. Overall, he says, the world's above-ground supplies of oil were drawn down by about 200 million barrels in the first quarter. Inventories should decline an additional 100 million barrels to reach a &quot;comfortable&quot; level of about 4.2 billion barrels for the industry, he says. &quot;If no one gets reckless,&quot; he says, that could happen over the next four to six weeks -- holding prices firm at $18 a barrel or higher for the remainder of the year.    The spot, or non-contract, price of West Texas Intermediate, the barometer of U.S. oil prices, rose 15 cents, to $18.85 a barrel, yesterday.    Industry sources generally expect oil prices to rise next year by at least as much as the inflation rate. Eventually, they suggest, prices will rebound beyond the prior peak of $40 a barrel, although there's little agreement on the timing.    Though drilling costs plunged in the wake of the 1986 oil-price collapse, the heavily drilled U.S. remains one of the world's highest-cost producers. Oil operators in the U.S., as elsewhere, are more confident that OPEC's $18 price will stick, but they say that this isn't enough to spur much new drilling.    This mood is underscored by the continuing slump in U.S. drilling even though oil prices currently are $4 a barrel higher than the 1986 average of $14 a barrel. As of last week, according to the latest Hughes Tool Co. count, only 765 drilling rigs were operating in the U.S. That was 15 more rigs than were active the preceding week, but the latest count still is down from the 855 units that were active a year earlier and sharply lower than the 4,500 rigs operating at the late-1981 peak.    &quot;At the absolute minimum level of prices, we are going to have to have somewhere between $22 and $25 a barrel and a fairly long period of stability to get any activity (in U.S. exploration),&quot; says H.B. Scoggins, president of the Independent Petroleum Association of America, which represents more than half of the nation's estimated 10,000 independent oil operators.    Major oil companies are also unlikely to increase their exploration spending for some months, at least in the U.S., even if prices remain firm at $18 a barrel or rise. Mobil Corp., for example, has budgeted exploration spending this year at about the same level as that of 1986, and that probably won't change, an official says, unless oil prices fall from the current $18 a barrel. Then, he says, spending probably would be reduced.    Oil prices are back near a level, however, that could spur further development of existing oil fields in the U.S., as well as additional exploration for natural gas if prices for that fuel continue to move in lock step with those for oil. Also, outside the U.S., where many regions are more economical to explore, prices are nearing the point that could result in a renewal of exploration interest.    &quot;I consider $20 a barrel as a minimum equilibrium price,&quot; Michel Pecqueur, chairman and president of France's Elf Aquitaine Group, yesterday told the World Petroleum Congress meeting in Houston. He concluded that such a price is &quot;attainable&quot; and that it should satisfy the world's oil producers as well as the world's oil consumers. </TEXT></DOC>