<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870915-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. PRESENTED new arms-control proposals to the Soviet Union.    As White House officials prepared for three days of high-level talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, U.S. arms negotiators in Geneva submitted the draft arms treaty to the Soviets. The proposal outlines steps for the elimination of superpower medium-range missiles within three years and shorter-range missiles within one year under a stringent verification procedure. The pact doesn't refer to the future of the warheads on the missiles, which the Kremlin has demanded be destroyed.    Reagan is to meet today with Shevardnadze, who is carrying a letter from Gorbachev that reportedly deals with a possible summit once an arms treaty is signed. U.S. aides expressed doubt that a pact would be concluded this week.    ---   ELIZABETH DOLE RESIGNED as Reagan's transportation secretary.    Saying she would leave her post Oct. 1, Dole said she planned to work full time on the presidential campaign of her husband, GOP Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas. He is expected to formally announce his candidacy later this year. The departure of Dole, the only woman in the cabinet, comes amid criticism that she hasn't moved aggressively enough to cope with airline service and safety problems that have occurred in the wake of deregulation.    Dole defended her record, saying that the department has added air-traffic controllers and safety inspectors, and that the accident rate has declined.    ---   Iraq called on the U.N. to take &quot;punitive measures&quot; against Iran for failing to respond to a cease-fire resolution. The demand was made to the U.N. secretary-general, who was in Baghdad as part of his Persian Gulf peace mission. Meanwhile, two Navy-escorted convoys were under way simultaneously for the first time in the gulf.    ---   Pope John Paul II termed AIDS a &quot;crisis of immense proportions&quot; and urged Roman Catholics to show love and compassion to victims of the disease. Speaking in Phoenix, Ariz., the pope renewed attacks on &quot;the great evils of abortion and euthanasia,&quot; and told Sun Belt entrepreneurs that they have &quot;increased obligations&quot; to aid the poor.    ---   Reagan met with South Korean ruling party leader Roh Tae Woo, who said the talks were intended to underscore Seoul's commitment to democratic change. The White House said the meeting with Roh, a presidential candidate, wasn't meant as an endorsement in South Korea's presidential election later this year.    ---   Israel and Hungary renewed low-level diplomatic ties after a 20-year breach caused by the 1967 Arab-Israeli war. The accord was viewed as underscoring the Jewish state's improving relations with the Soviet bloc. Poland signed a similar agreement with Israel last October.    ---   The Philippine government challenged the fugitive leader of last month's failed coup to prove he is &quot;man enough&quot; to surrender and face a court-martial. Col. Gregorio Honasan, however, said in a radio broadcast that he wouldn't give up until President Aquino discusses &quot;meaningful&quot; changes.    ---   The Reagan administration lodged a diplomatic protest with Panama's government for the detention by security forces of a U.S. diplomat, who was held incommunicado for eight hours over the weekend. The embassy employee, released yesterday, was detained while watching anti-government demonstrations Sunday in Panama City.    ---   A federal Tax Court judge ruled that Rep. James Traficant (D., Ohio) accepted $108,000 in bribes from organized crime figures when he was sheriff of Mahoning County, Ohio, and that he owes the government back taxes and civil fraud penalties as a result. Traficant said he would appeal the ruling.    ---   A judge in Bhopal, India, urged Union Carbide and the New Delhi government to reach a settlement by Oct. 30 to pay victims of the December 1984 poison-gas leak, in which at least 2,500 people were killed. The Indian government is seeking about $3 billion in damages.    ---   Tamil Tigers rebels massacred at least 68 people in a weekend onslaught against rival militants in eastern Sri Lanka's Batticaloa district, police and witnesses said. The separatist group is opposed to an Indian-backed peace accord, which several rival Tamil groups have endorsed.    ---   Italian investigators released the chairman of Valsella Meccanotecnica S.p.)A, an Italian arms maker accused of illegally shipping land mines to the Mideast. He remains under investigation in the case, in which magistrates have accused Valsella of knowingly shipping 30,000 mines to Syria, by way of a Nigerian intermediary.    ---   Mary Beth Whitehead argued through her attorneys that surrogate contracts should be illegal. At the start of an appeal before the New Jersey Supreme Court, the surrogate mother also urged the return of a daughter she bore for a childless couple granted custody by a lower court.    ---   A National Research Council panel said NASA's plan to build a space station with the shuttle will be difficult and risky, and could lead to the loss of another orbiter. The committee also said the project could cost billions of dollars more than estimated.    ---   Apartheid foes in South Africa said Pretoria's plan to give only some blacks a role in national politics could generate violence. The United Democratic Front said a proposal, announced late last week, to elect nine blacks to a government council would deepen divisions among blacks.    ---   Ivan Lendl won the U.S. Open tennis championship, defeating Mats Wilander three sets to one, in New York. </TEXT></DOC>