<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NAMPHY DECLARED himself president of Haiti following a military coup.    Troops stormed the national palace in Port-au-Prince and ousted President Manigat, ending four months of civilian rule. The coup, which began late Sunday, returned Lt. Gen. Namphy to command of the nation he led for two years as head of a three-man junta. Namphy named a 12-member cabinet. The takeover came less than a week after Manigat, who fled to the Dominican Republic, dismissed Namphy and tried to reorganize the military.    The U.S. condemned Haiti's military takeover as a &quot;serious blow&quot; to democracy and warned Americans against traveling to the Caribbean nation.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD a law barring bias by large private clubs.    In a unanimous ruling, the justices found that a New York City law prohibiting discrimination against women and minorities by clubs that serve a public role is constitutional, at least as written. The law affects clubs with more than 400 members that provide regular meal service and are used for business purposes. It exempts charitable and religious groups. The decision is considered a major victory for civil and women's rights groups.    Washington's Cosmos Club voted over the weekend to scrap its 110-year-old male-only policy. Four women have been nominated for membership.    ---   THE U.S. INDICTED a former CIA agent on charges tied to the Iran-Contra affair.    A special federal grand jury in Washington accused the intelligence agency's former station chief in Costa Rica of participating in an illegal conspiracy to arm the Nicaraguan rebels. The five-count indictment against Joseph Fernandez also charges him with obstructing the Tower Commission's inquiry into the affair and making false statements to government agencies. Fernandez, who is also known as Tomas Castillo, retired from the CIA earlier this year.    The indictment signaled that independent counsel Walsh is continuing his investigation into the affair while preparing to try North and three others.    ---   Summit leaders in Toronto endorsed wider East-West trade and called for &quot;deep cuts&quot; in U.S. and Soviet strategic nuclear arms. The leaders of the U.S., Canada, Britain, France, Germany, Italy and Japan also condemned terrorism and supported a proposal for a task force to fight international drug trafficking.    ---   Soviet officials said 16 people were injured in weekend clashes in Armenia, the first ethnic riots in the republic since a territorial dispute began with neighboring Azerbaijan in February. Dissidents in Moscow said 12 people had died in the unrest, and Red Army troops reportedly were patrolling the streets of Baku, Azerbaijan's capital.    ---   South Africa's Botha told Parliament he would appoint a black cabinet minister, but his government wouldn't give blacks a one-man, one-vote system despite increasing pressure from apartheid foes. The president didn't give a timetable for the move, but a spokesman said legislation allowing such a move could be approved after August.    ---   Nicaragua's Contras rejected an offer by the Managua government to reopen peace talks aimed at ending the country's civil war. Rebel leaders said the proposal was linked to the Reagan administration's consideration of renewed military aid to the insurgents. The rejection of talks next week didn't rule out all further negotiations.    ---   Duarte was released from Walter Reed Army Medical Center, where he has been undergoing treatment for stomach and liver cancer. A spokesman said the Salvadoran president, who is terminally ill, would continue his convalescence in the Washington area. Duarte, a staunch U.S. ally, may return to El Salvador next month.    ---   Suspected Sikh militants detonated a bomb in New Delhi, killing at least four Hindus and injuring about 40 other people, police said. It was the first such attack in the capital this year by Sikh extremists, who are seeking an independent homeland in India's northern Punjab state.    ---   The U.S. and Greece opened three days of talks on a new American military bases agreement to replace an accord that expires at the end of the year. The negotiations in Athens may be the last effort to resolve a dispute over the facilities before formal notification that they must leave Greek soil.    ---   Vietnam's foreign minister said an informal meeting aimed at ending the nine-year-old conflict in Cambodia would take place even if the hard-line Khmer Rouge refuses to attend. The talks between Cambodia's Hanoi-backed government and a guerrilla coalition led by Prince Sihanouk have been tentatively set for July 25 in Indonesia.    ---   Curtis Strange defeated England's Nick Faldo by four strokes in an 18-hole playoff round to win the U.S. Open golf championship in Brookline, Mass.    ---   Died: Ralph Lazarus, 74, former chairman of Federated Department Stores Inc., Sunday, in Cincinnati. </TEXT></DOC>