<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861208-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Rebels to LeaveHonduran BasesUnder U.S. Pact---Accord Could Spell DisasterFor Nicaragua Contras;Iran Arms Scandal Cited---By Clifford KraussStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMEXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. has agreed to a Honduran government request that all anti-Sandinista rebels based in Honduras leave and move into Nicaragua, possibly by April.    The secret verbal pact could spell disaster for the Contras, who have never been able to sustain large-scale operations in Nicaragua itself.    Responding to pressures related to the Iran-Contra scandal, Washington agreed to try to make sure that the Contras move into Nicaragua.    The U.S.-financed rebels have relied on Honduras since 1981 as the supply depot and headquarters for the Caribbean coast and northern fronts inside Nicaragua. The Contras' southern front has already suffered severely from the closing since May of their Costa Rican supply lines by the Costa Rican government.    U.S. officials and Contra leaders characterized the agreement to move the Nicaraguan rebels out of Honduras as routine. &quot;What's the big deal?&quot; said Robert Kagan, a spokesman for the State Department on Central American affairs. &quot;Everyone wants the democratic resistance fighting in Nicaragua.&quot;    A spokesman for the U.S. Embassy here said: &quot;We are not going to comment on our operational aspects of assisting the democratic resistance. Such information could be helpful to Sandinista intelligence.&quot;    Separately, the State Department said that President Reagan late Saturday night approved a Honduran request made several hours earlier to provide U.S. airlift assistance to help ferry Honduran troops to a military airfield in eastern Honduras. The department said the airlift, which began late yesterday, is expected to conclude today.    The department added that the U.S. helicopters, which are based at Palmerola air base in Honduras, aren't armed and &quot;will not approach areas of possible hostile action.&quot;    The department, in a statement last night, said that on Saturday more than 1,000 Sandinista troops in Honduras had launched attacks against Honduran military outposts. Officials said that Honduran planes bombed the Sandinista positions Saturday and yesterday. The bombings came as a response to reported Sandinista army attacks on four small Honduran army border outposts Friday in which three Honduran soldiers were wounded and two captured.    The Iran-Contra crisis in Washington reinforced the fear among Honduran officials that the U.S. Congress and public wouldn't fully back the Contra war while guaranteeing the security of Honduras. Moreover, there is growing resentment among the local population in Honduras and within the Honduran armed forces against the Contras.    Against this backdrop, Honduran government officials summoned U.S. Ambassador Everett Briggs last Monday to the president's office, where he was met by President Jose Azcona Hoyo, the foreign minister and five Honduran military officers. According to one of the Honduran officials present, the Hondurans told the American ambassador that the Contras must leave their country as soon as possible. There are between 7,000 and 15,000 Contras stationed in Honduras.    The next day, after apparently conferring with Washington, the American ambassador met with the Hondurans again and offered a detailed plan to move the Contras. He agreed that the U.S. would see that the Contras leave their camps in Honduras and infiltrate inside Nicaraguan territory by April. Mr. Briggs said that with the training and heavy weapons included in the administration's $100 million Contra aid program, passed by Congress earlier this year, the Contras will no longer be dependent on Honduras.    The account of the accord was confirmed by a second Honduran official at the highest level of the Tegucigalpa government.    &quot;There's no exact timetable,&quot; said the Honduran official who was at the meeting. &quot;It could be six months. We're content with that.&quot; He stressed that there was no showdown or argument over the matter. Honduran officials also indicated that they would like to see a continuation of U.S. military maneuvers in Honduras to bolster national security.    President Azcona, in an interview, said he couldn't confirm the outcome of the meeting because to do so &quot;would mean confirming that the Contras are inside Honduran territory&quot; -- the government insists publicly that the rebels are not inside Honduras. But he added: &quot;The government of Honduras wants the Contras fighting in Nicaragua, not in Honduras.&quot;    Contra spokesman Frank Arana said the Contras will be able to operate entirely in Nicaragua because of the $100 million U.S. aid program. &quot;It's our game now,&quot; he said. &quot;We have no excuses. We'll have all the resources we need.&quot; However, he said he was concerned that Congress could block the final $40 million allotment of the program.    House Democratic Leader Jim Wright of Texas said yesterday on NBC's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; that it is possible Congress will stop the already approved Contra aid funds. Asked if lawmakers will approve additional money for the Nicaraguan rebels, Mr. Wright, who is expected to be named speaker of the House, said, &quot;I think it would be a very difficult thing.&quot;    Outgunned by the 70,000-man Sandinista army, the Contras have failed repeatedly to infiltrate their forces into Nicaragua in any major way. And with congressional approval of more aid in serious question, it may not get any easier. About 1,500 Contras early last week attempted to cross the border but couldn't make it. From highland positions inside Honduras, Sandinista army units fired mortar and rockets to disperse the guerrillas through &quot;new Nicaragua&quot; -- the area they occupy north of the Honduras-Nicaragua border in Honduras.    Such incidents have underscored Honduran army discomfort over the Sandinista-Contra conflict being waged within Honduras. Meanwhile, as many as 9,000 Honduran coffee planters and landless peasants have been forced to flee the region. They blame the Honduran army for not protecting them from the Nicaraguans.    Top Honduran military officers have long doubted Washington's resolve to destroy the Sandinista regime and protect Honduras, should the covert policy to destabilize the Sandinistas backfire into a war between Honduras and Nicaragua. They became sensitive to a growing perception that Honduras could face &quot;Lebanonization,&quot; with armed refugees running amok once the Contras lost the war.    The military's concerns grew in intensity following the Democratic party's winning control of the U.S. Senate and broadening its hold in the House in the November congressional elections. Democrats are perceived here as being soft on the Sandinistas and willing to negotiate with Managua. The last straw came when what is locally called &quot;Irangate&quot; broke into the headlines and raised the specter of Honduran officers being publicly implicated in the illegal transfer to the Contras of arms bought with profits from weapons sales to Iran.    Honduran civilian and military officials have already had their fill of Contra-related embarrassments. While the government officially claims the Contras aren't based here, it has to answer charges lodged by international human rights and church organizations that Tegucigalpa isn't doing enough to protect Nicaraguan refugees from forced Contra recruitments. Honduras is being sued by Nicaragua in the world court for harboring the Contras, and is expected to lose the case.    Honduras is the poorest country in the hemisphere after Haiti, but officials here have always taken pride in the country's calmness and stability. But that has changed over the last year. Crime is rising and the popular perception is that the Contras are responsible. The country was traumatized last summer when a time bomb exploded, destroying the car owned by Rodrigo Wong Arevalo, Honduras's most popular radio personality. Because he frequently and bitterly criticized the Contras, the Nicaraguan rebels are widely thought to be responsible for the failed assassination attempt.    It isn't clear whether the Contras know they are about to be forced out of Honduras. Carlos Ulvert, the Contras' foreign secretary, said he wasn't aware of the U.S.-Honduras agreement, which he said was nothing to worry about. &quot;Nicaragua is where our fighters belong,&quot; he said.    But unless the rebels can manage to develop an air defense, they will be ripped apart by the Sandinistas' attack helicopters. Under the final $40 million part of the $100 million Contra aid package, set to be shipped in February, the Contras will receive surface-to-air missiles. They will come in handy -- unless Congress decides to block the aid because of the Iran scandal. </TEXT></DOC>