<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880104-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL STRUCK Palestinian strongholds in Lebanon, killing at least 19.    The air attacks, carried out Saturday night, were apparently ordered in retaliation for a hang-glider attack in November that killed six Israeli soldiers. Meanwhile, Israel's occupied territories erupted again following the fatal shooting of a West Bank Palestinian woman and an order for the deportation of nine Palestinians involved in recent unrest. The U.S. had asked the government to avoid deportations, but Prime Minister Shamir said Israel will handle its security as it thinks best.    Israeli jets staged mock air raids in southern Lebanon yesterday following their attacks on bases of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.    ---   Carlucci is scheduled to arrive in Kuwait today on a Persian Gulf tour to assess possible modifications of U.S. policy. The defense secretary also will visit Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Oman, as well as U.S. warships. Diplomatic sources said the visit signaled an expanded Navy role, but the Pentagon denied any change was contemplated.    Persian Gulf shipping executives said a Maltese-flagged oil tanker attacked last week was struck by an Iraqi-fired Exocet missile after sailing from Kuwait, which Iran accuses of aiding Baghdad in the gulf war. Iraq denied that it attacked the ship.    ---   A surprise witness testified that he saw a soldier shoot President Corazon Aquino's husband as he returned to the Philippines from exile in the U.S. in August 1983. It was the first time in the current trial that a witness had testified to having seen the assassination of Benigno Aquino, which touched off a wave of indignation that led to the ouster of President Marcos in February 1986.    ---   Indian gunboats sank a vessel off Sri Lanka's northern Jaffna peninsula, killing 21 Tamil rebels, military officials in Colombo said. The rebels were said to be carrying arms to separatist guerrillas in the island nation. Colombo said earlier that Tamil rebels killed three Sinhalese civilians and burned houses in an eastern village.    ---   Police in Bangladesh used tear gas and truncheons to break up demonstrations in Dhaka by 10,000 protesters seeking the ouster of President Ershad. Opposition leaders earlier announced a monthlong series of protests and strikes aimed at foiling parliamentary elections scheduled for Feb. 28.    ---   Two top administration aides traveled to Pakistan for talks on Afghanistan, the State Department said. The Washington Post said the officials will meet with Afghan rebel leaders and deliver a message of support from Reagan. Separately, Kabul said relief convoys reached the eastern town of Khost, but rebels said their siege continues.    ---   Rival black groups clashed in South Africa, leaving 10 dead in weekend fighting between members of the United Democratic Front and the Zulu Inkatha in townships outside Pietermaritzburg in Natal Province. In 1987 more than 250 blacks were killed in fighting between the groups in the townships near the southeastern city.    ---   Zimbabwe's President Mugabe named chief opposition leader Joshua Nkomo to the post of senior cabinet minister, the No. 3 spot in the government, following a reshuffling announced over the weekend. The appointment followed an agreement signed last month that unites their political parties in a one-party Marxist-Leninist state.    ---   Reagan and Mulroney signed a free-trade pact that would remove all tariffs and many other trade barriers between the U.S. and Canada over a 10-year period. The signing was conducted over the telephone by the president and prime minister Saturday.    ---   An oil-storage tank collapsed south of Pittsburgh, spilling an estimated one million gallons of diesel fuel into the Monongahela River, forcing the evacuation of 1,200 people and threatening drinking water for 750,000 suburban residents. The spill occurred at an Ashland Oil Co. storage tank that was being filled for the first time.    ---   Prince Sihanouk agreed to a second round of peace talks with Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, according to a member of the resistance leader's entourage. The new talks, canceled by Sihanouk twice before, are to take place in France by Jan. 27. They are aimed at ending fighting that began when Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978.    ---   Search parties in Turkey recovered the bodies of 16 people killed in the crash Saturday of a chartered West German jetliner. The Condor Airways Boeing 737 crashed during a rainstorm while approaching the western city of Izmir, where it was to pick up a group of Turkish workers on holiday.    ---   Died: Robert N. Miller, 59, former president and chief executive officer of Getty Oil Co., Wednesday, in Bastrop, Texas. </TEXT></DOC>