<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   POLISH POLICE CLASHED with demonstrators during a May Day protest.    Authorities reportedly detained at least 200 protesters nationwide as thousands of people in at least 15 cities heeded a call by the outlawed Solidarity trade union for a national &quot;day of protest.&quot; There were scattered reports of injuries. The violence came at the end of a week of strikes and what was viewed as the worst labor unrest in Poland since the Communist government suspended Solidarity in 1981. A strike continued at the Lenin steel mill near Krakow. A strike by workers at a heavy-machinery factory in Nowa Huta was resolved Saturday.    Violence was reported in the Philippines and in Chile at May Day rallies honoring the world's workers. Western envoys ended a boycott, begun in 1979, of such ceremonies in Moscow.    ---   U.S. officials said evidence suggests that a Japanese terrorist arrested last month in New Jersey with homemade bombs was on his way to attack a target in New York City.    The sources also believe Yu Kikumura, identified as a member of the Japanese Red Army, probably was working on behalf of Libya's Gadhafi.    ---   Aloha Airlines grounded three aging jetliners like the one that lost part of its fuselage last week at 24,000 feet. A flight attendant was killed. On Saturday, the FAA imposed an emergency order restricting older Boeing 737s to an altitude of 23,000 feet until they can be inspected for possible structural flaws.    ---   Democrat Dukakis criticized the Reagan administration's efforts against crime and drugs, and said Attorney General Meese &quot;should have left office a long time ago.&quot; Polls showed the Massachusetts governor leading Jackson in tomorrow's presidential primary in Ohio. Indiana and the District of Columbia also hold contests tomorrow.    ---   Three British soldiers were killed and three others injured in two separate gun and bomb attacks in the Netherlands. The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility. It was the first successful IRA attack in 12 months and the first in the Netherlands in almost a decade. The soldiers were based in neighboring West Germany.    ---   Seoul's Foreign Ministry said a North Korean official sought political asylum in South Korea through an embassy in &quot;a certain European country.&quot; Local reports said Kim Jeong Min, 45, a senior intelligence officer in Pyongyang's security organization, was the highest-ranking defector to the South since the end of the Korean War.    ---   Surgeon General Koop is expected to declare that nicotine is an addictive drug. The head of the federal Office of Smoking and Health, speaking in a CBS-TV interview, said the surgeon general is to release a report within the next few weeks saying smoking &quot;is more than just a simple habit.&quot;    ---   Treasury Secretary Baker said in an NBC-TV interview that negotiations were continuing for Noriega's removal, but a Panamanian official said U.S. drug charges against the military chief must first be dropped. And GOP Sen. Lugar of Indiana said on ABC-TV that the U.S. retains a &quot;military option&quot; to oust Noriega.    ---   France's Le Pen indirectly endorsed conservative Prime Minister Chirac in next Sunday's presidential election. The leader of the extreme-right National Front Party told a rally of more than 20,000 supporters in Paris that &quot;no one who is a Frenchman at heart&quot; could vote for Pr Mitterrand, a Socialist. (Story on Page   ---   Israeli troops killed a Palestinian protester in the West Bank as Arabs in the occupied territories staged widespread demonstrations. An Israeli military spokesman said an army officer was relieved of his duties after a preliminary investigation indicated the shooting was unjustified. Additional details weren't disclosed.    ---   Sandinista-Contra talks concluded Saturday in Managua without a peace accord. Both sides agreed to arrange new negotiations aimed at ending Nicaragua's civil war, but the question of where and when the next round of talks should be held wasn't resolved at the three-day meeting.    ---   Melanesian separatists refused to accept a Roman Catholic archbishop as a mediator in proposed talks aimed at the release of about 20 French police hostages in New Caledonia. The Kanaks described the officers as prisoners of war, as four gendarmes were wounded in the latest incident in 10 days of violence in the French island territory.    ---   Tamil rebels detonated buried explosives beneath a bus outside Sri Lanka's eastern port of Trincomalee, killing at least 26 passengers. At least 30 others on the vehicle were injured in the blast, the second Tamil attack on a passenger bus in two days.    ---   Afghanistan and Pakistan vowed to comply with a U.N.-mediated settlement providing for the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. The pledges were made to a 14-member U.N. group traveling in the region. The agreement, which also provides for the return of Afghan refugees in Pakistan, was signed last month in Geneva.    ---   Died: Robert Henry Hinckley, 96, a cofounder of American Broadcasting Cos., Saturday, in Eden, Utah. . . .    James McCracken, 61, operatic tenor, Friday, in New York City, following a stroke. </TEXT></DOC>