<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880928-0156 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL><AUTHOR> Paul B. Carroll </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CMRO CHPS </CO><IN> EDP ELE TEL </IN><TEXT>      Tiny Computer Screen   Displays Full-Size Text   ALTHOUGH computers are becoming so small that some minicomputers could double as footstools, personal computers have always faced fundamental limitations on just how small they could become. Keyboards, for instance, have needed to be big enough for people's fat fingers. And screens have had to be big enough to be readable.    But now Reflection Technology Inc. seems to have made a breakthrough with the screens. The Cambridge, Mass., company has produced a screen that offers the same capacity and clarity as those of most desktop computers, though it is only slightly bigger than a matchbox and weighs less than two ounces.    The screen, which can either be held directly in front of one eye or attached to a pair of glasses, fools the eye so that any text and graphics appear to be two feet away from the viewer. The screen can display 25 lines of 80 characters each. In a company demonstration, for example, most of the poem &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; was shown on the screen.    The ability to fool the eye in this way has long been used in such devices as children's kaleidoscopes. The new screen's twist on that technology is its ability to get high resolution. Reflection Technology declines to explain how the screen works, however, lest competitors take advantage of it.    Because screens -- and the batteries needed to run them -- account for so much of the size and weight in laptop computers, the new development could make it easier for companies to shrink the machines considerably. And the new screen uses just a quarter of a watt of power. The screen could be used in a host of other ways, too, such as in portable pagers that would let people see lengthy messages, whole documents or maps showing them where to go.    Reflection Technology says several companies have expressed interest in making products using the screens, and some of the products could hit the market within a year. For many manufacturers, the screens would cost less than $100 a piece, the company estimates.    Laptops Come of Age   With New Technology   LAPTOP computers are rapidly becoming more efficient.    Chips andamp; Technologies Inc., San Jose, Calif., recently introduced a chip set that will double or triple the length of time that many laptops can operate under battery power. The new chips save power by shutting down any part of the machine that isn't being used at that moment, such as a disk-drive or the keyboard.    The chips also slow down the inner workings of the machine if someone is merely typing, which doesn't require much oomph, rather than crunching numbers for a spreadsheet. Although a few high-end machines, such as some made by Zenith Electronics Corp., already have some of these capabilities, the chip set will make such systems far more widespread.    Many companies also are starting to bring out so-called page-white screens, which work much better than previous laptop screens. The screens, which look like regular white sheets of paper with black characters on them, offer contrast many times sharper than those generally available on laptops.    In addition, Prairietek, Longmont, Colo., has announced a small hard-disk drive, and other companies are likely to follow soon with their own versions. The drive -- just 2.5 inches in diameter, compared with the normal 3.5 inches -- weighs less and uses less power than current versions.    Market-research firms say the laptop market is already growing some 50% a year, but Gordon Campbell, chief executive of Chips andamp; Technologies, says, &quot;The technology for laptops is just finally starting to come together.&quot; He says he knows of at least one manufacturer that will introduce by the end of the year a fully loaded laptop that is less than an inch thick and weighs less than five pounds.    Electricity-Carrying   Ink Used in Circuit Boards   ELECTRONIC circuit boards, currently made through a messy and expensive process, may eventually be made as simply as silk-screen prints.    PrinTron Inc., of Mountainside, N.J., says it has developed an ink that can be laid down in tiny lines with great precision on a circuit board. When the boards are then irradiated and cured, the ink will conduct electricity as well as copper wires do.    The company says the process is much faster and cheaper than the current procedure, which involves using toxic chemicals to etch wires on the boards. By avoiding those chemicals, the process would also reduce the production of toxic waste, which has become a headache for the electronics industry and for people who live near some plants.    PrinTron says it is about 18 months away from having a commercial product. The process initially will be able to handle only such simple applications as circuit boards used in household appliances or cars, but the company expects to further develop it for more complex uses. Consultants say the process could find its way into numerous applications in a market that they estimate generates $7 billion of revenue a year.    Odds and Ends   COMARCO of Anaheim Hills, Calif., has produced a solar powered cellular telephone. That means emergency phones can now be placed anywhere on those long, deserted stretches of highway. . . . Calera Recognition Systems Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., has introduced an add-in board for personal computers that improves the usefulness of scanners, which are used to store copies of printed documents in PCs. Using most scanners, the computers can merely display a picture of the document, so editing it is like trying to edit the text in a photograph. But the Calera board, which costs $2,500 to $3,500, recognizes the characters in the document and deposits the text in a computer file that can be easily edited. </TEXT></DOC>