<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870901-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Taxation: The Long View---By Herbert Stein</HL><DD> 09/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   Congress will soon be back to resume its great debate over whether to embarrass Ronald Reagan with the issue of raising taxes or to save that embarrassment for his successor. In 1989, or whenever the next recession comes, we will have a great debate about restoring the investment tax credit. In 1991 or thereabouts, as people become aware that the Social Security Trust Fund is running a cash surplus, we will have a great debate about cutting the payroll tax rate.    And so, if we continue business as usual, we will inch our way shortsightedly past the century mark to 2037, the 250th anniversary of the Constitution. And we will find ourselves with a tax system that we neither expected nor intended and that the president will call an &quot;atrocity.&quot;    How far the tax system can go in 50 or a hundred years can be seen by looking back to 1887 and 1937. In 1887 federal receipts were about 3% of gross national product. There was no federal income tax. Over 60% of the federal receipts came from customs. Almost all of the internal revenue came from excises on alcohol and tobacco. In 1937, federal receipts were about 5 1/2% of GNP. Income taxes, corporate and individual, supplied 45% of the total and employment taxes (for Social Security) about 5%. A family of four with an income of $10,000 paid about 3 1/2% in federal income tax. &quot;Progressive&quot; income taxation was being carried to great lengths. A family with an income of $1 million paid almost 68% in federal income tax.    This year the federal government is collecting about 20% of the GNP in revenue, of which 55% comes from income taxes and 35% from payroll taxes. The $10,000 income of 1937 would have to be about $80,000 now to have the same purchasing power. When the new rates go into effect next year, a family with an income of $80,000 will pay about 14% in tax, compared with the 3 1/2% paid by the $10,000 family in 1937. But the progression has flattened out. Next year's $8 million family will pay about 28% in taxes, compared with the 68% by the $1 million family in 1937.    There is always a tendency to think that history ends with us and that the future, in taxes as in other things, will not undergo changes as radical as occurred in the past. But a view of how far there may be to go, at least in one direction, can be obtained by comparing the U.S. with Sweden. In 1983 the marginal tax rate on the average production worker in the U.S. was 43% -- when all taxes are combined. For Sweden the marginal tax rate was 73% (according to OECD studies). Who is to say that our inching-along process may not bring us to Sweden's present position in 50 years or less -- or, indeed, that 50 years may not bring Sweden to our present position?    Believing that a long look at future tax developments would be useful, the University of Virginia and Erasmus University of Rotterdam are sponsoring an international conference on Economic Policy in the 21st Century to be held in Washington next month. The conference is funded by Philip Morris Cos. Of course, no one thinks that he can now reliably prescribe or predict a tax policy for the year 2037. But considering the question should help to open the minds of policy makers and taxpayers.    There is a temptation in speculating about a tax policy for, say, 2037 to try to figure out how to achieve in that year the &quot;ideal&quot; tax system one has failed to achieve in 1987. But that is not really the problem. The problem is to try to visualize the developments of the next 50 years that are relevant to tax policy and to imagine how tax policy should or will respond to those developments.    Several of such developments can be seen more or less clearly. One of the clearest is the increasing ease with which business, capital and labor will move across borders. This will intensify the effort of business and individuals to find locations with tax advantages. It will force governments to try to find less mobile tax bases -- consumption rather than income, for example. International competition will tend to limit the tax rates that national governments can impose, which will also limit their expenditures. The conflict between the expenditures that governments consider necessary for their defense or for social solidarity and the taxes they can afford to levy will become more acute.    This may generate a demand for international agreement on tax policy, to keep national revenues from being eroded by competition. But if there is to be international agreement on tax policy, there may have to be international agreement on other things as well. So the consequences of resource mobility, through international tax competition, could be profound.    Another example of possibly influential developments is the change in the technology of taxation. One thing I learned from reading a big book on the history of taxation is that the modern income tax would have been extremely difficult to administer if we still used the Roman numeral system. Perhaps a basic lesson is that tax systems adapt to the capacity of the administrative machinery.    What will the tax system be like when every economic transaction of every individual is instantly stored in a central data bank and instantly retrievable from it? Will the Internal Revenue Service have a continuous up-to-the-minute file of each individual's lifetime income and lifetime tax payments and automatically credit or debit his assets with the amount required to keep the lifetime payments adjusted to the lifetime income? Will the IRS be able to attribute to each stockholder precisely his share of the retained earnings of a corporation, and tax the stockholder on that, making corporation profits taxation redundant? Certainly, ingenious people will find more ways to make use of the mass of additional data governments will have at their disposal.    Other factors that will influence the probable or desirable course of taxation during the next 50 years can be identified. Almost certainly, per-capita incomes will be rising nearly everywhere. In the experience of the past century or more, rising per-capita incomes have been associated with a rising demand for government services and rising willingness to pay taxes. The question is whether we are near a turning point in this process. Will there be a new attitude in which rising affluence is seen to reduce the need for government programs and thus for taxes? More generally, are the relative weights given to economic growth and efficiency, to &quot;equity,&quot; meaning income redistribution, and to environmental concerns changing, with necessary consequences for the level and character of taxation?    The idea of thinking about tax policy for the 21st century seems bizarre at first glance. But the Treasury issues and people buy bonds that are not due until 2017. The Pentagon plans ships and planes that are expected to be in service in the 21st century; some of them may not even enter service until after the year 2000. Private investors erect buildings that will be used in the 21st century. People have babies who will be alive well past the middle of the 21st century. All of these enterprises receive at least a little forethought. To think ahead about taxation would also be a good idea.    ---   Mr. Stein, a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute, is chairman of the advisory board of the Conference on Tax Policy in the 21st Century. </TEXT></DOC>