<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Japan Tightens Reins on Sensitive GoodsAfter Unauthorized Exports to the Soviets---By Eduardo LachicaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FREST EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan is tightening controls on the export of strategic goods following Western criticism of local companies' unauthorized shipments of computerized machine tools to the Soviet Union.    The Ministry of International Trade and Industry, or MITI, signaled its tougher stance on Friday by prohibiting Toshiba Machine Co., a subsidiary of Toshiba Corp., from shipping any goods to the Soviet bloc and China for a year and barring C. Itoh andamp; Co., a large trading house, from selling machine tools to those countries for three months.    Apparently acting on information provided by the U.S., MITI has charged that the two companies were involved in the illegal export of four metal-working machines that are believed to have helped the Soviets design quieter submarines. A Pentagon spokesman earlier confirmed that ultra-quiet propellers produced with the help of illegally acquired Japanese and Norwegian technology are already installed in some Soviet attack submarines.    MITI also has advised 150 industry and trade associations to urge their members to comply strictly with export regulations. And the ministry said it will more closely scrutinize shipments to the Soviet bloc.    The penalties against Toshiba Machine are the stiffest ever imposed on a Japanese concern that has violated export controls. By being shut out of Communist markets for a year, the company stands to lose about $36 million in sales -- 12% of its total exports. Some individuals in the company could have been subject to criminal penalties, including a maximum of three years in prison, but the statute of limitations relating to such crimes had already expired, Japanese officials said.    Toshiba Corp. spokesmen were unavailable for comment, but the Japanese officials confirmed that Kazuo Iimura, Toshiba Machine's president, has resigned.    C. Itoh, which stands to lose $18.7 million because of its three-month ban, was given a lighter penalty because MITI doesn't have enough evidence that the trading house intentionally violated export regulations, the officials added. A small trading company, Wako Koeki Co., was given a written reprimand by MITI and warned that it could be subject to further sanctions pending the outcome of a current investigation. C. Itoh acted as contractor in the sale; Wako Koeki's role wasn't specified.    Yukio Okamoto, director of the Foreign Ministry's national security division, called MITI's actions &quot;a clear message to the entire Japanese industry.&quot; He said the &quot;severe penalties&quot; against Toshiba Machine, combined with other administrative measures, will help deter further exportcontrol violations.    The Pentagon has commended MITI for its actions. Still, MITI has a maximum of 30 officials engaged full time in screening the 200,000 export applications it receives annually. That is far smaller than the U.S. export-control system, even though Japan has become a major source of computers, semiconductor-making equipment and other sensitive goods that the Soviet bloc wants.    Japan is obliged to deny the Soviet bloc several categories of high-technology products in concert with the other members of the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, a watchdog body created by the U.S. and its allies. But earlier reports of Japanese negligence have irked the U.S. and some of Cocom's Western European members.    MITI concedes that its export-control system still has to rely heavily on the cooperation of exporters. However, the new measures are meant to plug some possible loopholes. For instance, MITI is creating a high-level committee to review proposed shipments of unusual value and to coordinate the actions of various divisions processing export applications.    The Toshiba case is particularly embarrassing to Japan because some members of Congress became aware of it only days before Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone's April 30 meeting with President Reagan. The legislators threatened to introduce punitive legislation against the Japanese company. On the same day that the two leaders met, Tokyo police raided Toshiba Machine's offices and factories in search of documents connected to the transaction.    According to Japanese officials, Toshiba Machine illegally misrepresented the machine tools' capabilities in obtaining export permission from MITI. The officials said the machines were shipped to the Soviet Union between December 1982 and June 1984 under a contract with the Soviet trading concern Techmashimport.    The officials said computers supplied by Kongsberg Vaapenfabrik, a Norwegian state-owned arms maker, were attached to the Toshiba machines before shipment to the Soviet Union. The officials declined to say where the assembly took place.    As previously reported, Norway's government is investigating its export-licensing procedures in an effort to soften U.S. anger over Kongsberg's role in the case.    Japanese officials said Toshiba Machine also could have sold the Soviets a computer software program for operating the milling machines some time in June 1984. Police are still investigating that aspect of the case. </TEXT></DOC>