<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Live Up to Being a Reserve Currency---By Alan Stoga</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   In a world instinctively looking to America for economic leadership, the U.S. cannot long remain both the largest debtor and the wellspring of the global reserve currency -- the basis for transactions and holdings around the world. The former condition has been spawned by economic mismanagement; the latter demands budgetary and monetary prudence.    Indeed, the recent stock-market crash and resulting financial turmoil were partly consequences of the U.S. having become dependent on the rest of the world economy for continuing injections of new capital to cover deficits and service debt.    According to the Commerce Department, America's net foreign debt at the end of last year was $264 billion; by the time the next president takes office, this will probably have doubled. In contrast, the U.S. had been a net creditor for most of the postwar period and, as recently as 1981, it was the world's largest creditor with a surplus of assets over liabilities equal to $140 billion. (Foreign-debt numbers are widely disputed; U.S. assets abroad often are measured at book value, or less than their real-market worth, but capital inflows are probably undercounted and this likely compensates.)    Even though the U.S. debt burden is relatively small compared with the enormous size of the American economy (equal to about 6% of total gross national product, but expected to exceed 15% in the early '90s), it probably will have profound consequences -- both on U.S. economic performance and on the direction of the global economy.    The dollar-based postwar economic system will be increasingly crisis prone as long as the key reserve-currency country continues to be the world's largest and fastest-growing debtor. While U.S. deficits persist and our debt accumulates we will find other industrial countries reluctant to accept our leadership. This will adversely affect our ability to resolve the Latin debt problem, to stabilize the global trading system (where our commitment to free trade has always been more deeply rooted than that of our allies), and to develop a cooperative international economic strategy. Inevitably, this will rebound on American economic interests here and abroad.    In short, the historic shift from being a creditor to being a debtor challenges a critical underpinning of the international system. Either we reverse course or the system inevitably will change. When the British, our predecessors at the center of the international economy, went through a similar shift, the transition to a new international economic order built around the U.S. was accompanied by depression and world war.    The existing international economic system presumes American financial credibility and, even more, political leadership. The world runs on a dollar standard; the U.S. financed the postwar recovery of Europe and Japan; American financial institutions contributed importantly (maybe too importantly) to the development of such emerging countries as South Korea, Brazil and Mexico in the 1970s. The great postwar international financial institutions -- the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade -- assume a world in which the U.S. is the leading economic power.    Simply put, all of this is incompatible with this nation's emergence as a debtor. Sooner or later dollars will be in excess supply in the world, relative to demand for them. Countries and companies will become reluctant to hold the dollars we offer in payment of our deficits. The institutional structure erected around the leading role of the American economy will fracture as the U.S. becomes preoccupied with its internal economic stresses.    Why does this matter? For at least four reasons:    --The key benefit conferred on the U.S. in return for letting the dollar serve as the basis for the global economy is the ability to pay its bills in its own currency. This makes it easier (and less painful) to handle economic imbalances that do occur.    --American companies and banks have benefited from having much of their trade denominated in dollars and from having a perhaps disproportionate say in setting the rules of international trade and payments.    --The U.S. economy as a whole prospered during the postwar period of economic and financial stability and inevitably will suffer in the absence of it.    --America's postwar political and military linkages are intertwined with our economic relations; eventually, our financial problems will undermine the coherence of the Western alliance.    At the broadest level, the country has few strategic alternatives.    The first may be the most dangerous because it seems to be the easiest: to deflate the value of our debt by inflating the economy. The experiences of the 1970s should have taught us the economic and social costs of inflation, but the temptation to avoid recession or economic adjustments by pumping out more money will grow as the constraints tighten.    The second is probably unworkable in a world of integrated capital markets: to erect capital controls that distinguish between &quot;offshore dollars&quot; and &quot;domestic dollars,&quot; reneging on our explicit promise to service fully our accumulated debt. This would require the abandonment of any pretense of free trade, perhaps in favor of a select set of bilateral trading agreements, and would risk -- but not guarantee -- a global depression.    Finally, the U.S. could progressively reduce its trade and budget deficits, create new incentives to save and invest, and reestablish the underlying competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing and service industries. Not only will this require bold domestic action, but international cooperation as the U.S. seeks a $100 billion to $200 billion shift in its trade balance. If this adjustment occurs mostly through lower U.S. imports (induced by lower U.S. growth or increased protectionism), then the world will slip into recession or depression; if it occurs with higher exports, then the world economy as a whole will prosper.    Inevitably, some will seek a fourth alternative: to continue borrowing from the rest of the world, making only marginal adjustments in our economic policies. Earlier this century, the British taught us that debt and leadership cannot long co-exist. Eventually -- and the markets seem to be saying sooner rather than later -- we will have to choose.    ---   Mr. Stoga is an economist affiliated with Kissinger Associates in New York. </TEXT></DOC>