<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870311-0117 </DOCNO><HL> A Safe and Effective Constitutional Convention---By Martin Anderson</HL><DD> 03/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Again and again during the first six years of his presidency, Ronald Reagan has pleaded the urgency and importance of a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution. In campaign statements, in his acceptance speeches at the Republican national conventions, in five of six State of the Union messages, in two national radio addresses, in the Economic Report of the President and in both inaugural addresses he has clearly made the passage of a balanced-budget amendment one of his top policy priorities.    But so far it has been a toothless tiger. The reasoning and rhetoric have been powerful and sleek, but his administration has not produced a specific program for him to take to the American people, a program that has sharp, cutting teeth. The main reason is that few people in the administration think that a balanced-budget amendment is as important and desirable as President Reagan does and the vast majority of the American people say they do. Time is running out on President Reagan and he can no longer afford to wait for his staff to produce the balanced-budget policy options he has every right to expect. He is going to have to demand them.    I propose a two-week constitutional convention in Philadelphia this fall for the express and sole purpose of drafting a brief amendment to the Constitution mandating a balanced federal budget.    But wouldn't this be dangerous? Think of the mischief that might be done if thousands of people got together in one room and started carving up the Constitution with their pens and pencils. Some noted conservatives and liberals have recently joined in a cry of alarm. Phyllis Schlafly, the head of the Eagle Forum; Gerald Gunther, professor at the Stanford Law School; and Howard Phillips, chairman of the Conservative Caucus, have issued agitated warnings that the constitutional skies may fall. Are their fears justified?    No, not at all. The specter of a &quot;runaway&quot; convention is a disingenuous argument put forth usually by those who are adamantly opposed to the idea of balancing the budget in the first place. There are some valid reasons why one could oppose balancing the budget -- concerns over having enough money to spend on national defense and on social-welfare programs, and concerns about having to raise taxes. These should be argued out in the open, not masked behind silly and dishonest arguments about the &quot;dangers&quot; of a constitutional convention.    To begin with, a convention would not be a gathering of thousands. The entire Constitution (some 8,500 words) was drafted by fewer than 100 people. The proper size of a modern convention would be about 100 people, similar in scope to the platform-writing committees of the major political parties.    Let each state send two delegates to the convention. This could be done by statewide election. Or, in a system that would be easier and faster, the governors could appoint two delegates, with the stipulation that there must be one man and one woman and one Democrat and one Republican in each state delegation. The intense publicity focused on the selection process by the media would go a long way toward ensuring that only responsible, outstanding citizens are chosen, citizens committed to limiting their amendment-drafting efforts to the topic of a balanced budget.    Few people seem to realize that Congress can, at any time, propose amendments to the Constitution, the same power a convention would have. One could argue that there is considerably more danger of Congress proposing dangerous, irrelevant amendments than of a small, carefully chosen set of constitutional delegates with a clear mandate doing so. The truth is that neither body, by itself, is going to do anything that would threaten one hair of the Constitution's head.    The zero danger of a &quot;runaway&quot; constitutional convention is doubly confirmed by the fact that neither Congress nor a convention has the power to change the Constitution. Both can only propose that something be changed. Then that proposed amendment must be submitted to the states for their approval. And three-fourths of the states -- 38 of them -- must ratify the amendment before it becomes part of the Constitution. The Founding Fathers created a political gantlet for any amendment to run that is so thorough and tough that only the most important, sensible amendments can ever make it.    Ridding the U.S. of a $175 billion deficit all at once could be counterproductive. It would weaken America's national defenses, ravage its social-welfare programs, and raise tax rates to ruinous levels. But reducing the deficit gradually, say $35 billion a year, is a different matter. That could be done without causing economic damage. In fact, just the opposite would occur. A sure, believable path toward wiping out the deficit would be of great benefit to the economy. That is why any balanced-budget amendment must include a specific deficit phase-out period. Five years would seem to be just about right.    This is the way Gramm-Rudman-Hollings was supposed to work, but what can be easily done by legislation can be easily undone. Just recently, Sen. Paul Simon ruefully admitted that as far as meeting the deficit targets of Gramm-Rudman-Hollings goes, &quot;There is almost no hope, and everybody knows it.&quot; Legislation to phase out the deficit was a brilliant idea, but it needs the steel spine of a constitutional amendment to make it happen.    The convention itself should last only two weeks, since all the delegates have to do is draft one or two paragraphs on the balanced budget. And Philadelphia would be the proper setting for symbolic reasons. An excellent version of the amendment to start with is the one that more than two-thirds of the Senate and a majority of the House voted for in 1982. If the delegates don't like that one, Milton Friedman has also drafted a couple of paragraphs. All they have to do is a little editing.    So let's get on with it. President Reagan should take his case directly to the American people. The issue is of such fundamental and lasting importance to the future of the U.S. that it deserves at least a full half-hour television address on prime time.    In his speech to the nation the president should urge Congress to propose a balanced-budget amendment within 30 days. If Congress fails to do this, as it is likely to, the president should declare that he will then personally lead a national campaign to call a balanced-budget constitutional convention, using all the powers of his office to persuade at least two more states to pass the necessary resolutions.    President Reagan's goal should be a balanced-budget amendment firmly embedded in the Constitution before he leaves office in 1989.    ---   Mr. Anderson is a senior fellow at Stanford's Hoover Institution. He was assistant to the president for policy development, 1981-82. </TEXT></DOC>