<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ALFONSIN OBTAINED the surrender of about 150 rebel soldiers in Argentina.    The Argentine president, who traveled to the Campo de Mayo military base near Buenos Aires to confer with the rebellious troops, said the leaders of the four-day-old mutiny agreed to give up. He said they &quot;will be detained and put to justice.&quot; The revolt began last week at a camp in Cordoba, when an army major refused to testify in a human-rights case. It spread to Buenos Aires, with mutineers demanding amnesty for military officers accused of murdering and torturing political prisoners in the 1970s.    Crowds throughout the country had held spontaneous rallies in support of Alfonsin, who took power in 1983 at the end of eight years of military rule.    ---   NATO PLANS to discuss European security under a Soviet arms proposal.    Alliance officials are to meet today in Washington to debate a draft document prepared by the U.S. that prescribes how best to ensure that European security isn't endangered by an approaching U.S.-Soviet arms agreement. The meeting is the first in a series of NATO discussions aimed at framing an allied response to Soviet leader Gorbachev's offer to open separate, new talks to abolish all short-range missiles in Europe after completion of a pact to dismantle all mid-range arms.    U.S. and Soviet officials expressed optimism that an arms pact could be reached and a Reagan-Gorbachev summit held in the U.S. by year-end.    ---   Two Israeli soldiers were killed in a gun battle with Palestinian guerrillas who entered Israel from Lebanon, the Israeli army said. Israeli helicopters later fired rockets at a Palestinian refugee camp near the Lebanese port of Tyre. The violence followed a battle Saturday in which 18 Moslems were killed by Israeli troops in Lebanon.    ---   South Korean police clashed with anti-government protesters at a cemetery in northern Seoul dedicated to a 1960 uprising that led to the fall of President Rhee's government. Elsewhere in Seoul, police detained about 50 backers of dissident leader Kim Dae Jung as they tried to hold a rally protesting his house arrest.    ---   A Soviet official rejected a resumption of diplomatic relations with Israel until it surrendered Arab lands taken in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war and agreed to international peace talks. The remarks by Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Petrovsky came at the close of a four-day visit to Kuwait for talks on ways to end the Iran-Iraq war.    ---   PLO leader Yasser Arafat agreed to scrap an accord with Jordan's King Hussein calling for a joint peace approach to Israel. The move by Arafat, which came on the eve of an assembly of Palestinian factions in Algeria, was prompted by hard-liners' demands to reunite the PLO movement.    ---   The EPA protested a federal court order easing its ban on certain uses of the pesticide dinoseb, which has been linked to sterility and birth defects. The agency said it asked a U.S. judge in Oregon to stay his order allowing use of dinoseb, saying it could affect the health and safety of thousands of farmers.    ---   Meese has disqualified himself from participating in all pending criminal inquiries involving Wedtech Corp., a military contractor under scrutiny in New York and Maryland. The Justice Department declined to detail Meese's reasons, but the attorney general is said to want to avoid any potential conflict of interest.    ---   Sri Lanka's government said thousands of Sinhalese would be armed and trained by the military. The residents then would be resettled in the eastern Trincomalee district, where Tamil rebels killed as many as 127 Sinhalese on Friday. Security forces continued to search for the killers.    ---   Vietnam reported heavy voter turnout in National Assembly elections that are expected to name a successor to Pham Van Dong, the premier who led the Viet Cong to victory over the U.S.-backed forces in the Vietnam War. Dong and President Truong Chinh are expected to retire when the new assembly convenes in June.    ---   A power failure blacked out Manila and most of the Philippine island of Luzon, prompting a tightening of security amid mounting speculation of a second coup attempt in as many days. Meanwhile, officials said soldiers who stormed an army headquarters in a mutiny against Aquino would be punished under articles of war.    ---   South Africa said police and soldiers would guard railway property in an effort to stop violence that has marked a strike by about 18,000 black transport workers. The move came after about 60 railroad cars were firebombed or stoned last week over deadlocked talks in the six-week-old strike. </TEXT></DOC>