<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870814-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Diplomacy on a Shoestring Has Its Price---By Faith Ryan Whittlesey</HL><DD> 08/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN GOVMTEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> U.S. ambassadors' use of privately donated gift funds  </DATELINE><TEXT>   particularly my own use of these funds -- has come under intense congressional and media scrutiny in the past year. While the Justice Department has concluded that no violations of law took place, the State Department has ruled that, in the future, such private funds may not be used for representational purposes at embassies, with the exception of embassy-sponsored July Fourth celebrations.    And so the issue appears to have been settled. Nonetheless, I remain concerned about the deeper policy implications -- implications that were not adequately addressed during the recent debate.    If one takes the view that the main function of an embassy, as distinct from that of the U.S. Information Agency, is to keep our government well-informed about local events and policy developments, the embassy's role in articulating U.S. policy concerns in the host country may well take on only minor importance. In this context, the question of enhancing representational efforts through the use of privately donated funds would not be a consideration.    The broader view, however, holds that it is crucial to engage a wide range of local opinion leaders in substantive exchanges. The evolution of participatory democracy and the communications explosion have brought more players than ever before into the political and economic processes of most societies -- open, relatively open, and even closed ones. These people's roles in shaping host-country responses to U.S. policies should not be underestimated.    What brings a dimension of urgency to this broader view is the unpleasant fact that many U.S. policies today are greeted with skepticism, if not outright hostility, abroad. While the USIA helps counteract this by sending speakers abroad to explain U.S. perspectives, broadcasting radio and television programs, and dispensing a variety of printed materials, I know of no authoritative official or analyst who suggests that the USIA's modest complement of officers and resources is sufficient to deal with the intensity of the international debate over a broad range of U.S. policies. The Soviet Union's spending on comparable activities is about four times the size of the USIA's budget.    The purpose of the gift funds, which were donated to individual embassies and administered there by the State Department, was to increase the opportunities for U.S. policies to be articulated on a personal basis. The idea was to create more opportunities for visiting American officials, businessmen, scholars and -- most important -- the embassy's own officers to meet with local officials and opinion leaders in relaxed settings. This was the primary purpose of the gift funds, although the terms also allowed for &quot;entertainment of guests of public stature,&quot; morale-enhancing expenditures for the embassy staff, and refurbishment of the ambassador's official residence.    The funds available for embassy representational activities are now once again limited to those appropriated by Congress. These amounts have remained relatively static over the years, which is not surprising during a time of budget restraint. With the devalued dollar, however, there has been an actual reduction in funds for most embassies. Our embassy in Switzerland, for example, has been allocated $40,000 -- or 60,950 Swiss francs -- for fiscal 1987; in 1985 it received $41,000, which was the equivalent of 101,300 francs. This year's amount, which must cover our embassy in Bern and our consulates in Zurich and Geneva, permits a monthly total of about three dinner parties (up to 25 guests each), one breakfast (up to 20 guests), and one luncheon (20 guests).    Invitations by U.S. diplomats to receptions, luncheons and dinners are coveted symbols of the esteem in which we hold our guests, whose understanding -- if not agreement -- we hope to win. These events remain the coin of the diplomatic realm as well as an aid in cultivating both good will and mutual understanding. They are a means that should not be taken lightly.    Critics say that contributors to a specific gift fund might appear to receive inappropriate benefits from that embassy. It should be noted that similar criticism could be voiced against the practice of accepting tax-deductible donations for embassy-sponsored Fourth of July events or for furnishing embassy residences and the State Department diplomatic reception rooms, donations that continue to be allowed. As it was possible to devise adequate regulatory safeguards to ensure the integrity of these tax-deductible donations, devising adequate regulatory safeguards for representational funds shouldn't be impossible. Another possibility, of course, is to increase congressional appropriations for representational events as suggested by Ronald Spiers, the State Department's undersecretary for management. However, this appears unlikely in the climate of continuing deficits.    Another criticism is that gift funds place career Foreign Service ambassadors at a disadvantage compared with politically appointed ambassadors. It is said that the political appointees are better placed to raise funds and therefore will enjoy more influential and expansive diplomatic styles. There are many ways to ensure that both categories of ambassadors benefit equally. One would be to create a common pool of funds.    I, of course, have adhered to the new State Department ruling on gift funds. I hope, however, that it is not forgotten that it remains critical for the U.S. to win understanding for its national values and foreign-policy goals in an atmosphere and spirit of good will. One of the most important and effective ways to do this is on the personal level. Despite the recent criticism, the privately donated gift funds demonstrated an appreciation of this truth and its broader implications for the advancement of our national interest.    ---   Mrs. Whittlesey is ambassador to Switzerland. </TEXT></DOC>