<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Thatcher Captures Moral Initiative </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Johnson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP LABOR </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Not content with inflicting three successive defeats on Britain's Labor Party and forcing it to scrap its commitment to full-blooded socialism, Margaret Thatcher has now embarked on a long-term campaign to swing the country's church leaders behind her efforts to establish democratic capitalism as the national ideology.    Mrs. Thatcher has always, by instinct and conviction, related political aims to moral purpose and insisted that her beliefs about the way the country should be run are firmly rooted in Christian teaching. In this respect she is not a typical leader of the Conservative Party, but more in the evangelizing tradition of the great 19th-century Liberal statesman, William Ewart Gladstone. It is true that British Conservatives are traditionally the &quot;Church and King&quot; party, and most of their leaders, including the Jewish-born Benjamin Disraeli, have been Anglicans. But in modern times Conservative prime ministers have tended to keep their religious views strictly for private life and to base their appeal to the public entirely on their practical governing skills. As one of them put it to me, &quot;We leave moralizing to those Labor fellows.&quot;    But Margaret Thatcher is not prepared to leave moral issues to her opponents. Brought up in a God-fearing Methodist household, converting to Anglicanism as a student at Oxford, she has never been able, or wished, to separate her strong religious convictions from her equally strong political ones. In her mind they are indivisible, springing as they do from the teachings of her father, a storekeeper and local councilor in the small town of Grantham, whose maxims constitute the bedrock both of her spiritual beliefs and her public conduct.    Her father's code was simplicity itself: There are real and absolute distinctions between good and evil. Everyone has a personal responsibility to choose the good. This applies equally to private and public life. Choosing the good means working hard to better ourselves and our families and to serve the community. Deal honestly and keep the spirit as well as the letter of the law. Borrow only when absolutely necessary, and repay promptly. Save systematically for the future. Give generously. In public life, apply exactly the same high standards as in your private dealings. Remember at all times that you are accountable not merely to the voter in this life, but to Almighty God in the next -- and God sees into our secret hearts and judges our motives as well as our actions.    There was never any question of Mrs. Thatcher keeping morals out of politics. When she first became leader of the Conservatives, in 1975, she brooded furiously on the way the Labor Party, with its cults of welfare socialism and its image of the &quot;Three Cs&quot; -- caring, compassionate and concerned -- had been allowed to occupy the moral high ground of politics.    To her, Labor was a party of moral fraudulence: It was compassionate with other people's money and it bribed its way into office by expensive schemes of public provision which, once installed, it was obliged to abandon since it could not generate the wealth to pay for them. Even in those days she reiterated the point: &quot;The Good Samaritan first has to earn the means to be generous.&quot; I remember her saying to me: &quot;I am determined to capture the moral initiative from Labor -- and keep it.&quot;    She certainly achieved this objective. She had no difficulty in turning trade-union reform into a moral issue, for everyone could see that the destructive and selfish way British unions behaved in the 1970s constituted a national scandal. But she gave her campaign an additional ethical dimension by insisting that in curbing the power of union leaders she was &quot;giving the unions back to their members&quot; and, in 1982-83, she dramatized her moral crusade by fighting a successful battle against Arthur Scargill, the hard-left leader of the militant coal miners.    She gave the Falklands War a moral purpose too: the need to reverse an unprovoked and brutal aggression by a military dictatorship against a defenseless, pastoral people. She turned the campaign against terrorism, dramatized by her sensational escape from the Irish Republican Army's attempt to blow up a Brighton hotel where she was staying, into a national moral duty. She even presented her highly successful privatization campaign as a righteous effort to transform grotesquely inefficient public corporations, run by bureaucrats in the interests of the work force and its union bosses, into real national assets, owned by millions of small shareholders. And she successfully argued that the property-owning democracy she was creating, where the percentage of families owning their own homes has risen to 65% and where the number of individual shareowners has jumped from 2.5 million to more than nine million, is a huge moral advance on the traditional industrial society, with its majority proletariat owning nothing but its labor.    The difficulty Mrs. Thatcher found herself in, after three electoral victories, was that her very success undermined her position of moral advantage. In 1988 there is no doubt that the economic policies she has pursued with such obstinacy since 1979 are bearing fruit. The economy is booming, unemployment is falling rapidly, inflation is low, productivity and real wages are rising. In this year's budget, Chancellor Nigel Lawson was able to cut taxes on all incomes, raise welfare spending modestly and still achieve a balance. It was the most triumphant budget of modern times.    But was it too triumphant? It cut the top tax rate to 40% from 60%, a move that will almost certainly increase the yield from higher incomes. But it is seen as a huge concession to the well-off at a time when there is still much visible poverty in Britain and when the country's sacred cow, the National Health Service, the one institution Mrs. Thatcher has not yet dared to reform, is clamoring for more cash.    The budget brought to the surface a feeling, irrational but powerful and pervasive, that Thatcherite prosperity, widely spread as it is, threatens to turn Britain into a nation of materialists -- greedy, selfish and heartless. This feeling has been eagerly fanned by radical churchmen of all denominations.    The ecclesiastical criticism has been vociferously echoed by the Labor Party, which has pounced on what it sees as the perfect opportunity to regain the moral initiative it lost to Mrs. Thatcher in the years after 1979. The result has been Mrs. Thatcher's moral counteroffensive, in which she has deliberately and systematically described the religious principles on which her political beliefs rest and her government acts. She began it with a powerful speech on Christian values to the annual meeting of the Presbyterian clergy in Scotland last month. She hammered home her belief in the essential moral need to work and produce: &quot;It is not the creation of wealth that is wrong, but the love of money for its own sake. The spiritual dimension comes in when deciding what one does with the wealth.&quot; She also repeatedly stressed the moral centrality of personal responsibility: &quot;Intervention by the state must never become so great that it effectively removes personal responsibility.&quot;    She followed this address by another hard-hitting statement of her ethics at the Conservative Women's Conference. She quoted John Wesley, founder of Methodism: &quot;Gain all you can. Save all you can. Give all you can.&quot; She stressed the moral theme in magazine and newspaper interviews. There are more &quot;moral issue&quot; speeches on the way. Her counteroffensive has received enormous publicity and aroused much critical comment from her clerical opponents.    But starting a public debate on the moral issues of politics is exactly what Mrs. Thatcher wants. She believes she can win it by reiterating a simple proposition that everyone can grasp: It is deeply immoral to promise benefits without taking positive steps to create the wealth to pay for them -- and that means an effective capitalist system. Capitalist efficiency and public morality go hand in hand. That is the message at the heart of her campaign. There is an uneasy feeling in the Labor Party that she is beginning to get it across.    The moral majority in Britain is less vocal than in America. The established churches, all of which are dominated by left-liberal oligarchies, have an absolute stranglehold on religious discussion on British TV; new or dissident church groups are not allowed to own TV or cable stations or even to buy air time. But a moral majority exists nonetheless, and Mrs. Thatcher speaks for it. Frank Field, one of the shrewder and more independent-minded Labor politicians, told his colleagues last week not to underestimate Mrs. Thatcher's ability to win the moral argument: &quot;She has a wonderful nose for gathering votes in the middle ground of England,&quot; he said. &quot;There is a fundamentalism sweeping the world-and Mrs. Thatcher will strike a chord.&quot;    ---   Mr. Johnson is a British journalist and historian. </TEXT></DOC>