<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880718-0062 </DOCNO><HL> South Korea's Recent Overtures to North Are Designed to Avert Olympic Protests </HL><AUTHOR> Susan Moffat and Urban C. Lehner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   South Korea made another overture to North Korea aimed at preventing student protests from disrupting September's Seoul Olympics.    The government proposed that North and South Korean students visit each other's countries and called for subsequent sports exchanges. The proposal follows a July 7 announcement by South Korea's President Roh Tae Woo of a package of initiatives encouraging trade and cultural relations between the two Koreas and their allies. South Korea also has announced plans to cease condemnations of North Korean leader Kim Il-Sung in its propaganda broadcasts to the North.    South Korea said its aim was to increase communication with the North. But North Korea's refusal even to accept the South's letter containing the proposal was predictable, as was its negative response to the July 7 package. Nobody expects major changes in relations between the two halves of the tension-ridden peninsula in the near future.    The major point of the shift from confrontation to conciliation in the South's public posture seems to be domestic. Radical students have been demanding co-hosting of the Olympics by Pyongyang, the withdrawal of U.S. troops and rapid steps toward reunification of the peninsula.    The students and their violent means have received little popular support for the most part, but they have succeeded in putting reunification on the political agenda and forcing a government response. Many Koreans yearn for reunification and are glad the issue has been raised.    &quot;It goes without saying. We all want reunification,&quot; says Yun Sang Tae, a Seoul grocer.    The South Korean government's student-exchange proposal resembles a plan submitted by students earlier this month but rejected by the Unification Ministry because it depended on nongovernmental channels. By repackaging the student project under Education Ministry auspices, the South Korean government is trying to take the initiative from the students and defuse their movement, analysts say.    Student protests in June forced the government to make reunification a political priority. The government thwarted students' attempts to march to the bordertruce village of Panmunjom for a meeting with North Korean students June 10, when more than 10,000 students clashed with riot police. The students subsequently announced plans to make a second attempt to march to Panmunjom Aug. 15, the anniversary of Korea's liberation from Japan in 1945.    In the wake of these protests, the government has been formulating plans to respond to the potential danger of students continuing demonstrations through the Olympics, when street violence would be a major embarrassment.    Response to the president's initiatives in South Korea generally has been positive, even among the opposition.    &quot;The progressive stance toward South-North relations manifested by President Roh in his declaration deserves praise from all segments of our society,&quot; Lee Sang Soo, spokesman for the opposition Party for Peace and Democracy, was quoted as saying in a local newspaper.    But it's too early to say whether the government's ploys will succeed in heading off more student demonstrations. Student leaders have said they will take public opinion into account in deciding whether to try to disrupt the Olympics, and Mr. Roh's gestures to the North are likely to be popular with average Koreans. The government's plan for exchanges, however, falls short of meeting the students' demands in important particulars. For example, student distrust of the government runs so deep that many students would be unwilling to take part in any exchanges conducted under government auspices.    Political analysts say the moves by the South Korean government indicate not only the impact of the student movement on government policy but also the increasing confidence of the South as its economic, military and diplomatic position vis-a-vis the North strengthens. With the South increasingly winning the international competition between the Koreas, as evidenced by the Olympics, it can afford to be more open to the North.    Although the government proposals for exchanges and better relations are seen as primarily for domestic consumption, foreign countries welcomed them, too.    Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz reportedly discussed Mr. Roh's initiatives in a positive light. Mr. Shultz is expected to discuss them during his meetings with South Korean officials concluding today.    Separately, Mr. Shultz said pressure on North Korea by the Soviets and Chinese will help prevent terrorism during the Olympics. Mr. Shultz noted that Moscow has said &quot;flatly&quot; that the North Koreans wouldn't interfere with the Olympics, and that the Chinese had given him similar assurances.    Japan also responded positively to South Korea's initiatives, and discussion of Mr. Roh's encouragement of ties between North Korea and Western nations is likely to come up during Mr. Shultz's visit to Tokyo later this week. </TEXT></DOC>