<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's New --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   AQUINO'S CABINET OFFERED to quit amid a split after a recent coup attempt.    The resignation offers from the 25-member cabinet and three members of Manila's anti-corruption commission, described as &quot;spontaneous,&quot; were viewed as an apparent effort to stem growing dissension within the government following an aborted coup last month. This is the second mass upheaval in the Philippine cabinet since Aquino assumed the presidency 18 months ago. She is under pressure to show stronger leadership, and the move by the cabinet provides an opportunity to do so.    The White House expressed its support for President Aquino in any restructuring of her government and in her attempts to &quot;establish a rule of law.&quot;    ---   FIGHTING ESCALATED between Iran and Iraq in the Persian Gulf.    Baghdad said its jets raided Iranian cities, power plants, factories and oil depots in retaliation for recent attacks on Kuwait and to force Tehran to accept a U.N.-backed cease-fire. Iran, which reported that at least 105 people were killed in the assaults, said it downed three Iraqi jets. It vowed additional retaliation. The fighting came as the U.N. secretary-general prepared for a peace mission to the region tomorrow.    Japan's Foreign Ministry said Tokyo's foreign minister is preparing to visit Iraq, possibly later this month, for discussions on protecting gulf shipping.    ---   Supreme Court nominee Bork was rated &quot;well qualified&quot; by an American Bar Association panel, but four of the panel's 15 members found him unqualified for the high court. Meanwhile, the Reagan administration acknowledged that it made &quot;minor mistakes or omissions&quot; in a document supporting Bork's nomination.    The White House rejected criticism from Supreme Court Justice Marshall about Reagan's civil-rights record. Marshall, in a TV interview to be aired this weekend, said the president ranked at &quot;the bottom&quot; of chief executives in terms of rights for blacks.    ---   NATO's military commander said the alliance can maintain security in Europe under an expected U.S.-Soviet agreement to remove medium- and shorter-range nuclear missiles. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Gen. John Galvin also said he supports talks on reducing conventional forces in Europe.    ---   Reagan's choice to head the FBI disputed Justice Department claims that the U.S. is gaining in the fight against drug traffickers. At a Senate Judiciary panel hearing, federal Judge William Sessions also challenged Meese's assertions that courts have hobbled prosecutors by emphasizing the rights of criminal defendants.    ---   Israel is returning its former ambassador to the U.S., Meir Rosenne, to negotiate terms for the Jewish state's cooperation in the Jonathan Pollard espionage case, United Press International reported. Israel has declined to allow the U.S. to question certain people involved in the case.    ---   Reagan met with Sweden's Ingvar Carlsson, the first Swedish prime minister to visit the White House since 1961. Carlsson pledged Stockholm's support for U.S.-Soviet steps to reduce nuclear arms, and Reagan said the U.S. hoped to make a five-nation Central American peace plan successful &quot;whatever weaknesses it may have.&quot;    ---   A federal health official told members of a presidential AIDS panel that Medicaid spending on the disease will increase sixfold to $2.4 billion annually by fiscal 1992 from $400 million this year. Federal funds will have to pay for more than half the expenditures, with the balance to be paid by states.    ---   Denmark's prime minister resigned after his center-right coalition lost ground in Tuesday's parliamentary elections. Following talks with party leaders in Copenhagen, however, Queen Margrethe II asked the Conservative premier, Poul Schlueter, to try to form a new government.    ---   Pope John Paul II said he is eager to listen to American Catholics chafing at the church's strict authority, especially on such matters as birth control, abortion and homosexuality. The pope, who made his remarks at the Vatican, is to arrive in Miami today for the start of a 10-day tour of the U.S.    ---   Dissident Kim Dae Jung continued his criticism of South Korea's government, asserting that President Chun's regime hasn't any intention of implementing the democratic changes promised in July. Kim, on his first visit to his native Haei Island in 28 years, said he would decide soon whether to run in planned presidential elections.    ---   Authorities in California issued health warnings because of dense smoke caused by wildfires that have charred more than 1,000 square miles of land in eight Western states. While many of the lightning-ignited blazes have been brought under control, about 22,000 firefighters continued to battle flames in northern California and Oregon.    ---   Meese said federal agents arrested 29 people and seized more than 70 tons of marijuana and nearly a ton of cocaine in five states. The attorney general said the moves, which followed a yearlong investigation, disabled an international drug cartel. </TEXT></DOC>