<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880915-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Oil Surges More Than 75 Cents a Barrel As Hurricane Nears U.S. Producing Area </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PET MIN PCS </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   World oil prices surged more than 75 cents a barrel on indications that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is trying again to curb runaway production.    But Hurricane Gilbert got equal billing with OPEC's oil ministers for pushing crude oil prices above $14 a barrel in Europe and $15 a barrel in the U.S. in volatile trading.    &quot;We call it Minister Gilbert,&quot; said Peter Gignoux, manager of Shearson Lehman Hutton's international energy desk in London.    In OPEC developments, the cartel's Vienna headquarters confirmed that the on-again off-again meeting of the price-monitoring committee is on again, and scheduled for Sept. 25-26. The meeting site wasn't disclosed, but OPEC sources said it probably will be Indonesia, as rumored, because several ministers will be in the area for a Singapore energy conference and for the Olympics in South Korea.    The committee of five leading oil ministers can't install production discipline on its own. But it has emerged as OPEC's new strategy-steering group. &quot;Don't write it off,&quot; advised the OPEC Listener, an industry analysis service. &quot;The meeting is intended to coordinate the political initiatives that could make a concrete price-sustaining agreement possible later this year.&quot;    Oil traders said the fact that the long-rumored meeting will be held -- combined with evidence that OPEC's production has declined some from the year's peak of 20 million barrels a day reached last month -- helped launch yesterday's price surge despite the market's overriding bearish tone. The upturn gained momentum as the hurricane hit Mexico and advanced toward Texas and Louisiana, which produce and refine more than one-third of the U.S.'s oil.    Traders said the storm is bullish for oil markets because of the probability it will interrupt supplies going into glutted markets from Mexico and the Gulf of Mexico. Oil prices world-wide are closely linked, with markets in one region directly affected by developments in another.    Whatever the reason, North Sea crude oil prices climbed 75 cents to 80 cents a barrel in active trading on European spot markets. As of late yesterday, cargoes of the widely traded Brent crude were being sold at $14 to $14.25 a barrel.    On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil futures prices were higher by as much as 56 cents a barrel in hectic early trading, after opening above $15 for the first time in weeks. Fuel prices surged, too, with unleaded gasoline leading the gains.    October gasoline closed up 3.2 cents, at 47 cents a gallon. Heating oil finished up more than two cents at 44 cents a gallon. And the futures price for spot-month West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, closed at $15.40 a barrel, up 84 cents on near-record volume.    In addition, some refiners increased their field postings for West Texas Intermediate by 50 cents to $14.50 a barrel yesterday. The refiners, led by Sun Co., which often is the pacesetter in changing postings, had reduced their field prices by 75 cents a barrel only last Monday, rescinding the cuts on Tuesday.    But some traders and analysts questioned how long the market revival will last in the face of weak fundamentals. &quot;This hurricane couldn't have come at a worse time {for oil markets}, because it might lull OPEC into continuing to do nothing,&quot; said Nauman Barakat, vice president-energy investments at Prudential-Bache.    In other commodities markets yesterday:   COTTON: Futures prices were again boosted by Hurricane Gilbert, whose path indicated it might hit Texas. December-delivery cotton rose 1.54 cents a pound, to 55.61 cents. According to one analyst, the storm appeared to be heading toward Brownsville, on the Mexican border. Heavy winds and rains would prevail as it hit land, he said. The winds would slow as the hurricane moved inland, but the rains would continue to be heavy and could cause damage in central and western Texas, where the bulk of the state's cotton crop is grown. He added, however, that all such projections were speculative because the hurricane could change course.    COPPER: Futures prices eased as profit-taking erased early gains that established a new set of life-of-contract highs. December-delivery copper ended 0.20 cent a pound lower, at $1.0370, after trading up to $1.0530. Prices rose to contract highs in all positions, in some cases for the fourth consecutive day. Despite market-supporting developments, traders apparently decided to take profits when prices peaked around noon. According to Ben Hanauer, vice president of Rudolf Wolff andamp; Co., New York metal brokers, there was demand for physical copper from the Far East. China bought some of the metal and there was some buying from Japan, but it was thought to be for China, he said. Mr. Hanauer said brass mills are experiencing excellent demand and they have been buying more copper than had been expected. Even one U.S. producer purchased some copper to help meet sales commitments, Mr. Hanauer said, but that may have been a case of obtaining the metal in a location that facilitated delivery, rather than a lack of supply to fill orders. Mexico lowered import duties on copper, and Mr. Hanauer said this was regarded as price-supporting because it might draw more American metal into Mexico.    PRECIOUS METALS: Prices ended mixed, as a narrower-than-expected U.S. trade deficit and a stronger U.S. dollar countered early gains prompted by a crude-oil price recovery. December-delivery gold ended with a loss of 20 cents an ounce at $428, after trading as high as $430.30. December silver was up one cent an ounce, at $6.61. October platinum was up $3.30 an ounce, to $522.00. The seasonally adjusted U.S. merchandise trade deficit in July fell to $9.53 billion from a revised $13.22 billion in June, well below the $11.5 billion expected. The trade-deficit report helped the dollar rise. An analyst said precious metals again showed an inability to sustain gains, a characteristic that has plagued them for a long time.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Hurricane Gilbert blew into the soybean pits, raising prices as traders speculated that crops would fall in the storm's path. November-delivery soybeans advanced 4.5 cents a bushel to $8.935 a bushel. The increase in soybean-contract prices sparked increases in corn futures. Prices rose on concern that Gilbert, one of the most intense storms on record, would dump heavy rains in the South, damaging, in particular, the soybean crop in Louisiana and Mississippi. The Agriculture Department projected Sept. 1 that those two states would harvest 80 million bushels, or 5.5% of the total U.S. soybean crop. &quot;This is a hurricane capable of destroying large buildings in a single bound, so certainly a little soybean plant weakened by the drought couldn't hold up to it,&quot; said Joel Karlin, analyst at Research Department Inc., Chicago. Mr. Karlin said he expected Gilbert to threaten only 10% of the states' crop. After the close of trading, however, a National Weather Service official said the heaviest rains and strongest winds are expected today only in southwest Louisiana, where almost half of the state's soybeans are planted. Because the crop there was planted late in the season and is only now in its critical growing stage, the hurricane could threaten the area's yields, said Gene Wrench, a government meteorologist. Other southern regions, including northern Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi and Tennessee, are expected to get only an inch of rain that would actually be beneficial, replenishing crucial soil moisture. Reports of steady export activity also helped wheat futures prices rise. </TEXT></DOC>