<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0110 </DOCNO><HL> A Case of Yanqui Constitutional Imperialism </HL><AUTHOR> William T. Pizzi </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   The Fourth Amendment to the Constitution protects the privacy of the individual against the power of the state. It guarantees the right of &quot;the people to be secure in their . . . houses against unreasonable searches and seizures.&quot; But who exactly are &quot;the people&quot; protected? Last month, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals took a giant step toward global application of the Fourth Amendment by ruling that a non-citizen and non-resident was entitled to the full sweep of the amendment in challenging a search that took place on foreign soil with the cooperation and assistance of the foreign government.    The case involved Rene Martin Verdugo-Urquidez, a Mexican citizen who has long been believed by the Drug Enforcement Agency to be a major exporter of drugs to the U.S. In January 1986, DEA agents in the U.S. obtained an arrest warrant for Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez on a complaint charging him with a series of drug and drug-related offenses. Upon learning of the outstanding arrest warrant, Mexican police arrested Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez and turned him over to DEA agents at the border to await trial in San Diego.    Immediately after Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez's arrest, the DEA sought permission from Mexican authorities to search the residences of Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez in San Felipe and Mexicali for any documents that would confirm his role in the importation of drugs into the U.S. DEA agents in Mexico secured permission from the director general of the Mexican Federal Judicial Police, and the searches took place with the assistance of a team of Mexican officers. While searching Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez's Mexicali residence, the DEA agents found a tally sheet in his handwriting that reflects the quantities of certain shipments of drugs smuggled into the U.S. and that corroborates other evidence in the government's drug-smuggling case.    Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez sought to suppress this tally sheet, and a federal district judge in San Diego agreed with his argument and ordered it suppressed. In its August ruling, the Ninth Circuit affirmed that decision by a 2-1 vote and ruled that the DEA agents had violated Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez's reasonable expectation of privacy in his Mexicali residence as guaranteed him by the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution because the DEA had failed to obtain a warrant in the U.S. prior to the search.    The majority, in an opinion by Judge David Thompson, acknowledged that the question of whether a foreign national whose foreign residence has been searched by U.S. agents can challenge the search under the Fourth Amendment was without direct Supreme Court precedent. But it reasoned that since Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez was in the custody of the government, there was &quot;no conceivable reason&quot; why he should be denied the full protection of the Fourth Amendment for his foreign residence. The majority noted that Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez was certainly entitled to due process and a fair trial under the Constitution and that it would be &quot;odd indeed&quot; to grant him these rights while denying him protection from unreasonable searches and seizures.    In a powerful dissent, Judge Clifford Wallace stressed that the Constitution is a social contract between the people of the U.S. and the government that provides individual protections but insists in return on at least a temporary allegiance to the U.S. and a willingness to accept the burdens imposed on those who reside here.    Since Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez's only connection with this country was that he was in custody to answer charges of systematically violating U.S. drugs laws, Judge Wallace insisted that Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez was not entitled to the same constitutional protections granted U.S. citizens or aliens who have chosen to reside in the U.S. Judge Wallace concluded that Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez was entitled to those constitutional protections necessary to ensure that he received a fair trial, but not the protection of the Fourth Amendment as to searches in foreign countries.    The Circuit Court's majority decision will strike many people as embodying a rather generous view of the Constitution. But equally troubling is the corollary of the court's conclusion -- that the search in Mexicali was an &quot;unreasonable search&quot; under the Fourth Amendment, despite its taking place with the permission and assistance of Mexican authorities.    The majority ruled that whether or not the search in Mexicali was lawful under Mexican law -- an issue it did not decide -- the failure of the DEA agents to obtain a warrant from an American judge made the search unconstitutional. But there is an obvious jurisdictional problem with the warrant requirement imposed in this case: There is no American judge with jurisdiction over Mexicali. The majority had to concede that &quot;an American warrant would be a dead letter in Mexico&quot; and that &quot;it would be an affront to a foreign country's sovereignty&quot; if the DEA presented an American warrant and suggested it granted its agents authority to search a foreign residence.    For the dissent, the fact that a warrant from an American judge would have absolutely no force in Mexico underscores the fact that a search conducted by American agents in a foreign country is a matter for diplomatic negotiation by the executive branch, not for judicial control. The dissent stressed that a search by American agents in a foreign country takes place, if at all, at the pleasure of the foreign government, which has the right to dictate its terms. Unless the evidence-gathering by the American agents in a foreign country is so outrageous or shocking as to violate due process, the dissent would permit evidence such as that seized to be used at the trial of a foreign national whether or not the search met the particulars of the Fourth Amendment that would be appropriate to such a search in the U.S.    Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez is still being held without bail. Nearing its end in Los Angeles is his trial for conspiracy to murder Enrique Camarena, a DEA agent who was brutally tortured and then murdered in Mexico. Mr. Verdugo-Urquidez will then have to face the drug charges pending against him in San Diego. He has filed a civil-rights suit seeking monetary damages for the violations of his rights under the Constitution that took place when the DEA agents and Mexican authorities searched his Mexican residences in San Felipe and Mexicali.    ---   Mr. Pizzi is a professor at the University of Colorado School of Law, Boulder. </TEXT></DOC>