<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870226-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Education Gap:Subpar Schools DeepenLouisiana's Troubles,Economic and Social---Many Employers Shun State;Illiteracy, Poor SchoolingBreed Poverty and Crime---Teachers Defend Their Role---By Paulette ThomasStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If some perverse soul wanted to draw up a recipe for the certain failure of an educational system, it might be this: Take one culture in which schooling wasn't terribly important to begin with. Add a cupful of money, a shovelful of racial tension and a barrelful of political patronage. Allow to settle. You have Louisiana.    The Pelican State doesn't lead the country in every negative educational statistic. But, being at or near the bottom in so many such statistics, it is certainly a leading contender for honors as the state doing least to prepare its young people for life and work in today's changing economy.    The fruits of Louisiana's neglect are bitter. Its poorly educated work force scares off potential employers, and many here believe it is no coincidence that a place with such bad schools also has the highest percentage of residents living below the poverty line, the proportionally highest prison population and the highest unemployment rate. &quot;Our schools are a factory for the expansion of the underclass,&quot; says Lee Gary, until recently an official of the New Orleans Chamber of Commerce.    Charles Foti, the sheriff of Orleans Parish (County), agrees. He has five times as many prisoners today as he did on taking office 12 years ago. They have spilled out of the jail and into tents, an old firehouse and a one-time motel. The average inmate tests at the fourth-grade level. &quot;Probation is fine,&quot; says Sheriff Foti, &quot;but unless we get them an education, they'll be right back in here.&quot;    Louisiana's illiteracy rate of 7.8% -- measured by the number of adults who have had less than five years of school -- is the worst in the nation. But that figure only hints at the extent of the problem, for the state's schools produce a constant flow of unfortunates who have gone way past the fourth grade and still can't read.    Finding themselves woefully unqualified to work, many Louisianians have to return to school in an attempt to get what they should have got the first time. Monica Johnson, 19, wants to earn enough money to get out of the St. Thomas Housing Project in New Orleans's rough-and-tumble 10th Ward, but she can't get a job. Though she completed the 11th grade, she is functionally illiterate and now is studying long division and reading, trying to earn her general-equivalency diploma. &quot;You can't do nothing without an education today,&quot; she says softly.    In the city of Lafayette, Hattie Dotson Handy, who runs a teaching program for illiterates, says 156 of her 200 enrollees went at least through the sixth grade without learning to read. Twenty are high-school graduates.    Illiteracy in the state is so pervasive, so taken for granted, that almost all political candidates display their ballot numbers next to their pictures on campaign billboards and bumper stickers, knowing that many voters won't be able to read their names, much less their messages. Even with that help, 35,000 voters in a statewide election last fall asked for assistance in figuring out the ballot.    For employers, finding and maintaining a halfway literate work force is a grind. Before Hilton Hotels opened the New Orleans Hilton in 1977, it had to interview 12,000 people to fill 500 jobs -- and it still took eight times as long as usual to train them. In Opelousas, Theodore Schad, the owner of a food-processing concern, began sending workers to remedial classes when he found bottles of peanut oil rolling off the assembly line with the labels on upside down; the operator couldn't read. &quot;In other states you could hire qualified people instead of growing your own,&quot; he says.    In those parts of the state committed to improving education, industrial-development officials strive mightily to separate their towns from the rest of Louisiana. When wooing prospects, Michael Olivier, the executive director of the Lafayette Economic Development Authority, refers to his landlocked city as &quot;Lafayette, the island&quot; -- a landfall of literacy and industriousness in a sea of ignorance and complacency.    But some employers won't go anywhere in Louisiana. One example is Lucas CAV Ltd., which is based in South Carolina and makes high-technology fuel-injection equipment at plants around the world. Says Peter Elliman, the vice president and general manager: &quot;The employees we need on board have got to have basic skills just so they can adapt to change. One doesn't find that in Louisiana.&quot;    It should be noted that, bad as things are, they are a little better than they used to be. In 1984 the state toughened its standards for high-school graduation. Last November, voters earmarked about $500 million, the bulk of a windfall settlement of an offshore-oil-lease dispute, for education. And in some individual towns and parishes, dogged educators have been gradually improving pupil performance.    State education officials are proud that Louisiana students' scores on the American College Test in 1984-85 were the state's highest in 11 years. They also stress that Louisiana's dropout rate -- 49%, the nation's highest -- doesn't reflect the 10,000 students who earn general-equivalency diplomas annually in adult-education programs. &quot;There is a trend at all levels toward being more positive,&quot; says Anne Stewart, associate superintendent for administration.    But it is an uphill battle. Those literate students who finish school and want to go on to college find in many cases that they lack the necessary skills. Of 28 states using the American College Test in 1984-85 as a qualification for college entrance, Louisiana, even though its scores were higher than in the past, nevertheless placed 27th, topping only Mississippi.    Still, Louisiana teachers say they are doing the best possible job under the circumstances. &quot;Louisiana has some of the best educators in the country -- dedicated people,&quot; says Jeff Simon, a spokesman for the Louisiana Association of Educators, a teachers' union. &quot;We don't question how the standard test scores could be so low. We say, How could our teachers be doing such a good job given the mess the system is in?&quot;    More than half the students entering Louisiana state colleges need at least one remedial English or mathematics course; at Southern University in New Orleans, more than 90% do. Jackie DeCote, an education specialist with the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry, declares: &quot;Our colleges might as well be high schools.&quot;    Those colleges, meanwhile, are losing some of their best academicians and researchers. Louisiana State University, which hasn't given a raise to faculty members in four years, has lost 125 of them in that span. &quot;When you don't see a raise coming, when all your friends are leaving, when they take away your support staff, you look for other jobs,&quot; says George Newkome, a chemistry professor who found another one. He now is at the University of South Florida, which offered him a 35% raise.    Teacher salaries at Louisiana's primary and secondary public schools are also low. Only six states pay less. When the state was flush with oil and gas revenues, it did little to improve teacher pay or the other building blocks of basic education, instead spending much of the money on college sports stadiums and on vocational schools.    These were politically popular, and politics are important in Louisiana's education structure. It has been a receptacle for patronage for many years and is no stranger to scandal, irregularities and inefficiency.    In 1981 the state superintendent of schools was named, though not indicted, as a co-conspirator in a kickback scheme. His successor, who was voted into office on a platform that promised to &quot;get the classroom out of the courtroom,&quot; was indicted -- last year, on payroll-fraud charges. He has pleaded not guilty, and his case is still pending.    Louisiana spent an average of $2,806 per pupil in 1985, ranking it 39th in the country. But one study by the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry concluded that 48% of the money never made it to the classroom, having been sopped up by overhead that includes busing, lunch programs and the cost of hordes of administrators. (The study included one other state, Iowa, where the comparable figure was found to be 45%. The difference between 45% and 48% doesn't sound like much, but if Louisiana had matched Iowa's figure, Louisiana's classrooms would have received an additional $65 million.    &quot;We have the best-bused, best-fed and most-illiterate kids in the country,&quot; says Rep. Kevin Reilly, a state legislator from Baton Rouge.    Louisiana pays for busing private-school students as well as those in public schools. When the public schools were integrated in the '60s, droves of whites deserted city systems by fleeing to the suburbs or putting their children into private schools. This has left the urban systems increasingly black and increasingly poor.    The Orleans Parish School District, for example, is generally considered one of the most dismal in the country. White flight has left it 85% black and severely underfinanced. The vast majority of homeowners pay no property tax because of low home values and high tax exemptions, and voters have refused to pass new levies. So students are crowded into neglected buildings, some 80 years old, and sometimes use hand-me-down texts. One teacher in an Urban League program for dropouts says youngsters who used such texts earlier have written such messages in them as &quot;Here, nigger, you can have this book now.&quot;    Educators also blame a cultural bias against schooling for the sorry condition of learning in Louisiana. Along the bayous and marshes of the Cajun country that covers much of the state, the idea still persists that a man doesn't have to be educated, doesn't even have to know how to read and write, in order to make his living shrimping or fishing or doing practically anything else.    Illiteracy in Cajun country is common and is considered no disgrace. A retired social worker in the town of Houma remembers her father, a butcher, keeping his accounts by drawing pictures of each animal he processed. Larry Roy, the high-school principal in St. Martin Parish, says that when he was a teacher his students could make more a day crayfishing than he did teaching. &quot;People found there was no need for education,&quot; he says.    But attitudes in Louisiana are changing. In Lafayette a new superintendent insisted on homework, and, after initial resistance from parents and children, he got his way. One result: Whereas Lafayette students scored in the 44th percentile nationally on reading tests five years ago, they now have moved into the 63rd percentile, well above the national average. In Terrebonne Parish, bayou country in the southeast, federal education officials praise the work of Superintendent Paul Fournier, who uses imaginative teaching methods that embrace the Cajun culture instead of operating in isolation from it.    Just as reformers can see a little light at the end of the tunnel, however, the tunnel gets longer. The decline of the oil and gas industry, Louisiana's main economic support, is already hurting education, and its future effects could far outweigh the $500 million windfall the state received from the offshore-lease dispute.    Facing a huge deficit, Louisiana legislators recently cut the education budget $235 million, or 11%, and there is no assurance more cuts won't be made. Special local sales taxes, which individual school districts also rely on, have dwindled because of the oil bust.    At St. Martinville Parish schools, teachers are bracing for a 10% pay cut; it is feared some will quit, negating the gains in student-teacher ratios that the district has struggled to achieve. Tiny Caldwell Parish is so broke it may have to save on salaries by closing schools two weeks early. &quot;The last time it was this bad was the Depression,&quot; says an official. &quot;We've worked so hard -- but now we're in the same boat financially as we were years ago.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>