<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880822-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Peru Firm Is Awarded Over $130 Million In Case Involving Hunts' Silver Scheme </HL><AUTHOR> Ann Hagedorn and Leonard M. Apcar (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM MER </CO><IN> PCS CMD BCY </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A federal jury awarded a Peruvian minerals concern more than $130 million and found that the three Hunt brothers and others conspired to corner the 1979-80 world silver market.    The jury, after six days of deliberation, returned a verdict Saturday, in U.S. district court, favorable to Minpeco S.A., which had claimed its investments in the silver market were ruined by prices pushed to artificial peaks because of the conspiracy.    The jury affirmed Minpeco's allegations, in its $150.6 million lawsuit, that Nelson Bunker Hunt, William Herbert Hunt, Lamar Hunt and others committed fraud and violated commodity and antitrust laws. The jury also found that the defendants, except for Lamar Hunt, had violated civil sections of the Racketeer Influence and Corrupt Organizations Act, known as RICO, by committing at least two acts of mail and wire fraud. The brothers are sons of Texas wildcatter H.L. Hunt.    &quot;It was a great victory, not only for Minpeco, which was vindicated in its efforts to restore its reputation and the money it lost,&quot; said Mark Cymrot, Minpeco's lead attorney from Cole, Corette andamp; Abrutyn, a small Washington, D.C.-based law firm. But also, he said, &quot;On a broader scale, the verdict was a victory for the U.S. economic and legal system. In order to have a strong economy, people must invest in this country, but they will do this only if they can trust the system.&quot; Mr. Cymrot said the exact amount of the damages award was $134 million, after giving effect to $64.7 million in settlements Minpeco has already collected from other defendants. Paul J. Curran, the Hunts' lead attorney, put the figure at $132.6 million.    The stunning verdict comes as the beleaguered Hunt brothers are on the verge of leading their personal trust estates and their flagship oil company, Placid Oil Co., out of bankruptcy proceedings by this fall in Dallas. The bankruptcies grew out of a celebrated fight between the Hunt companies and 21 bank lenders, which was tentatively settled recently, over some $1.5 billion in corporate debt that went into default in 1986 when oil prices skidded. About half that debt was used initially to bail out the Hunts from their silver speculation.    Over the weekend, a Hunt spokesman declined to discuss how an award might be paid. However, the Hunts have had an uncanny ability to raise millions of dollars in spite of their troubles. They still have many valuable possessions, including personal real estate, business ventures and art collections that could be used to secure additional borrowings. Their biggest hope for a comeback rests on a deep water oil drilling venture that is under way in the Gulf of Mexico.    The verdict may be a boon to thousands of investors who, like Minpeco, had short positions in the 1979-80 silver market and who have filed class action suits for damages against the Hunt brothers and several other defendants including brokerage firms. Persons holding a short position in the silver futures market stand to gain on price declines.    There aren't any criminal actions pending against the Hunts.    Attorneys for Minpeco, the Peruvian government's mineral marketing company, proved to the jury's satisfaction that there was a conspiracy to hoard silver bullion from August 1979 through March 1980, that the scheme drove the price of silver to unprecedented heights, and that, as a result, Minpeco was damaged. Because it was a civil case, Minpeco only had to prove its case by a preponderance of the evidence, rather than &quot;beyond a reasonable doubt,&quot; as in criminal cases.    Minpeco claimed it had more than $100 million in losses because of the speculative frenzy. On Jan. 21, 1980, silver prices hit a record $52 an ounce, soaring from $9 the previous September. The price then plummeted to $10 by March 27, known as Silver Thursday.    In addition to the three Hunt brothers of Dallas, the participants in the conspiracy, according to the jury's findings, were Mahmoud Fustok, a prominent racehorse owner and a brother-in-law of the Saudi Arabian crown prince, and International Metals Investment Co., a Bermuda concern that traded in silver futures and was owned by Bunker Hunt, Herbert Hunt and two Arabian sheiks.    As they filed out of a crowded courtroom Saturday afternoon, the Hunt brothers, looking weary, declined to comment. Their lead attorney, Mr. Curran of the New York firm Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays andamp; Handler, said, &quot;Obviously, we are disappointed. But this is only the first step in a legal process. We're sure on appeal it will be rectified.&quot;    This is the first case against the Hunt brothers involving the silver debacle to reach a jury verdict. As such, it probably will have a strong impact on other legal proceedings that were postponed pending the outcome of the Minpeco trial. Judge Morris E. Lasker, who presided over the Minpeco trial, also has before him two large class-action suits against the Hunts on behalf of about 17,000 investors. There are also numerous individual suits claiming losses because of the alleged price manipulation.    &quot;As soon as Judge Lasker says 'go', we go,&quot; said Herbert Deutsch, a New York attorney at the law firm Deutsch andamp; Frey, over the weekend. Mr. Deutsch, who represents the investors in the class action suits, said, &quot;This establishes the fact that there was a conspiracy. Now we will go after the brokerages and try to prove that the brokers were part of the conspiracy.&quot;    Named in his suits, which claim $500 million in damages, he said, are Merrill Lynch and Co.; Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America; ACLI International Commodity Services Inc.; Conticommodity Services Inc. and Continental Grain Co.    Minpeco already has obtained $64.7 million in pre-trial settlements from six other defendants in the case, including E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., Merrill Lynch, Prudential-Bache and AML Futures Inc., a now-defunct unit of Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Securities Corp.    The huge award to Minpeco and potential ripple effects in other cases raised questions about the financial status of the Hunt brothers, who, though heirs to one of America's greatest fortunes, have in recent years lost money in their oil and silver investments.    By any measure, the three Hunt brothers remain fabulously wealthy even after their more than $2 billion loss from silver speculation and the oil and real estate bust in the Southwest. In 1980, at the energy boom's zenith, the brothers' combined net worth was at least $5 billion and that didn't include their vast trust-held real estate or one of their principal energy companies. Today, their net worth is probably about $1 billion, including trust investments in real estate, according to court filings. That includes a separate estimate of their personal holdings based on disclosures by the Hunts in 1985.    Still, that won't necessarily make it easy for them to come up with their share of the more than $130 million award, if it's upheld. More than half their wealth is tied up in their two struggling energy companies, Placid Oil and Penrod Drilling Co., which are held by the brothers' trust estates.    Besides the energy companies, their trusts, with assets totaling more than $2.2 billion, according to recent bankruptcy court filings, hold much slow-moving real estate in Texas and nearby states, of which $200 million will be pledged to the banks as part of a settlement of Penrod's debt. The Penrod settlement also would initially halve the trusts' equity in the restructured company. Similarly, Placid's settlement would be secured by substantial amounts of its assets.    Placid is winding up its Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings, having worked out a plan to repay its debt, most of it incurred because of the brothers' silver losses. Penrod, which isn't in bankruptcy proceedings, is a partnership owned by the brothers' three trusts, which are in separate bankruptcy proceedings that are also coming to an end.    The Hunts have always had impressive resources from which to raise cash to pay unexpected bills. Early this year, for example, Bunker Hunt grossed nearly $50 million from a sale of his celebrated horse breeding stock. He has also sold some ranch land and corporate stock. Placid raised about $200 million recently by selling its huge Black Lake natural gas field in Louisiana and its share of a downtown Dallas office tower. The proceeds were used to help pay Placid's debt as part of a pending settlement agreement with its banks.    Throughout the Minpeco trial there was speculation that the Hunts would settle before a jury verdict. Once last spring, Mr. Corette confirmed over the weekend, they offered $20 million to Minpeco. But Minpeco declined to pursue it, partly because not enough of the offer was in cash. Attorneys declined to comment on whether there had been settlement talks last week throughout the jury's deliberations. </TEXT></DOC>