<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0129 </DOCNO><HL> U.S.-Soviet Trade: Lessons of Detente </HL><AUTHOR> Benjamin Weiner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   We forget. Sixteen years ago American business was seduced by the expectation of tremendous trade and investment opportunities with the Soviet Union, a result of the aura of detente highlighted by summit meetings between President Nixon and Party Secretary Brezhnev.    It seemed a productive period. U.S. and Soviet officials signed pacts on trade, shipping, technical cooperation and space exploration, and organized a commission to work on large-scale economic exchanges. Washington authorized the Export-Import Bank to extend credits and guarantees to facilitate sales to the Soviets.    The American business community not only kept pace with these developments but was decidedly more enthusiastic than the senior American officials who were burdened with the reality of seemingly insoluble political problems. A contingent of businessmen accompanied Commerce Secretary Peter Peterson to Moscow in his quest for a trade agreement, and Armand Hammer of Occidental Petroleum met with Premier Alexei Kosygin and other officials to discuss a variety of particularly ambitious projects.    Mr. Hammer's legal adviser predicted $5 billion in annual two-way trade by 1975, a figure endorsed also by former Secretary of Commerce Maurice Stans and a congressional subcommittee. David Rockefeller, then head of Chase Manhattan Bank, was a bit more restrained when he told a Soviet TV audience: &quot;It will take some time to develop commerce, but we have brighter prospects than ever before.&quot; One of his deputies proclaimed 1973 the &quot;year of the American in the Soviet Union.&quot;    Indeed, for a while it seemed it could be the decade of the Americans given the number of business agreements announced. They involved such companies as International Harvester, Crowell-Collier, Macmillan, Kaiser Industries, Upjohn, GE, Philip Morris, Control Data, General Dynamics, PPG, Swindell-Dressler, NBC, the American Foreign Insurance Association, ITT, Arthur Andersen, and Bechtel. The trouble was that upon closer reading, many of these &quot;agreements&quot; were simply letters of intent to do something or other mutually beneficial at some convenient but unspecified time in the future.    It all fell apart. Congressional provisions regarding the emigration of Russian Jews, restrictions on credit and sales of advanced technology, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan brought it to a halt. The denial to the Soviets of most-favored-nation treatment hampered the competitiveness of Soviet exports to the U.S., and limitations on the sale of high-technology items as well as specific &quot;on-and-off&quot; embargoes constrained American exports to the Soviet Union.    The lesson is clear. In the 1970s there was too little attention paid to the consequences of political frictions, much less to the structural incongruities impeding economic collaboration. When all was said and done, the economic child of detente proved stillborn and our mementoes of that era are mainly soda pop and vodka. The goal of $5 billion in annual trade was never reached. (According to the International Monetary Fund, it neared $4 billion in 1984 and fell to less than $2 billion last year.)    Today, American executives and government officials, and their Soviet counterparts, are again excited by visions of bountiful trade and investment, and in the U.S. there is a rash of &quot;how to&quot; conferences with consultants, attorneys and instant experts proclaiming an era of profitability for all. Now it is glasnost and perestroika instead of detente, but the question persists: Can the Americans and Russians succeed this time? Perhaps, especially if both parties have the good sense to moderate the talk about opportunities and concentrate on the problems hindering the growth of trade and investment.    There are serious business and commercial problems impeding cooperation that Americans tend to ignore or play down. Without their resolution, progress will be virtually impossible:   --Dramatic growth in trade or joint ventures is hard to envision without a freer flow of hard currency between the two economies. This would require the emergence of the ruble in some internationally viable guise, painful as that might be for the Russians. The alternative is continued dependence on Rube Goldberg devices that complicate trade and investment.    A U.S. firm pressured to accept joint-venture profits in kind rather than in dollars might do so if it really needed the product or if the ultimate resale of the product could be highly profitable. Otherwise it would, wisely, concentrate its sales and international investment projects in regions where the expected return on investment was more immediate and where payment was in hard currency.    --One obvious way the Soviets could strengthen the ruble would be to export more goods and services to the U.S., which means individual Soviet enterprises had better learn how to sell to American markets. The absence of most-favored-nation status is a convenient excuse for the current low level of Soviet exports to this country, but it is not likely the numbers would jump dramatically were most-favored-nation status granted. Yet, the Soviets do have products and services that could generate significant hard-currency earnings for them.    American farmers, for example, are showing an interest in smaller Russian tractors, which reportedly are rugged and easy to maintain, and the Soviet version of the jeep could sell well to Americans as a low-cost utility vehicle. (Also, tourism in Russia is a largely untapped gold mine.) The task for Soviet managers is to avoid the crutch of an exclusive arrangement with an American agent and instead begin understanding the requirements of marketing, advertising and distribution; the hiring of American personnel; the problems of servicing and spare parts; and the burdens of proliferating local, state and federal regulations, as well as the nightmare of product liability suits.    --Exclusive access to a market is a concept to be abandoned, whether we are talking about a U.S. venture in Moscow or Soviet sales in the U.S. Exclusivity stifles. And American firms demanding exclusive rights in the Soviet Union ought to be reminded gently by their Russian hosts that healthy competition is a mainstay of dynamic capitalism. Imagine the stimulation in consumption -- no less the decline in price for the Russian consumer -- that could result from dynamic advertising and marketing were Pepsi and Coke to compete in Russia the way they do in the U.S.    --Another important task Soviet enterprises must master is evaluating the American firms seeking to conduct business with them to determine whether they would be suitable partners. Does the U.S. company have a strong earnings record? Is it in a growth industry and is it a leader in its field? Is its management considered aggressive or mediocre? Is it heavily in debt? What has been its performance in other foreign countries? Why is the American firm looking at the Soviet Union -- is it seeking a &quot;quick fix&quot; to compensate for lagging performance elsewhere or to tickle up the price of its stock?    --The problem of &quot;asymmetry&quot; in Soviet-American business negotiations must be resolved. American businessmen want discussions concluded expeditiously, whereas the Soviet side appears to favor a slower pace. In part this stems from the pressure on U.S. firms to report to their stockholders every 90 days on profitability or on the anticipation of profits, whereas one is not quite certain of the Soviet performance timetable. Of course, the Soviet style may simply be a negotiating ploy.    --Both the Soviets and the Americans must try to prevent wishful thinking from distorting reality. Combustion Engineering is a case in point.    Earlier this year there were extensive press reports that the Connecticut-based company was selected to lead a consortium to build 40 petrochemical plants in the Soviet Union, and an executive of that company claimed the deal eventually could be valued at more than $20 billion. This was enough for Merrill Lynch to state in one of its newsletters that Combustion Engineering &quot;stands to be an important beneficiary of improved commercial relations between the U.S. and U.S.S.R.&quot; and that &quot;the stock warrants our highest rating for long-term performance potential.&quot; A reading of the actual press release issued by Combustion Engineering, however, shows that what it signed was a &quot;letter of intent,&quot; and any final agreement must await the result of a feasibility study and, presumably, subsequent negotiations.    Would it not have been more prudent had Combustion Engineering damped publicity until after the agreement was chiseled in stone? The same holds true for other U.S. corporate initiatives, which often generate more press coverage on what is hoped will happen than on what has been accomplished to date.    This indeed may be the moment to refocus on Soviet-U.S. prospects within an aperture of reality, and to concentrate on the structural impediments to trade and investment between our two countries as a first step in resolving them. To play down these problems and to instead be enthralled by the drumbeat of tremendous opportunities is to relegate economic prospects to the slowest path of growth.    ---   Mr. Weiner is president of Probe International, a Stamford, Conn., political research firm. </TEXT></DOC>