<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881020-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Commodities: Crude-Oil Futures Rocket in Last-Minute Rally As OPEC Ministers Prepare to Meet in Madrid </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas Petzinger Jr. and James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PET CMD MIN PCS </IN><TEXT>   The oil cartel, though less effective than ever at controlling its members, proved anew its deftness at controlling the futures markets.    In an explosive rally at the closing bell, crude-oil futures surged as ministers of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries began gathering in Madrid. Oil companies, floor traders and outside speculators all began buying at once, triggering automatic buy orders, flushing out short-sellers and sending West Texas Intermediate for November delivery up 79 cents to $15.40 a barrel.    &quot;Pandemonium and panic struck the market,&quot; said Richard Donovan, head of the international energy department at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. &quot;We exploded in a rally like we haven't seen since Hurricane Gilbert.&quot; Volume may have reached record levels. Gasoline, heating oil -- everything followed crude higher.    The price surge in the final minutes of trading was precipitated by relentless, buy-at-any-price bidding from a major trading company -- but a slew of positive statements emanating from OPEC earlier in the day made the market fertile for such a move. For instance, an OPEC official was said to have called $18-a-barrel oil attainable. And Iran suggested that politics should have no place at the crucial meetings of OPEC's price and long-term strategy committees beginning Thursday in Madrid.    &quot;It is almost irrelevant where the true fundamentals of the market are,&quot; said Eric Bolling, vice president of Edge Trading Corp. With prices gyrating 50 to 70 cents a day purely on rumors and off-the-cuff remarks by OPEC officials, &quot;it's simply not worth the risk of being short in this market,&quot; he said.    But in Madrid, there wasn't much evidence to support yesterday's euphoria in the oil markets. There was, in fact, a note of pessimism that enough could be accomplished in Madrid to keep oil prices from declining again.    Some OPEC sources said they expected the eight ministers at the meeting to do little more than put together a pricing and production proposal that could be the basis for a possible agreement at the full OPEC conference in late November. Indeed, several said a position advocated early this week by the Persian Gulf Arab producers hadn't been submitted to the other OPEC members as yet.    &quot;Nothing has been presented to me, and I only know what I read in the papers,&quot; said Ginandjar Kartasasmita, Indonesia's oil minister.    As previously reported, the Arab producers -- acting through the Gulf Cooperation Council, which includes heavyweight Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates -- are proposing that OPEC return to a production ceiling of 17.4 million barrels a day that would include Iraq, now outside the quota system, with a quota equal to Iran's. Or, according to some of the Arab producers, the ceiling could be higher if all OPEC members shared proportionally in the increases.    A range of 18.5 million to 19 million barrels a day has been suggested as a &quot;realistic&quot; ceiling, which, if adhered to, could cause an actual reduction of OPEC output, which currently totals about 21 million barrels a day.    An OPEC source called the Arab producers' proposal a &quot;basis&quot; for trying to arrive at an agreement, but some of the other members clearly consider such a range to be excessive. Whatever the outcome, Iraq had clearly emerged as the most important participant in the Madrid meeting, with several OPEC sources saying the primary issue is to get the Iraqis back into the fold.    Iraq's oil minister will arrive late in Madrid, coming in today. As a result, the joint sessions of the two OPEC committees, to be held in the Algerian embassy, won't begin until late in the day.    Several other ministers, meanwhile, slipped quietly into the Spanish capital and spread out among five hotels -- some more than 45 minutes apart by taxi in Madrid's heavy traffic.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   COPPER: Futures prices again pushed to new highs amid growing concerns about supplies because of the miners' strike in Peru. The spot October contract rose to a life-of-contract high of $1.4180 a pound before settling at $1.4170, up 3.70 cents. December copper advanced as high as $1.35 and then ended at $1.3335 for a gain of 5.50 cents. U.S. producers and consumers depend on Peruvian copper, one analyst noted, and they're still feeling the effects of the July and August strike in Peru. The latest walkout, which began Monday, appeared to have spread to at least another copper mine and some silver mines, he said, and is exacerbating tight supplies of the metal. While U.S. production has risen sharply, it is down more than 15% from last year in Zambia and Zaire and flat in Chile, the world's top producer, he said. According to another analyst, if the Peruvian strike continues for a few weeks, the low level of stocks is liable to touch off panic buying of the metal. &quot;Prices are likely to remain high through the end of the year and possibly into early next year, because it isn't the kind of situation that can be turned around quickly,&quot; he said.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices closed lower after first rising, mostly in reaction to similar fluctuations in crude oil. There was little impact from the Peruvian strike, which has immobilized some silver mines in that country. December delivery gold ended 40 cents an ounce lower at $414.70, while December silver declined two cents an ounce to $6.4050. January platinum was off $2.50 an ounce to $537.70. Yesterday's action exemplified how two markets can react differently to the same news. &quot;The strike at Peruvian silver mines -- Peru is the world's second-largest producer of silver -- isn't having any impact at all in precious metals, while the stoppage at the copper mines is creating a panic situation in copper,&quot; one analyst said. One reason, he said, was that silver is in ample supply, while copper isn't. Another is that precious metals traders are being influenced by crude oil, and also by the dollar, after ignoring it for several months. Yesterday, precious metal prices rose with those of crude oil and then fell when oil gave up part of its gains, he noted. A firming dollar created additional pressure on precious metals, he said.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle futures recovered from Tuesday's price fall in trading driven largely by strong cash and wholesale prices around the country. Cash prices for live cattle in Kansas edged to 73.5 cents a pound. In the Corn Belt, quotes rose to 70 cents to 71 cents a pound. After the close of trading Tuesday, the Agriculture Department reported that the average wholesale price of beef has risen to its highest point since Sept. 12, analysts said. The selloff in futures Tuesday came partly because prices for December delivery rose too far above prices on the cash market. </TEXT></DOC>