<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870427-0078 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. to Press Nakasone for More AccessIn Japan for American Financial Firms---By Michael R. SesitStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN SB FBC CCIMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Reagan administration will ask Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, who visits the U.S. this week, to grant American financial firms more access to Japanese markets, several congressmen said.    Many U.S. financial firms have ambitious expansion goals in Japan. But &quot;the tortoise pace of deregulation in Japan, contrasted with the hare-like expansion of Japanese firms in the U.S., is unacceptable,&quot; said Rep. Charles E. Schumer (D., N.Y.). Rep. Schumer was among three representatives and one senator who recently visited Japan to press for equal access for U.S. commercial banks and investment banks.    Rep. Bruce A. Morrison (D., Conn.), who like Rep. Schumer is a member of the House Banking Committee, met with Treasury Secretary James Baker after returning from Japan. &quot;The Baker meeting was encouraging,&quot; Rep. Morrison said. &quot;His assurances were that he was committed to having financial-service market opening an important part of the agenda with the Japanese.&quot;    While that was already on the list of topics to be discussed, &quot;I don't think it was all that high on the agenda,&quot; Mr. Morrison added.    In Washington, the Treasury said it wouldn't be appropriate to comment on the specifics of the Nakasone visit, which begins Wednesday.    The talks will be held as the House debates a trade bill, a provision of which would bar Japanese financial institutions from being primary Treasury bond dealers in the U.S. until American firms are granted full reciprocity in Japan.    Currently, three Japanese firms are primary dealers, an elite group of 40 institutions that deal directly with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York when it buys and sells U.S. government securities as part of its domestic open-market operations. The three are the U.S. units of Nomura Securities Co., Daiwa Securities Co. and Industrial Bank of Japan.    During the trip, Reps. Schumer and Morrison, along with Sen. Jake Garn (R., Utah) and Rep. George Miller (D., Calif.), met with Mr. Nakasone; Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa; Satoshi Sumita, the central bank governor; and the top officials of the Tokyo Stock Exchange and major Japanese financial institutions.    The congressional delegation sought these concessions, among others, from the Japanese:    --Additional seats for U.S. securities firms on the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Currently, six foreign firms, including four from the U.S. -- Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. and a unit of Citicorp -- hold seats. Reps. Schumer and Morrison said the Tokyo exchange agreed to call for applications from prospective foreign members by October, which would mean that new members would probably be accepted by next January and could begin trading by May -- six months earlier than previously believed.    In addition, exchange officials indicated strongly that several U.S. firms would be admitted. It is understood that Salomon Brothers Inc. and First Boston Corp. are near the top of the list.    --Greater participation for U.S. institutions in the Japanese-controlled syndicates that underwrite the primary issues of Japanese government 10-year bonds. In particular, U.S. firms would prefer an auction system in this major Japanese market. At present, Japan issues long-term bonds to a syndicate controlled by Japanese banks and securities firms. The syndicate managers allocate bonds to other members. All foreign securities firms receive a total of no more than 5.7% of any issue.    Richard Medley, a principal of Smick-Medley andamp; Associates Inc., the Washington-based consulting firm that organized the trip, said that Japanese officials indicated in private conversations that they would consider conducting auctions for six-, eight- and possibly 20-year government bonds. &quot;Rather than having to break a logjam&quot; with the 10-year issues, &quot;they'd just go around it,&quot; by gradually putting more bonds into the new auctions, he said.    --The right for U.S. securities firms in Japan to trade foreign exchange. Only commercial banks currently may do so. The Japanese officials pledged only to study the issue.    --A larger share for U.S. firms of domestic Japanese corporate underwitings. &quot;We give Japanese firms bigger participations in the U.S. market, and we get crumbs over here,&quot; said Eugene D. Atkinson, president of Goldman Sachs (Japan) Corp. in Tokyo. Japanese officials said they were unaware of the issue and agreed to meet with U.S. firms.    --A rapid move by Tokyo to adopt capital-adequacy ratios for Japanese commercial banks similar to those under consideration in the U.S. and Britain. Otherwise, &quot;U.S. banks would be at a tremendous disadvantage&quot; because they could be underpriced in lending and in other business by Japanese banks that were allowed to adhere to less-stringent standards, Mr. Medley said.    Mr. Sumita of the central bank said that he wanted to move toward the capital-adequacy ratios being considered by the U.S. but that they created tax problems for Japanese banks, according to Rep. Schumer.    --Enhanced ability for U.S. banks to buy small Japanese banks. Rep. Schumer noted that Japanese banks had purchased sizable American banks, particularly in California, and that Citibank was having difficulty -- presumably with the Finance Ministry -- in its negotiations to gain access to the cash dispensers of Tokyo Sogo Bank Ltd. Japanese representatives said they weren't aware of this issue and would study it.    The trip by the U.S. delegation followed a visit to Japan by Michael Howard, a junior British trade minister, who threatened to retaliate against Japanese financial institutions in London if more British firms aren't added to the Tokyo exchange.    Furthermore, because the congressmen went to Japan as Washington was imposing tariffs on Japanese electronic products and as the House prepared to debate the retaliatory legislation, &quot;they got the attention of Japan,&quot; said Mr. Atkinson of Goldman Sachs.    Rep. Schumer said that &quot;the {proposed} legislation had them scared; it was a two-by-four that got their attention.&quot; He noted that &quot;the legislation introduced was narrow {in scope} but could be expanded if needed.&quot;    Added Rep. Morrison: &quot;Without a strong kind of pressure, the Japanese system is very intractable.&quot;    To some degree, the congressional pressure already has had an effect. Recently, when Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan considered buying a stake in Greenwich Capital Markets Inc., a primary dealer, the New York Fed told it the political environment wasn't right. </TEXT></DOC>