<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0009 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Hunting: The Call of the Not-So-Wild </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Pearce </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Platte City, Missouri  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The father and grown son walked slowly, their long, ebony shadows in sharp contrast against the tawny strips of switch grass, as the young hunter's golden retriever melted in and out of sight in front of them.    They had taken their time working through the ridge-top field that sat framed by maroon-tinted oaks, orange maples and fiery yellow hickories. Conversation flowed as smoothly as the Missouri River that snaked through the valley they overlooked, interrupted only by exhilarating bird flushes brought forth by the blond dog.    The hunt at Game Hill Hunting Club, a shooting preserve, had been arranged by the younger hunter. The annual trip was a chance to squeeze in a few hours of quality sport with his father before career and family obligations as well as hunts with friends and associates filled his schedule.    And they found what they had come for. As they walked from the field their game bags sagged heavily with partridge and quail. But, more importantly, their minds were filled with the memories of shots made and missed, of great dog work and of hard-flying birds. Both agreed the preserve hunt was one of the best hunts in a sporting partnership of more than two decades.    Yet 20 years ago most of the American sporting public thought of shooting preserves as little more than a perversion of hunting --and often rightfully so. A little more than a dozen years ago the father and son had hunted a preserve in which they had walked well-trampled paths through heavily grazed pastures in search of overweight pheasants that made no attempt to hide, and when forced to fly lumbered away like overloaded beer trucks. It was little more than a shoot with live targets.    But things have changed. &quot;You don't see that blood-thirsty attitude anymore,&quot; said Gary Norris, president and manager of Game Hill Hunting Club. &quot;The killing of the bird is not the big thing anymore. It's the experience, the camaraderie, the dog work and the birds. That's what we try to offer hunters. Our job, as modern shooting preserves, is to replicate what is found in the wild and if possible improve on it.&quot;    And they do. Game Hill's hunting grounds stand as a showcase of hundreds of acres of exemplary habitat, both natural and planted. The fields are sculpted with the game and the hunter in mind, laid out in ways that make each one a separate experience enjoyed only by the hunters within it.    Then there are the birds --gaudy, long-tailed pheasants that are often indistinguishable from their wild brethren as they skulk about before rising skyward in thunderous flushes. And there are the gentlemanly coveys of bobwhite quail, diminutive game birds that hold well for pointing dogs only to flush like feathered missiles that scatter in all directions.    Today, quality shooting preserves such as Game Hill hold a different spot in the opinion of the hunting public. &quot;Ten to 15 years ago, if you got ten sportsmen together maybe only one or two would have had any experience on a preserve and most would have said it wasn't real hunting,&quot; said Jeff Hughes, manager and part owner of Wild Wings of Oneka, a preserve near Hugo, Minn. &quot;Take that same group of sportsmen now and probably one or two haven't had some preserve experience, and most will have liked it.&quot;    The new face and acceptance of shooting preserves is the result of the evolution of both the preserves and American hunters. &quot;There's been a massive change in the American hunting scene just since I started Game Hill in 1975,&quot; said Mr. Norris. &quot;Back then a person could hunt about anywhere, but not anymore; it's getting tougher and tougher to find a place to hunt and even once you find a place to hunt it can be tough to find any birds.&quot;    Messrs. Norris and Hughes both said that it's out of such frustration that many hunters are turning to the convenience of shooting preserves. &quot;America is becoming more and more of a fast-paced society,&quot; said Mr. Hughes. &quot;People don't want to waste a lot of time. When they go hunting they want to be able to hunt and to find some birds. It's a heck of a lot easier to do both at a good preserve.&quot;    As with all American business, the law of supply and demand shaped the shooting-preserve industry to meet the quality demands of its new generation of users. The dedication to quality in turn opened the market to new consumers.    &quot;Ten years ago only about six of our 75 members were corporations,&quot; said Mr. Norris. &quot;Now I'd say close to 90% are corporate types who use the club as both a place to entertain business clients and a place to simply get away.&quot;    According to Mr. Norris, most shooting preserves offer packages tailored to corporate needs. Game Hill's services include everything from pickup at the nearby Kansas City airport to arranging masterful meals. Guided hunts and meeting facilities are also available.    The services of many preserves now reach further than just bird hunting. Some offer facilities for shooting sports such as sporting clays courses, and many facilities for boarding as well as training dogs. A few preserves, such as Game Hill, are the equivalent of golfing country clubs, offering family activities for those who share a common love of the outdoors.    Interestingly enough, shooting preserves now are expanding their horizons in order to help that which they emulate --wild bird hunting.    For instance, take the Lazy J Hunting Service. It's located in a seemingly strange place for a preserve --in the southwest Kansas community of Sublette, three hours from the closest metropolitan areas, Wichita and Amarillo.    But there's a reason. Sublette is pheasant country, and nowhere is it better than on the 20,000 acres of harvested crop fields, feed patches and weed rows of the Lazy J. Long-tailed roosters and drab-colored hens seem to be in endless supply among the sea of habitat. The hunting may be the best in the nation . . . in fact, sometimes it's too good.    &quot;People were coming from a long way and often limiting out too soon,&quot; said Dave Holloway, co-owner of the Lazy J. &quot;And naturally they wanted to shoot all that they could.&quot; Now, the Lazy J has nearly 5,000 acres under special regulation, so, as on all shooting preserves, hunters can take more than the state-regulated limit during a greatly expanded season. Such a wide expanse of habitat offers gunners an enjoyably unpredictable mixture of native, well-conditioned supplementary birds.    The preserve ground has opened up new avenues for the Lazy J. Every season the guide service imports thousands of hard-flying, unpredictable Hungarian partridges. The hunts are unlike any in America; Mr. Holloway estimates that the average hunter shoots 10 boxes of shells per day.    &quot;It's the same kind of shooting that they can find in Spain or England,&quot; said Mr. Holloway. &quot;But they'll do it for much cheaper here.&quot;    ---   Mr. Pearce is a free-lance writer in Manhattan, Kan. </TEXT></DOC>