<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870217-0028 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Trading: The Scandal Spreads --Kidder Peabody Could Face Possible Criminal Penalties---And, With Parent General Electric,Civil Lawsuits, Too---By Daniel Hertzberg and James B. StewartStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The investment banking firm of Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. could face criminal penalties as a result of the government's spreading insider-trading investigation, legal specialists say. And Kidder and its parent, General Electric Co., also could be the targets of massive civil lawsuits, the specialists add.    Federal prosecutors, in complaints filed last week, charged that Kidder made &quot;millions of dollars in illegal profits&quot; as a result of an illegal trading scheme in which Kidder and Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. officials swapped inside information about their investment banking transactions.    U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani, at a news conference here last Friday, indicated that the government was considering bringing criminal charges against Kidder. &quot;It's certainly a topic we have to take a look at,&quot; he said.    A Kidder spokesman, responding to questions about the firm's potential civil and criminal liabilities, said that Kidder &quot;won't speculate about some event that hasn't occurred.&quot;    An important question to be answered in the government's investigation is the extent to which top Kidder officials exercised proper control over the trading of Kidder's highly profitable arbitrage-trading operation.    Also being questioned is whether Kidder's top management adequately maintained the customary &quot;Chinese wall&quot; that is intended to limit the exchange of information between a firm's investment banking and arbitrage activities, and whether management was aware of any improper trading.    According to people familiar with the federal investigation, the government is studying evidence suggesting that Ralph DeNunzio, Kidder's chief executive officer, may have told Martin A. Siegel, then Kidder's top takeover specialist, in March 1984, to help create an arbitrage department, and indicated that Mr. Siegel's involvement in arbitrage shouldn't be disclosed publicly.    Mr. Siegel pleaded guilty Friday to charges of illegal insider trading and tax evasion and agreed to cooperate in the government's investigation.    As reported, the government last Thursday arrested three officials and charged them with conspiracy as alleged participants in the insider-trading scheme. The three are: Richard Wigton, Kidder's head of arbitrage and over-the-counter trading; Timothy L. Tabor, a former Kidder arbitrager, and Robert M. Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman Sachs. The three men have denied any wrongdoing.    Alan Bromberg, a law professor at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, said that, if the charges against Kidder and Goldman employees are proven, &quot;it is conceivable there will be either Securities and Exchange Commission or criminal proceedings against Kidder.&quot;    He added that &quot;there may be private lawsuits alleging that people who made deals had to pay more for them because Kidder bid up the market in the stocks they were buying, through its insider trading.&quot;    Mr. Bromberg said there also could be lawsuits from investors &quot;who were on the other side of Kidder trades, who said 'I would have gotten more money had I known what Kidder had known.'&quot;    Lawyers said that if the government's charges are proven, Kidder could face lawsuits and financial penalties under a variety of provisions of federal law. For example, the government is contending that Kidder made illegal profits from insider trading. Under the Insider Trading Act of 1984, those who traded on inside information can be made to disgorge any illegal profits, plus an additional penalty of three times that amount.    Mr. Bromberg said: &quot;If you look at Kidder as an entity making illegal profits because they knew the information came from insider sources,&quot; then the firm could be subject to penalties under the triple-damage provisions (of the 1984 law).    Lawyers said that the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 provides that a securities firm is liable for the illegal actions of its employees unless the firm can show that it acted in good faith and didn't directly or indirectly cause the violation. The law provides for both civil and criminal penalties. However, a firm can defend itself by showing that it had well established policies and controls against insider trading, and that it took reasonable steps to enforce those policies through a checkup mechanism.    Kidder has said that it has a longstanding policy against trading on non-public information, &quot;and as far as we know, it has been strictly observed.&quot;    The existence of an illegal insider-trading scheme, if proven, could open top Kidder management to possible sanctions by the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange for failure to properly supervise employees.    Moreover, Mr. Siegel's admission that he leaked confidential information to arbitrager Ivan Boesky and Mr. Freeman of Goldman Sachs, could open Kidder to lawsuits from companies contending that insider buying drove up the stock price of other companies they were taking over.    Litton Industries Inc. last year sued the investment banking firm of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., charging that insider trading by Dennis Levine, a former Shearson employee, made Litton pay more than it should have to take over Itek Corp. Shearson has said that the suit, which still is pending, is without merit.    Because the government contends that Mr. Freeman repeatedly leaked confidential information about clients' takeover and other plans to Mr. Siegel, Goldman Sachs, too, could face similar lawsuits from disgruntled clients.    However, while the government has charged that Mr. Freeman in one instance traded on inside information in his personal account, it hasn't alleged that Goldman itself traded on illicit data. On Thursday federal marshals carted away some records from Goldman's takeover trading area, and on Friday the firm received a subpeona for records, according to sources. It wasn't clear if the subpeonas referred to the records taken on Thursday.    A Goldman spokesman said that, based on an investigation by outside attorneys retained by Goldman, &quot;we have no reason to believe there has been any wrongdoing on the part of the head of our arbitrage department or our firm.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>