<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871211-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Korea Ruling Party Mobilizes Its ForcesTo Improve Roh's Presidential Fortunes---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   South Korea's ruling party, shaken by polls that show it losing ground, is mobilizing its vast party machinery and playing to national-security fears to improve its chances in next week's presidential election.    Local pollsters, who aren't allowed to publish their findings, say the contest is still too close to call ahead of Wednesday's vote, the country's first presidential election since 1971. The winner will be determined by the one-fourth of the country's electorate still believed to be undecided. While opposition candidates Kim Young Sam and Kim Dae Jung are appealing to resentment of South Korea's long military rule, the ruling Democratic Justice Party is mounting a more-sophisticated home-stretch effort. Party organizations -- ranging from those representing 50,000 voters to groups as small as 25 households -- are drumming up support. Members get gifts and &quot;expenses&quot; to attend rallies and help get out the vote.    The party is also trying to raise uncertainty about what would follow an opposition victory in a country where the government has never lost a presidential contest and where the capital, Seoul, is only a 40-minute drive from North Korea. Western diplomats and South Korean analysts say it isn't clear if the last-ditch government campaign can bring victory, but they believe ruling party tactics have helped slow Kim Young Sam's recent momentum.    &quot;Don't underestimate us,&quot; says Nam Jae Hee, the chairman of the Democratic Justice Party's policy committee. &quot;The strong point of the government, something the opposition just can't match, is our organization right down to the lowest level. We are mobilizing the whole party machinery, the whole party members and the whole party funds.&quot;    &quot;What it boils down to in the last days is Roh Tae Woo is running a climate-of-fear campaign,&quot; says a Western diplomat, who holds a minority view that Mr. Roh is pulling ahead. He says ruling-party strategists have customized the campaign for three different audiences that pollsters say make up most of the undecided: older people and conservative rural voters who deeply fear the North Korean threat, workers between ages 20 and 40 who worry that slower economic growth could cause unemployment, and thousands of senior corporate salary employees and mid-level government officials who worry about their jobs under a new government.    The recent crash of a Korean Air Lines flight off Burma, which South Korean officials blame on North Korea, continues to be a central news item, with each tiny development reported exhaustively.    A smear campaign against Kim Young Sam has also escalated, focusing on his alleged reputation as a playboy and his alleged lack of active military service during the Korean War, when he says he was involved in a propaganda unit. Government-run television even showed 50 women asking Mr. Kim to explain his alleged seduction of a bar girl 26 years ago.    Should these tactics fail, it isn't out of the question that the Korean military would step in. For the first time in the campaign, Mr. Roh was forced to cancel a rally yesterday in Chongju -- part of Kim Dae Jung's heartland -- after a day of violent incidents at his election appearances. Fearful that the military might lose patience with this increasingly charged democratic process, senior U.S. officials have been sending warnings to the Seoul government against armed intervention before or after the election.    The government's all-out effort faces a test tomorrow, when the ruling party tries to match in Seoul the one million-strong crowds its opponents have drawn at rallies. Government fears that a student campaign might yet succeed in unifying the opposition behind a single candidate have added urgency to the ruling party's efforts. The party also is concerned that one of the less-prominent candidates, former Prime Minister Kim Jong Pil or student hero Paek Ki Won, might throw his support to Kim Young Sam. Democratic Justice Party campaigners and party officials have the added incentive of knowing their jobs might disappear if Mr. Roh loses.    The ruling party's greatest problem has been its candidate's role in the 1979 coup that brought the current regime to power. Mr. Roh, then an army commander, withdrew his troops from national defense positions to Seoul to prop up Chun Doo Hwan. The eighth anniversary of the event is tomorrow, making it all that much more difficult to ignore. Mr. Roh nevertheless scheduled his Seoul rally to coincide with the anniversary.    His advisers say his speech will draw the clearest line yet between himself and the highly unpopular President Chun. They say he will announce new initiatives to promote democracy, including a tough crackdown on government corruption -- addressing one of the bitterest complaints against the current regime and particularly against Chun family members. But Western diplomats believe voters will discount what he says as electioneering.    Meanwhile, the ruling party's Mr. Nam says the party has nearly doubled its membership, to 10% of the electorate. Moreoever, party members at every level of government and business are coaxing fellow workers to keep the ruling party in power. They are particularly active at company year-end parties, where party members hand out stocking stuffers such as Roh Tae Woo cigarette lighters or calendars.    One senior manager of a large Korean conglomerate says his boss mentioned to him that if Kim Young Sam wins, the company may have to hire new people to appease the president. Such tactics may frighten some employees into voting for the ruling party, the manager says.    But government tactics fail, too, and their extensiveness illustrates just how worried the government is. A Seoul housewife says she was invited with 200 others to a lunch with President Chun's wife, who is a graduate of her high school. She declined. &quot;What would my friends say if they found out?&quot; she says. </TEXT></DOC>