<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0160 </DOCNO><HL> Americas: The Privatization of Justice in Colombia </HL><AUTHOR> Tova Maria Solo </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> BOGOTA, Colombia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Americans must be puzzled that accused drug lord Jorge Luis Ochoa -- wanted in Florida for crimes that carry life terms -- was released last week from a Colombian jail after serving barely one month of an 18-month sentence for cattle smuggling. There is little prospect of his coming to trial in the U.S. As President Virgilio Barco Vargas remarked in December, &quot;As long as mafiosos must appear before Colombian judges, they will never be extradited.&quot;    What Americans may not understand, and what Colombians must reluctantly acknowledge in the president's remarks, is that the administration of justice by the state has been overpowered by the private system of vendetta, judgment and punishment that has long existed alongside the formal institutions.    Administration of justice in Colombia has never been easy or rapid. The court system is painfully slow and bureaucratized. Young lawyers fresh out of the university fill the bulk of the low-paying positions as circuit judges.    Legal instruments that assist in the apprehension of criminals in the U.S. do not exist in Colombia. Plea bargaining is considered beneath the law, and even confession does not constitute a proof of criminality. The classic U.S. technique of prosecuting the leaders of organized crime for tax evasion cannot work in Colombia; tax amnesties are offered so frequently that tax evasion as a crime gets wiped away every five years or so. The declaration of income from unidentified foreign sources and the legal importation of dollars are accepted with no questions asked.    In the face of investigative limitations, the principal technique of the Justice Department appears to be to hold people charged with a crime, hoping that a case will build itself, until the statute of limitations runs out. Thus the confessed assassin who gunned down the justice minister, Rodgrigo Lara Bonilla, five years ago was released a year ago, without ever having been brought to trial.    The intricacies of Colombian law have rendered the extradition treaty for criminals inoperant, not due to any legal faults but because the treaty was signed unconstitutionally. Furthermore, the civilian authorities have no power over certain groups such as the Roman Catholic clergy, nuns, monks and the military that maintain their own, private courts of law. (Msgr. Abraham Gaitan Mahecha, a Colombian bishop accused of embezzlement, refused to come to trial for two months, asking: &quot;Why is everybody upset about earthly goods if what's important is the divine?&quot;) Other groups can intimidate, or buy their way out of court as the rampant killing of judges and the constant threats to their lives indicate. A letter, sent to a Medellin newspaper and signed by &quot;The Extraditables,&quot; promised to &quot;kill all political leaders&quot; if Jorge Luis Ochoa was extradited.    The very weakness of the state judiciary, and its total absence in certain areas of the country, has meant that Colombians have been taking the law into their own hands for a long time. And compared with the public authorities, the system of private justice in Colombia works with deadly efficiency. While capital punishment does not exist under the law, more than 1,000 people were executed here last year because some private groups considered them a threat to society. While the state has not been able to extradite more than a handful of criminals, private operators have used death threats to send an estimated 500 people into exile.    The growing presence of bodyguards, security systems and private armies to protect industrial plants and farms represents the private sector's answer to the inefficiency of the police and the courts.    Systems of private justice in Colombia have emerged with each period of civil war. While civil, military and church courts have functioned simultaneously, landholders also have played the role as authority figure in remote areas. After the &quot;era of violence&quot; -- the period from 1948 to 1956 when 400,000 were killed -- guerrilla groups forged alliances with peasants by maintaining order where civil authorities were lacking.    Since the amnesty in 1982, however, the guerrillas' private justice system has been accused of killing unsupportive peasants, of waging war against amnestied guerrillas and the nonviolent left, and of shooting down political and military leaders on the right.    The most recent assassination attributed to the left was that of Congressman Pablo Emilio Guarin, a fervant anti-communist, rumored leader of the &quot;MAS&quot; death squads and staunchly opposed to the advance of the guerrilla forces. Earlier this year, a guerrilla group claimed credit for the death of a nurse who belonged to a leftist group opposed to the use of arms. It subsequently &quot;executed&quot; two of her fellow workers for being pallbearers at her funeral. Two peasants who survived a December massacre, which left eight dead in Yacopi, indicated that members of the guerrillas had attacked the group with machetes for joining a &quot;self-defense&quot; group sponsored by local landlords.    When one private group begins to apply its own system of justice, others develop in response. &quot;Executions&quot; are now carried out on the political left, on the right, on vagrants and delinquents, on poor people for being poor and on the wealthy for being rich. They appear in the internecine killing between different mafia groups, and the killing of judges, journalists, police and government leaders opposed to the drug traffic.    Perhaps most dramatic are the killing of leftists, presumably by members of right-wing death squads. New graffiti appear in Bogota declaring: &quot;Be patriotic -- kill a communist&quot; or &quot;Communism and Commission on Human Rights -- they're the same thing.&quot; Despite the assassination of more than 500 citizens -- leaders of the leftist Patriotic Union party (U.P.), civil-rights leaders, journalists from the center to the far left-police have not arrested a single suspect. The country is still outraged by the October assassination of Jaime Pardo Leal, leader of the U.P.    A breakthrough in resolving the mystery of Mr. Pardo Leal's death seemed close when the justice minister, Enrique Low Murtra, stated on television that the killing was directed by the Medellin Cartel, a consortium of cocaine dealers. The same group has been accused of masterminding the killing of judges, police, the leader of a national newspaper and a minister of justice.    To Colombians, desperate for an explanation, Mr. Low Murtra's statements came as a palliative. The government was exonerated, and the minister fingered the private group that has least sympathy in the country. But no evidence was offered in support of the accusation, nor any explanation as to why the mafia would want to kill a leader of the political left. In fact, the minister seems to have acquiesced to the norms of the informal justice system: free-slung and unsubstantiated accusations announced before any formal charges are filed and before any arrests are made. Even if such accusations are reassuring to the nation, they will not help the Justice Department's case, if it ever gets to court. Nor will they help Colombians in their greatest task: to re-establish the rule of law in a very desperate nation.    ---   Ms. Solo is an architect/planner based in Cartagena. </TEXT></DOC>