<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870109-0001 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   ARMS WERE TRADED for hostages, a Senate panel report indicates.    A Senate Intelligence Committee report offers new evidence that the administration sold arms to Iran more to win the release of U.S. hostages in Lebanon than to cultivate Iranian moderates, as Reagan and other top aides have insisted. The report, obtained by NBC News, also says that two months before Attorney General Meese disclosed the diversion of arms-sale profits to Nicaraguan rebels, CIA Director Casey and others in the agency had evidence of the transfers.    Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel in the Iran-Contra affair, is likely to probe longstanding allegations of narcotics smuggling by the Contras, law-enforcement officials and congressional sources said.    The officials said that the Justice Department already has agreed to turn over to Walsh jurisdiction to pursue the drug-related inquiries.    ---   A KGB official's dismissal was reported by the Communist Party newspaper Pravda, highlighting Moscow's continuing anti-corruption campaign. The unusual report said the head of a KGB unit in the Ukraine was fired for the illegal arrest of a Soviet reporter who exposed local abuses of power.    ---   Reagan left Bethesda Naval Hospital after a four-day stay for prostate surgery and a cancer checkup. White House spokesman Larry Speakes said the president will meet with aides in his residential quarters this week and deliver his weekly radio address from there on Saturday.    ---   Rep. Charles Bennett was endorsed by the House Democratic leadership panel to succeed Les Aspin of Wisconsin as chairman of the Armed Services Committee. But even with the nomination of Bennett, a Floridan, Rep. Marvin Leath of Texas remains the favorite to win the bitterly contested position.    ---   Shultz said close links to the West are the key to Africa's future prosperity. In a speech delivered in Dakar, Senegal, the secretary of state praised the continent's moves toward free enterprise from socialism. Shultz is on the first leg of a weeklong trip to six sub-Saharan African countries.    ---   Philip Habib will be sent on a new peace mission to Central America, the State Department said. The initiative follows a meeting this week in Miami attended by special envoy Habib, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams and Rodrigo Madrigal Nieto, Costa Rica's foreign minister.    ---   U.S. envoy Richard Murphy arrived in Israel from Jordan in a Middle East tour aimed at exploring peace prospects in the region. Murphy, who is the State Department's senior Middle East expert, met separately with Israeli Prime Minister Shamir and Foreign Minister Peres. He also is to meet with Defense Minister Rabin.    ---   A senior Shamir aide asserted that &quot;it is possible to expect&quot; a peace summit involving the Israeli prime minister and leaders of Egypt and Jordan, according to Israel's state radio. The statement by the official, Yosef Ben-Aharon, was made during a television interview, the radio said.    ---   The Interior Department wants to slow work on early stages of many dams, irrigation systems and other water projects in an effort to focus spending on those that are close to completion. An official said the plan is likely to be resisted in Congress, which allocates project spending largely on political considerations.    ---   An AIDS test program was launched by U.S. health officials, who want to check anonymous hospital patient blood samples for the virus. Officials at the Centers for Disease Control plan to check blood of patients whose treatment is unrelated to AIDS, in order to gain a better idea of the prevalence of the infection in the general population.    ---   A federal judge in San Francisco ordered the Veterans Administration to pay $115,000 in fines and legal fees for destroying documents and making evasive responses to a suit by veterans who were exposed to radiation. A VA attorney said the Justice Department began investigating possible criminal obstruction of justice by VA supervisors.    ---   Puerto Rico's top law official said that &quot;more than 200 people&quot; are being investigated in connection with the Dupont Plaza Hotel fire, which killed 96 people. Justice Secretary Hector Rivera Cruz said those being questioned include both sides in a labor dispute at the stricken hotel.    ---   The African National Congress marked its 75th anniversary with an appeal to South African blacks to carry the fight against apartheid beyond the borders of their segregated townships. Meanwhile, other antiapartheid groups called on Pretoria to legalize the ANC and to release Nelson Mandela, the group's imprisoned leader.    ---   French officials sought to play down escalated fighting between Libyan forces and French-backed government troops in Chad. In Paris, Defense Minister Andre Giraud described the most recent Libyan air raid in the French-defended sector as probably &quot;an error&quot; and he appeared to rule out any retaliation by France for the attack.    ---   About 300 African students marched through Peking to protest racism in China. The demonstrators, who said they will boycott classes until they are assured of better treatment, marched from the Foreign Language Institute to the Moroccan Embassy, nine miles away. </TEXT></DOC>