<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881003-0173 </DOCNO><HL> International -- Canada's Decision: Trade Ties With U.S. Are at Issue as Ottawa Sets Nov. 21 Election --- Mulroney Sees Pact as Help To Firms and Consumers, But Foes Fear Job Losses --- Blue Jeans andamp; 'Queasy Feeling' </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Freeman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CANDA </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Canadian voters are about to decide the future of the world's largest bilateral trading relationship.    In an announcement Saturday, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney called a national election for Nov. 21 that will determine the fate of the Canada-U.S. free-trade pact signed earlier this year. The election will hinge on sharply different visions of Canada and its place in the world economy.    Mr. Mulroney's Conservatives, with strong backing from the business community, link the country's future prosperity to a strengthening of ties with the U.S., which already buys 75% of all Canadian exports. They say the pact, which will virtually eliminate tariffs between the nations over 10 years starting next Jan. 1, will force Canadian industry to get more competitive, create jobs and cut consumer prices.    The opponents, including the two main opposition parties and a coalition of special-interest groups, argue that free trade will swamp Canada's economy with unwanted U.S. free-market notions and endanger the country's generous health and social programs. Unions warn of job losses. Farmers see Canada's artificially high commodity prices at risk. Environmentalists fear that Canada, to compete, will have to adopt laxer U.S. pollution standards. Above all, the opponents see the pact turning Canada into nothing more than an American colony.    &quot;Many Canadians think it's the cheapest way to get blue jeans and a deep freeze,&quot; says Desmond Morton, a historian at the University of Toronto. &quot;But others get a queasy feeling about it.&quot;    Curiously, the deepest opposition lies in Ontario, Canada's wealthiest, most populous province, which accounts for 40% of its gross domestic product. Much of that prosperity comes from a booming auto industry, which benefits from the 1965 U.S.Canada pact allowing for a form of free trade in cars and trucks.    Free-trade opponents worry that the U.S. may use the new pact to undo Canada's trade surplus and that some U.S.-owned branch plants, which are concentrated in Ontario, may close because parent companies would no longer need them to get around tariff barriers. And Ontario residents, who lack the strong regional identities that make French-speaking Quebec or the Western provinces distinct, see U.S. culture as more of a menace.    The debate over the agreement has turned into an emotional argument over Canada's traditional love-hate relationship with the U.S. For many Canadians, a fair deal with a country 10 times its size just isn't possible.    &quot;When you speak to Canadians' emotions, they're against the deal,&quot; says Michael Adams, the president of Environics Research Group, a polling concern, noting that 38% of Canadians favor the pact, 40% oppose it, and the rest are undecided. &quot;On this issue, Canadians don't particularly trust the Conservative government.&quot;    Although Canadians rejected former Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau's confrontational approach to the U.S., Mr. Adams says Mr. Mulroney, who once headed a U.S.-controlled mining concern, never &quot;sufficiently established his nationalist credentials&quot; before starting the talks.    &quot;It was like sending Jimmy Carter or George McGovern to negotiate with Brezhnev,&quot; Mr. Adams says.    Lloyd Axworthy, trade critic for the opposition Liberal Party, believes that the agreement will lead to further economic and political integration with the U.S. &quot;If we want to disagree with the U.S. on Nicaragua, our ability to do so 10 years from now will be a lot less than it is now.&quot;    &quot;Total nonsense,&quot; responds Thomas d'Aquino, the president of Canada's Business Council on National Issues, which has lobbied for the Canada-U.S. pact since the early 1980s. &quot;Give me one example of a free-trade association where a small country has ended up losing its independence. It hasn't happened.&quot;    Enabling legislation for the trade agreement was signed last week by President Reagan. In Canada, the House of Commons has passed its own legislation. But the agreement stalled in the Senate, Canada's appointed upper house, where the Liberal majority refused to expedite the bill until the prime minister called an election on the issue.    Rejection of the agreement may touch off a new series of trade disputes between the countries, whose two-way trade is estimated at $155 billion annually. It may also set back the prospects for similar pacts with Mexico and Japan and the movement for liberalized trade world-wide.    &quot;It would take years to recover from a rejection,&quot; says Rep. Sam Gibbons, a Florida Democrat and the chairman of the trade subcommittee. &quot;I don't see the U.S. putting itself out&quot; for a new pact.    Congressional sources say U.S. industries and regional interests that have delayed trade complaints against Canada because of the pending agreement would see rejection as a sign to push their views.    &quot;If the Canadians think that the status quo is an option, they're wrong. If they think they can go and negotiate a better deal, they're even more wrong,&quot; warns Peter Morici, an economist at the University of Maine who specializes in U.S.-Canada relations. Mr. Morici also worries that rejection of the agreement would fuel protectionist sentiment in Europe and leave little prospect for a major agreement at the Uruguay Round of trade talks.    Although Mr. Mulroney's Conservatives have recently surged in opinion polls after trailing the Liberals for 2 1/2 years, the electorate remains volatile. A survey published last week shows that 40% of the decided voters favor the Conservatives, compared with 31% for the left-leaning New Democratic Party, which also opposes free trade, and only 26% for the Liberals.    The Liberals' big drop in recent polls is linked more to the weak image of its leader, John Turner, than to a surge in support for free trade. Mr. Mulroney apparently won't make free trade the only issue in his campaign but will emphasize Canada's healthy economy, which has enjoyed the fastest average growth of the seven largest industrial economies over the past five years.    Because of the three-way split, Mr. Mulroney could win a majority of Commons seats with less than 50% of the popular vote, but at his current level of support, he isn't assured of a majority. If he does win a majority, it will be a feat that eluded even Mr. Trudeau in the 15 years he dominated Canadian politics. No Canadian prime minister has achieved consecutive majority governments since 1953.    Leading Ontario's fight against the deal is its popular Liberal premier, David Peterson, the most powerful politician outside Ottawa but one of only two provincial premiers opposing the agreement; the other is Joseph Ghiz of tiny Prince Edward Island, and eight support Mr. Mulroney. Mr. Peterson favors liberalized trade but not the current broad pact.    &quot;I think we made a crummy deal,&quot; Mr. Peterson says. &quot;We're living in an 80% to 90% free-trade atmosphere now as barriers have come down. For the extra 10% to 20%, we gave away advantages that we had as Canadians.    &quot;I can't imagine Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher or anybody else giving away the right to use energy as a domestic policy lever,&quot; he says, citing a provision prohibiting Canada from levying an export tax on energy sold to the U.S. and guaranteeing the U.S. continued proportional access to Canadian energy in an emergency. He also accuses Ottawa of abandoning the right to screen all but the largest foreign takeovers and of failing to get immunity from U.S. trade law.    And he worries about the agreement's effects on industries such as food processing. &quot;If you're making kiwi jelly, all you have to do is leave the machine on for 10 more minutes in Detroit, and you've got the whole Canadian market,&quot; he says.    But Milton Harris, a steel executive who quit the Liberal party because of its trade stand, sees the opposition as simply fearful. &quot;We've always believed that we were one step away from annexation and we couldn't stand up to the Americans in a fair fight,&quot; he says. He believes that his own experience with a steel bar plant in Burlington, Ontario, and a similar facility near Detroit proves just the opposite: &quot;We operate much more efficiently in the Canadian plant. We find the work ethic to be better here.&quot;    Mr. Harris says the free-trade agreement gives Canadian steel producers more secure access to the huge U.S. market and reduces the threat of U.S. quotas, which he said almost struck his company four years ago. Within 400 miles of Hamilton, Ontario, the center of Canada's steel industry, &quot;there are fewer than 10 million Canadians but 80 million Americans,&quot; he notes.    Free trade has long been a major issue in Canadian politics, with voters always rejecting the concept. In 1911, the last time it was an election issue, opponents of a reciprocity agreement with the U.S. defeated the government with a cry of &quot;No Truck or Trade with the Yankees.&quot;    Nevertheless, Canada's truck and trade with the U.S. has surged, especially since the end of World War II, when only 38% of Canada's exports went to the U.S., compared with today's 75%. U.S. influence on Canada has grown as well. Canadians lunch on McDonald's hamburgers, tune in to U.S. television stations and winter in Florida. Yet differences remain.    &quot;This is a more peaceable country. We're less competitive. It's a slower pace,&quot; says Pierre Berton, a Toronto author and broadcaster who fiercely opposes free trade. And, he adds, &quot;We're a subsidy country.&quot; He considers government aid to the arts and some industries essential because of Canada's thin line of population across a huge continent.    &quot;If we become somewhat Americanized, so what?&quot; counters Link Byfield, who publishes Western Report, a weekly newsmagazine based in Alberta, where support for free trade is strongest. &quot;If culture is simply what sort of shows we watch on TV, then we have already become very Americanized. But the rest of the world has also become very Americanized.&quot;    The cultural argument against free trade is an English Canadian phenomenon. In French-speaking Quebec, the provincial government has embraced the agreement, and nobody talks about any threat to the province's identity.    &quot;We aren't one bit afraid of assimilation by the U.S. economy and culture,&quot; says Pierre MacDonald, Quebec's minister of industry and commerce. &quot;The French language definitely makes us different.&quot;    Opponents of the deal say Canada should pursue multilateral talks through the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, through increased trade with Europe and Japan or through separate freetrade agreements with the U.S. in specific sectors, such as steel.    But John Crosbie, Canada's trade minister, sees no prospect of achieving as much through the GATT because of the divergent interests of its 95 member nations. He also says sectoral agreements with the U.S. were tried and failed because each country only wanted free trade in areas where it saw an advantage.    Business leaders aren't optimistic about the alternatives. &quot;People who say we're going to rush off and expand our trade with Europe haven't been over there recently,&quot; says William Stinson, the president of Canadian Pacific Ltd., the big railway and natural-resources concern. &quot;That community is getting more powerful and is looking inward.&quot;    And Quebec's Mr. MacDonald worries about the U.S. reaction if the agreement is rejected. &quot;On Jan. 1, there is going to be a lineup in Washington to take compensating duty actions against us charging unfair practices,&quot; he says. Sen. Max Baucus of Montana, a lukewarm supporter of the pact, agrees Canada will be in for a rough ride in Congress if it seeks renegotiation of the agreement. Sen. Baucus also fears that rejection of the agreement would weaken the nascent North American trading bloc as it faces a more unified European Community in 1992, when most internal trade barriers are to fall.    Talk of U.S. retaliation doesn't worry opponents of the agreement. Bob White, leader of the Canadian Auto Workers Union, comments: &quot;If this agreement gets scrapped through a democratic decision of the Canadian people, I'm sure the American government isn't going to throw a wall around the U.S. because it affects a lot of jobs in their country, too.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>