<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880815-0162 </DOCNO><HL> Care Crisis: In a State Aid Agency, Overwhelmed Staffers Fight a Losing Battle --- Ill-Trained and Underpaid, Florida's HRS Employees Find Miracles Are Elusive --- Losing Track of a Dying Boy </HL><AUTHOR> Martha Brannigan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Police unearthed little Lazaro Tew from a shallow grave in a wooded patch. His head was battered and his throat stabbed. He was wrapped in plastic trash bags, his hands and feet bound behind him with shoelaces.    Lazaro's tragic death had a horrifying twist: The 20-month-old boy was under the &quot;protection&quot; of the state of Florida. He was one of 10 children over the past year who died of child abuse after becoming the subject of a state investigation.    Florida's Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services took Lazaro when he was an infant, declaring his parents unfit. The HRS shunted him to his aunt, Miriam Gonzalez.    Ms. Gonzalez, a welfare mother overburdened with a new second child of her own, gave Lazaro to her neighbor Ana Maria Mateo. Police say Ms. Mateo confessed that on Easter morning, she beat the baby because of his crying, and he died. Ms. Mateo later pleaded innocent to a charge of first-degree murder and is awaiting trial. (Her lawyer won't comment on the reported confession.)    In the months before the killing, Fred Pirez, an agency caseworker, visited Ms. Gonzalez periodically to check on Lazaro. He claims he doesn't recall wondering why Lazaro wasn't at home, but concedes, &quot;We have too many cases to keep a close watch. You have to be a Superman to do this job.&quot;    The staggering overburdening of caseworkers like Mr. Pirez is at the heart of the nation's crisis in state social services. Nowhere is their plight more painfully evident than in Florida. The HRS is the nation's largest state-administered agency.    It is also one of the most troubled. The population, the fastest-growing of any large state, is straining the agency's $4.73 billion budget to the breaking point. State auditors deplore the agency's sloppy bookkeeping. The agency's own top administrator, Gregory Coler, calls it &quot;a Mack truck with a shiny paint job and a Volkswagen engine.&quot;    Amid this disarray, ill-trained and badly underpaid workers must make life and death decisions based on superficial inquiries. Many are quickly demoralized by the lack of resources and impossible demands. The child-abuse investigators are under particular duress: They rescue children from horrible homes only to find there are no foster parents to take them. Worker turnover is so high the agency rushes into disastrous hiring mistakes. This year a former investigator was convicted of having molested two young girls he was dispatched to interview about a complaint that they were abused.    Too often, caseworkers' feeble efforts to intervene in child-abuse cases just make matters worse. &quot;Children neglected, abused and dysfunctional within their families are further abused and neglected by the same government that should heal and protect them,&quot; wrote William E. Gladstone, a Florida juvenile-court judge, in a recent report.    The HRS's child-abuse investigators start work at $18,629 a year. For that, they get to drive their own cars into blighted ghettos at night, unarmed and unescorted, and knock on doors to ask people if they are beating and mistreating their children.    &quot;I've been threatened, bitten, spit at, and chased with a fire extinguisher,&quot; says one 29-year-old worker. &quot;My car was shot at twice.&quot; When she was eight months' pregnant, she got a call telling her that a child whom she had returned to his parents' custody was killed.    Last year, a worker was sent to investigate an anonymous complaint that Anthony Rodriguez, an infant, was living on a diet of fruit juices. The investigator couldn't find the child's address, which was misstated in a complaint report. Four months later, the HRS closed the case as &quot;unable to locate.&quot;    In April, Anthony's parents took the 23-month-old child to a Miami hospital. He weighed 10 pounds -- less than a third of normal weight -- and was near death. The parents, Juan and Venerina Rodriguez, went on to plead innocent to felony charges of aggravated child abuse in Dade Circuit Court. Authorities say the boy's condition has been improving.    Many people who know the HRS shrug at the 27% annual turnover rate of its abuse workers. More remarkable, they say, is that people stay at all. In 1985, a particularly bad year, 78% of the abuse workers in Fort Lauderdale and 61% of those in Miami quit.    Under these circumstances, the agency can hardly expect to attract the best and brightest. Sometimes it gets the worst. Last summer, Antonio Mata, a child-abuse investigator, was charged with molesting two young Miami girls whom he had been dispatched to interview about child-abuse allegations. An attorney for the girls, who are suing the HRS, says the agency previously failed to act on similar complaints against the investigator.    Mr. Mata, who was at first declared mentally incompetent to stand trial, later pleaded guilty and was sentenced to a year in jail and 12 years' probation. The agency denies that it was negligent in hiring or keeping Mr. Mata.    Still, few people at the agency defend the quality of its day-to-day work.    &quot;It's a nightmare,&quot; Peter Digre, HRS deputy secretary for operations, lamented earlier this year, as the agency fought for additional workers. &quot;The reality is they are inundated, and they just do a superficial job. Not because they are bad people or aren't diligent. It's just an impossible job.&quot;    There are some hopeful signs for the agency. It won a 14% budget increase for the year that began July 1. The abuse investigators received $11.8 million to train their staff and hire and equip workers. Right now, investigators are saddled with as many as 30 new cases a month. The agency says the new money will help bring that number down to about 12. The agency also hopes a new computer will manage cases better and keep them from getting lost in the bureaucracy, a longtime problem.    George Clarke was one who got lost. Someone called HRS last year to complain that 5-year-old George was starving to death in Tampa. Louis Hlava, an investigator, drove by the Clarke home several times over the next two weeks, but found no one there. On June 5, 1987, the boy died of starvation in a Tampa hospital. His parents were sentenced to life in prison.    When Mr. Hlava was promptly fired over the case, he called himself a scapegoat. In his appeal, he argued that an enormous caseload made it impossible to do a better job. &quot;It was swamped,&quot; Mr. Hlava testified. He said he handled 31 cases and various court matters the month he got the complaint about George. &quot;It seemed like every day there was a crisis to do.&quot;    The agency eventually agreed to a settlement that gave Mr. Hlava back pay.    The child-abuse investigators aren't the only people in the HRS system struggling to perform miracles for pennies. Foster parents licensed by the agency receive as little as $8.53 a day to care for a child -- less than some pet kennels charge. A few years ago Anita Luster, a retarded woman, became pregnant while living at an agency-contracted group home. No one noticed her condition in time to consider an abortion. She gave birth to a healthy baby, but was unable to identify the father, according to a negligence suit by Ms. Luster's mother that HRS settled out of court in April.    This spring, with news photographers in tow, Gov. Bob Martinez and several agency workers made a surprise visit to Randamp;R Guest House, an HRS-licensed boarding home, to expose the squalid conditions for its elderly residents. The owner later agreed to close the home.    Agency inspectors, dating back to 1980, had regularly reported filth, neglect and improper supervision of residents at Randamp;R. The agency says Randamp;R's lawyers had derailed past efforts to shut down the home.    Inside a cramped Miami juvenile-court room, Judge William Gladstone, a balding and bespectacled man with his brow twisted in worry, oversees the future of a crowd of children. A pretty little girl with bushy braids shifts uneasily in her chair as he pores over her manila file. She announces matter-of-factly that she wants to leave her shelter and go home to her mother. The judge learns that the shelter is crowded with 11 children, though it is licensed for seven.    &quot;This is a goddamned thing they ought to raise hell about,&quot; the judge thunders to the courtroom. &quot;Want to learn about child abuse? Find out what the state of Florida does with kids in shelter care.&quot; Despite the judge's anguished tirade, he returns the child to the overcrowded home, to await another hearing.    Near Fort Lauderdale, children taken from troubled homes have sometimes lingered 16 hours a day in a sterile HRS office building awaiting foster homes. The children, some of them emotionally disturbed, must sometimes spend the night at a youth detention center, albeit separate from the young criminals. Sometimes they return to the agency office building for another day.    What resources the HRS has aren't always managed well. The department has given away millions of dollars from federal grants to private concerns without requiring audits that ensure the money was properly used, according to the Florida Auditor General's reports.    Last year the HRS was the only Florida department that fell seriously short of standards for overseeing federal grant money. &quot;They have a history of inadequately monitoring their funds, more than our other agencies,&quot; says Samuel McCall, Florida's deputy auditor general. &quot;The system of internal controls is that there is not a system, and that's bad. It's a major problem.&quot;    In March, Luisa Maurer, the agency's top administrator in Miami, was fired after HRS learned that her office had diverted $37,000 in federal food-stamp money last November to decorate a shelter for abused children. The misappropriation went undetected by the HRS until the U.S. Department of Agriculture alerted the agency. The HRS and state prosecutors are also looking into various contracts Mrs. Maurer's office awarded outside the required bidding procedures. Mrs. Maurer denies any wrongdoing.    James Duvall, a senior child-abuse investigator, wheels his car into the parking lot of a ramshackle south Dade housing project, strewn with trash and broken beer bottles. He eases past a group of idle youths who wave him down, mistaking him for a prospective drug customer.    Crack houses infest the project, where broken windows are boarded with plywood. It is also the scene of many abuse and neglect complaints. Mr. Duvall keeps his files in a cardboard box in his car, a makeshift office. &quot;I don't have my own desk at work,&quot; he explains.    Mr. Duvall, who is 41, works about 60 hours a week and carts his worries home. &quot;There are the nagging questions. Did I read that one right?&quot; he agonizes. After a year and a half he is one of the old-timers on staff, with a $20,600 salary. &quot;People don't stay. They're overworked. They get stressed out,&quot; he says. &quot;Even when we do remove a child from a home, often there is nowhere to put them.&quot;    Not long ago, he too came close to quitting. &quot;It's constant crisis management,&quot; he sighs. &quot;It's like they're bleeding from the carotid artery, and we're having to fix it with a Band-Aid.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>