<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871231-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Fickle Forecasters:How Three Analysts,After Crash, RevisedEconomic Predictions---Their Views Differed Greatly,But All Changed ThemWithout Computers' Aid---Sell the Farm, One Advised---By David WesselStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   About 3:30 p.m. on Black Monday, as panic selling of stocks swept across the country, Joel Popkin called his broker and began buying.    The Washington consultant is one of the few economists who think that the stock-market crash will lead to a stronger U.S. economy in 1988 than previously forecast. &quot;I try to listen to my own advice,&quot; he says.    Larry J. Kimbell of the University of California at Los Angeles also takes his own advice. The crash caused him to junk an optimistic forecast and instead predict a quick, sharp recession next year. He also told his mother to sell the farm -- literally. &quot;I just wanted to sit on lots and lots of cash,&quot; he explains.    Ah, economists. Reputable, well-schooled economists examine the same event, yet often reach strikingly different conclusions. It is a reminder that economic forecasting, particularly at moments of great turbulence, often amounts to little more than educated guessing, despite the aura of precision created by large, computerized models of the economy.    &quot;Weather forecasters are finding the more complex the computer system, the greater the accuracy,&quot; says F. Gerard Adams, a University of Pennsylvania economist. &quot;That surely isn't true in economics. We haven't significantly been able to increase our accuracy even though the models are bigger and more complex.&quot;    At times such as these, when the economy is sending conflicting signals and the financial markets are showing strain, many corporate executives look to economists for clues about business prospects.    Economic forecasts these days are a mix of computerized number crunching and common sense. No matter how sophisticated the computer model, an economist's opinions significantly affect his forecast. &quot;Forecasts vary greatly with respect to the relative roles of model and judgment, but . . . there is no way to avoid judgment,&quot; says Victor Zarnowitz, a University of Chicago economist who monitors the forecasting game.    Nicholas S. Perna, the chief economist at Connecticut National Bank in Hartford, says he subscribes to three forecasting services and closely follows press accounts of forecasts by others. He also makes his own forecast. &quot;What do you do? You've got 400 economists and 800 forecasts,&quot; he says. &quot;Economists aren't very good at telling when recessions are going to start. But the odds are high enough to do some contingency planning for 1988.&quot; Thus, in advising Connecticut National's executives and clients, Mr. Perna says, &quot;I tell people listening to me: 'Hey, watch your expenses a little bit.'&quot;    A look at the post-crash forecasts of three reputable economists -- Mr. Popkin, Mr. Kimbell and Donald Ratajczak of Georgia State University -- illustrates how the interplay of computers and judgment shapes their projections. They all share a mainstream Keynesian view that the economy is driven primarily by consumer demand and business spending.    Within that common framework, though, the three have differing views that are expressed both in mathematical equations that reflect their understanding of the economy and in their post-crash predictions. Computer models of the economy are &quot;frozen history,&quot; Mr. Popkin says. Hundreds of equations based on economic statistics from the past, combined with statistics from the present, are used as a guide to the future.    The Kimbell and Ratajczak models, for instance, assume that consumers spend less when they are less wealthy. When stock prices fall, the argument goes, consumers feel poorer, buy fewer cars and take fewer vacations. Mr. Popkin's model, in contrast, ignores stock prices because he considers them irrelevant to consumer spending. &quot;Not that many consumers own stocks,&quot; he explains. &quot;They may own them in their pension plans, but they can't touch them anyway.&quot;    All three economists revised their 1988 forecasts immediately after the crash without consulting their computers. Each then fiddled with his computer calculations so that the computer generated a prediction in line with his judgment.    This was the reverse of forecasters' normal procedure; Mr. Zarnowitz says they generally turn to their computers first and then add a dash of judgment. But an event as dramatic as the market crash may be an exception. &quot;The models don't have the capability to deal with unusual events,&quot; Mr. Zarnowitz explains. Thus, forecasters must make a series of adjustments based on judgment alone.    So, amid the turmoil, what did the three economists conclude?    Mr. Popkin, the optimist, believes that the crash will lead the Federal Reserve to push interest rates lower than he had been anticipating, stimulating the economy. He now expects gross national product, the value of all goods and services produced, to grow 2.75% after inflation next year; his pre-crash forecast was 2.25% growth.    Mr. Kimbell, the pessimist, argues that the stock-market crash cut substantially into the wealth of American households and spooked businessmen. He expects that to translate into sharply lower spending by both consumers and companies, resulting in a 1.3% decline in real GNP next year. Before the crash, he was forecasting robust 3.5% growth.    And at Georgia State, Mr. Ratajczak trimmed his 1988 growth forecast to 1.7% from 2.7%, a view close to the consensus of recent forecasts by academic and corporate economists. The crash will pinch consumers, gradually slowing the economy to stagnation around midyear, he believes.    The 55-year-old Mr. Popkin made his upbeat prediction in a mailing to clients without consulting the 150 equations in an economic model he maintains on a mainframe computer in Massachusetts. &quot;I never rush to run the model,&quot; he says. &quot;I've got to think first.&quot; He adds:    &quot;Judgment plays a much more important function in my forecast than it did 10 or 15 years ago. Econometric models work if history repeats itself. But we know that history doesn't do that.&quot;    A former Labor Department economist who specialized in the arcane craft of designing price indexes, Mr. Popkin eight years ago opened an economic consulting firm that bears his name. The eight-person firm specializes in ways to measure and predict inflation and issues a monthly one-page newsletter. Mr. Popkin won't disclose what he charges clients or identify them.    Mr. Popkin finally got around to running the computer model in mid-November. But first, he made one big change: He told the computer to assume that the Fed will allow the money supply to grow faster than his pre-crash assumption. Based on that change, the computer produced the same 2.75% growth forecast for 1988 that he had been making. &quot;You get to know your model,&quot; he remarks.    Even before Black Monday, the 48-year-old Mr. Kimbell, who has been teaching at UCLA for 14 years, was uneasy about his optimistic forecast. In the 72-page quarterly publication sent to his subscribers in September, Mr. Kimbell admitted being baffled by rising interest rates.    &quot;It doesn't bother me to be wrong,&quot; he says. &quot;You can't be a forecaster if you can't take the heat. But it's very disturbing if you can't rationalize what's going on.&quot;    On Friday, Oct. 16, Mr. Kimbell was monitoring the stock market from his office, where he has a personal computer equipped to track stock prices. The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 108 points that day, a record that was soon broken. &quot;I got very terrified,&quot; Mr. Kimbell recalls. The next day, he told his mother to sell a 320-acre cotton farm in Deaf Smith County, Texas, that his late father had bought as an investment 30 years ago. She sold it within days. On Monday, Oct. 19, Mr. Kimbell began monitoring the market from home at 6:30 a.m. PDT and grew increasingly nervous.    His pessimism doesn't have much to do with number-crunching. &quot;It's just pure gut terror,&quot; he says. &quot;Something troubling is going on. There's more uneasiness than I've ever seen in my life.&quot;    To gauge just how quickly the economy could react to a single event, Mr. Kimbell looked back to 1980 when President Carter went on television and urged Americans to borrow less. The reaction then was immediate. Many consumers stopped using their credit cards. Consumer spending fell abruptly; so did GNP. Now, Mr. Kimbell figured, the stock-market crash might produce a similar reaction.    Mr. Kimbell uses a computer model developed by Data Resources Inc., a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc. He then plugs into his personal computer his own estimates for interest rates, auto sales and the like to produce a forecast that often is quite different than DRI's. (After the crash, DRI itself dropped its 1988 forecast to a 1.8% gain from 2.6%.) &quot;We're explicitly prohibited from blaming them {DRI} if we're wrong,&quot; he notes.    Mr. Kimbell's UCLA Business Forecasting Project sells its service to about 20 big companies for an annual fee of approximately $5,000, conducts quarterly conferences on the national and California economies, and issues a written forecast each quarter.    Mr. Kimbell isn't backing away from his gloomy 1988 predictions despite signs that the economy is continuing to grow after the crash. Christmas retail sales were weak, he says. The U.S. trade deficit persists. &quot;Something about this episode is much much more difficult than people are willing to admit,&quot; he says. &quot;I am not nearly as optimistic as the forecast.&quot;    Donald Ratajczak began making predictions even before the stock market closed on Black Monday. He had to. He spent most of the day fielding phone calls from reporters and from Georgia companies that support his forecasting center with $3,500 annual subscriptions. &quot;I sympathize with the discount brokers,&quot; he says, recalling complaints that they often couldn't be reached that day. &quot;We didn't service all our clients.&quot;    The 45-year-old Mr. Ratajczak did a quick calculation and told callers that he was reducing his 1988 growth forecast to 1.7% from 2.7%. He is sticking with that forecast even though the 300 equations in his econometric model initially predicted a far sharper downturn.    Mr. Ratajczak says he wants his computer program to generate numbers with which he feels comfortable. That took some doing this time. More than other models, Mr. Ratajczak's was very sensitive to stock prices. When stock prices rose, it expected businesses to invest more; when prices fell, it expected them to invest less. When the stock market crashed, Mr. Ratajczak's computer predicted economic disaster.    But he didn't think that likely. So he changed the model, removing the equations that tie business investment to stock prices and substituting another set that links investment to consumer spending. That softened the predicted effect of the crash on corporate-spending plans.    &quot;A model is a tool,&quot; Mr. Ratajczak says. &quot;It's not the truth.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>