<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880223-0095 </DOCNO><HL> Speeding Up: Manufacturers Strive To Slice Time Needed To Develop Products --- They Cut Bureaucratic Cycles And Use Suppliers More To Compete With Japan --- Honeywell Inc.'s 'Tiger Team' </HL><AUTHOR> John Bussey and Douglas R. Sease (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> AUT </IN><TEXT>   A few years ago, Xerox Corp. executives were stunned to learn that Japanese competitors were developing new copier models twice as fast as Xerox and at half the cost. Its market share eroding, Xerox faced a painful choice: either slash its traditional four- to five-year product development cycle or be overtaken by more nimble competitors.    Today, after a sweeping reorganization and millions of dollars of investment, Xerox can produce a new copier in two years. But that still isn't as fast as some of its Japanese competitors, who have also quickened their pace. &quot;We'll be 30% more efficient by 1990,&quot; promises Wayland Hicks, Xerox executive vice president.    Quality in U.S. industry may be up and costs down, but American companies like Xerox are still getting sideswiped by foreign competitors who get new and improved products to market faster. The edge those competitors get from shorter development cycles is dramatic: Not only can they charge a premium price for their exclusive products but also they can incorporate more up-to-date technology in their goods and respond faster to emerging market niches and changes in taste.    &quot;It's the next battlefield,&quot; says Vladimir Pucik, a University of Michigan business professor who has studied product cycles in the auto industry. &quot;The game the Japanese {auto makers} are going to play is to leave the Americans {building} well-engineered but boring and obsolete cars.&quot;    Now, U.S. manufacturers of all stripes are scrambling to shorten their development cycles and be the first to market at home and abroad. To do that, they are attempting to break out of old, stratified ways of developing new products -- methods that, up to now, have left them uncompetitive. The Big Three auto makers, for instance, all recently formed task forces to cut ponderously bureaucratic development cycles that have swollen to nearly five years. The Japanese, by comparison, can design and build a new car in a little over 3 1/2 years.    Some of the &quot;innovations&quot; U.S. industry is using to close the gap are really just common sense by any other name. A couple of years ago, for example, General Motors Corp. management was puzzled by a huge testing backlog at its Milford, Mich., proving grounds. The backlog was delaying entire car projects, so GM called in consultants. They found that drivers were completing a full test cycle to check just a handful of parts. Why not double the number of parts tested on each run? the consultants asked. That done, the backlog quickly shrank.    &quot;We're not talking about rocket science here,&quot; acknowledges James Rucker, who heads a GM group searching for ways to trim lead-time. &quot;We're talking about business discipline.&quot;    Similarly, Allen-Bradley Co., a unit of Rockwell International Corp., recently abandoned its old, &quot;sequential&quot; method of developing new industrial controls. Under that approach, the marketing department handed off an idea to designers, who drew up concepts they then passed on to product engineers. The engineers, working in virtual isolation like everyone else, built a batch of expensive prototypes and then handed one off to the manufacturing department, which had to find a way to build the new product.    Now, all of Allen-Bradley's departments work together to find -- from the start -- a design that fits both the customer's demands and the company's manufacturing capability. Results have been striking: Allen-Bradley recently developed a new electrical contactor in just two years. It would have taken six years under the old system.    It is often desperation, not enlightened planning, that drives U.S. industry to shorten development cycles. Until recently, Honeywell Inc. required four years to design and build a new thermostat. Then a customer, worried about the delay, threatened to take its request for a new climate-control device to a competitor. In response, Honeywell set up a special &quot;tiger team&quot; of marketing, design and engineering employees and gave it carte blanche.    &quot;We told them to break all the rules but get it done in 12 months,&quot; says John Bailey, a Honeywell vice president and general manager. The team did.    Such innovations can turn old-line companies upside down. The Big Three auto makers, for example, have all adopted &quot;parallel engineering&quot; programs similar to Allen-Bradley's, scrapping their traditional sequential approach. &quot;It's a whole change in philosophy,&quot; says Donald Mullaney, the manager of development of medium and large four-wheel-drive cars at Ford Motor Co. &quot;We've got to teach our engineers to get involved upstream, to learn to be predictive.&quot;    Indeed, the auto companies provide a good case study of how U.S. industry is tackling the development-cycle problem. For years, the car companies decreed public taste, often cranking out one million cars of a single design in a year. Management regularly changed designs at the last minute -- incurring huge retooling costs -- and let stylists run free.    In one moment of excess, the Chrysler Corp. design shop ordered up a fin for the middle of the trunk lid on an early 1960s Plymouth. &quot;It was a magnificent fin, a fin like this,&quot; recalls Stephan Sharf, former head of manufacturing, running his hand high into the air. There was just one problem: No stamping machine could press it, so factory workers would have had to weld the fin by hand onto each car. At the last minute, recalls Mr. Sharf, Chrysler scrapped the idea.    Such reverses were common. Until 1981, in fact, Chrysler's manufacturing group wasn't even represented on its product-design committee. That might explain why, in the past, the company regularly raised program budgets by 25% to 40% to cover expected midstream changes.    By contrast, Japanese auto makers have long designed with an eye toward production. At Honda, for example, stylists generally don't craft door panels that require more than four operations by a stamping press to shape them. (In the U.S., intricate designs often require six, seven or eight operations.) And at Honda, the concept of all departments working together is old hat. The company even has a nickname for the resulting discussions -- &quot;wai-gaya,&quot; loosely translated as &quot;hubbub.&quot;    The benefits of this approach: Up to now, Japanese auto makers have needed only half to two-thirds the number of engineering hours that U.S. companies require for comparable car projects, estimates Kim Clark, a professor of business administration at Harvard University. Consumers in the U.S. have seen the difference in Japanese firsts -- for instance, 16-valve engines offered as standard equipment.    Now, rapid market segmentation is forcing auto companies to design more cars than ever, making speedy development cycles increasingly critical. Ford, Chrysler and GM are responding with strategies of their own, and all essentially incorporate the same truth: A lot of headaches can be prevented by planning ahead, sticking to decisions and working as a team.    The push for shorter cycles is evident in each phase of the development process. In design and engineering shops, engineers are building early &quot;math models&quot; of vehicles on computer-aided design systems. This reduces the need for laboriously crafted clay mockups and the construction and testing of dozens of prototypes. Now, says Donald Atwood, GM vice chairman, you, &quot;in effect, only build a clay model to validate your aesthetics.&quot;    These computer designs -- which contain detailed specifications -- also help the factory get a head start on tooling production equipment. (Previously, it had to wait for design engineers to take measurements from clay mockups and pass those specifications on to manufacturing.) Simultaneous, or overlapping, engineering like this, for example, recently saved Chrysler two weeks in the tooling stage of a new midsized car program, according to John D. Withrow, executive vice president of product development.    Americanized &quot;wai-gaya&quot; also is helping save time on the factory floor. A few years ago, for example, Chrysler suppliers ran into problems making the complex three-tone bumpers the auto maker wanted on its cars. That quickly backed up manufacturing, so Chrysler management handed down an edict: no more car designs with bumpers in more than two tones. To avoid such problems in the future, the company is increasingly moving manufacturing personnel into offices with the engineers designing the product, instead of having the two groups work in isolation.    At the same time, the auto makers are awarding more contracts to trusted suppliers without a lengthy bidding process. These suppliers, in turn, are doing more design work for the Big Three, speeding information over common computer systems rather than waiting for dog-earred blueprints to arrive in the mail.    In another effort to streamline production, Ford has halved the number of suppliers it uses in North America, keeping only the ones who don't pose quality problems. It, like other auto makers, is also relying more on suppliers to do time-consuming assembly work. A Dana Corp. division, for example, now delivers &quot;subassemblies&quot; of an entire power system -- including axles, drive shafts and transfer cases -- for Ford's Tempo and Topaz four-wheel drive models. Before, it just sent axles.    The auto makers claim such changes have pushed development cycles below five years, and some say that segments of the cycle are now comparable to Japanese efforts. GM's Chevrolet-Pontiac-Canada group, for example, has squeezed 14 weeks out of its cycle by getting the finance and engineering departments to review designs at the same time, instead of sequentially, says Gary Dickinson, the director of engineering. He contends efforts like this already have helped cut engineering costs on an average project 35% since 1986.    Faster isn't always better, of course. GM got its Fiero to market ahead of other low-cost, two-seat sporty cars, but with an engine prone to bursting into flames. And the new gospel isn't yet fully reflected in products now on the road. At Chrysler, Richard Dauch, the head of manufacturing, taps a pointer impatiently against a photo of one of the company's 1988 luxury cars on his office wall. It takes 10 separate stamping operations to form the car's intricate fender, which complicates the manufacturing part of the development cycle. &quot;That design is beautiful, but it's inefficient,&quot; Mr. Dauch says. &quot;We can't live with that in the future.&quot;    Clearly, the pressure is on the auto industry in general to fix this sort of problem quickly -- and find other ways to catch up with the Japanese. Donald Smith, an auto-industry expert at the University of Michigan, says the world's inefficient car companies will have to cut current development-cycle time by a further 25% to 33% and development costs by 50% to keep pace with the top auto makers five years from now.    &quot;Whenever the last bell rings and we've fought the last round,&quot; he says, &quot;this is going to determine who won and who lost.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>