<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880823-0032 </DOCNO><HL> Jackson, Miss., Reels From a Kidnapping Of a Society Matron --- Note to Her Wealthy Spouse Is Linked to His Business; A Month Without Word </HL><AUTHOR> Timothy K. Smith (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> PIX </CO><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> JACKSON, Miss.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At age 71, Robert M. Hearin sometimes gets up in the middle of a steaming Mississippi night to drive to his office and start working at 4 a.m., just for the love of doing deals.    Mr. Hearin has done thousands of deals in his lifetime; they are his livelihood and his recreation, and they have made him staggeringly rich. Worth some $200 million, he is probably the richest man in Mississippi, possibly the richest who has ever lived here.    But business can be a minefield, and somewhere in the course of his career, Mr. Hearin apparently took a step with terrible consequences. Late last month, the reclusive tycoon became caught up in a mystery that blew apart his household and what should have been his comfortable old age: his 72-year-old wife, Annie Laurie, was kidnapped.    A note was found demanding that money be paid to 12 people associated with School Pictures Inc., an obscure outpost of Mr. Hearin's empire. The note didn't say how much to pay or how to make the payments, and authorities say the kidnapper hasn't made contact since. The Hearin family has gathered for a vigil that is something worse than a funeral, because they cannot even mourn.    The shock reverberates particularly strongly in Jackson, a patrician, deep-South city of 216,000, where the rich enjoy a degree of security and isolation even beyond what is customary for America's business gentry. &quot;There is no middle class here,&quot; explains a local bartender who, like many Jacksonians interviewed, speaks only on the condition of anonymity. &quot;For so long, the status quo has been maintained as more of a colonial society than anything else,&quot; adds a longtime resident. &quot;The lords of the land have had an uncanny degree of insularity.&quot;    And Mr. Hearin keeps a very low profile. In partnership with New Jersey oil millionaire Leon Hess he controls Mississippi's largest gas-distribution company, its second-largest bank and its second-largest insurance company, but many people in the state have never heard of him. He called the first press conference of his life 11 days after the kidnapping, when he stood before television cameras to ask for his wife's safe return (he has not spoken with the press).    Annie Laurie Hearin disappeared on Tuesday, July 26, some time between 3 p.m., when the family maid left for the day, and 4:30 p.m., when Mr. Hearin came home. She was wearing a light-colored skirt and a beige, long-sleeved blouse. Her bridge club had met at her house earlier in the day for a game of cards and a lunch of eggplant pie, marinated squash and blueberry ice-cream cake.    About sundown, his wife having neither come home nor called, Mr. Hearin summoned his son-in-law, and together they searched the house and the neatly groomed grounds. At 9:49 p.m. they called the police. It was then that drops of blood were found on the front door, and, folded up nearby, the ransom note.    The note is either very crude or very sophisticated. Typed on an old manual typewriter, it contains misspelled words and names. It reads:   R bert Herrin   Put these people back in the shape they was in before they got mixed up with School Pictures. Pay them whatever damages they want and tell them all this so they can no what you are doing but don't tell them why you are doing it. Do this before ten days pass. Don't call police.    The note then lists 12 names and says, at the end: If any is dead, pay his children.    Federal Bureau of Investigation psychologists have used the note to develop a profile of the kidnapper, but the bureau won't say whether they think the errors are deliberate.    School Pictures develops and prints photographs of students, taken around the country by photographers who are franchisees of the company. Mr. Hearin, the company's chairman and largest shareholder, is credited with turning the company around by streamlining it after a disastrous diversification program in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In April, the Jackson-based company agreed to be acquired by Jostens Inc. of Minneapolis, which makes class rings, yearbooks and other school items, for about $25 million. The transaction hasn't yet been completed.    School Pictures officials didn't return repeated phone calls, and Jackson police and FBI agents declined to describe the relationships between the company and the people named in the note. But court records indicate that at least three of them are franchisees or ex-franchisees that the company has sued.    Besides the kidnapper's identity, the main mystery in the case is his failure to make a specific demand. &quot;This is unique, because we had a note at the crime scene that demanded action but no money, and was not threatening,&quot; says Wayne Taylor, Special Agent in Charge of the FBI office in Jackson. &quot;Usually when you have something like this you have a reasonably quick turnaround, a demand for action.&quot;    The silence is particularly agonizing because Mrs. Hearin is not in robust health. Described by friends as frail, she suffers from a chronic inflammation of the small intestine that can be fatal unless treated daily with steroids. A source of hope is that Mrs. Hearin's medication is missing from the house. A source of fear is that the bloodstains found on the door turned out to be of her blood type.    After the ransom note was found, police notified the FBI and Jackson's mayor, Dale Danks, a friend of the Hearin family. By Wednesday, local newspapers and television stations already had wind of the story, and Mayor Danks summoned editors and station managers to his office. He told them that making the story public could endanger Mrs. Hearin's life, and asked them to sit on it. They did, but by Thursday night it was clear that much of Jackson already had heard about the kidnapping, and Mayor Danks held a press conference to announce it formally.    The FBI says it has leads, and is pursuing them with as many as 100 agents all over the country, and is optimistic about them. But it won't discuss them. The leading suspicion among people in Jackson is that during what most people consider the ordinary course of business, Mr. Hearin's company did something hurtful to somebody crazy, cruel, or simply vengeful enough to abduct an old woman.    &quot;When corporations are bought and sold, you jerk people's lives around without even knowing it,&quot; says one Jacksonian, summing up the general view.    One person on the list is dead, and the FBI has spoken to all the others. The agency won't say whether it considers anyone on the list a suspect.    One of them, N. Alfred Winn -- whose name is spelled &quot;Alferd&quot; on the list -- was interviewed by a federal grand jury in Biloxi. Mr. Winn, a St. Petersburg, Fla., attorney, was a School Pictures franchisee from 1981 to 1983 and has been involved in a court battle with the company. School Pictures sued him in 1983, alleging he owed the company money it had advanced him. Mr. Winn countersued, alleging the company had misstated his prospects for making money when it signed him up as a franchisee. In 1984, a district judge in Jackson ordered Mr. Winn to pay the company $153,883. School Pictures, having failed to collect, is currently trying to seize Mr. Winn's law office.    Neighbors of the Hearins told Jackson police they saw a van with Florida plates driven by a white man in his sixties in the neighborhood a week before the kidnapping. Mr. Winn is 64. He declined to comment, on the advice of his lawyers.    Mr. Hearin, born in Demopolis, Ala., met Annie Laurie, of Tuscaloosa, while they were both students at the University of Alabama. He served in the Navy during World War II, and worked for United Gas Co. until 1955, when he joined First National Bank of Jackson, now called Trustmark National Bank.    He became Trustmark's president in 1958, and the following year met Mr. Hess, now chairman and chief executive officer of Amerada Hess Corp. The two became fast friends, and over the years have invested in businesses ranging from petroleum to insurance to lawn mowers. Friends and associates describe Mr. Hearin as firm, but not obnoxious, in his business dealings. &quot;He can make a decision and stick to it,&quot; says Mayor Danks.    The Hearins are known as a civic-minded, unpretentious couple. They live in a posh neighborhood, by Jackson standards, but their brick Georgian house isn't lavish; the most spectacular thing about it is the two gigantic hackberry trees that dominate the front lawn. The Hearins have funded scholarships at local colleges and universities and contributed to the Jackson art museum.    Mrs. Hearin has been a more visible presence in Jackson than her husband. She is a patron of the Jackson Symphony, a past president of the Jackson Opera Guild and Junior League, and a former co-chairwoman of the Mississippi Arts Festival.    There is no knowing how many people have been affected by the numerous deals her husband has struck during his long career. At his press conference, he said: &quot;Like any businessman, I have made decisions which may appear to others as unfeeling, but those appearances are not true. Moreover, those business decisions were mine, not my wife's, and she had nothing to do with them. My children and I appeal to whomever has my wife to return her safely to us.&quot;    She has been missing 28 days. </TEXT></DOC>