<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870714-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Troubled Raider:Victor Posner BattlesA Variety of FinancialAnd Legal Difficulties---He Is Facing Another Trial,Sharon Is in Chapter 11,And Other Firms Falter---Even Critics Praise His Ability---By Michael AllenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FISBANKRUPTCIES (BCY)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><DATELINE> FARRELL, Pa.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Rocco Vadala, a burly steelworker whose arms strain the seams of his sport coat, sidles up, cocktail glass in hand, to the frail, white-haired man at a reception in the Oak Tree Country Club.    &quot;Some of the boys and me were wondering, Mr. Posner,&quot; he rasps, as other union people from Sharon Steel Corp. cluster around, &quot;do you ever go to Vegas? How does a man like you gamble?&quot;    &quot;Well, I'll tell you,&quot; replies Victor Posner, the usually reclusive Miami Beach financier. &quot;Every day, I buy companies for $100 million, $150 million, $200 million. Now, that's real gambling. Las Vegas doesn't entice me.&quot;    Over the decades, the 68-year-old son of a Russian immigrant has built a financial empire by throwing around huge blocks of securities as if he were playing penny-ante poker. A pioneer corporate raider, he remains one of the most notorious. He is often accused of plundering his corporate conquests -- a charge he denies.    But in recent years, many of the tables have turned against him. His latest reverse came last April. Sharon Steel -- 74%-owned by NVF Co., which Mr. Posner controls through a 38% stake -- filed under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, barely beating a herd of frustrated creditors to the punch. Sharon now is operating under the protection of an Erie, Pa., bankruptcy court while it works out a plan to pay its debts. Mr. Posner is urging that the company be given to an employee trust in exchange for deep wage and benefit cuts -- an idea that major creditors are expected to oppose.    Mr. Posner insists that Sharon's long-predicted downfall won't undermine other parts of his empire -- which at its peak once included big stakes in about 40 companies. But the empire -- as well as Mr. Posner himself -- was already facing a host of serious problems. And the problems of the nation's 14th-largest steelmaker are a milestone in his career. Sharon's story since 1969, when Mr. Posner acquired control, is, in many respects, the story of the man himself.    &quot;I happen to have grown fonder of Sharon than my other companies,&quot; Mr. Posner says, sitting comfortably in his spacious 17th-floor office in the Victorian Plaza, an aging former hotel and apartment house overlooking Miami Beach that is now the headquarters of most of his companies. The office walls are decorated with Norman Rockwell paintings of Sharon Steel workers.    Sharon Steel, Mr. Posner says, &quot;was like an Erector Set. It reached me in a way I've never been reached by a business.&quot;    Many outsiders scoff and say Sharon's downfall reflects Mr. Posner's brassy management style at least as much as the steel industry's problems. &quot;From what I've seen, he's about as sentimental as Attila the Hun,&quot; says William Paxton, an assistant professor of accountancy at Cleveland State University who has closely followed Mr. Posner's companies since conducting a 1985 study commissioned by this newspaper. &quot;The story of Victor Posner and the companies he's exercised control over is the story of looking out for No. 1.&quot;    In 1977, when times were good at Sharon Steel, the Securities and Exchange Commission accused Mr. Posner of arranging for Sharon and five other publicly held companies to pick up $1.7 million in personal expenses -- including housing, limousines and drivers, servants, vacations and groceries -- for himself and two of his children. Without admitting or denying wrongdoing, the Posners eventually reimbursed the companies $600,000, plus $1.1 million in personal expenditures subsequently cited by independent auditing committees.    Even when times turned bad at Sharon, Mr. Posner continued to fare nicely. In 1985, when the steelmaker sustained a net loss of $64.3 million, defaulted on most of its debt and opened wage-concession talks with workers, Sharon's board voted Mr. Posner $2.8 million in salary, and its subsidiaries paid him an additional $1.1 million in bonuses for his 1984 performance. Mr. Posner's son, Steven, the vice chairman, got more than $500,000 in salary and bonuses that year. Three other relatives -- brother Bernard, daughter Tracy and nephew Martin -- also were on the executive payroll. In 1985, as usual, Sharon paid for a corporate yacht and corporate jet.    Mr. Posner stoutly defends his performance, saying, &quot;Everything that was ever made by Sharon Steel was made by me in the market&quot; -- an exaggeration, although his stock deals did contribute increasingly to Sharon's bottom line. He also disputes his fearsome reputation.    &quot;I'm probably the easiest guy to work for in the world,&quot; he says, adding that, as a result of his stewardship of Sharon, &quot;many people came away millionaires.&quot; Mr. Posner has said he and Steven are forgoing their Sharon salaries because of the bankruptcy filing.    Indeed, although Mr. Posner is a controversial figure in this western Pennsylvania mill town, his public image here isn't all that bad. Sharon is by far the largest employer in Farrell, and Mr. Posner is often recalled as the man who spent millions of dollars to modernize the mill and donated liberally to local charities. &quot;We all made money from him,&quot; says Vincent Pagliaroli, a 37-year-old mold-yard worker. Although Mr. Posner's visits are rare, his presence is always felt: A few years ago, the town renamed its main thoroughfare Victor Posner Boulevard.    In 1985, the financier broke a labor impasse by flying a dozen United Steelworkers leaders to meet him at New York's Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. When ushered into his suite, few realized that the short man in a sweater, scrambling around setting up chairs, was Victor Posner. The financier -- who never finished high school -- quickly disarmed the group by emphasizing, in his gruff Baltimore accent, his commitment to keep the plant open.    &quot;He didn't strike me as a tycoon with a big desk and cigars and all,&quot; says Ronald Speck, a union leader. &quot;Everybody's attitude was changed considerably.&quot;    The Sharon bankruptcy filing isn't Mr. Posner's only problem. In November, he faces his second trial on charges that he inflated, for income-tax purposes, the value of land he gave to Miami Christian College; last year, a conviction was thrown out by the judge because of jury misconduct. Mr. Posner says he is innocent.    And as reported, federal prosecutors, as part of the insider-trading inquiry on Wall Street, are investigating whether Mr. Posner and others violated securities laws in his 1985 takeover of Fischbach Corp. In April, stock speculator Ivan Boesky pleaded guilty to a criminal information outlining facts that suggest that Mr. Boesky and others may have conspired to help Mr. Posner gain control of Fischbach, people familiar with the investigation say. Mr. Posner, who is now Fischbach's chairman, denies any wrongdoing and says he doesn't know of any such investigation.    The financier's outside shareholders are also becoming increasingly militant. As part of a settlement of four shareholder lawsuits, Mr. Posner and several associates recently agreed to the formation of an outside directors' committee to govern the salaries and benefits that he and other top officers receive, as well as to oversee large intra-corporate transactions. The settlement, which doesn't cover Sharon, is awaiting the approval of a Delaware chancery court. Mr. Posner and the other defendants didn't admit any wrongdoing.    What's more, much of his empire -- burdened by heavy debt and large investments in faltering Rust Belt industries -- has been under financial strain. Analysts say cash-flow problems could soon throttle two more major Posner holding companies -- NVF and Pennsylvania Engineering Corp. -- though Mr. Posner insists that they will pull through.    Nonetheless, his empire may have to shed some assets. Recently, NVF-controlled APL Corp. sold $40.6 million of stock and said it was using the proceeds to shore up Pennsylvania Engineering. And, as reported earlier, an associate says Mr. Posner is trying to sell his Royal Crown Cola Co. unit to a foreign investment group for roughly $200 million.    As his fortunes have declined, Mr. Posner -- always a loner -- has become even more isolated, several associates say. But even critics depict him as still a formidable adversary. &quot;You won't find anybody closer to a genius than Victor Posner,&quot; one federal investigator says.    Mr. Posner's reign here has been controversial from the start. George Perrault Jr., former chairman of Sharon, says it began on Labor Day weekend in 1968, when he received a phone call at home from Mr. Posner. He says that the budding raider said he had a &quot;sizable&quot; block of Sharon stock and invited Mr. Perrault to New York to discuss an acquisition by Mr. Posner's NVF, a maker of vulcanized fiber and laminated plastics with one-sixth Sharon's sales.    Mr. Perrault, who had been monitoring Sharon's shareholder roster, says he pointed out that Mr. Posner's name hadn't appeared on it. &quot;Oh,&quot; he says Mr. Posner replied, &quot;it's in friendly hands.&quot;    &quot;I knew right then there was a conspiracy,&quot; Mr. Perrault says, but he adds that his lawyers advised him not to file a complaint because he didn't have any proof that Mr. Posner was illegally &quot;parking&quot; stock. Mr. Posner, through a spokeswoman, denies that the conversation described by Mr. Perrault took place. He says he didn't talk with Mr. Perrault until after he had made a formal tender offer and had acquired more than 50% of the stock.    Sharon's board fought the acquisition vigorously -- to no avail. Eventually, Sharon shareholders tendered 86% of their shares, giving NVF control. At the first board meeting under Mr. Posner, six directors resigned. An embittered Mr. Perrault left three months later.    Also leaving was Mary Jane Brandt, the assistant corporate secretary -- but not before she sparked Mr. Posner's first major run-in with the SEC. Miss Brandt says that shortly after the takeover, one of Mr. Posner's lieutenants demanded that she sign an order to use $800,000 in union pension funds to purchase securities from DWG Corp., another Posner-controlled company. She says she not only refused but also secretly tipped off the union, which, she adds, then contacted the SEC.    In 1971, the SEC filed in a New York federal court a complaint alleging that Mr. Posner and two associates used two union pension funds to buy securities from and make unsecured loans to other companies he controlled. The following year, the court ordered agents of the three men to step down as pension-fund trustees, although the three neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing.    &quot;If you had some sense of ethics,&quot; Miss Brandt says, &quot;you found it hard to stay on.&quot;    But other employees say they didn't face any ethical problems, and most top officials stayed -- luckily for Mr. Posner, who knew little about steelmaking. One of his first moves was to give out raises, stock options and perks such as country-club memberships and company cars.    Even without such perks, many old-timers say, it would have been hard to leave a company that once employed many of their fathers and grandfathers. &quot;It was just a good place to work,&quot; says A.G. Neese, a former vice president of sales, who ended 41 years at Sharon in 1978. &quot;It was family-oriented.&quot;    James J. Needham, a former chairman of the New York Stock Exchange who was put on Sharon's board in 1977 as part of an SEC settlement, says debate was encouraged at Mr. Posner's board meetings -- to a point. &quot;You could say whatever you wanted to, but with a caveat: You better know what you're talking about because he's so well-informed and well-read he could be very overpowering.&quot;    (The settlement that put Mr. Needham and another independent director on Sharon's board stemmed from the SEC inquiry into Mr. Posner's alleged use of corporate funds to pay personal expenses and into alleged misstatements of Sharon's 1974 and 1975 profits. A third SEC investigation, made public in 1980, looked into alleged insider trading at Sharon, among other things; it ended with the SEC release of a staff report detailing suspicious trading, but no charges were filed.)    In the first decade under Mr. Posner, Sharon's earnings rose sharply, from $2.9 million in 1968 to a record $58.6 million in 1979. One reason was Sharon's strong niche in specialty steel -- at one time, for example, nearly all the golf clubs made in the U.S. used a Sharon alloy.    But more and more of the earnings were coming from Mr. Posner's stock dealings; he used Sharon as a vehicle for his runs at other companies. In 1979, $15.6 million of net income came from gains on stock sales. In that year, the steelmaker listed marketable securities and other investments of $204.3 million -- including substantial stakes in 10 public companies. &quot;Sharon became a sort of mutual fund,&quot; a former assistant treasurer says.    However, Sharon's purchases loaded the steelmaker with debt. In part, Sharon's unraveling can be traced to 1980, when it issued $411.2 million in debentures in its unfriendly takeover of UV Industries Inc. Stockholders of the New York electronics and copper-mining concern voted to liquidate it rather than fall into Mr. Posner's clutches, leaving the raider with a huge cash hoard when he eventually acquired UV's assets. But rather than pay off debt, he made more acquisitions. Sharon's interest expenses soared from $14.9 million in 1979 to $86.3 million in 1980 and $101.1 million in 1981.    About that time, the steel industry slumped badly, and in 1982, Sharon posted a net loss of $105.6 million. By 1984, the loss reached $144.9 million. In March 1985, Evans Products Co., a building-products and transportation concern that Mr. Posner controlled through Sharon, filed under Chapter 11, leading the steelmaker to write off about $50 million. In April 1985, Sharon said it could no longer pay the interest on the debentures issued in the UV takeover, and banks started calling in their loans.    Faced with a cash-flow crisis, Sharon's operations began to suffer. Workers fought over spare parts to keep equipment running. Sharon's financial dealings became increasingly desperate. Unable to obtain bank financing, it arranged to borrow about $30 million from the Schottenstein family of Columbus, Ohio, for the equivalent of nearly 30% annual interest.    By last April, Sharon's liabilities exceeded assets by $264 million. Debenture holders, long kept at bay with a succession of complex debt-swap offers that never quite worked out, began to tighten the noose. Under the company's final debt-for-equity swap offers, they seemed likely to obtain control of Sharon, reducing Mr. Posner's interest to less than 20%.    Quantum Fund, the parent of Curacao-based Quantum Overseas N.V., which held $96.9 million in debentures, told Sharon that it had raised the $55 million that Sharon needed for the debenture swap. However, it also indicated that after getting control, it would replace Mr. Posner's team with &quot;professional management.&quot; On April 14, Quantum informed Sharon's board that it had 72 hours to accept its offer, which involved the sale of Sharon's profitable Mueller Brass unit; otherwise, Quantum said, it would petition to throw Sharon into involuntary bankruptcy proceedings. Just an hour before Quantum's deadline, Mr. Posner's own attorneys filed under Chapter 11.    In the wake of the filing, it came to light that for more than a month, Mr. Posner had been secretly negotiating with Steelworkers officials a bizarre pact to give Sharon to an employee-owned trust in exchange for wage and benefit cuts. Some observers wonder whether Mr. Posner would wind up with continuing control of the company.    In another action just two days before the bankruptcy filing, NVF sold 10 million shares of Sharon to a Posner-controlled company based in Bermuda. Many observers say the move, which reduced NVF's Sharon holdings to 74% from 86%, appeared designed to lessen NVF's liability for Sharon's pension-fund debts, although they say it probably won't succeed.    Now, with Sharon's future in the hands of a bankruptcy court, Mr. Posner still is pushing his give-it-to-the-employees idea. On his recent visit here, Mr. Posner, dressed in a blue United Steelworkers jacket, toured the plant and told workers that his plan would &quot;revolutionize the relationship between management and labor.&quot; Many workers seem convinced that Mr. Posner is on their side.    On a recent Saturday morning at the Italian Home, a social club founded around the turn of the century to help immigrant steelworkers, Eugene Pacsi, Farrell's mayor and a former steelworker, dug into breakfast and said he couldn't help being suspicious about Mr. Posner's motives, but he added that steelworkers now have little choice but to believe in the financier.    &quot;Who knows?&quot; he said. &quot;Maybe Victor Posner has had a change of heart in his old age.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>