<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881020-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Losing Battle: U.S. Air War on Drugs So Far Fails to Stem Caribbean Smuggling --- Shipments of Cocaine Rise, As Planes Elude Radar And Federal Forces Bicker --- Piloting a Hand-Me-Down </HL><AUTHOR> William M. Carley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> TRE JUS TRN </G><TEXT>   In a U.S. Coast Guard radar plane circling high over the Caribbean, Lt. John O'Leary peers into his screen and spots a green blip -- possibly a drug smuggler -- heading north, toward Florida.    His plane is too slow to catch smugglers' planes, so a second Coast Guard aircraft -- a small but speedy executive jet -- is flying nearby to give chase. Lt. O'Leary calls the chase plane on his radio.    &quot;We have a possible bogie flying north. Let's try an intercept.&quot;    &quot;Roger,&quot; comes the response, and the chase is on.    But this episode proves to be a false alarm, as do many others during a reporter's recent two-night stint aboard Coast Guard planes patrolling the Caribbean. The &quot;bogie&quot; has filed a flight plan with U.S. authorities, and is on a legitimate trip.    The U.S. air war against drug traffickers is escalating rapidly. The Coast Guard and the Customs Service have joined forces to throw high-tech military aircraft against smugglers attempting to penetrate the nation's leaky southern borders. The effect of this $16 million-a-month air war has been to push the battlefield out of Florida's mangrove swamps and into the skies above the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico, where new frustrations lurk.    With so much legitimate air traffic -- at peak hours the Coast Guard radar scope may show over 200 planes -- one drug-smuggling plane becomes the proverbial needle in a haystack. According to recent Congressional testimony, only about 12% of traffickers' planes are being captured along the southern U.S. border. A level of at least 25% to 35% is considered necessary for a measure of deterrence.    Not only are there too few radar planes out on patrol, but smugglers are quickly learning to evade the radar. Moreover, debilitating turf wars regularly erupt between the various government agencies active in drug enforcement. And there is evidence that officials in several Caribbean governments -- including Cuba and Haiti -- are in league with the smugglers. Small wonder, observes the Coast Guard commandant, Adm. Paul Yost, that the U.S. &quot;is awash in cocaine.&quot;    The Coast Guard, Customs, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Drug Enforcement Agency, in fact, are all working hard to stem the flow of narcotics. Seizures of U.S.-bound cocaine from private planes rose from about 44,000 pounds in 1986 to 55,000 last year and will hit nearly 77,000 this year, according to the DEA intelligence center in El Paso. In the year ended Sept. 30, the overall air surveillance program resulted in 438 arrests, up from 167 in 1986. Seventy-one planes were seized, compared with 41 two years ago, according to the Customs Service. (Over half the cocaine entering the U.S. comes by private plane; the rest comes in on scheduled airliners, by ship, and by vehicle from Mexico.)    Even with increasing seizures, however, the price of cocaine in the U.S. has been dropping, indicating that no matter how much is being confiscated, even more is getting in. In New York City, cocaine now wholesales for $800 to $1,000 an ounce, down from $1,200 to $1,800 an ounce two years ago, the DEA says. Illegal heroin shipments, too, are on the rise, while marijuana smuggling appears to be declining.    Until the early 1980s, smugglers could fly virtually unimpeded into Florida. The Everglades were full of wrecked planes that missed the makeshift landing strips or back roads they were heading for. &quot;It was an 'open skies' situation,&quot; says Norman Scurria, the lanky Coast Guard commander who heads the service's radar-plane unit based in Norfolk, Va.    Customs, and then the Coast Guard, began to acquire helicopters and chase planes. But the smugglers still had an advantage. Ground-based radars for defense and air-traffic control were designed to spot planes flying high and fast. Smugglers countered by flying low and slow.    Enter the E2C, a Grumman Corp. radar plane originally built to serve as airborne eyes for Navy carriers. Early last year, the Navy lent two of the planes to the Coast Guard, and two to Customs. Because the E2C flies high, often at 25,000 feet, its radar can peer over the horizon and down, spotting low-flying planes as far as 250 miles away. The E2C's computers are programmed to guide an interceptor to a point two miles behind a target plane. With E2Cs in the air, the Coast Guard &quot;can play cat and mouse with the smugglers,&quot; Cmdr. Scurria says.    On a recent afternoon, the twin-engine plane, crowned with a revolving radar dome, roars into the sky from Homestead Air Force Base near Miami. Cmdr. Scurria is forward at the pilot's controls. Lt. O'Leary and Lt. David Kireta scan the blinking radar scopes and contend with a maze of electronic controls in the rear of the aircraft. Strapped into cramped seats as the plane bucks through turbulence, they first sweat and then shiver as the E2C leaves the Florida heat and climbs into cold altitudes as it heads southeast.    &quot;We can fly in position about here,&quot; Lt. O'Leary says, indicating a spot south of Andros Island. &quot;And we can put the chase jet to the west.&quot;    From its vantage point off Andros Island, the E2C's radar can pick up smugglers plying two favored air routes from Colombia's northernmost point, the Guajira peninsula: One route is via Cuba, the other via Haiti.    Once north of Cuba or Haiti, the smugglers fan out. Many of them fly in the late afternoon so they can navigate to their destinations before dark. Some still head directly to Florida. Others fly to one of the hundreds of tiny islands in the Bahamas. There, they land on dirt airstrips, where the drugs are transferred to boats; or the planes drop the drugs into the sea, where waiting speedboats retrieve them.    To spot smugglers' boats, Customs agents placed radar atop the sleek condominiums hugging the Florida coast. But these &quot;condo radars,&quot; as they are called, can see only to the horizon, and it is nearly impossible to distinguish smugglers from the thousands of pleasure boats in this area.    At 5:30 p.m., with the Coast Guard's chase plane circling 60 miles east of the E2C, a Customs chase jet on its own mission appears on the scene. Lt. O'Leary radios the Customs plane, asking it to participate in practice intercepts. For 15 minutes, guided by the E2C's radar and computers, the two jets wheel and dart in the Caribbean skies.    The Customs pilot soon tires of this. &quot;I don't know what I'm doing here,&quot; he snaps over the radio, and departs. &quot;Just when we had a golden opportunity to practice some more intercepts,&quot; Lt. O'Leary sighs. By 8 p.m., with no smugglers in sight and the E2C low on fuel, Cmdr. Scurria heads back to Homestead.    If inter-agency tensions are apparent in the air, they are even more obvious on the ground. Customs, for example, was set to get all four of the E2Cs lent by the Navy. But after a bitter bureaucratic showdown in Washington, the Coast Guard managed to snag two. &quot;Patrolling the coasts is our mission; Customs shouldn't even be involved,&quot; one Coast Guard man argues.    Yet, the E2Cs have proved a mixed blessing for the Coast Guard. The planes -- the linchpins of the airborne war on drugs -- are old hand-me-downs in such poor condition that they arrived from the Navy with cracks in their wings, which limit their use.    The Coast Guard and Customs also squabble over the coded radio call signs used to designate planes and bases. The Coast Guard wants the codes changed daily to foil traffickers. &quot;The druggies can learn a lot about our strategies just by listening to the radio,&quot; one Coast Guard man says. Retorts a Customs agent: &quot;Some smugglers have frequency scanners, and once they tune in to my frequency, I don't care if I call myself Donald Duck -- they can still listen in.&quot; He adds that coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration makes changing call signs impractical.    Such conflicts, says an assistant U.S. attorney who has prosecuted many drug cases, arise because the task of drug-busting is parceled out to several U.S. agencies. &quot;Each has its own personalities, its own turf to protect and its own tradition of how to operate, and they all conflict,&quot; the prosecutor says. &quot;Sometimes I have to put on an umpire's shirt and blow a whistle to keep FBI, DEA, Customs and the Coast Guard from killing each other.&quot;    Worse yet, officials of some Caribbean governments are more hospitable to smugglers than to U.S. agents. Earlier this year, a federal grand jury in Miami indicted Col. Jean Claude Paul, commander of a Haitian army battalion, his wife and his brother for conspiracy to smuggle cocaine into the U.S. Among other things, the indictment says Col. Paul arranged to have a grass airstrip on his ranch in Haiti used by a Piper Aztec that took off with 220 pounds of the drug. (In New York, that much cocaine would retail for over $8 million.)    Col. Paul, who was stripped of at least some of his powers in Haiti's recent political shake-up, hasn't come to Miami to respond to the indictment. Nor has his wife or brother.    Cuban officials also are suspected of aiding smugglers. One pilot, unaware that he was being videotaped by the DEA, bragged to associates in Miami about help he said he got from the Cuban coast guard. After one flight from Colombia to Cuba, his cargo -- allegedly cocaine -- was loaded onto two speedboats that were then guided by the radar of the Cuban coast guard, the pilot said. The Cuban boats, the pilot told associates, &quot;scan the whole area out, man. And they tell you, go this way, go that way.&quot;    The pilot, Ruben Ruiz, was indicted earlier this year in Miami for his part in the alleged smuggling conspiracy. He has pleaded not guilty to the charges and is awaiting trial in federal district court.    Faced with political obstacles, the U.S. is turning more to technology. To winnow suspects in the air, an E2C with a blip on its screen can radio its communications center. Within seconds, the center can check FAA computers to determine whether the suspect plane has filed a flight plan, as required of any aircraft entering U.S. air space. (Upon landing, all aircraft are checked routinely by Customs.)    If there is no flight plan, the E2C's computers alert a Customs or Coast Guard chase jet. The chase planes can lock their radars -- designed for F-16 fighters -- onto the suspect and follow until he lands. Meanwhile, Customs, Coast Guard and Army helicopters, based at various points in Florida and around the Caribbean, are called in to capture the smugglers, the plane and its cargo.    On June 15 last year, a Coast Guard E2C was heading back to Homestead after a fruitless patrol. The communications center, which had spotted a suspect on an air-defense radar, radioed Lt. O'Leary in the E2C for help.    The center lost the suspect on its radar, &quot;but we had him solid on ours,&quot; Lt. O'Leary recalls. The suspect plane, flying only 5,000 feet over the ocean at a slow 115 knots, was a Cessna heading northwest toward Fort Lauderdale.    The communications center ordered two Customs chase planes and a helicopter at Homestead into the air. Guided by Lt. O'Leary, all three swung onto the Cessna's tail as it neared the coast. The Cessna, with the government aircraft in hot pursuit, began zigzagging through traffic taking off and landing at the Fort Lauderdale Executive airport. &quot;The tower controller at the airport was going crazy&quot; trying to avoid collisions in the air, Lt. O'Leary says.    The Cessna finally landed on a grass strip west of Fort Lauderdale, and the Customs helicopter dropped down beside it. One man from the Cessna ran into the woods. But Customs men seized another man and the plane -- loaded with guns, money and 600 pounds of marijuana.    Seldom, however, do the skirmishes end so productively. Smugglers, realizing they have been spotted, may turn back and land in Haiti, out of reach of U.S. lawmen. Or they may land on a Bahamian island and disappear with their drugs before a Customs helicopter can arrive. Or they may dump their cargo into the sea and land in Florida, with no evidence to convict them.    Some frustrated U.S. pilots say privately they want a &quot;shoot-down&quot; policy once smugglers start jettisoning drugs. But that isn't feasible, says the Coast Guard's Adm. Yost. &quot;You don't know if {the plane is carrying} a dentist on his way home from vacation with two kids asleep in the back.&quot;    Smugglers also are becoming adept at avoiding E2Cs. They sometimes post spotters near bases where E2Cs take off, such as Homestead or the Key West Naval Air Station. &quot;We're in an area only a couple of days before the smugglers seem to know all about it,&quot; says Cmdr. Scurria. The smugglers then fly farther west, near the Yucatan peninsula, or stop flying altogether until the Coast Guard E2Cs return to their home base in Norfolk. (To foil spotters, Cmdr. Scurria says, the E2Cs sometimes hopscotch from Homestead to Key West to the Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, over a period of days.)    Then there is the matter of pure luck -- being in the air when a drug-runner makes his move. At 2 a.m. one recent night, the Caribbean is dark save for the jewel-like lights of the Florida Keys strung across a black velvet ocean. The chase plane has spent six-and-a-half hours on two sorties crisscrossing the skies, but there are no smugglers in sight, or on the scopes of the E2C circling nearby. Some blips are identified as legitimate flights, others as false radar signals. It is the type of frustration that most of the Coast Guard's surveillance flights experience.    The planes are ordered back to base. &quot;They're probably over by the Yucatan tonight,&quot; says one crew member, resignedly. &quot;Or in bed,&quot; replies the pilot, banking toward home. </TEXT></DOC>