<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Korean Party Chairman to UrgeSweeping Concessions on Chun---Roh Calls for AcceptanceOf Direct Vote, VowsTo Quit If Not Heeded---By Joseph P. Manguno and Bernard Wysocki Jr.Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The chairman of South Korea's ruling party offered sweeping concessions in an effort to end civil unrest.    In an address on state television, Roh Tae Woo, head of the ruling Democratic Justice Party, said he would urge President Chun Doo Hwan to accept opposition demands, including direct presidential elections, amnesty for dissident Kim Dae Jung and the immediate release of most political prisoners.    Mr. Roh also told a party council that he would resign as the party's chairman and as its presidential candidate if Mr. Chun rejected the proposals. Mr. Roh's comments followed often violent anti-government demonstrations that began June 10.    The Korea Broadcasting System reported that Mr. Roh said he would step down both as party chairman and as Mr. Chun's handpicked candidate as his successor unless the president agrees. However, there was no immediate indication when Mr. Roh and Mr. Chun would meet to discuss the proposed concessions.    According to a United Press International report, Kim Young Sam, leader of the major opposition Reunification Democratic Party, said of Mr. Roh's proposal: &quot;Though it came a little late, I heartily welcome his idea.&quot; Mr. Kim urged Mr. Chun to take immediate action to free political prisoners and dissident leader Kim Dae Jung, who also welcomed the proposals, saying, &quot;I expect an official declaration of acceptance by President Chun.&quot;    The proposals come at a time when sentiment has been growing within South Korea's ruling party to drop Mr. Roh as Mr. Chun's designated successor and to meet opposition demands by scrapping the president's rigid timetable for elections.    As the Korean political crisis moved into its third week, officials of the DJP wrestled with options throughout the weekend and opposition leaders had vowed to continue the demonstrations that have become a daily fixture. But the opposition leaders promised to keep the demonstrations peaceful, as signs became apparent that the DJP was preparing to make significant concessions.    Despite reports that the government was close to presenting concessions that would go beyond the ones that were on the table prior to Friday's massive anti-government rally, there wasn't any guarantee the opposition would accept the package. Mr. Kim of the RDP was unenthusiastic yesterday about the government concessions that are reportedly forthcoming.    Nor was it certain that the government will actually announce a package of measures and then follow through on them. Government plans have changed several times since the crisis began.    Leading members of the DJP acknowledged that there is increasing rank-and-file restiveness within the party. They said many members are frustrated with the unyielding attitude of Mr. Chun, the DJP's creator and titular president, on constitutional reform.    &quot;It is inconceivable that the change of government in February will be made under the current constitution,&quot; DJP Secretary-General Lee Choon Koo told Korean newspapers.    It was Mr. Roh's nomination by the DJP on June 10, a long-expected event, that touched a nerve in the South Korean population and brought tens of thousands of anti-government protesters into the streets -- including, for the first time, many housewives, businessmen and other middle-class Koreans.    Prior to the unexpected announcement, one DJP leader said Mr. Roh still had the support of &quot;a considerable majority&quot; of party members. But, the leader said, members are increasingly convinced that Mr. Roh's close relationship with the unpopular Mr. Chun and his unacceptability to the Korean public make him more of a liability to the party than an asset.    One top DJP official said yesterday that there were a few other possible candidates, but that there was &quot;no groundswell of support yet&quot; for any one of them.    There had been speculation in the past two weeks that Mr. Roh might withdraw his candidacy. He was quoted two weeks ago as saying that he would pull out if that was necessary to end the crisis. Most political analysts said at the time that Mr. Roh's statement was only public posturing.    There was also deeper squabbling within the DJP over the need to abandon the political timetable dictated to it by President Chun and repeatedly rejected by opposition leaders. The timetable called for Mr. Roh to be nominated on June 10, for an election to be held under the current constitution in November or December, and for the winner, almost certainly Mr. Roh, to become president when Mr. Chun's term expires next February.    One senior DJP official said he was &quot;disgusted with the handwringing that is going on&quot; among party leaders trying to determine how much ground they must give to satisfy popular demand, yet still protect their position of gerrymandered electoral strength.    Earlier last weekend, there were reports that the government was considering calling an election in which the main issue would be what kind of electoral system the South Korea public wants. The majority party in the new national assembly chosen by this general election would make the decision.    Until now, Mr. Chun, who has the constitutional power to call a national referendum on matters of &quot;grave importance,&quot; has refused to agree to such a national plebiscite, mostly out of fear that the opposition's direct presidential election proposal would win easily. And government officials reiterated during the weekend their opposition to such a referendum, saying legal and political reasons make it difficult to carry out.    There wasn't an immediate response by opposition leaders to the DJP's proposed concessions. But other RDP officials said it was highly unlikely that the party would agree to any election under the current electoral system in which electoral districts are gerrymandered to assure a DJP victory.    To some longtime observers of South Korea, last Friday's demonstration suggested that the level of street violence may be declining from the level of two weeks ago.    &quot;It seems to have peaked and fallen off somewhat,&quot; said Horace Underwood, associate dean of Yonsei University. He added, however, that the turmoil is far from over.    During Friday's demonstration, a group of Yonsei University students said they were restraining themselves from engaging in violent protests. &quot;Last year, people didn't support the students very much. This year, 40 million people are angry at the Chun government,&quot; said one third-year Yonsei student. But he explained that, because middle-class people oppose violence, &quot;to keep their support, we must practice self-restraint.&quot;    A DJP spokesman, Kim Jung Nam, Saturday thanked &quot;the people that the rally ended without any grave unfortunate incidents.&quot; And he said the party &quot;understand{s} that the people have expressed their desire for the nation's political development through the rally.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>