<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0073 </DOCNO><HL> The SEC's Case Against Drexel: Letters Are Sent to Milken, 4 Others in Drexel Case Indicating Criminal Charges Will Be Sought Soon --- Proposed Indictment Said To Be Drafted Already; Hearings Are Continuing </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR STK BON </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. attorney for Manhattan has issued &quot;target letters&quot; to Michael Milken, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s chief of junk-bond operations, and at least four other individuals, formally indicating that federal prosecutors will seek criminal charges within a month from the grand jury that has been investigating Drexel for nearly two years.    Others expected to receive the target letters are Mr. Milken's brother Lowell; Cary Maultasch, a Drexel trader, and James Dahl, a Drexel bond salesman, both of whom work for Mr. Milken; and Bruce Newberg, a former Drexel trader, according to people familiar with the investigation. The Milken brothers and Mr. Maultasch were also named as defendants in the Security and Exchange Commission's civil suit filed Wednesday.    Mr. Newberg, who left Drexel earlier this year, was indicted last month in an alleged tax-fraud scheme involving Princeton/Newport Partners.    Mr. Dahl figured prominently in allegations contained in a lawsuit brought by Staley Continental Corp. last year that accused Drexel of trying to &quot;extort&quot; the food company's management into a takeover. Staley dropped the suit this year after Drexel agreed to buy a Staley unit.    The target letters were issued late Wednesday, just as the SEC disclosed its charges of insider trading and numerous other securities law violations against Drexel and against Mr. Milken and five other people. The letters give the prospective defendants a final opportunity to convince Rudolph Giuliani, the U.S. attorney in charge of the case, and higher officials in the Justice Department that criminal charges shouldn't be filed.    Criminal lawyers, however, said that once target letters are issued, a recommendation that the grand jury issue indictments is all but a foregone conclusion. One person familiar with the case said prosecutors already have drafted a proposed indictment, though changes still could be made or the indictment dropped.    Drexel itself hasn't received a target letter, and people familiar with the case said the firm isn't expected to receive one immediately. But they said Drexel could still be named a target after the grand jury hears further testimony. They said the grand jury is scheduled to hear witnesses through the end of this month.    Criminal lawyers said the strategy of issuing a target letter to Mr. Milken -- who is considered nearly indispensable to Drexel's high-yield, high-risk &quot;junk&quot; bond operations -- and not issuing one to Drexel itself appears designed to put maximum pressure on Drexel to settle the case against it and cooperate with prosecutors. Drexel, however, has steadfastly backed Mr. Milken and hasn't given any indication it is willing to change its stand.    The issuance of the target letters for individuals indicates that, for all practical purposes, the criminal investigation of Mr. Milken and the other individuals is complete and that prosecutors are prepared to go to trial. Ordinarily, the process of negotiation and review begun by target letters takes about a month, criminal lawyers said. That means that Mr. Milken could face the second blow next month, with even more serious implications than those of the SEC's massive civil case.    Not only are criminal charges generally more serious, carrying as they do the possibility of prison terms, fines and major damage to reputations; but Mr. Milken and the other potential defendants also face the possibility of racketeering charges under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.    RICO charges, used against businesses suspected of repeated illegal acts, carry enormous potential financial penalties, including automatic forfeiture of all profits tainted by a racketeering enterprise and triple damages. Such damages could strip Mr. Milken of much of his estimated $500 million net worth.    Spokesmen for Drexel and for Michael Milken declined to comment yesterday, as did Michael Armstrong, a lawyer representing Lowell Milken, Reid Weingarten, a lawyer representing Mr. Maultasch, and Gerald Lefcourt, a lawyer representing Mr. Newberg. A lawyer for Mr. Dahl declined to comment. Bruce Baird, head of the Manhattan U.S. attorney's securities-fraud unit, also declined to comment.    People familiar with the government's case said the simultaneous issuance of the target letters and filing of the SEC's complaint shows how closely coordinated are the actions of the U.S. attorney and the SEC. They said this should lay to rest any notion that there has been a rift between the two investigative offices. &quot;They're working hand and glove together,&quot; one person familiar with the investigation said.    It isn't known exactly what charges prosecutors plan to seek, but people familiar with the case said subpoenas already issued indicate the government is investigating crimes that include mail fraud, wire fraud and RICO violations.    The possibility of RICO charges gives the prospective defendants the right to request Justice Department review of those proposed charges. Lawyers, however, give defense lawyers only a scant chance of success in any appeal to Washington. They note that the Republican presidential nominee, Vice President George Bush, has made &quot;greed on Wall Street&quot; a theme of his campaign and that Attorney General Richard Thornburgh once worked in the Justice Department's securities fraud division and is considered tough on securities crime.    Moreover, the recent attempt by Princeton/Newport Partners, several of its officials and a former Drexel junk-bond trader to stave off RICO charges by appealing to the Justice Department failed. Princeton/Newport, which has ties to Drexel, became the first securities firm ever to be named a &quot;racketeering enterprise&quot; under the RICO statute last month, when RICO charges were filed against individual defendants in its case.    RICO is a controversial law, with some lawyers and legislators saying the statute, passed in 1970 to combat organized crime and drug trafficking, has been extended far beyond legislators' original intent.    Attorneys for defendants in the SEC's civil case are expected to quickly seek depositions from a number of individuals, including the imprisoned former arbitrager Ivan Boesky, a key government witness. But lawyers said that with prosecutors expected to seek criminal charges within a month, the U.S. attorney might be able to persuade a federal judge to stay the depositions until the criminal investigation is completed.    In a letter sent to clients yesterday, Drexel took a hard line on the SEC civil charges. It said the SEC &quot;essentially has charged nothing beyond what Boesky apparently told the SEC in 1986,&quot; when Mr. Boesky &quot;was desperate to settle with the SEC and to minimize his own punishment by accusing others.&quot; Drexel said it is &quot;particularly eager to confront&quot; Mr. Boesky in court and prove his charges false.    The Drexel letter also said &quot;the linchpin&quot; in the SEC case is a $5.3 million fee paid by Mr. Boesky's securities firm to Drexel in March 1986. The SEC complaint alleges that the payment represents, in large part, Drexel's profit on stock it illegally parked with Mr. Boesky to conceal its true ownership, after subtracting profit Mr. Boesky earned on stock parked with Drexel.    Drexel told clients &quot;the evidence indicates&quot; that the payment was for corporate finance, research and other advisory services Drexel furnished to Mr. Boesky.    However, people familiar with the investigation said several witnesses from the Boesky organization, including Setrag Mooradian, principal accountant for Mr. Boesky's Seemala Corp., are prepared to testify about the $5.3 million payment.    They said Mr. Mooradian kept handwritten records calculating amounts due under the alleged parking arrangement between Mr. Boesky and Drexel, records that the government has obtained. They said Mr. Mooradian, who has been granted immunity from criminal prosecution, will testify about conversations with Drexel about the payment. Robert M. Romano, Mr. Mooradian's attorney, declined to comment on the matter.    A Drexel spokesman declined to discuss the $5.3 million payment. </TEXT></DOC>