<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870319-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Congressional Panels to Grant ImmunityTo 6 Others in Iran-Contra Investigation---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON </DATELINE><TEXT>   House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair voted to grant immunity to six more witnesses and moved to make the U.S. role in the Nicaraguan war the early focus of joint public hearings beginning in May.    The grants of immunity were designed to persuade the individuals -- including several who were prominent in a private Contra supply network -- to testify. The supply network was directed from within the National Security Council during a period in which Congress had prohibited U.S. military aid to the Contras, as the Nicaraguan rebels are known.    Under an agreement reached with Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel investigating the affair, the congressional panels also will vote next month to grant limited immunity to John Poindexter, former national security adviser. Investigators could begin interviewing Adm. Poindexter privately a few days before the scheduled start of hearings May 5.    Committee members said the decision to focus the first hearings on the U.S. role in Nicaragua was dictated in part by the chronology of events. But it also has political importance because it will influence how the entire Iran-Contra affair is cast in the months ahead.    The private network assisting the Contras pre-dated any diversion of funds from U.S. weapons sales to Iran, and investigators believe the scandal can only be understood in this context.    Moreover, by securing Adm. Poindexter's early testimony, the committees hope to determine whether President Reagan approved the creation of the private network to aid the Contras and whether he knew about the National Security Council's role in directing it. Adm. Poindexter was head of the NSC, a branch of the White House.    &quot;The diversion of funds from the Iran arms sales is only a part of the puzzle, and maybe a very small part,&quot; a congressional source said. &quot;We first want to focus on how the private network which supplied the Contras got set up in 1984, and whether (President) Reagan authorized it.&quot;    Intelligence and congressional sources said William Casey, former Central Intelligence Agency director, appears to have been one of the architects of the private aid program. They said Mr. Casey directed some of his subordinates to help Lt. Col. Oliver North, fired NSC aide, supply arms to Iran and aid to the Contras.    Separately, intelligence sources said a report by the CIA's inspector general concluded that officials at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., and at CIA stations in Europe and Central America helped funnel aid to the Contras despite a CIA directive to avoid violating the congressional ban at that time on aid to the insurgents.    The sources said the report doesn't single out any officials or recommend disciplinary action. But the former CIA station chief in Costa Rica already has been given early retirement, following disclosure that he helped coordinate arms deliveries to the Contras.    The congressional committees so far have approved grants of immunity for 10 people. The six approved for immunity yesterday include a former NSC aide, Lt. Col. Robert Earl, and two participants in the private Contra supply network, Robert Owen and retired Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Gadd.    Col. Gadd is a close associate of retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord. Apart from his role in the private airlift of supplies to assist the Contras, Col. Gadd controls a series of Virginia companies that have received classified contracts from the government for clandestine operations.    Sources said the committees voted to grant immunity to two of Col. Gadd's past employees, including a retired noncommissioned officer in military special operations. The committees previously granted immunity to retired Air Force Col. Robert Dutton, who was part of the same Contra supply network.    Gen. Secord appears increasingly isolated in the investigation. The Senate panel voted yesterday to initiate civil contempt proceedings against him in an effort to force him to turn over bank records important to the inquiry. The measure must next be taken up by the full Senate, where it is expected to be approved promptly. But the process may be overtaken by events, since investigators hope to obtain much of the same information elsewhere.    Albert Hakim, a business partner of Gen. Secord, is believed to have access to many of the same records. The committees last week voted to grant Mr. Hakim immunity, but Mr. Walsh has since indicated that he objects to that move. The prosecutor's objections legally ensure him only of winning a 20-day delay before immunity is granted, however.    The congressional committees announced their plans after days of private talks with Mr. Walsh. By reaching an agreement with Mr. Walsh on the issue of immunity, the committees avoided a fight with the prosecutor, who wanted a 90-day waiting period before lawmakers granted immunity to Adm. Poindexter and Col. North, the two central figures in the affair.    The committees aren't expected to vote on granting immunity to Adm. Poindexter until around April 21, and his first public testimony won't come before June 15. The panels won't decide when to grant immunity to Col. North before June 4, and any testimony he gives under such a grant won't come before June 15.    To expedite their proceedings further, lawmakers said the two panels largely will meld their staffs. </TEXT></DOC>