<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880726-0027 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID he was prepared to hold talks with Iran about U.S. hostages.    The president said &quot;it's time&quot; for discussions about Americans held hostage in Lebanon, if Tehran's leaders are &quot;willing and ready.&quot; Reagan didn't elaborate, but an administration official said the U.S. sent a message to Iran last week about talks aimed at normalizing ties. Tehran hasn't sent an &quot;authorized&quot; reply, the official said. In the Persian Gulf war, some fighting continued, but Iraq said it would withdraw from recently captured Iranian territory, prompting hopes of a quiet war front when U.N.-mediated peace talks begin this week.    The U.N.'s secretary-general said he expects to be able to announce within 10 days a date for the start of a cease-fire in the war between Iran and Iraq.    ---   Cambodia's warring factions held peace talks for the first time, but apparently failed to make progress toward ending the country's civil war. At the talks in Indonesia, the Vietnam-backed Phnom Penh government demanded the dismantling of the Khmer Rouge guerrilla army, and said Prince Sihanouk should help organize elections.    ---   Dukakis faced a possible delay in receipt of $46 million in federal campaign funds. The GOP has requested that the Democratic candidate's money be withheld until the Federal Election Commission can rule on questions raised by Texas Sen. Bentsen's pursuit of the vice presidency and re-election to the Senate at the same time.    ---   Burma's ruling party accepted the resignation of leader Ne Win as head of the party, but opposed his call for a referendum on ending one-party rule, according to a delegate to a three-day socialist congress in Rangoon. The 77-year-old Ne Win, who came to power in a 1962 military coup, announced Saturday that he was resigning.    ---   Workers in Armenia returned to their jobs following a two-month strike that failed to persuade the Kremlin to transfer control of the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh enclave from the republic of Azerbaijan. Authorities said factories and transportation were operating and shops had reopened.    ---   The U.S. said it has received new assurances from Moscow that the Soviet Union will fulfill its commitment to withdraw by Aug. 15 half of the estimated 115,000 troops it had in Afghanistan. A Red Army official raised concern when he indicated last week that new troops would be sent to Kabul, which has been under guerrilla fire.    ---   Meese criticized two of his former top aides, saying they triggered an independent counsel's 14-month inquiry of him by failing to conduct a &quot;competent and thorough&quot; Justice Department investigation. The attorney general made his remarks in a speech before the National Press Club in Washington. The aides resigned in March.    ---   NASA postponed a critical test-firing of the space shuttle Discovery's main engines for 24 hours until Sunday. The practice countdown, which had started, was delayed as the space agency's engineers assessed methods for fixing a small fuel leak without having to take the spacecraft off its Cape Canaveral, Fla., launching pad.    ---   Visitors were barred from parts of Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming as a forest fire doubled in size to more than 2,500 acres. It was within nine miles of Old Faithful geyser. A 23,000-acre blaze in the nearby Teton Wilderness appeared to be contained. Fires also charred thousands of acres in five other Western states hit by dry weather.    ---   Israel's army released 148 Palestinian prisoners in the occupied Gaza Strip in what the military called a goodwill gesture toward Arabs during a four-day Moslem feast. Clashes between Israeli troops and Palestinian demonstrators were reported in the occupied territories, and a curfew was imposed on the Jabaliya refugee camp.    ---   Gunmen disguised as police killed a member of the Irish Republican Army's political wing in Belfast as Roman Catholic Cardinal O'Connor of New York, delivering a sermon about a mile away, denounced Americans who &quot;romanticize violence&quot; in Ireland. Sinn Fein blamed Protestant extremists in Ulster for the slaying.    ---   Sikh extremists assassinated one of their faith's five high priests in an attack near the Punjab capital of Chandigarh. Officials said the killing shocked the moderate Sikh community. The victim recently had been appointed as the head of the Golden Temple, Sikhdom's holiest shrine, in Amritsar.    ---   Thailand's governing coalition began talks that are expected to result in Prem Tinsulanonda continuing as prime minister. Members of the four-party coalition already have endorsed Prem to lead the new government. According to results from Sunday's general elections, the parties retained control of Bangkok's 357-seat parliament.    ---   The Athens government opened a round of talks with the U.S. aimed at breaking a deadlock on a new agreement covering American military bases in Greece. The negotiations come after Greece formally notified Washington that the current accord, covering four major U.S. bases, would be terminated in December.    ---   Medical researchers found that early miscarriages don't affect a woman's ability to conceive or heighten the risk of spontaneous abortions. The study, to be published in this week's New England Journal of Medicine, urges the reconsideration of the &quot;unnecessary postponement of pregnancy&quot; in women who have an early miscarriage. </TEXT></DOC>