<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870624-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Party's Breaking Up in Chicago---By Thomas F. Roeser</HL><DD> 06/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In this era of Contragate hearings and Reagan-bashing, it is axiomatic to say that everywhere the Democratic Party is the beneficiary -- except in Chicago, once its impregnable bastion.    Here, Edward Vrdolyak -- &quot;Fast Eddie,&quot; who in his oracular tirades resembles no one more than Dr. Harold Hill of the &quot;Music Man&quot; and who until he quit last week held what is supposed to be the state's most powerful job, chairman of the Cook County Democratic Committee -- is unabashedly eyeing a switch to the enfeebled Republican Party.    Black and white-liberal enthusiasts for Mayor Harold Washington say &quot;so what?&quot; To them, Mr. Vrdolyak's retreat to the Republicans will symbolize his total failure following April's general election, where as a third-party candidate he was beaten by Mayor Washington. They see Mr. Vrdolyak, attired in greatcoat, collar drawn to his chin to protect him from the elements, astride a dispirited horse and leading his shattered troops from debacle, like the portrait of Napoleon after Moscow.    But such is not the case. While winning supposedly means everything in politics, history is populated by eventual winners who gained much attention from electoral close calls. And Mr. Vrdolyak, supposedly a hopeless loser, carried 42% against the mayor this spring while pitted against two white ballot opponents as well. He did well on the supposedly liberal Lakefront, carried easily even the 43rd Ward (long the jewel of the &quot;independent&quot; movement), and swept many blue-collar neighborhoods. He was stunning in the television debates. Today Mr. Vrdolyak, who formerly also controlled the city council, is vastly more celebrated than at any other time in his career.    Anywhere but Chicago, such an electoral performance and fame might guarantee a bright future for a Democrat. But such are the racial and reformist dynamics of city politics that Mr. Vrdolyak and other white Democratic leaders not even conspicuously in his camp are treated as pariahs. The Republican Party of Cook County, notwithstanding an able chairman, has done little to change its image as a seedy, evil-smelling corpse except to elect a new former Democrat as sheriff; but while the GOP has little to offer Mr. Vrdolyak but shelter, the Democratic Party presents him with far worse.    It is, under Harold Washington, seemingly inhabited by a ruling class composed of three categories, none companionable to Mr. Vrdolyak. While hundreds of thousands of traditional middle-class Democrats rumble with discontent, increasingly the party elite seems to consist of (a) black, pulpit-pounding, &quot;gimme five&quot; community organizers with wide-open access to the mayor's office; (b) a covey of radical-chic millionaires -- all white -- plotting heady strategy on the Lakefront but who generally themselves fail to register to vote; and (c) white activist-organizers you might see in any left-liberal demonstration. The other Democratic Party has middle-class, stolid burghers aplenty but little clout at the top.    By the old rules, Mayor Washington, newly triumphant, should meet with his old enemies, accept their pledge of fealty, and allow them to live under a reign where they would prove themselves and receive at least a modicum of scraps from the royal tables. But under the new political rules of Chicago, this is not to be. Save two widely heralded exceptions -- Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski and former Mayor Jane Byrne -- Harold Washington has forsworn compromise with his old antagonists who need, and even pathetically crave, his approbation to survive.    Even in the case of Rep. Rostenkowski, it was the powerful Ways and Means chairman who came hat in hand to the mayor's office to make peace after a set-to during the mayoralty race. Rep. Rostenkowski did it not out of concern for better relations with the city government but because his district is rapidly changing from white to black and Hispanic. Mayor Washington has it within his power to sanction a debilitating primary fight. Mayor Washington breakfasted with the congressman and accepts Rep. Rostenkowski's entreaties poker-faced, but there is no rapproachement.    Mrs. Byrne supported the mayor after her primary loss to him. But she didn't deliver many white votes (Mr. Washington won the general election with only 53%, the same as in his 1983 win), and everyone knows she needs him rather than he her -- she is asking his blessing for a future clerk of the Circuit Court bid.    But in his glorious defeat Mr. Vrdolyak won't be a supplicant for Mr. Washington's pleasure. Not that he would get it anyhow. But the mayor could forestall the departure of the Vrdolyak camp if he would bend a little. Rather, Mr. Washington is willing to watch the potential evacuation of leaders, certain to depart with thousands of white city voters, to the Republican Party. It is the hallmark of urban race-reform politics that there is no concern about party disintegration. Like the far right of the Republican Party, movement people in the Democratic Party are proud of the wounds that come with refusal to sacrifice what is known as principle.    One can point to nearly a dozen prominent local Democratic officials who could follow Mr. Vrdolyak out of the party, affecting not only Chicago's blue-collar wards and centers of patronage, but perhaps the balance of the state Senate.    What, besides Mr. Washington's intransigence, has produced this potentially great gain for the Republican Party of Cook County and Illinois? These four reasons:    1.The unintended consequences of reform. Despite a court-ordered end to &quot;patronage,&quot; any resourceful politician still can utilize city jobs and lucrative contracts to build his army. Indeed, Mayor Washington is doing this right now with black supporters as befits his perfect right, a laudable activity in the direction of party-building. But he is not doing anything to patch up relations with his old enemies -- just coolly resolving to even the score, which leaves them no option but to go elsewhere.    2.The increasing leftward drift of the party. Richard J. Daley wisely kept his party in Cook County resolutely nonideological. Increasingly under Harold Washington the party has become less of an organization and more of a canopy spread over trendy peace and sexual-orientation movements that lead to campaigning via mediacracy. Fickle television attention is assiduously courted in place of nuts-and-bolts organizing, and the coverage turns off centrist Democrats.    This has been extended to the state party. Pro-Washington gubernatorial candidate Adlai Stevenson III lost control of its processes when, thanks to his own inattention and Harold Washington's, the LaRouche-ite faction saddled Mr. Stevenson with LaRouche-ite running-mates. Result: Mr. Stevenson, who was given every possible chance to upset moderate-liberal Republican James Thompson, had to invent a third-party candidacy and became a laughingstock.    Meanwhile, U.S. Sen. Alan Dixon, a downstate centrist, is a big vote-getter who typifies the old coalition brilliantly but is enduring much Chicago Democratic Party abuse because he has the temerity to vote for Contra aid, in the tradition of Hubert Humphrey and Henry Jackson.    The state's other senator, Paul Simon, could be in some reelection trouble in 1990 if his presidential bid fails. The downstater ran as a centrist in 1984, but his increasing visibility on the left end of the spectrum will not ingratiate him with the old regulars at home.    3.The Jackson influence. It is one of Sen. Simon's rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination, Jesse Jackson, who in Illinois Democratic politics preaches that victors should take no prisoners of rival centrists. Mr. Jackson's power with the trendy electronic media is debilitating for Democrats, sensational for Republicans. Allowing for partial repair of a 1984 rupture with the Jews, Mr. Jackson infuriates, by his ultra-dovish foreign policy, voters of Eastern European heritage as well as non-ethnic middle-class voters. Thanks largely to Mr. Jackson's stentorian rhetoric in Chicago in 1984, 14 middle-class Democratic Chicago wards voted for Ronald Reagan, vs. three in 1980. Many more will likely vote GOP in 1988.    4.Decline of business support. Under Mayor Daley the Democratic Party was always first in line to receive business support; these days Harold Washington gets his share, but even so, has to travel far and wide to other cities on fund-raising expeditions. While business will always be on hand to support Democratic mayoral candidates, contributions to the party are rumored to have dropped precariously.    Thus, what could be jeered as Mr. Vrdolyak's retreat could really be a kind of resurrection for him and the Republican Party. This is not to say there aren't some compensating demographic shifts for the Democrats. As with the remainder of the nation, affluence brings susceptibility to post-industrial liberalism: Some of Paul Simon's strongest supporters can be found in the wealthy, upscale precincts of Winnetka and Wilmette. But this is more than offset by the infusion of energy the Republican Party is receiving from Chicago residents unhappy with their Democratic Party for whom the GOP is a beaconing but flickering light.    ---   Mr. Roeser, a one-time fellow at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, is president of the City Club of Chicago, a 600-member civic group. </TEXT></DOC>