<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880908-0036 </DOCNO><HL> The SEC's Case Against Drexel: Milken's Pursuit of Business Opportunity Built A Personal Fortune, Brought Drexel to the Fore </HL><AUTHOR> John Emshwiller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BON BIO STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><DATELINE> BEVERLY HILLS, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael Milken is the world's worst driver, says longtime friend Harry Horowitz: &quot;He tries to read the newspaper&quot; and drive at the same time.    A high school friend, Gary Herzberg, recalls that Mr. Milken wasn't so hot in woodshop, either. &quot;If he ever wanted to be a carpenter, he would be in trouble,&quot; says Dr. Herzberg, now a physician in northern California.    However, lumber isn't used in what Mr. Milken has built, and he has spent most of his time in recent years driving a multibillion-dollar financing machine rather than a car. As senior executive vice president and head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s high-yield and convertible bond department -- based in this town dedicated to high yields -- Mr. Milken has been described in the media as a &quot;one-man revolution,&quot; the &quot;grand sorcerer of finance&quot; and the &quot;Mozart of the money markets.&quot;    He has also been accused of helping to put the future of the U.S. in hock. And now, Mr. Milken and Drexel have been formally accused by the Securities and Exchange Commission of numerous insider-trading and other securities law violations.    From the beginning of the insider-trading investigation, Mr. Milken has clearly been viewed as the prime target by investigators. Drexel's Beverly Hills office &quot;is the focus of the entire probe,&quot; one person close to the investigation said shortly after the inquiry became public in late 1986.    That Mr. Milken should have such an exalted place in these controversies is at least in part a reflection of the enormous changes he has helped bring about in the financial world.    Thanks largely to his efforts, a generation of entrepreneurs has been able to raise sums of money they could once only dream about. Kenneth Pontikes, for instance, started out in 1970 with a one-man company. Today the company, Comdisco Inc., employs hundreds and is a major computer-leasing concern. Mr. Pontikes said he doesn't believe his company would have survived without the hundreds of millions of dollars raised by Mr. Milken's operation at Drexel.    At the same time, Mr. Milken's money-raising talent has helped fuel some of the bitterest and most controversial takeover battles ever, ranging from T. Boone Pickens Jr.'s unsuccessful efforts to acquire Gulf Oil Corp., Phillips Petroleum Co. and Unocal Corp. to Ronald Perelman's successful bid for Revlon Inc.    Largely because of such takeover battles, Mr. Milken and Drexel are viewed in many corporate boardrooms as major menaces.    Whatever one thinks of Mr. Milken, however, he clearly is a man who, more than most, isn't interested in traveling with the crowd.    He was born July 4, 1946, into the solidly middle-class world of Los Angeles's sprawling San Fernando Valley. By the age of 10, he was helping his father, an accountant, prepare clients' tax returns.    At Birmingham High School in Los Angeles, he was voted the &quot;most spirited&quot; and &quot;friendliest&quot; member of his 1964 graduating class. He was also head cheerleader on a squad that included Sally Field. (The future actress was voted the &quot;funniest&quot; person in the class.)    He was nosed out for valedictorian, however, by Dr. Herzberg. At a birthday party in 1986 for a mutual friend, Dr. Herzberg says, Mr. Milken &quot;kidded me about how I probably cheated to get my A in chemistry.&quot; Dr. Herzberg adds: &quot;I bet 90% of the people from our high school think he was valedictorian.&quot;    Mr. Milken got his undergraduate degree in business administration from the University of California in Berkeley, where he stayed aloof from the political activism that was rife on the campus in the mid-1960s. Instead, he spent his spare time managing investments for a small group of clients. He covered any losses out of his own pocket and took half of any profits.    At Berkeley, &quot;people accused him of not being politically active,&quot; recalls Mr. Horowitz, who has been Mr. Milken's friend since the two were 10 years old. &quot;But Michael always felt you could accomplish more social change if you were successful in business.&quot;    In 1968, Mr. Milken went to the Wharton business school in Philadelphia, where he began focusing on the financial product that would make him rich and famous.    &quot;Junk&quot; bonds once led a simple and relatively obscure existence. They were merely securities that had been issued as investment-grade debt but had lost that status because of hard times at their corporate parents. Most investors took their name at face value and shunned them.    But to Mr. Milken, such junk looked golden. By studying the prices, interest rates and default histories of these bonds, he determined that the issues generally were safer and more lucrative than the market was giving them credit for.    (Mr. Milken and Drexel never warmed to the term &quot;junk&quot; bonds. Early on, Mr. Milken called them &quot;high-opportunity&quot; securities. Now, Drexel generally calls them &quot;high-yield,&quot; reflecting the high interest rates they pay. Critics still call them junk.)    Mr. Milken didn't stop at trading existing junk bonds. Though Drexel wasn't the first investment banking concern to underwrite securities that were below investment grade from birth, Drexel essentially created and continues to dominate that market.    What Mr. Milken and his Drexel colleagues saw was a giant business opportunity reflected in a couple of numbers. By Drexel's count, only about 800 companies have been deemed investment grade by one of the major rating concerns. But there are thousands of companies with annual sales of $25 million or more, and they need to borrow money too.    Such companies generally have had to borrow from banks or insurance companies. But with floating interest rates and covenants &quot;that put you technically into default from the moment you sign the loan agreement, I don't sleep at nights when I have bank debt,&quot; says Ralph Ingersoll III, chairman of Ingersoll Publications Co, a Drexel customer. &quot;You can't build a stable business with it.&quot;    Mr. Milken and Drexel had to find the right companies to back and a pool of investors willing to buy the bonds. To succeed, Mr. Milken had to challenge some traditions of financial thinking, such as the idea that piling up huge amounts of debt relative to equity was bad for a company and dangerous for investors. In Mr. Milken's world, the shape of a balance sheet is less important than the quality of management and the ideas it has for its business.    In a 1986 speech, Mr. Milken said: &quot;Capital is no longer a scarce resource. . . . The scarce resource today is management, knowledge, vision, dealing with change. . . . You won't find these scarce resources listed on a balance sheet.&quot;    Despite their fat yields -- typically several percentage points above U.S. Treasury bonds -- marketing Drexel's junk bonds took a lot of work, much of it by Mr. Milken.    One manager of a high-yield-bond investment fund recalls Mr. Milken coming into their first meeting &quot;carrying two huge briefcases that must have weighed 50 pounds, filled with prospectuses. He told me that between what was in those briefcases and his head, we could go over every high-yield issue in existence.&quot; And for 15 hours, they did just that.    So far, Mr. Milken's analysis of the business world has been spectacularly successful -- and lucrative for himself and his employer.    The success of Mr. Milken's operation has helped closely held Drexel rise out of the backwaters of investment banking to become one of the richest and most powerful houses on Wall Street. In the process the accountant's son has built up a personal fortune estimated at $500 million or more.    Mr. Milken might have remained a rich and relatively uncontroversial financier if he and other top Drexel officials hadn't made a fateful decision to help finance hostile corporate takeovers with junk bonds.    Drexel and its clients didn't invent hostile corporate takeovers. But Drexel's fund-raising power vastly expanded the game and opened it to a new range of players, known as entrepreneurs to their friends and raiders to their enemies.    Associates say Mr. Milken is unapologetic about his role in takeover fights, that he believes the corporate giants his clients pursued were vulnerable because they had failed to adapt to changing business conditions.    But despite being a man who preaches the need to deal with change, Mr. Milken has in many ways clung to the world he grew up in. He still lives in the San Fernando Valley. His home -- once owned by actor Clark Gable -- is elegant but hardly palatial.    He met his wife, Lori, in the ninth grade. When Mr. Milken moved Drexel's high-yield operation here from New York in 1978, he persuaded his younger brother, Lowell, and his boyhood friend Mr. Horowitz to join Drexel. His idea of a good time -- other than trading bonds -- is spending time with his wife and three children.    Mr. Horowitz says his friend never has imbibed drinks containing alcohol, caffeine or carbonation. &quot;Don't ask me why. He just never has,&quot; Mr. Horowitz says.    Since the federal insider-trading investigation began, however, Mr. Milken has made some changes. To try to counteract the flood of negative publicity, he began granting interviews to reporters after shunning such requests for years. Mr. Milken wouldn't discuss the investigation, but he was willing to talk about his business philosophy and plans.    Those plans included tackling the economic problems of underdeveloped countries. Last year, for instance, he said he planned to raise funds for investment in Latin America, particularly Mexico.    At the same time, Mr. Milken's advisers and friends began talking up his value as a financier. Some of his attorneys, for instance, started referring to him as a &quot;national treasure.&quot;    And in a speech this year to a Drexel-sponsored meeting on Latin American investment, Rep. Tony Coelho, a Democrat from California, described his &quot;very good friend&quot; Mr. Milken as a man &quot;who is constantly thinking what can be done to make this a better world.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>