<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880906-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Five Great Goals for the Next Generation </HL><AUTHOR> W.W. Rostow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST LATAM JAPAN AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   The world is passing through a watershed. The outcome is uncertain; but after a half century of war and impassioned enmity there is ground for hope. Four dangerous regional conflicts have moved from bloody confrontation toward negotiation; great new domestic forces have been unleashed in the communist world; relations between the Soviet Union and the West, China and the West, and, perhaps, the Soviet Union and China are being reshaped; Western Europe is moving toward 1992 and a higher degree of unity.    To be sure, ample economic and political trouble still exists: American deficits; Third World debts; Northern Ireland; the West Bank; etc. At some point, the Stalinists, Maoists and Khomeinis of this world will, almost certainly, try to reverse the recent course of events.    It is a time both to keep our powder dry and to strive with hope in new directions.    What must be accomplished in the generation ahead? Five great needs emerge as a substantial part of that agenda:   --The peaceful end to the Cold War, an anachronism in a world that does not lend itself to domination by any one nation.    --The peaceful absorption into the world economy and polity of nations now moving swiftly to absorb all the major technologies, a group including among others, China and India, Brazil and Mexico. Avoiding the violence that accompanied the rise of Germany, Japan and the Soviet Union is imperative for survival in a nuclear age.    --The maintenance of economic vitality and a high degree of cooperation in and among the countries of Western Europe, Japan, and the U.S. -- a condition for successful management of the first two tasks.    --Intense international cooperation to cope with the mounting pressures on the environment.    --Patient assistance to the nations that have found development difficult: e.g., Africa south of the Sahara, Haiti, Yemen, Afghanistan, Burma, some of the Pacific Islands. These nations contain about 20% of the human race and are an inescapable charge on the early-comers to modernization.    This agenda calls for deeper, rather than reduced, U.S. involvement with the world. This goes against the grain of many Americans, who feel that with the Soviet Union and China preoccupied at home and an amelioration of regional conflicts, U.S. involvement with the world can be safely cut back. Since the U.S. was drawn into the world in 1917, 1941, 1947 and 1950 by dangers to the balance of power generated by wars -- hot and Cold -- that feeling is understandable. But the successful management of the more hopeful agenda of the next generation calls for wider engagement in the world's affairs.    Let me illustrate this proposition with three cases:   First, the movement to end the Cold War in Europe. This requires the reconciliation of the claims of Eastern European states for greater human freedom and national independence with the claims of the Soviet Union and the U.S. that Europe not again threaten their national security. It also requires the reconciliation of the aspiration of the German people for unity with the strategic anxieties the prospect of such a development evokes among the smaller states of Europe. Stalin's empire in Eastern Europe is doomed to pass into history. But we have a collective duty to ensure it is not superseded by anarchy.    A successful outcome will depend on unity within the Atlantic community. It is fortunate that, from its beginnings, its members regarded the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as an instrument for seeking peace as well as for military defense; and, on European issues, NATO has been able to sustain for 40 years a high degree of mutual understanding and consensus.    A second illustration: The Pacific Basin. This vast region is likely to remain the most dynamic area in the world economy. That dynamism has generated a sequence of problems and tensions in trade and capital movements that justify the creation of an intergovernmental organization similar to the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development, but with an important difference: It must accommodate the interests of countries at quite different levels of development.    There are further common tasks: the full and peaceful absorption of China into the affairs of the Pacific, the achievement of a mature and stable equilibrium of Japan with the other nations of the region, and a progressively enlarged stature for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations; perhaps, even, the emergence of a non-confrontational role for the Soviet Union in the Pacific and, almost certainly, increased participation in the region's affairs by some of the major Latin American countries. These and other political developments, will justify a patient, constructive U.S. effort. This is what we should be working on as Europe moves toward 1992.    A third illustration: Latin America. The 1960s were a decade of efforts in development cross-cut by important security crises: notably, the Bay of Pigs, the Cuban missile crisis, and the Dominican crisis. Hemispheric ties weakened in the 1970s. Latin America turned politically toward the United Nations' New International Economic Order and, economically, toward the private capital markets for financing its increasingly sophisticated economies. The 1980s have proved a painful, sobering decade dominated by debt burdens, a restructuring of many Latin American economies, and -- in a kind of miracle -- a surge forward toward democracy at a trying time.    In the 1980s the interdependence of the U.S. and Latin America has increased, as flows of immigration, the debt problem, a stubborn hemispheric commitment to the ultimate success of democracy, and inescapable common interests in the peaceful resolution of the region's security problems attest. While a nostalgic revival of the old Alliance for Progress is neither wise nor possible, there are a great many useful things we can do together to advance common interests.    Emerging international environmental problems and the collective efforts required to buy time for those countries lagging in development will also draw the U.S. into the world on a wider basis. Over the next generation the U.S. is likely to continue to produce about 20% of the world's output -- a proportion probably declining slowly as the newcomers to technological maturity gather momentum. Yet the U.S. cannot dominate the world's affairs. In fact, it did not do so even in the immediate post-1945 years. But it remains -- and is likely to remain -- the critical margin. Things do not go well in the world when it performs badly. But much can be accomplished when it concerts its efforts with others in sensible directions.    For America to fulfill its role as the critical margin we must balance the nation's accounts, stop living by borrowing, and then start rebuilding the nation's attenuated capital stock. Is American society capable of this kind of domestic performance? I am inclined toward temperate optimism: By and large, the performance of American society at the state and local levels has been marked by sustained cooperative efforts to solve problems.    The reconstruction of the centers of many American cities has been the product of complex partnerships embracing the private sector, state and local government, with the universities and labor often lending a hand. Most important of all have been the partnerships between the universities and the private sector in generating new technologies, with state and local governments and financial institutions sometimes getting into the act with new forms of venture capital.    Developments in the states anticipate the shape of national politics, and we shall see before too long the politics of partnership and cooperation dominant at the national level. When that happens, hitherto intractable problems will yield much as bipartisanship solved the Social Security crisis of 1983.    In any case, that vision of the possibilities underlies my judgment that our society still commands the strength, resilience, and will to play the role of critical margin over the next generation.    There is another way to state this argument. For more than 40 years the Cold War has supplied the primary framework for U.S. relations to the world. Ideologically, today there is a sense in which a favorable turning point has occurred in the Cold War. The forces of democracy are clearly on the rise; the virtues of competitive capitalism vs. bureaucratic management of markets are increasingly recognized and new balances are being struck between private and public enterprise on every continent.    In this international effort the role of the U.S. will, by and large, be judged honorable when we command the perspective to assess it. But history never stops. The world of progressively diffusing power in which we live is capable of chaos and violence and of generating nuclear danger. The task ahead is to play our part, working with others, to organize that world peacefully. That was the hope we all had in 1945 -- a hope interrupted by the Cold War. The watershed through which we are passing is an apt moment to recommit ourselves to bringing that hope to life.    ---   Mr. Rostow is professor of political economy at the University of Texas. He held high posts in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations. </TEXT></DOC>