<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881003-0042 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV SHUFFLED the Soviet leadership to proceed with radical change.    After building his power base for more than three years, the Soviet leader emerged from a weekend shake-up of the Communist Party apparatus with a clear mandate to press ahead with political, economic and social restructuring. During a Central Committee meeting Friday, party veteran Gromyko and former ambassador to the U.S. Dobrynin were sent into retirement, and two Gorbachev opponents were demoted. At Saturday's session of the Supreme Soviet, Gorbachev was elected to the additional post of president.    Nationalists meeting in Estonia called on Moscow to reduce control over the Baltic republic. The group's congress was sanctioned by Moscow.    ---   Discovery's crew prepared for today's scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California, stowing scientific experiments and equipment used in the flight. The five shuttle astronauts also saluted the crew killed in the 1986 Challenger explosion and answered questions posed by reporters at Johnson Space Center in Houston.    ---   Canadian politicians kicked off a seven-week election campaign expected to focus on Prime Minister Mulroney's free-trade agreement with the U.S. Polls show Mulroney's conservative party leading, though not by its 1984 margin. Taxes, day care, the environment and defense will also be debated.    ---   Pinochet supporters paraded through Chile's capital on the last day of campaigning before Wednesday's vote on extending the general's presidency. On Saturday, his opponents staged the biggest rally since the military seized power in 1973. If Pinochet loses the vote, he must call open elections by the end of 1989.    ---   Zaire's President Mobuto accepted an invitation to visit South Africa after a meeting Saturday with President Botha. It was Botha's third summit with a black African leader in three weeks. South Africa's foreign minister wouldn't confirm or deny reports that Botha promised Mobuto the release of black nationalist Nelson Mandela.    ---   The FBI discriminated against Hispanic agents in promotions and working conditions, often assigning them to tedious wiretaps or pulling them off major cases, a federal judge ruled Friday in El Paso, Texas. But the judge didn't find that the FBI had retaliated against the agents who sued.    ---   Two Yugoslav Politburo members quit under pressure, signaling a major Communist Party purge. Demonstrators in Serbia, the nation's biggest republic, have demanded that some 40 officials resign for being soft on Albanian separatists in Serbia's southern autonomous province of Kosovo.    ---   Pakistan's top court ruled that candidates in November can run as members of political parties, using party symbols. The decision favored opposition leader Bhutto. Meanwhile, at least 245 people were killed in weekend violence in southern Pakistan.    ---   The GAO found a pattern of laxity toward safety at a Savannah River, S.C., nuclear weapons plant run by Du Pont, including 30 safety-related incidents between 1957 and 1985. Du Pont denied safety was compromised and said no employee ever missed work due to injury.    ---   Pope John Paul II ruled out the priesthood for women but condemned sexual discrimination in a teaching that will shape debate on women in the Roman Catholic Church. He said that men and women are equal but different and that women should devote themselves to others, either through motherhood or &quot;spiritual motherhood.&quot;    ---   Republican Quayle differed with Bush on arms-control strategy. The vice presidential nominee told the New York Times that long-range nuclear weapons should be linked with conventional arms in U.S.-Soviet talks. In an interview with the Associated Press, he said he would focus on Dukakis during his debate with Bentsen Wednesday night.    ---   The Olympic Games concluded in Seoul as thousands of athletes turned the closing ceremony into a giant party. The Soviet Union finished the 16-day competition with 132 medals, including 55 golds. East Germany captured 102 medals, and the U.S. came in third with 94 medals, 36 of them gold.    ---   Died: Truong Chinh, 81, former chief of Vietnam's Communist Party, Friday in Hanoi, of injuries sustained in a fall. </TEXT></DOC>