<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870901-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Creativity Furor:High-Tech AlterationOf Sights and SoundsDivides the Arts World---Films, Music and PhotographsAre Subject to Tinkering:Like Removing a Toenail?---Fast Movies and Stray Squeals---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX)PHOTOGRAPHY (PIX) </IN><TEXT>   Tom Lord-Alge is a hot young rock-music recording engineer, and one reason is his enormous collection of other people's sounds. He has them neatly organized on 10 reels of tape. He has Phil Collins drumming, James Brown shrieking, the Tower of Power horn section blaring, Bruce Springsteen yelling &quot;whoa,&quot; a little piece of a Japanese television commercial and about 2,000 other noises.    When he works on new records, computerized recording gear lets Mr. Lord-Alge dip into his collection as if it were a palette of paints. He recently slipped the James Brown scream into a record by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark. For a song by The Cars, he pasted in the sound of TV's cartoon character Road Runner running. This year the 25-year-old engineer won a Grammy for his work on Steve Winwood's latest album, where he adorned one song with Diana Ross and the Supremes clapping and stomping their feet in &quot;Where Did Our Love Go.&quot;    Rock records today are made this way all the time. &quot;We're all blatantly stealing from everyone else,&quot; says Mr. Lord-Alge. &quot;Any record is fair game, no matter what it is. . . . That's just the way it's done in the '80s.&quot;    New technology is making the '80s a strange and lawless time to be a creative artist. Not only musicians but also photographers and movie makers are grappling with the advent of computers that let their works be manipulated by other people in powerful new ways. The computers are stirring up big disputes in the arts world, pitting artists against producers and publishers -- and sometimes against other artists.    Digital recording equipment lets engineers appropriate any sound and bend and twist it to fit onto a new record. That unsettles some musicians -- like the drummer who was stunned to find that a few seconds of conga drumming he casually recorded for a friend had been cloned to become the background for the entire &quot;Miami Vice&quot; theme song.    Photographers are worried about new graphics computers that add, subtract and recombine elements of pictures without leaving a trace. For instance, National Geographic caused an uproar when it used a computer to neatly move two Egyptian pyramids closer together in a photo.    And in the movie business, directors and actors are raising a ruckus over new tools that electronically transform the look of films. They have gone to Congress to decry companies that use computers to turn black-and-white movies into color. They are also starting to oppose a widely used gadget that speeds up movies to fit short TV time-slots without making them sound speeded up.    All this raises questions that strain the modern boundaries of law, morality and aesthetics. Are Madonna's rights infringed when another record uses her trademark squeal electronically raised an octave? Who gets to decide whether &quot;The Maltese Falcon&quot; should be reissued in color? Is it wrong to lift the sunset from a magazine photo, play around with the colors and use it for the background of another picture?    As the anti-computer faction sees it, much more is at stake in this debate than the way rock records sound or TV movies look. This faction says the new arts technology sends a dire message about artists' place in society, by overpowering their basic right to control their own work.    &quot;Just as in other fields -- in the sciences and in weaponry -- our technological capabilities here are far in advance of our intellectual development or our moral development,&quot; says the director and actor Woody Allen, who emerged from his customary reclusion this year to speak out against colorizing movies. &quot;The problem,&quot; he says in an interview, &quot;is that the solutions in the United States always come down so heavily for the side where the money is.&quot;    The high-tech advocates think computers open up exciting new avenues for artists. Like their opponents, some of them base their case on artists' rights. Artists, they say, have the right to use any new artistic technique without restrictions.    &quot;This is a new form of music, just like collages,&quot; says Arthur Baker, who runs the Shakedown Sound recording studio in New York and is known as one of the kings of audio cutting-and-pasting. &quot;The technology has developed to the extent that if you like the sound, you can have the sound.&quot;    The tool of his trade is a device called a digital sampler. It can take any &quot;sample&quot; of recorded sound, convert it into a series of numbers and manipulate it in virtually limitless ways by changing the numbers. It can raise or lower its pitch, give it more or less echo, repeat it in any rhythm, combine it with other sounds and perform dozens of other tricks that a simple tape recorder could never do.    Samplers once cost tens of thousands of dollars, but now a cheap system sells for $700. The odds are good that any pop song you hear on the radio today has sounds that came out of a sampler. Engineers feed their samplers all manner of sounds: new ones made by studio musicians or electronic synthesizers, and old ones gleaned from other records. Using old sounds is easier and cheaper, and has a certain renegade allure in the rock-music world.    Figuring out who gets credit for sampler music is messy. A few years ago David Earle Johnson, a jazz drummer, brought his rare Nigerian conga drums into a producer friend's studio and played a few patterns into a sampler. Months later, he flipped on &quot;Miami Vice&quot; and heard his drumming running through the entire theme song.    Mr. Johnson couldn't persuade the producer, Jan Hammer, to pay him for the use of the samples. He also couldn't persuade the musicians' union to take up his case. &quot;My mistake was I didn't have any kind of written agreement,&quot; he says. &quot;Now the computer has my sound for life.&quot; Mr. Hammer's manager, Elliott Sears, comments that Mr. Johnson simply wanted &quot;money for doing nothing.&quot;    Frank Doyle, a New York engineer, recently plugged into his sampler the sound of Madonna screaming &quot;hey!&quot; on her song &quot;Like a Virgin,&quot; raised it an octave and dropped the new sound into a few parts of a coming song by Jamie Bernstein. He took a horn blast from a James Brown song and turned it into a lush, mellow tone for a Japanese singer's love ballad. &quot;I didn't feel at all like I was ripping James Brown off,&quot; he says.    That's not the way James Brown sees it. &quot;Anything they take off my record is mine,&quot; says the soul-music pioneer, speaking from his Augusta, Ga., office. &quot;Is it all right if I take some paint off your house and put it on mine? Can I take a button off your shirt and put it on mine? Can I take a toenail off your foot -- is that all right with you?&quot;    So far the copyright law, which was last updated in 1976, hasn't been much help in untangling the questions that digital sampling raises. It prohibits knockoffs that &quot;directly or indirectly recapture the actual sounds&quot; of a recording, but lawyers disagree as to whether that language applies to sampling and there hasn't been a court test.    One rock star trying to put up his own legal roadblocks against sampling is Frank Zappa. His newest album, &quot;Jazz From Hell,&quot; bears this unusual warning in small print on the cover: &quot;Unauthorized reproduction/sampling is a violation of applicable laws and subject to criminal prosecution.&quot;    New technology has photographers embroiled in a similar dispute. At its center are million-dollar graphics computers -- made by Scitex Corp. and others -- that scan photographs and convert every tiny point into computer information. Ad agencies and publications routinely use them to do jobs that would take too long or look too sloppy without a computer.    National Geographic stirred a debate in the photo world when it used a Scitex machine in 1982 to move two of the pyramids of Giza closer together to fit on a cover. It used the Scitex again for another cover that year, to add a little chunk to the top of a Polish coal miner's cap that had been cut off by the camera in the original photo.    Two years ago, Rolling Stone's editors faced a last-minute crisis over a cover photo that displeased the magazine's publisher, Jann Wenner. The picture showed the two stars of &quot;Miami Vice&quot; clowning around near the ocean. A grinning Don Johnson wore a pistol in a shoulder holster slung over his pink sleeveless shirt. Mr. Wenner, an anti-handgun activist, refused to go to press with a gun on the magazine's cover.    Putting the picture inside a Scitex computer solved the problem. An artist sitting behind a keyboard and a big monitor carefully overlaid the gun with little pieces of pink fabric electronically copied from the photo of Mr. Johnson's shirt. He extended the shadows and wrinkles from the real shirt onto the new artificial patch. When he was finished, there was no trace of the gun left and no detectable seam where the computer had done its work. It was as if Jann Wenner had reached into the photograph and pulled off Don Johnson's holster.    Like digital samplers, photo-rearranging computers are leading into a wilderness of legal and ethical questions. Photographers wonder whether they will lose their copyright on pictures that emerge from a computer-tinkering session. They also worry about losing money if publishers furtively reuse photos stored in a computer -- or pieces of them. (Without a computer, a publisher usually has to use an original negative.)    Most of all, they worry that high-tech tinkering could damage the credibility of journalistic photos. &quot;People have always wondered about writing -- if you didn't hear someone speak, you can never be sure if they've been quoted right -- but they've always believed photographs,&quot; says Ken Kobre, the director of San Francisco State University's photojournalism program.    &quot;Now there's no way to prove that a picture is phony,&quot; says Michael Evans, a Washington, D.C., photojournalist. Mr. Evans spent four years as President Reagan's personal photographer. &quot;I'm a little terrified,&quot; he says, &quot;at the prospect of the image makers at the White House having control over a process they can seamlessly put together, like they seamlessly put together press releases.&quot;    Of course, photographers have been using artificial means to play around with their pictures for decades, cropping, pasting, using filters, and using bleach in the darkroom to brighten sections of photos. &quot;I have an old friend who says you shouldn't use a flash -- that alters the reality -- and if it's dark, you shouldn't photograph,&quot; says Rick Smolan, the co-director of the &quot;Day in the Life&quot; series of photo books about different countries. &quot;This is just another tool,&quot; he says of photo computers.    But it is an extraordinarily powerful tool. Mr. Smolan has used a Scitex to fiddle with the covers of all seven books in his series, usually to adapt a photo to fit a vertical space. In &quot;A Day in the Life of America,&quot; he moved the moon and a tree in an originally horizontal shot of a preacher riding up a hill. In the forthcoming &quot;A Day in the Life of the Soviet Union,&quot; he added an extra strip of sky to the top of a shot of Red Square at night.    He says he doesn't use the Scitex to &quot;change the meaning of the picture&quot; and would use it only on a cover photo, whose integrity is already spoiled, he says, by printing words on it.    The loudest battle in the computer-arts arena right now is over colorizing movies. On one side are a handful of entertainment companies, led by Turner Broadcasting System Inc. and Hal Roach Studios Inc., that have spent millions of dollars electronically adding color to dozens of old black-and-white movies. On the other is a loud coalition of film makers and critics who think the technique mutilates movies and shouldn't be used without a director's approval.    Meanwhile, movie makers are just starting to line up against another new technology: an electronic device called an audio time compressor. It performs a neat trick on audio tapes: It converts them into computer data and then deletes what the device's makers call redundant elements of sound. The result, compressor makers say: a tape that plays faster without turning squeaky or detectably losing any sound. Compressor makers say they can shorten a tape by up to 15%.    The leading compressor maker, Lexicon Inc. of Waltham, Mass., has sold about 150 of these machines to TV stations, which use them to speed up the sound of movies and TV shows. Last year the Directors Guild of America asked the Federal Communications Commission to bar or regulate the use of compressors. It argued that the machines let TV stations secretly play movies faster so that they can sell more commercials.    The FCC refused to take any action. The guild has petitioned the FCC to reconsider, a request that is still up in the air.    Lexicon's rejoinder to this debate is that directors are even worse off without its compressors. Normally, TV stations just chop up movies that run too long for their time slots.    &quot;We don't live in a perfect world,&quot; says Ronald Noonan, Lexicon's president. &quot;Would you rather have the thing be cut with the prejudice of an editor, or would you rather have the whole thing compressed?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>