<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870205-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Suburban Blight:Housing-Market BustIn Houston Is CreatingRash of Instant Slums---Abandoned Houses Fall PreyTo Thieves and Vandals;Worst Collapse Since '30s---Root Cause: Overbuilding---By Steve FrazierStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT GEMH GHO PHM RYLREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Three years ago, eager home buyers began settling into a tidy new suburban subdivision here with the pastoral name of Ashcreek. As little as $65,000, with a minimal down payment, bought a well-appointed three-bedroom ranch home with access to tennis courts, a swimming pool and excellent schools.    Today, Ashcreek threatens to become an overnight suburban slum.    Within a year of the first sales, dozens of residents began abandoning their dream homes; their monthly payments, it turned out, had jumped as much as $200 because of their builder's gross underestimate of their property taxes. As the glut of vacant unsold homes worsened throughout Houston, Ashcreek property values plummeted, leaving remaining residents with mortgages that far exceeded the value of their homes. Foreclosures mounted, and home values plunged further -- by as much as $30,000 -- prompting still more homeowners to walk away from their residences.    By 1986, the neighborhood was pockmarked by overgrown lawns and rusting for-sale signs. Departing U-Haul trailers began to replace station wagons as a symbol of suburban life. Thieves broke into abandoned homes and carried off dishwashers, water heaters and ceiling fans.    &quot;It just got too depressing to stay there,&quot; says Thomas Sewall, who, despite a well-paying job as a certified public accountant, quit making mortgage payments, packed up his family two months ago and moved out. &quot;Ashcreek could have been a nice subdivision,&quot; he says, &quot;but it's going to be a dump.&quot;    Fear and resentment linger among those who have been left behind. &quot;You start wondering if you're going to end up living in a ghost town,&quot; says homeowner John Arnold.    Across a wide swath of suburban Houston, thousands of homeowners are caught in the same nightmare. The steep plunge in local home prices, accompanied by a skyrocketing foreclosure rate, has reduced their neat new middle-class suburbs to crumbling pockets of boarded-up dwellings and untamed lawns. Urban experts say they have never witnessed anything like it. Bucolic communities have been transformed into blighted, declining neighborhoods -- in less than five years' time.    &quot;Many neighborhoods look like war zones,&quot; says Barton Smith, a University of Houston economist. &quot;Houston risks the real possibility that some of its suburban neighborhoods will become permanent slums.&quot;    The debacle represents the costliest housing-market collapse since the Great Depression. The housing boom was greater in Houston than in other oil-patch cities, resulting in a far greater oversupply of houses -- and a sharper drop in prices -- when the bust came. Local authorities estimate that the drop in home values has chopped as much as $8 billion from the tax rolls of Harris County, where Houston is located.    Prices in some Houston suburbs have plummeted by more than half. As a result, homeowners are fleeing their mortgages in record numbers: Foreclosures are mounting at the rate of more than 100 every day, and in some neighborhoods the foreclosure rate exceeds 60% of all homes. By the end of this year, the three-year total of foreclosures will probably exceed 70,000 -- as many houses as were built last year in Detroit, Chicago and Seattle combined. Right now, one in six homes and apartments in Houston stands vacant.    Yet at the same time, sales of existing homes have reached an all-time record in Houston, greater even than during the energy boom of the early 1980s. Far from reflecting a robust housing market, the statistic dramatizes the extent of home abandonments.    &quot;People know they can leave their house, go to the other side of town and buy another house that has been foreclosed on,&quot; says Wes Peoples, a local home builder. Financing the new home is often easy because many lenders have given up trying to report their avalanche of foreclosures to credit agencies. Or, in a typical suburban subdivision, residents can simply abandon homes with mortgage payments as high as $1,000 a month and rent a vacant home in the same neighborhood -- often for $400 a month.    How could it all happen -- and with such frightening speed?    Most real-estate agents and builders prefer to emphasize the effects of Houston's oil bust, which they often liken to an unforeseen natural disaster. Certainly, the drop in oil prices, and the accompanying loss of local jobs and population, didn't help. But many local housing experts insist that Houston's retrenching economy can't begin to account for the level of home abandonments. Many builders and lenders concede that voluntary, &quot;walk-away&quot; foreclosures far outnumber homes lost because of unemployment. Of the five families who have abandoned home on Alstead Drive in the Concord Bridge subdivision of west Houston, none had experienced a layoff.    The root cause of the neighborhood decay, experts say, was the frenzy of overbuilding that continued even after the oil-drilling boom began to die more than four years ago. While employers laid off 160,000 workers in 1982 and 1983, builders kept right on building -- and at a record pace. In 1983 alone, they completed 75,000 more homes and apartment units than the city needed.    &quot;There were problems in the housing market long before the price of oil went through the floor,&quot; says Pamela Minich, a local real-estate analyst. &quot;Builders just went crazy. Many, many of the neighborhoods that are having troubles today are ones that shouldn't have been built.&quot;    Consider Forestwood, a neighborhood of $90,000 homes in northwest Houston built in fits and starts by a succession of overextended developers. After the last developer went broke in 1985, the neighborhood collapsed. Yards grew into jungles, the community pool was padlocked and even such essential services as street lighting were suspended. As property values sank, abandonments, burglaries and vandalism soared. One resident even began raising goats and chickens in his back yard.    Mr. Smith, the economist, helped plan a volunteer effort to &quot;save&quot; such neighborhoods by encouraging clean-up efforts; Forestwood, after months of struggling, finally got its street lights relighted. But there are hundreds of other neighborhoods on the same downward path, and the obstacles to recovery are huge. While average home prices in Houston are beginning to bottom out after three years of decline, Mr. Smith calculates that values in many outlying suburbs are still dropping by a steep 3% to 5% per quarter.    When the decline began, and builders scrambled to whittle down their inventories, they resorted to desperate sales tactics that made weak suburbs even more vulnerable to foreclosure. For example, when U.S. Home Corp., then the nation's largest home builder, was stuck with a huge stock of unsold homes in 1984, it dumped some at auctions and others on tax-shelter partnerships that rented them out to whomever they could find. As neighborhoods of single-family homes began filling up with more transient renters, homeowners panicked and left.    What they left behind has become fair game for vandals, who have damaged some empty suburban homes so severely that the repossessed dwellings are unloaded for their raw-land value. &quot;In some neighborhoods in Houston, you couldn't keep the vandals out if you put boilerplate over the windows and stationed the National Guard on the front lawn,&quot; says Lewis Fought, a federal housing official who helps manage the several thousand local homes repossessed through federal mortgage-insurance programs.    The evacuations caught some homeowners off guard. &quot;It all happened so fast: boom, boom, boom,&quot; says Virginia Ashford, a resident of one dilapidated, half-finished U.S. Home development, who saw the value of her year-old home drop 20% in a matter of months.    Several thousand other Houston homeowners watched $10,000 of home equity disappear literally overnight in late 1983, when General Homes Corp. discontinued offering interest-rate subsidies and used the savings to slash sales prices by $10,000. &quot;You can't sell your home when a new one down the street was selling for $10,000 less,&quot; says Linda Sue Cooney, a General Homes customer who lives in Atascocita South, a Houston suburb. &quot;They kept building the community in one sense, while tearing it down in another.&quot; Adds her husband John: &quot;They made it easy for people to consider walking away.&quot; General Homes points out that its reduced prices merely reflected depressed market conditions.    Even more troubling are the widespread allegations that builders -- using illegal and misleading sales tactics -- populated their subdivisions with buyers who were almost certain candidates for foreclosure, thereby ensuring that neighborhoods would become depressed. Such abuses, &quot;perpetrated by members of the homebuilding industry . . . undermine the stability of the house market,&quot; according to a recent report on the Houston housing market by the Department of Housing and Urban Development.    Focusing on another problem, residents of the Ashcreek subdivision have filed a class-action suit against Gemcraft Inc., alleging that the builder deliberately underestimated their property taxes by up to 50%. In their lawsuit, filed in a state court here, they claim that the &quot;hidden&quot; tax obligations helped accelerate the plunge in their home prices and prompt the abandonment of many of the homes. Gemcraft's general counsel, Michael Thibodeaux, denies that the company intentionally misrepresented tax payments. &quot;We provide estimates, but we're not God,&quot; he says.    Gemcraft also found ways of putting first-time buyers into homes with little or no down payment -- which meant that they had no equity to protect by preserving their ownership of their properties. Federal audits show that Gemcraft salesmen, to spur sales, would often reimburse buyers' down payments on federally insured home mortgages -- a violation of federal law -- and attempt to hide the kickbacks by obtaining letters from the buyers' relatives falsely stating that they were providing the money. Gemcraft would also funnel so-called commissions to real-estate brokers who, in turn, paid off home buyers in cash.    Gemcraft says competitive pressures inspired these practices. &quot;Everybody else was doing it,&quot; says Mr. Thibodeaux, the general counsel. But Gemcraft got caught doing it and paid the federal government $104,000 to settle charges of violating guidelines on federally insured loans.    Although mortgage fraud is a growing problem in other cities, Houston is the only place where major home builders have forged alliances with reputed scam artists to operate &quot;trade-in&quot; programs -- furthering neighborhood blight. In hundreds of cases, builders have told homeowners trapped in declining neighborhoods they can dispose of their homes through a third-party &quot;investor&quot; so they may move into a better neighborhood. But the investors have turned out to be reputed con men, who collect fees from the builders to acquire used homes and then default on the homeowners' original mortgages. The homeowners end up being held responsible by creditors for the default.    Keith Morgenroth, for instance, was anxious to move away from his fraying subdivision and leaped at a trade-in offer from Pulte Home Corp., one of the nation's largest builders. It arranged for the purchase of his home by Fraser Realty, a company started by two principals of a firm that had already been indicted for more than 200 allegedly fraudulent deals. Months after moving into his new home, Mr. Morgenroth learned that the Frasers had disappeared, leaving him responsible for his original mortgage as well as the loan on the home he bought from Pulte. His only option, he says, is to let his original loan go through foreclosure.    &quot;There are three parties involved in this -- Pulte, the Frasers and us,&quot; says Mr. Morgenroth, an accountant. &quot;Pulte sold their house. The Frasers got their money and disappeared. And we're left holding the bag.&quot;    More than 100 homeowners have lodged formal complaints or filed lawsuits against Pulte, Gemcraft and several other builders. The builders deny any wrongdoing, saying that they provided only a referral service and that they put a halt to such programs as soon as they learned of problems. However, one builder -- Ryland Group Inc. -- agreed to pay settlements of several thousand dollars each to a group of customers and compensate others for any losses they might suffer.    In other ways, builders are unabashedly capitalizing on the flight from blighted suburbs that they themselves helped cause. Several residents of one four-year-old Gemcraft subdivision that was troubled by abandonments say they were attracted to new Gemcraft homes only a few blocks away. But besides discovering that they remained liable for their old mortgages under Gemcraft's ill-fated &quot;trade-in&quot; program, one couple were shocked to hear a saleswoman urge them to rip the shrubs from their old lawns and drag them down the street to their new home. (Such a recommendation, says Mr. Thibodeaux, Gemcraft's general counsel, &quot;certainly isn't our {normal} sales practice . . . that's the first I've heard of that.&quot;)    Now the couple's old Gemcraft neighborhood -- beset by vacancies and vandalism -- is precisely the type that Gemcraft's own sales literature warns home shoppers to avoid. &quot;Many used homes are for sale in 'Depressed' neighborhoods,&quot; one of the company's handouts reads. &quot;A Gemcraft home is bought in an active, growing, economically stable community.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>