<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880127-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Europessimism Takes Turn for the Worse </HL><AUTHOR> Karen Elliott House </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Europessimism. It's as old as the Western Alliance itself. But something very different and much more ominous is festering in European capitals today. Normally, when Europeans are fearful, they come whimpering and wheedling to Uncle Sam; this time they aren't.    Instead, the allies -- especially the French and Germans -- are gritting their teeth and groping among themselves for new alliances and alignments that can substitute for their traditional dependence on America. The current European mood goes beyond pessimism to something much more serious -- a conclusion that survival depends less on America and more on some combination of their own political ingenuity and Soviet good will.    This conclusion comes from talks in Bonn, Paris and London with many of Europe's leading security experts and policy makers. These included, among others, the national security advisers to British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and French President Francois Mitterrand; former French President Valery Giscard d'Estaing; and, in Germany, Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher, Defense Minister Manfred Woerner and opposition defense spokesman Karsten Voigt.    From this side of the Atlantic, the Reagan-Gorbachev treaty removing intermediate-range nuclear missiles from Europe is generally seen as just one more piece of evidence that America is pulling back. For public consumption, European officials offer a lukewarm endorsement of a treaty they already view as a fait accompli. What they say in private is very different.    The INF Treaty actually is viewed as part of Uncle Sam's long, slippery slide these past 18 months away from a traditional commitment to Europe. First came the superpower summit in Reykjavik in October l986, when President Reagan expressed willingness to do away with all nuclear weapons, thus leaving Europe at the mercy of the Warsaw Pact's massive superiority in conventional forces. In European eyes, the Reykjavik meeting lives in infamy.    &quot;It was Yalta II,&quot; says a French official involved in national security policy. &quot;The two superpowers got together and in two days, without any consideration, without any consultation with us, sold out Europe again.&quot;    Since then, several other things have reinforced the fear and trembling in Europe. Following last month's Reagan-Gorbachev summit, America now actually is pulling its INF missiles out of Europe, not just talking about it. Then, too, the humbled economic circumstances of America and its once-dominant dollar encourage the conclusion that a U.S. troop pullout from Europe will come next. Additionally, the siren song of glasnost suggests to many Europeans, especially the Germans, that the Soviet bear isn't really all that threatening anymore. On top of all that, this month's landmark Pentagon study by such prestigious strategists as Albert Wohlstetter, Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski concluding that the U.S. must refocus its defense priorities away from Europe to conflicts in the Third World is another sign to Europeans that America is abandoning them.    All this could have had positive consequences. The U.S. decision to withdraw its INF missiles and the talk of broader nuclear reductions could have led the Europeans toward a commitment to more military self-reliance. That would have made it more difficult for the U.S. to think seriously about reducing its troop presence in Europe. In turn, the sense of a firm and lasting U.S. presence could have further reinforced European efforts to do more for their own defense.    But that constructive cycle hasn't materialized. Instead, the catch phrase here these days is, &quot;No Nukes, No Troops,&quot; meaning that America isn't about to leave its troops exposed to the Warsaw Pact's superior forces without the protection of nuclear weapons in Europe. It is an analysis that has all the earmarks of a self-fulfilling prophecy. Europeans are starting to act on the basis of what they fear will happen.    In short, they are running to each other, but heavily burdened with the suspicions and rivalries that have characterized European power politics for centuries. Without America in its traditional parental role, the Europeans are beginning to behave with all the familial intrigue of characters on &quot;Dynasty&quot; or &quot;Dallas.&quot;    France and Germany are proclaiming themselves the twin pillars of a new European order. Their leaders talk of going beyond economic cooperation into an era of military integration. So far, however, only one joint brigade exists -- even on paper. Indeed, the only thing the French and Germans really share is a common fear of American abandonment.    The Germans, always eager to find some way to reunite their divided nation, see glasnost as making that possibility somewhat more likely. But Germany's dream of reunification is France's nightmare. The French view a closer Franco-German alliance as a leash to restrain West Germany's pull toward the East. Paradoxically, the Germans see greater cooperation with France less as a defense shield against the Russians than as a screen behind which they can carry on flirtations with the Soviets while being protected from American protestations.    &quot;We don't want any distrust in America that we are changing our position,&quot; says a senior West German official. &quot;Getting rid of this distrust is essential to get room for maneuver in our relations with the East. The backing of the French socialist president makes that easier.&quot;    As the Germans maneuver behind their French shield, they expound other virtues of closer Franco-German relations. The French, they explain in loud stage whispers, are the &quot;enfants terribles&quot; of Europe and someone has to tame them into closer cooperation with the NATO military alliance. The problem, of course, is that the last thing the French want is to be lured into NATO.    There are other limits on France's military commitment to Germany. With the U.S.-Soviet INF agreement, France's nuclear missiles take on added significance. Despite all the talk of Franco-German cooperation, President Mitterrand has made it clear that France's strategic nuclear forces won't be used automatically to save Germany. Germany, he says, must look for protection under the American nuclear umbrella.    &quot;Mitterrand asks America, which is far away, to do what he refuses to do for a neighbor,&quot; says a top West German official.    If Germany is concerned about French egocentrism and France is fretting over German flirtations with the Soviets, Britain is worried about even the talk of Franco-German cooperation. That's partly because closer Franco-German ties relegate Britain to a peripheral role in European affairs. But it's more because the British fear that the more Europe talks of alliances to defend itself, the more budget-conscious U.S. congressmen will be inclined to let Europe do precisely that. Once again, this could become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Indeed, Mrs. Thatcher is the only Western leader publicly calling for no more nuclear disarmament in Europe and the upgrading of the missiles that remain after the INF pullout.    Yet the Soviets seem closer than ever to their ultimate goal of denuclearizing Western Europe. Messrs. Gorbachev and Reagan are expected to meet again at midyear to conclude a treaty that would cut in half the superpower strategic nuclear arsenals. This would affect the core of those arsenals -- intercontinental-range missiles targeted by the two superpowers on each other. Soviet willingness to make such deep cuts is seductive stuff to European public opinion.    At the same time, the Soviets seem virtually certain this year to offer substantial cuts in conventional weaponry. This, too, the Europeans will find beguiling.    The catch is that the Soviets want removal not just of INF missiles, but also of what soon will be the last remaining U.S. nuclear missiles in Western Europe -- those, based mostly in Germany, with a range of under 500 kilometers. The official NATO strategy is to &quot;modernize&quot; these remaining missiles and aircraft to give them greater range and penetration capability. That would make them a more potent threat to Soviet aggression -- or at least a bigger bargaining chip in conventional arms-reduction talks.    That strategy, however, already is being undercut. Key decision makers in France and Germany are deeply divided over whether to a) modernize the shortrange nuclear missiles, b) bargain them away for cuts in Soviet conventional weapons, or c) get rid of them as relics that have outlived their usefulness in a new age of glasnost. The Soviets, who are pressing for immediate negotiations on the short-range missiles, can afford to be magnanimous in such talks since they have roughly 1,300 such missiles, compared with the 88 Lance missiles in West Germany. &quot;Deep cuts,&quot; the current catch phrase, would mean the effective end of all Western nuclear missiles.    If short-range missiles follow the INF missiles out, Europe, which is unwilling to spend more on conventional defense, would have to depend on American willingness to use its strategic nuclear forces -- and risk global nuclear war -- in the event of a Soviet conventional attack on Western Europe. In short, Europe would be dependent on America's willingness to sacrifice say, Boston, for Bonn. Germans never before have found that prospect credible, which is the reason the U.S. put nuclear weapons in Europe in the first place.    Nonetheless, public determination remains high in West Germany to get rid of the remaining nuclear weapons, because, if used, they would land mostly on either East or West Germany. The Germans summarize their distaste for this prospect with the phrase: &quot;The shorter the range, the deader the Germans.&quot;    If these last short-range nuclear missiles go, as seems probable, Western Europe's security will depend on one of two possibilities: the chance that the U.S. would be willing to risk all-out nuclear war or the hope that the Soviets have dropped their goal of dominating Europe.    Given a choice between two such frail reeds, Western Europe, led by West Germany, is likely to grasp at the chimera of Soviet good will rather than risk relying on increasingly remote and dubious American protection.    ---   Ms. House is the Journal's foreign editor. </TEXT></DOC>