<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870212-0140 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> Washington  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Drusilla! What are you doing in my garden with a knife in your hand?&quot; Poppea asks, sitting up with a start in her lounge chair, surrounded by plastic flamingos. Drusilla is not gardening. Drusilla is not even Drusilla. She is really Ottone, Poppea's husband disguised in Drusilla's kerchief and high heels. He has been, you might say, dragged in by Nero's wife, Octavia, to murder Poppea for stealing the heart of Rome's most famous fiddler.    Such is the tortuous, nasty premise of Claudio Monteverdi's &quot;The Coronation of Poppea.&quot; This 17th-century landmark of opera is not an obvious candidate for directorial &quot;aggiornamento.&quot; But in the Washington Opera's updated new production, Nero wears boxer shorts instead of a toga, and his senators clutch briefcases and orate around a board-room table instead of from the world's original rostrum. Purists will probably wish to inflict some Neronian punishment on director Christopher Alden for his irreverence -- throw him to carnivorous fish, perhaps. But this transformation of decadent Rome into a gangster-filled corporate headquarters really doesn't hurt a single hair on Monteverdi's historic head.    He wrote this piece in 1642, when he was very old (75) and opera was very young (Monteverdi himself had helped invent the medium). By then this worldly courtier knew a few things about ambition and lust. His &quot;Poppea&quot; is a period-vaulting parable of the power of sex and the sexiness of power. There's nothing moralizing or sentimental about it or its two appalling lovers, who exit singing a seductive love duet and, in this production, swinging a bottle of champagne. Leading up to Poppea's triumphant, trumpet-filled coronation are mordant vignettes detailing just how bizarre, profitable and pleasurable crime can be. The connection here with Washington today is not far-fetched.    And Mr. Alden makes it smoothly and slyly. I've seen nothing funnier recently than his senators, every one of them painstakingly combing a few sparse hairs sideways over a balding pate. Assisted by designers Donald Eastman and Gabriel Berry, Monteverdi's Romans segue easily into the stereo era. Cupid is a prepubescent little creep who wears sunglasses and tight pants as he croons into a microphone. Nero dials Poppea to tell her about the problems he's having with Seneca, and then he sings about her breasts. Monteverdi's librettist was slightly more discreet, but on the whole the witty translation from the Italian is legitimate.    And anyway, who can think of business when singing to Patricia Schuman. There aren't many sopranos around today who can lounge about looking devastating in those nutty Madonna-meets-the-Duchess-of-Windsor outfits and nearly none who can sing with her kind of dazzling polish. Warren Ellsworth vied successfully for attention with his own impressive pectorals and a robust tenor well-suited for Nero's choleric attacks. He's scary when he struts on top of the table threatening Seneca.    The stage-dominating table is the main prop. Draped, it also turns into a bed and, in an affecting scene, it becomes the college green where Seneca (expressively sung by Will Roy) philosophizes to three slack-jawed bikers. More often, the table serves as unhappy hideout for that dreary empress Octavia. Mezzo Emily Golden turns this whiner into a memorably pathetic boozer guarded with frightening intensity by Martha Jane Howe as her nurse, a bulky woman with a bag of drugs.    With Kurt Ollmann offering a mellifluously sung Ottone, there isn't a miscast person in this long and densely populated opera. Nicolas McGegan keeps them zipping along with his vigorous conducting from the harpsichord. For people struggling to stay awake through the capital's winter doldrums, Monteverdi ought to be a most welcome, if unlikely, source of pep.    ---   Compared with &quot;Poppea's&quot; crafty couple, the Chevalier des Grieux and his Manon are tender juveniles who can't plan their way out of a cream puff. She is sweetly venal; he is gracefully incompetent, and sadly for them, they ended up in a penal colony, not ruling France.    Their story was first detailed in a novel published in 1731 by the lapsed priest known as the Abbe Prevost. Then they were set to music, and vaulted into the standard repertory by Jules Massenet and also Giacomo Puccini. Massenet's pastel confection comes closest to the soft heart of the Abbe's plaintive tale. Here is an opera filled with a whole range of emotions -- youthful curiosity, tenderness, passion, humor, and sadness, too.    You would not easily guess this from Jean-Pierre Ponnelle's production of &quot;Manon&quot; at the Metropolitan Opera. This &quot;Manon&quot; is so grim, the original author could have been Samuel Beckett. Le Havre's harbor even has garbage.    The production is new, but not new enough. It is mostly pale gray, with beige and white highlights -- just like Mr. Ponnelle's Mozart productions. His pure, light-filled sets for &quot;La Clemenza di Tito&quot; and &quot;Idomeneo,&quot; are perfect for the idealized realms of these stately works. But the same bleached tonalities don't work for an opera different in atmosphere and style.    All those faded colors turn Massenet's delicately rouged piece into an alienating spook show stuffed with dimensionless people who are never given anything interesting to do. The only truly beautiful scene is the Cours-la-Reine pleasure garden. This is magical. As the curtain opens, a tightrope artist slowly crosses over a lantern-lit park filled with puppeteers, an alchemist, a few jugglers and happy strollers, one of whom walked a sensitive dog who hid his face in a skirt when Manon (Catherine Malfitano) launched into her aria.    Way out of her depth, Ms. Malfitano sang mechanically, rarely shaping notes into seductive phrases. Neither in timbre or presence was she right for reinventing this frothy charmer previously incarnated by Victoria de los Angeles, Beverly Sills or the legendary Bidu Sayao (a stoic presence in the Met's center box). Years ago, Ms. Malfitano saved a Salzburg production of &quot;The Tales of Hoffmann,&quot; conducted by Met artistic chief James Levine and directed by Mr. Ponnelle, by smoothly assuming all the heroines on short notice. Gratitude was in order, but the public thank-yous go on and on.    Earning his own bit of credit with Met management, and giving pleasure to the rest of us in the bargain, was Denes Gulyas, who stood in for an afflicted Neil Shicoff, as the chevalier. More rehearsing and a conductor less ponderous than Manuel Rosenthal might eventually turn him into a stylish des Grieux. Nobody else made any impact, and not much was gained by chucking the opera's traditional spoken dialogue in favor of some recently discovered recitatives penned by Massenet after the 1884 premiere at the Opera-Comique. On the other hand, the Met forces its &quot;Carmen&quot; cast to speak the original French dialogue instead of the traditional orchestrated lines. The Met is a mysterious place.    ---   Marilyn Mims has high E-flats loud enough to rouse all Scotland. And news that she was starring in a &quot;Lucia di Lammermoor&quot; took me to Norfolk's Virginia Opera two weeks ago. She does indeed have a healthy, very pretty voice, though the somewhat disconnected, booming top suggests a lyric soprano taking shape beneath all the coloratura icing. In a performance fluidly conducted by Peter Mark, it was also easy to like the swaggering Enrico of baritone Lee Velta, who brought some flair into the Norfolk's modestly appointed auditorium. </TEXT></DOC>