<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870302-0074 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> EFAC GPU SGP SO D BSE BNLUTILITIES (UTI)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG) </IN><DATELINE> Cogeneration  </DATELINE><TEXT>   the technology that can turn almost any industrial or commercial concern into its own power company -- is rapidly coming of age.    More and more companies are installing cogeneration facilities, enabling them to produce from a single fuel -- natural gas, for example, or wood waste or garbage -- both electricity and steam for their own consumption and for sale to others.    And the kinds of companies turning to the hybrid systems are diverse, ranging from paper, chemical and pharmaceutical concerns to large shopping centers, apartment buildings and fast-food outlets. The applications can provide not only energy cost savings but revenue: A pharmaceutical plant, for instance, can sell electricity to the local utility and sell steam to the chicken stand across the street.    Big engineering firms are establishing cogeneration departments. And a growing number of electric utilities, which just a few years ago vehemently opposed cogeneration as competition and a means to erode their monopoly status, now view it as a way to meet future capacity needs without having to make risky new-plant investments of their own.    &quot;We see the (cogeneration) market growing very rapidly: Tens of thousands of small cogeneration facilities will be developed by the year 2000,&quot; says Dennis T. Wilson, marketing vice president of Turner Power Group, which develops, owns and operates cogeneration systems. Formed last year, Turner Power Group is a joint venture of Turner Corp., a big engineering firm, and Data Acquisition Sciences Inc., a closely held energy engineering concern, both based in New York.    Though cogeneration has been around for decades, it was only in the late 1970s, spurred by federal energy regulations, that companies looked at it seriously. Cogeneration production is at &quot;the beginning of a rapidly ascending curve,&quot; says Scott Spiewak, publisher of Cogeneration and Small Power Monthly, an Arlington, Va.-based trade publication that recently surveyed more than 1,000 cogenerators.    To be sure, cogenerated electricity still represents only a tiny fraction of U.S. power supplies -- roughly 15,000 to 20,000 megawatts out of total U.S. capacity of more than 600,000 megawatts. And in some states, particularly in the Pacific Northwest, cogeneration isn't expected to catch on because utility-supplied power -- often hydropower -- is cheaper.    Still, specialists agree with Malcom Maze, energy manager for Abbott Laboratories, a pharmaceutical concern based in Abbott Park, Ill., that cogeneration's &quot;potential is great.&quot; Mr. Maze explains that cogeneration is indeed often cheaper than utility-provided electricity, and several energy engineers say it can be about 20% less. Moreover, he says, utilities' fear that regulators won't allow them to recover from ratepayers the full cost of building the next generation of power plants has made them gun-shy -- despite projected capacity shortfalls as soon as the early 1990s.    &quot;In five years, the driving force (behind cogeneration) will be the utilities,&quot; Mr. Maze predicts.    Another reason why specialists say the cogeneration business is starting to take off is cities' pressing need to find new ways to get rid of their garbage, as their landfills are rapidly filling up. Three out of four city officials cite waste disposal as one of their two or three most critical problems, according to a recent survey of 49 municipalities by Combustion Engineering Inc., a Stamford, Conn.-based engineering concern that develops, owns and operates cogeneration plants. Dozens of such waste-to-energy plants are in operation or under development.    Cogeneration facilities come in all shapes and sizes, but all of them use a single fuel to power a turbine, thereby generating two forms of energy -- electricity and steam. By consuming both the steam and the electricity, an industrial or commercial concern has a built-in efficiency advantage over traditional power plants, which simply vent their steam.    Much of cogeneration's recent popularity has stemmed from low natural gas prices. Indeed, some natural gas-fueled cogeneration facilities can produce electricity for as little as four cents per kilowatt-hour, compared with as much as 12 cents per kwh for some high-cost nuclear power. Energy analysts predict that natural gas prices will rise over the next couple of years, cutting into but not eliminating natural gas's cost advantage over utility-supplied electricity. Cogeneration systems can begin to pay for themselves 18 months to two years after installation.    Companies build cogeneration facilities for two reasons, to cut energy costs or to turn a profit by selling power to the local utility. Under federal regulations, utilities are required to purchase this independently produced power if it is cost-competitive.    Schering-Plough Corp., a pharmaceutical concern based in Madison, N.J., is a good example of how a company can use cogeneration to reduce energy costs.    Schering expects to have two natural gas-fueled cogeneration facilities operating during the first quarter of 1988 at its manufacturing plants in Kenilworth and Union, N.J. Both systems are being built and will be owned by Energy Factors Inc., a San Diego-based engineering concern, with Schering under contract to buy power and steam. Energy Factors will sell the power that Schering doesn't use to a unit of General Public Utilities Inc., Parsippany, N.J.    The two cogeneration facilities will initially save Schering $1 million a year, or about 8% of the plants' $14 million annual energy budget, says William Shay, senior director of engineering and operations services. That includes both the electric power and steam heating costs.    While an 8% saving isn't bad, Mr. Shay says he expects another 15% to 20% saving, or an additional $1.5 million a year, by eventually using the steam produced by cogeneration to air-condition the Schering plants. He explains that while steam heats the buildings in winter, in summer it can be used instead of electricity to drive the turbine that runs the air conditioning.    &quot;The key to cogeneration is having a healthy heat load,&quot; says Mr. Shay. &quot;If you do, you can use energy more efficiently than a power company.&quot;    Another company using cogeneration not just to cut costs but also for reliability is Beneficial Corp., a financial services concern based in Wilmington, Del. At Beneficial's management center in Peapack, N.J., a natural gas-fueled cogeneration facility ensures that the company's extensive computer operation will stay properly air-conditioned even when there is a utility power failure.    John Washburne, vice president for facilities at Peapack, says that with cogeneration the company shaved $400,000, or 35%, off its power bill last year, as well as having in place a backup power system for the center's computers that is more cost-effective than the battery system many companies use as a backup.    The enthusiasm for cogeneration by industrial and commercial power users with extensive heating and air-conditioning needs has caused some utilities to change their attitude toward cogeneration. &quot;Three or four years ago, we were pretty negative&quot; about it, says Edward L. Addison, president and chief executive officer of Southern Co., an Atlanta-based utility holding company. Today, &quot;We're not encouraging it, but if a customer wants it, we want to be the one they turn to&quot; to develop a facility, he says.    Like many other utilities, Southern Co. has set up a subsidiary dedicated in part to developing cogeneration facilities. &quot;As time goes on and competitive pressures grow, (industrial concerns) will have to look at every way to cut costs,&quot; including cogeneration, Mr. Addison says. Cogeneration is here to stay, he says, because of &quot;the basic economics of it.&quot;    Another factor at work: recent regulatory and court rulings that effectively require a utility to provide costly backup electrical service for a customer even if the customer stops buying power from that utility. While utilities are fighting to charge a premium for such backup service, they also need to be involved in designing and servicing cogeneration facilities if they are to offset the revenue loss resulting when a customer goes &quot;off system.&quot;    Utilities also are starting to embrace cogeneration as an alternative to the uncertainties of building a new power plant. &quot;Cogeneration is going to play a significant part in capacity additions,&quot; says Larry Ellis, manager of system planning and power supply for the Virginia Power unit of Dominion Resources Inc., Richmond, Va.    Indeed, Mr. Ellis says, Virginia Power has recently doubled the amount of cogenerated power it expects to be buying in 1990 -- to 700 megawatts, or 5.1% of total capacity. Concerned about high electricity prices, state energy regulators in New Jersey, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine and Texas, among other places, have encouraged utilities to purchase more cogenerated power.    Some utilities for which new capacity is already becoming critical are actively fostering cogeneration. Jack Whippen, head of energy supply planning for Boston Edison Co., says he favors cogeneration because capacity additions can be made in smaller, more controllable increments. Moreover, by buying power from cogenerators using trash, peat, wind and other nontraditional fuel sources, Boston Edison is starting to develop a more diverse and thus more reliable fuel mix.    Boston Edison has been relying on oil and natural gas for 60% of capacity and nuclear power for 40%. Without cogeneration, &quot;All we need is one disruption and we're in deep trouble,&quot; Mr. Whippen says. </TEXT></DOC>