<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Sayang: The Trials of Jaime Ongpin </HL><AUTHOR> Claudia Rosett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>      {Second in a Series}   MANILA -- Within nine months, Jaime Ongpin would be driven by despair to kill himself, penning a note to his family, &quot;I beg your forgiveness.&quot; But in March 1987, he arrived for debt talks in Manhattan in good spirits. Hoping to transform the statist Philippines into Asia's next tiger economy, he serenaded his negotiating team with the old melody, &quot;We're almost there.&quot;    Mr. Ongpin, who'd joined President Aquino's cabinet as secretary of finance just after the 1986 Philippine revolution, thought that his economic reform program was back on track, and with it his country's chances of stopping the Communist guerrilla movement and consolidating democracy. The bespectacled, Harvard-trained businessman planned to cut out the interventionist policies that had benefited cronies of President Marcos, and build growth on a true private sector.    President Aquino had backed him with an unsteady hand, but had recently offered new support. He had just won her backing against the debt-repudiation proposals of Solita Monsod, minister of the National Economic Deveopment Authority. Even more important, the president had promised that her close adviser and executive secretary, Joker Arroyo, would be leaving the presidential palace. Mr. Arroyo had been using his position to delay and frustrate reform. Mr. Arroyo believed, as he explained in a recent interview, that Mr. Ongpin's job as finance secretary was not to reform the economy as the president had promised, but &quot;simply to raise money.&quot;    Sayang, &quot;lost opportunity&quot; in the Tagalog language, is the Philippine word for what became of Jimmy Ongpin's hopes -- for himself certainly, and perhaps for his country as well.    Mr. Ongpin's good cheer in March was quickly interrupted. News of Mr. Arroyo's impending resignation was leaked to the Philippine press. In the resulting furor it began to look like Mr. Arroyo would keep his job. Mr. Ongpin, tracking this development from New York through newspaper clips faxed from Manila, was crestfallen. Meanwhile, he was contending with what one Western businessman who was there describes as &quot;about as rough a debt restructuring as one gets.&quot; In a phone call home to his wife, Maribel, Mr. Ongpin said the stubborn bankers were &quot;acting like a bunch of little old ladies.&quot;    Determined to save his economic program, Mr. Ongpin told a colleague, &quot;If we want to get this country moving, we have to act.&quot; On March 12 he issued a searing public report including a list of &quot;Major Problems.&quot; Critical financing and tax programs &quot;have been delayed at the Office of the President for as much as 149 days, even after approval by the cabinet.&quot; He cited &quot;unauthorized or premature public statements by cabinet-level officials&quot; on matters outside their direct responsibility -- a charge directed at Mrs. Monsod's advocacy of debt repudiation.    President Aquino phoned Mr. Ongpin in New York. One colleague recalls that when Mr. Ongpin got off the phone, he said, &quot;I've just been told to shut up.&quot; Mr. Ongpin obeyed.    Mrs. Aquino gave the same order to Mr. Arroyo and Mrs. Monsod. But Mrs. Monsod went on telling the Manila press that Mr. Ongpin was &quot;shortsighted.&quot; And Mr. Arroyo had no need to say more. About a week later, President Aquino announced that he would stay on as executive secretary with her full support.    While Mr. Arroyo worked in President Aquino's office and saw her every day, Mr. Ongpin was still halfway around the world, bargaining with the bankers. To cheer on his exhausted team members he outfitted them one day in yellow neckties, the color of the Aquino revolution. On March 27, Mr. Ongpin reached a deal.    He flew home convinced the Philippines had gotten good terms, but within two weeks came news that both Mexico and Argentina had done better. The difference in dollars was trivial -- for the Philippines, about $5 million per year. But it left Mr. Ongpin open to political attack.    First into the breach was Mrs. Monsod. While a political ally on the need for privatization and tariff reduction, she now questioned in public whether the Philippines should comply with the debt deal. On April 24, at a cabinet-level meeting attended by the president, Mrs. Monsod attacked the debt deal as a &quot;disservice&quot; to the nation.    After yet another spat at a meeting on May 29, the president reproved Mr. Ongpin, but not Mrs. Monsod. Mr. Ongpin for the third time offered his resignation. In a three-page personal letter to Mrs. Aquino, dated May 30, 1987, he wrote, &quot;I think you know that I have tried my very best to do my job, despite all the private frustrations and public criticisms of the controversial stands I have taken on many issues, and despite the unending bickering, distasteful intrigues and paranoid power plays within the cabinet.&quot; Once more, the president kept him on.    The Philippine economy was by then growing at an encouraging annual rate of about 5%. But Mr. Ongpin feared for future progress. Plans for privatization had been stuck for months in the president's office, where Mr. Arroyo was quietly sabotaging the program. Regulations had been revamped at Mr. Arroyo's urging so that big state companies could be sold only when their state-appointed managers decided to do so. Naturally, few appointees wanted to privatize themselves out of a job.    At Philippine Airlines, overseen by Mr. Arroyo's nominee, Feliciano Belmonte, management argued the company could not be sold until it began making money. At Philippine National Oil Co., Mr. Arroyo was officially chairman of the board, and his deputy, Catalino Macaraig, was acting chairman. Here management argued that a huge subsidiary, Petron, should not be sold because it was turning a profit. With Mrs. Aquino's earlier approval, Mr. Ongpin had been telling potential buyers for more than a year that Petron's sale might be the kickoff for the whole privatization program.    Now Mr. Ongpin feared the privatization policy would be delayed into oblivion, inviting a new era of crony patronage and money-losing state projects. &quot;The question is no longer the wisdom of Petron's privatization,&quot; he wrote Mrs. Aquino in a confidential May 15 memo, &quot;a reversal of the decision to privatize Petron would cast serious doubts not only on the success of the program, but on the credibility of your entire administration.&quot;    Succeeding memos to the president, including one signed by three other cabinet members along with Mr. Ongpin on July 15, failed to get Petron's privatization back on track. Mr. Arroyo, in an Aug. 11 letter to a government colleague, complained, &quot;This fixation on Petron is disturbing&quot; because &quot;we have other more urgent matters to attend to.&quot;    Another sticking point was agrarian reform. Mr. Ongpin had planned for sales of state companies to help fund a limited land reform. But with privatization bogged down, there are no significant sales. Mr. Ongpin was tasked to raise the money from other sources, but given no vote on the land-reform committee -- which had begun shaping a program he said he feared would become &quot;a gravy train for bureaucrats.&quot;    In the midst of this came some personal troubles. On May 31, Mr. Ongpin's father died suddenly. In August came allegations that a subsidiary of the company once run by Mr. Ongpin, Benguet, had been cooking its books. Benguet's current president, Delfin Lazaro, says Mr. Ongpin was not involved, and that most of the alleged fraud took place after Mr. Ongpin left to help manage Mrs. Aquino's presidential campaign. But the scandal left Mr. Ongpin vulnerable to further flank attacks on his economic program.    In late July, the newly elected Philippine Congress was due to convene, and Mrs. Aquino's extraordinary lawmaking powers were due to expire. Draft laws that had sat in Mr. Arroyo's office for months finally emerged in a rush -- many drastically altered without consultation. Mr. Ongpin had sent in three draft decrees approved by the cabinet in late 1986 that would have made state companies accountable to the finance ministry for their use of funds. Only one of the decrees got signed; in its changed version, it turned over authority directly to the president's office.    At the opening session of Congress on July 27, President Aquino used her first State of the Nation address to angrily denounce the terms of Mr. Ongpin's foreign-debt deal. She said they were &quot;far short of our expectations and, more importantly, of our urgent needs.&quot; She said, &quot;We vow never again to let the patrimony of this nation lie at the feet of these noble houses that have finally shown the true face of foreign finance.&quot;    Mr. Ongpin believed this kind of talk hurt the country's credit standing and repelled investors. The attack devastated him all the more because the president had shown him an early draft of the speech, and agreed to his request to tone it down and show him the final version. The speech was not toned down. And Mrs. Aquino's speech writer, Teodoro Locsin, explains that Mr. Ongpin never got to see the final copy for reasons of &quot;mechanics.&quot;    Egged on by President Aquino's speech, the Philippine Senate decided to investigate the foreign-debt deal. Mr. Ongpin was called to testify on Aug. 25. Through four hearings, the senators treated him like a man on trial. &quot;You took the line of accommodation, did you not?&quot; intoned the committee chairman, Sen. Teofisto Guingona. Several times, they asked Mr. Ongpin why, if the deal was the best he could strike, the president had attacked it. Mrs. Aquino, who knew Mr. Ongpin had acted with her support and consent, said nothing.    On Aug. 28 came Col. Gregorio Honasan's coup attempt -- a symptom of frustrations within the military that ran at least as deep as Mr. Ongpin's. Less than two weeks later, Mrs. Aquino began reshuffling her cabinet. Among those she dismissed were both Jimmy Ongpin and Joker Arroyo.    Mrs. Aquino announced Jimmy's departure on Sept. 16, with one curt sentence of &quot;deep regrets.&quot; She announced Joker's dismissal the next day, praising him at length as &quot;a man of unwavering fidelity, of proven courage, patriotism and true nationalism.&quot;    For Mr. Ongpin, the fight was over. He canceled a September trip to the U.S., where he had been scheduled to go to his 25th reunion at Harvard Business School, receive a Euromoney award for his performance as Philippine finance secretary, and attend the International Monetary Fund meetings in Washington. Instead, he stayed in Manila to turn over his portfolio to his successor, Vicente Jayme. When Manila's business leaders offered Mr. Ongpin a testimonial dinner, he turned it down for fear it would be seen as a protest against Mrs. Aquino.    The anti-graft law prohibited him from working for most Philippine-based companies for one year after leaving government. So Mr. Ongpin half-heartedly began exploring new business projects. He told one friend, Pilipinas Shell President Cesar Buenaventura, &quot;I'm really bothered by this whole thing because I can see the future is so bleak for the country.&quot; Philippine Sen. Vicente Paterno says, &quot;I believe he felt responsible for the success of this government.&quot;    In late September, Mr. Ongpin moved into a two-room office along a drab stretch of the Manila avenue known as EDSA -- not far from the site of the popular uprising that brought Mrs. Aquino to power. In October, when the government took away his bodyguards, Mr. Ongpin borrowed a .38-caliber pistol from one of them, saying he needed it for protection. On the afternoon of Dec. 7, a Monday, Ongpin sent out his only aide, Ernesto Ramos, to cash a check.    Alone in his office, 49-year-old Jimmy Ongpin took out a pad and wrote a one-page note to his family, saying &quot;please try to understand.&quot; Putting the gun to his head, the man who had once hoped to save the Philippines shot himself.    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>