<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881007-0158 </DOCNO><HL> Law: Courts May Have to Lead Product-Liability Reform </HL><AUTHOR> Paul M. Barrett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS </IN><TEXT>   Companies fearful of product-liability lawsuits typically have pushed for legislative curbs of plaintiffs' rights, such as limits on damage awards. And nearly every state has responded, passing some type of &quot;tort reform&quot; that has effectively restricted the remedies available under civil law for harm such as physical injuries.    But a growing number of judges, lawyers and legal scholars now warn that more aggressive steps are needed to further tighten the standards of liability. Though their approaches differ, they share a common theme: Rather than legislators, the judges who created modern liability law must be the ones who overhaul it.    These ideas remain for the moment topics of ivory-tower debate. But they deserve attention because liability law is largely made by judges, not legislators. And judges often rely on each other and on legal scholars for the ideas that shape their opinions. As the notion of a judicial restructuring of liability law spreads through the legal community, the chances of it coming to pass increase.    George L. Priest, a professor at Yale Law School, writes in a series of law review articles that existing legislative tort reforms are too weak to cure problems such as high insurance rates, which many legal specialists say are a result of a proliferation of lawsuits and the unpredictability of large jury awards. Caps on damages, for example, bar only the rare million-dollar jackpot; they don't necessarily deter the majority of more modest awards.    Moreover, many of the tort-reform laws have come in response to lobbying by manufacturers, doctors and insurers, Mr. Priest says. The result, he contends, is a maze of conflicting rules that make it more difficult than ever for defendants to predict their liabilities. Unable to forecast their risks with precision, insurers increase premiums. Companies, in turn, drop potentially useful products and avoid innovation because of liability worries.    The judges' central mistake, according to Mr. Priest, has been to assume that wealthy defendants ought to pay for mishaps by buying more insurance and passing on the cost to consumers. Routing this so-called third-party victims' insurance through the courts allows lawyers on both sides to take a huge cut, resulting in higher payouts and making coverage more expensive. It also produces delays as cases wind their way through the court system.    What is needed, Mr. Priest contends, are fundamental changes executed by the same state judges who have spent 25 years expanding such theories as strict liability, which allows an injured person to win money without having to show that a defendant was at fault. He urges judges to get out of the insurance business altogether. Instead, they should establish rules that penalize defendants only when such action will deter future accidents.    His view of liability law would sweep away thousands of suits each year based on strict liability. Under current standards, a person injured by, say, a lawn mower needs to prove only that the machine was &quot;defective&quot; and &quot;unreasonably dangerous&quot; -- not that the manufacturer was negligent. Under Mr. Priest's ideal set of laws, the plaintiff would have to show specifically how the defendant could have prevented the injury.    Mr. Priest believes that most victims will still be able to pay their medical bills without the benefits of third-party insurance. He contends that consumers can simply buy their own insurance or, if they are poor, get it from the government. Recent studies, he writes, &quot;confirm that the number of individuals denied basic health and disability compensation in the United States is very small.&quot;    Peter W. Huber, a senior fellow of the Manhattan Institute, a New York think tank, agrees with much of Mr. Priest's analysis but proposes a different solution. In his book, &quot;Liability: The Legal Revolution and Its Consequences,&quot; Mr. Huber recommends that state judges defuse confrontations over injuries by encouraging contracts between potential litigants.    For instance, Mr. Huber would have judges interpret drug label warnings as implicit contracts agreed to by consumers presumed to understand that certain products come with risks. Currently, judges treat the adequacy of warnings as a subjective question left to juries to decide, without judicial interference. That allows plaintiffs to argue that, given just a little bit more information, they wouldn't have used the drug at all.    Mr. Huber concludes that approach to liability masks a general bias against defendants. He urges judges to give companies more &quot;freedom&quot; to make tacit contracts with customers, who, in turn, must take more responsibility for their actions.    Judge Richard Neely of the West Virginia Supreme Court has heard preachings such as those of Messrs. Priest and Huber. But he confesses that he and his state court brethren are beyond redemption. The reason, the judge writes in his book, &quot;The Product Liability Mess,&quot; is that tort law is local law. The typical high-stakes liability suit pits a plaintiff from the same state as the judge and jury against an out-of-state company.    &quot;As long as I am allowed to redistribute wealth from out-of-state companies to injured in-state plaintiffs,&quot; he admits, &quot;I shall continue to do so. Not only is my sleep enhanced when I give someone else's money away, but so is my job security, because the in-state plaintiffs, their families, and their friends will re-elect me.&quot; Other judges, he adds, usually do the same.    Like a regretful compulsive thief, Judge Neely begs to be stopped before he strikes again. His solution: that U.S. Supreme Court justices -- insulated by lifetime appointments -- forge a restrictive federal law that would handcuff state judges.    The justices would have plenty of precedent, according to Judge Neely. In the 1960s and 1970s, the Supreme Court established federal rules limiting state libel suits against the press and rewrote state procedure for such things as police searches and interrogations. The same could be done for tort law, he argues, and recent conservative appointments to the high court provide an ideal opportunity. </TEXT></DOC>