<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871027-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Bork Vote: Just a Battle in a 50-Year War---By Terry Eastland</HL><DD> 10/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   During the weeks of debate leading up to the defeat of Judge Robert Bork, my favorite poll was one taken Oct. 1 by USA Today. It found that 87% of those surveyed say &quot;the public has no right to know an athlete's private life&quot; but that 74% say &quot;the same athletes should be required to submit to drug tests.&quot;    &quot;I know it sounds inconsistent,&quot; a psychologist told the newspaper. &quot;But I really feel quite strongly about both answers. Their lives are their own, but they deserve privacy only up to a point.&quot;    What did the inconsistent results of a sports poll have to do with the Bork nomination? Almost everything.    Deeply ingrained in our history and tradition is the value of privacy. So it's no surprise that a poll shows a very strong attachment to it. And it's clear that Judge Bork's opponents set out in July to appeal to this sentiment. They determined to portray the judge as opposed to privacy, and to broadcast this message far and wide, in hopes of turning the general public and then a majority of senators against him.    By the end of the confirmation hearings, Judge Bork's opponents had managed to pin on him a privacy position that was not his. At the same time, they never had to confess their own, which differs radically from that of most Americans.    The truth is that Judge Bork is by no means against privacy. He told the Senate Judiciary Committee that &quot;no civilized person wants to live in a society without a lot of privacy in it&quot; and that the Constitution protects privacy &quot;in a variety of ways.&quot; The judge noted that the First Amendment protects free exercise of religion, that the Fourth Amendment protects against unreasonable searches and seizures, and that the Fifth Amendment protects against self-incrimination.    But as in his previous writings, so it was in his testimony: Judge Bork refused to pledge allegiance to what has now become a central tenet of modern liberalism -- that the Constitution contains some generalized right to privacy. His opponents made much of this &quot;failure&quot; and left the quite false impression that the judge is not only against the ordinary kinds of privacy most of us take for granted but also favors state intrusions into our lives.    Over the past three months, Judge Bork's opponents kept their views on privacy well out of sight. Yet what are they? When they talk of privacy, most of those opposed to the judge do not have in mind modesty or solitude or even marital privacy. These matters are neither much litigated in courtrooms nor much discussed in the legal literature.    What is litigated and what is debated, and what Judge Bork's opponents typically mean by &quot;privacy,&quot; are rights to engage in homosexuality and prostitution, and to take illegal drugs. And unlike Judge Bork, whose philosophy of judging requires that he separate his own personal views on such matters from what the Constitution may or may not say about them, his opponents are eager to read their views into the Constitution. For them, constitutional protection of homosexuality and the like are vanguard issues in their ideological effort to establish through judicial fiat a society in which &quot;personal autonomy&quot; reigns, traditional values be damned.    For example, the American Civil Liberties Union, one of the most active groups opposing Judge Bork, argued last year in Bowers v. Hardwick that there is a constitutional right of privacy to engage in homosexual conduct. Stanford Law Prof. Barbara Babcock, who testified against Judge Bork, expressed apparent sympathy in a law-review article for using constitutional &quot;right to privacy&quot; arguments to decriminalize prostitution.    And New York University Law Prof. David A.J. Richards, who also testified against Judge Bork, argues in his &quot;Sex, Drugs, Death, and the Law,&quot; that the choice to use illegal drugs is &quot;an aspect of personal dignity that is worthy of protection under the constitutional right to privacy.&quot; Of course, it follows for many who hold this view that drug testing is an unconstitutional invasion of privacy.    Bork opponents also employ other constitutional arguments to push their agenda. Thus, laws against prostitution are also attacked on grounds of equal protection, free speech and even cruel and unusual punishment. And the ACLU has used in court not only the &quot;right to privacy&quot; but also the First Amendment in its effort to gain constitutional protection for homosexuality.    Bork opponents have been largely unsuccessful in achieving their agenda in recent years: The Supreme Court rejected the ACLU's privacy argument in Hardwick, and none of the five courts of appeals that have considered drug testing have voided such tests on the ground of a generalized right to privacy (or on any other grounds; drug testing has been sustained in each of these courts). Ironically, Judge Bork -- accused of being outside the mainstream -- is just about where most courts are on these issues, which, to judge by the USA Today poll, is where the American people are as well.    Norman Podhoretz recently commented that &quot;a war is going on in this country,&quot; and the past three months of debate on the Bork nomination have helped clarify and bring to full public view the nature of this war, fought for the past half-century but intensifying since the '60s.    On the one side are those who value privacy but &quot;only up to a point&quot; -- that is, they are unwilling to have the law treat all &quot;life styles&quot; equally, and they are unwilling to forgo necessary public measures -- such as reasonable drug testing -- that protect public safety and health. Not all on this side agree on how the law should treat homosexuality or any other issue, but at a minimum they do agree that not judges but the people, through their elected representatives, should determine public policy, be it liberal, conservative -- whatever.    On the other side are those -- including most of those who so passionately opposed Judge Bork -- who are committed to an agenda of social change imposed by judges. The agenda's advocates not only are relentlessly opposed to obsolete laws but must also attack by lawsuit every new effort by a community -- whether local, state or federal -- to protect itself through legislation against what it deems to be a moral or social harm.    Those committed to this agenda speak the attractive language of &quot;fundamental rights&quot; (in all aspects of life except, ironically, the marketplace) and &quot;equal dignity&quot; for all. But this agenda is really about securing constitutional protection for homosexual conduct, prostitution and use of illicit drugs. These people also seek abolition of the death penalty, further extensions of the abortion liberty proclaimed by the Supreme Court in 1973, legalization of the distribution of child pornography, elimination of restrictions on the production and sale of obscenity, and expulsion of legislative chaplains and traces of religion from public life.    The Bork nomination proved a battlefield for these contending forces, and constitutional arguments about privacy became a site of major engagement. That Bork opponents will ultimately succeed in the cultural war is far from clear. The battle they waged was one-sided and, from the standpoint of how nominations historically have been treated, grossly unfair. Deep runs the anger, and it will find an outlet.    Perhaps it is starting to find one already. Jack Kemp has declared his intention to nominate Judge Bork to a Supreme Court vacancy should he be elected next year, and other GOP contenders may similarly declare. Most of the Democratic hopefuls publicly opposed Judge Bork, and whoever wins that party's nomination will be stuck with the radical agenda of the Bork opponents. So will the senators, including those few Republicans who voted against Judge Bork, when they face their electorates.    ---   Mr. Eastland is director of public affairs for the Justice Department. </TEXT></DOC>