<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880210-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Iowa Fallout: Robertson's Showing And Dole's Triumph Change GOP Picture --- Bush's Lead Could Dwindle In New Hampshire Race, But He Has Advantages --- Who Will Stop the Preacher? </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry and David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> MANCHESTER, N.H.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A triumphant Bob Dole, a confident Pat Robertson and a weary George Bush now tumble into New Hampshire for a test that may determine who wins the Republican presidential nomination.    Mr. Dole scored an important victory in the Iowa caucuses Monday night, but the man who turned the race upside down is Mr. Robertson, the shrewd, calculating preacher from Virginia. He came in second, &quot;humiliating&quot; -- it was the word used again and again on TV and in the newspapers -- Vice President Bush.    From now on, Mr. Robertson is someone to contend with in the increasingly rambunctious Republican Party. And the bigger his role, the tougher it will be for any Republican to win the general election in November.    &quot;The Republican Party is a coalition that is about to fracture,&quot; says Kirk O'Donnell, the head of the Center for National Policy, a Democratic think tank.    &quot;It's going to happen,&quot; says John Deardourff, the veteran Republican strategist. &quot;We're going to reap the whirlwind from these right-wing religious nuts.&quot;    Reaping the whirlwind straight off is the vice president, the front-runner in the race until Iowans trudged to their caucuses Monday night. &quot;George Bush ain't got Big Mo no mo',&quot; says Thomas Rath, a former New Hampshire attorney general and now a leading Dole strategist here. &quot;It's jump ball now.&quot;    Mr. Dole's victory -- the Kansas senator picked up 37% of the straw poll against 25% for Mr. Robertson and 19% for Mr. Bush -- gives him the surge he needs to begin closing the gap here in New Hampshire, where polls show Mr. Bush leading by as much as 20 points.    If Mr. Dole catches up here and wins the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, he becomes, ipso facto, the front-runner in this race and the likely party nominee. Mr. Bush can hardly stand two highly publicized setbacks in a row.    The three major players now are the Messrs. Bush, Dole and Robertson. Rep. Jack Kemp of New York, who had been surging here, may be roadblocked by Mr. Robertson's powerful showing in Iowa, and he must now work desperately to stay in the race.    Meanwhile, the Democrats roll into New Hampshire as a kind of troika -- Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri, the Iowa winner, and his two close pursuers, Gov. Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts and Sen. Paul Simon of Illinois. Virtually out of the race are former Sen. Gary Hart of Colorado and former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona.    Sen. Dole, who was counseled by former President Richard Nixon two weeks ago to take the offensive, is striking in New Hampshire while the iron is hot.    The Senate GOP leader's strategy is to highlight his leadership abilities and to contrast them with the vice president's bland image. The Dole TV ads already are on the air here. In one of them, the voice-over quietly says: &quot;Bob Dole led the fight to save Social Security. George Bush had nothing to do with it.&quot;    Part of the strategy is to paint Mr. Bush as a loser. &quot;Regular Republicans,&quot; says Dole strategist Rath, &quot;are convinced their electoral fears about George Bush are true.&quot;    Adding to Mr. Bush's woes on this score is the fact that, according to polls, most voters in New Hampshire had no idea Mr. Bush was in such trouble in Iowa. &quot;The Dole victory is real news to three-quarters of the Republican voters in this state,&quot; says David Moore, a public-opinion expert at the University of New Hampshire. &quot;That could be of enormous value to Dole.&quot;    It was just four years ago, after all, that Gary Hart was propelled into New Hampshire on the wings of a distant second-place finish to Walter Mondale in the Iowa caucuses. Tracking polls showed that Mr. Hart's support jumped 27 points in the eight days between Iowa and New Hampshire. No one argues that the situation this year is any less volatile.    Yet all is not yet lost for the vice president. He has advantages here he didn't have in Iowa, and if he pulls this out, he could be back in the race as a contender -- and maybe even, once again, the front-runner.    He is far and away the best-organized candidate in New Hampshire; his steering committee numbers 13,000 people; and he has had people working in each of the state's 299 voting precincts since October. In Iowa, Mr. Dole's campaign boasted, &quot;He's one of us.&quot; Mr. Bush, who has a summer home in nearby Kennebunkport, Maine, told reporters at a Nashua factory gate yesterday morning, &quot;I understand this area . . . I'm one of them.&quot;    In Iowa, Sen. Dole won points by putting distance between himself and the Reagan administration on such issues as the Iran-Contra scandal, whether to retain Attorney General Edwin Meese, and Sen. Dole's willingness to support an oil-import fee.    But Mr. Reagan is much more popular with Republican voters here than in Iowa, another advantage for the vice president. So Sen. Dole will try to subtly shift his message, stressing his own legislative role in getting the Reagan program enacted into law.    In recognition of changed circumstances, Mr. Dole quickly embraced President Reagan here. In a speech to a joint session of the New Hampshire legislature yesterday, he challenged his Republican rivals to pledge their support to the president's controversial Star Wars missile defense system -- the Strategic Defense Initiative. As president, he said, &quot;I will develop SDI, I will test SDI, I will deploy SDI.&quot; He also drew applause by saying that the House vote to cut off military aid to the Contras in Nicaragua &quot;was a grievous strategic mistake.&quot;    At the same time, however, Mr. Dole, who isn't known for taking big political risks, isn't likely to make basic changes in what turned out to be a successful strategy in Iowa.    All things being equal, says GOP theoretician Kevin Phillips, Mr. Bush should win in a close call next Tuesday. But, he suspects, something may be happening: a steady disillusionment with Mr. Bush that grows out of his stumbling explanations of his role in the Iran-Contra affair, &quot;his loss of grace under pressure&quot; with TV's Dan Rather and other factors.    &quot;If that's starting to eat in, he may be in trouble on a personal basis,&quot; says Mr. Phillips, &quot;and that will influence people everywhere.&quot;    Arthur Miller, a political scientist at the University of Iowa, says that that kind of unraveling was happening to Mr. Bush in Iowa: &quot;People began to have real questions about his integrity.&quot;    Mr. Phillips thinks Mr. Bush's best chance to restore his fortunes is to pick a fight with Mr. Robertson. &quot;He must begin to reveal Robertson's weaknesses and oddities,&quot; says Mr. Phillips. That might not be a distasteful task for Mr. Bush, for he is no favorite of Mr. Robertson's. Sen. Dole is closer to Mr. Robertson, and in a showdown the former evangelist might be willing to swing his delegates to the senator. It is no wonder, then, that Mr. Dole grits his teeth and says he welcomes Mr. Robertson and his army of militant evangelicals into the Republican Party.    Lee Atwater, Mr. Bush's campaign manager, says that as of right now, &quot;there is no specific plan to go after anybody.&quot; But Bush strategists do plan to hammer Sen. Dole on three major fronts: suggestions that Mr. Dole might raise taxes; the oil-import fee; and the idea that Congress, Mr. Dole's turf, is responsible for many of the nation's problems.    The Bush strategists insist they will not attack Mr. Robertson, noting that much of their own support in the South is conservative and evangelical. &quot;It would be counterproductive&quot; to go after Mr. Robertson, says one Bush aide. &quot;He's not going to be the nominee of the party.&quot;    If neither Mr. Dole nor the vice president takes on Mr. Robertson -- leaving that job to the rest of the field, particularly Mr. Kemp -- then Mr. Robertson gets things pretty much his way.    New Hampshire isn't supposed to be as friendly to Mr. Robertson as Iowa. Iowa was a caucus state, putting a premium on organization. New Hampshire is a primary state, involving more voters, more TV commercials, less contact with individual voters.    The Robertson people &quot;think this is Beirut and they can drive their truck bombs through the snow&quot; for their candidate, says Joe McQuaid, the editor of the Manchester Union Leader, which is supporting former Delaware Gov. Pete du Pont. &quot;But I just don't think there are enough trucks. This isn't his kind of territory, because that silly grin on his face scares people here.&quot;    That kind of attitude may be inviting trouble, for Mr. Robertson should by now have proved even to hardened skeptics that he shouldn't be underrated.    In Iowa, the Robertson forces mailed 130,000 tape cassettes to likely caucus goers in the last 10 days of the campaign. The cassettes allow voters to listen to the soothing words of Mr. Robertson as he outlines his moralistic and patriotic themes. Already, aides say, 170,000 cassettes have been mailed to New Hampshire voters.    Jeffrey K. Hadden, a University of Virginia sociologist and Robertson biographer with close ties to his campaign, says that everything is right on schedule. &quot;He surprised everyone first in Michigan,&quot; says Mr. Hadden, though the Bush forces managed to stage a recovery there later. &quot;He won easily in Hawaii. Now he's captured all the headlines in Iowa. The plan in New Hampshire is to make a respectable showing, third place maybe. Then he has some more surprises. Everything has been carefully planned.&quot;    Mr. Hadden says the next surprise will be the Minnesota caucuses on Feb. 23. In that state, a powerful combination of evangelical Christians and anti-abortionists is preparing a repeat of the Iowa experience. The anti-abortion groups are especially significant. &quot;They are much better organized here than in Iowa,&quot; says Steven Smith, a political scientist at the University of Minnesota.    &quot;Robertson had an event in Duluth in late January and 1,000 people showed up,&quot; says an aide to a Minnesota politician. &quot;Duluth is not the kind of place to get that big a crowd, especially in January.&quot; Mr. Robertson held three rallies in Minnesota yesterday before flying on to New Hampshire.    After Minnesota, the next target is the South Carolina primary. That contest is to be held March 5, three days before Super Tuesday -- the day when voters go to the polls in 20 states, most of them in or on the edge of the South, home to millions of evangelical Christians.    &quot;There is a growing realization that Robertson has got to be stopped,&quot; says Mr. Phillips, the GOP theorist. &quot;But doing it is a very tricky thing.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>