<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870701-0015 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan to PushPlan to EscortTankers in Gulf---Kuwaiti Ships to Get NavyProtection; OppositionIn Congress Continuing---By Gerald F. Seib and Tim CarringtonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Despite continuing opposition in Congress, President Reagan insisted that he will proceed with his plan to provide military escorts for oil tankers in the Persian Gulf.    The president said that his plan, under which Kuwaiti tankers will fly the American flag and receive protection from the U.S. Navy against possible Iranian attacks, will begin in mid-July. To show the importance the administration attaches to its initiative, Mr. Reagan's statement was read by a spokesman at an unusual White House press briefing attended by all the administration's top foreign-policy officials.    Within hours of the administration's announcement, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee passed a bill that would block any use of the U.S. flag on non-U.S. ships in the gulf for a year. But congressional leaders said they doubted they could stop the president's plan.    The foreign relations panel signaled its own lack of confidence by approving a separate resolution stipulating that the War Powers Act, which requires the president to notify Congress when American forces are being used in an area where conflict is likely, would have to be invoked if the Kuwaiti tankers began flying the U.S. flag.    There doesn't appear to be a consensus within the Senate on what Congress should do. The Foreign Relations Committee resolution wasn't the first choice of Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.), who favors a non-binding resolution that would attack the president's policy but wouldn't try to block it.    Democratic leaders in the House also intend to present a non-binding resolution attacking the policy, though a vote on such an amendment or series of amendments won't be held until next week. House Republicans have been working to block consideration before Congress returns from its Fourth of July break.    In an attempt to soften congressional criticism that he is relying too much on military power, Mr. Reagan announced he is launching a new diplomatic push for a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war between Iran and Iraq. He said he was dispatching United Nations Ambassador Vernon Walters to countries represented on the U.N. Security Council to work out a resolution imposing sanctions on the two combatants if they fail to accept a cease-fire.    The White House disclosed that Mr. Reagan on Monday sent letters to the four other Security Council members -- Britain, France, the Soviet Union and China -- urging that the council meet before mid-July and pass a &quot;strong comprehensive resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire.&quot; Under the diplomatic plan envisioned by the administration, such a resolution would be paired with a second one ordering international sanctions against either Iran or Iraq if they refuse to accept the ceasefire.    While Iraq has long expressed its willingness to accept a cease-fire, Iran has consistently rejected such resolutions and argued that the Security Council is too biased toward Iraq to mediate an end to the fighting. And when the Reagan administration tried last month at a summit meeting in Venice to round up support for a resolution imposing sanctions for ignoring a cease-fire, it found that allies are divided on the idea.    So while the administration's new diplomatic drive will be welcomed by some in Congress, it will be seen by many as a public-relations effort to divert attention from the military escorts and the risk of confrontation with Iran they would generate.    Indeed, administration officials acknowledged that the new diplomatic plan was announced after a meeting between President Reagan and congressional leaders because so many lawmakers had urged greater efforts to end the war. White House aides said that none of the congressional leaders at the meeting spoke up to defend the escort plan.    The overall message the White House is trying to relay, though, is that it considers its gulf plan important and that there isn't any squabbling within the administration about the need to go ahead.    The White House briefing on the subject was attended by Secretary of State George Shultz, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, Director of Central Intelligence William Webster, White House National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci and Adm. William J. Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The group appearance seemed to head off reports that the joint chiefs had deep reservations about the plan and that Mr. Shultz didn't fully support it.    The administration officials tried to rally more support for the escort arrangement for Kuwaiti tankers by asserting that the U.S. will get help from its allies and Arab friends in the Persian Gulf. Mr. Weinberger said that Saudi Arabia has agreed to fly additional patrols in an American-made AWACS radar plane to help guard American ships, and that Kuwait has agreed to provide oil for the American escort ships and landing facilities for helicopters that will be used to sweep mines in the gulf.    The officials acknowledged that intelligence reports indicate there will be an increased risk of Iranian-sponsored terrorist or commando attacks against American targets because of the escort policy.    But Mr. Weinberger argued, as did President Reagan recently, that the U.S. needs to protect the Kuwaiti tankers to prevent gulf countries from turning more to the Soviet Union, which has a plan to lease tankers to Kuwait. </TEXT></DOC>