<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870226-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD an affirmative-action plan in Alabama.    Rebuffing a Reagan administration challenge, the justices voted 5-4 that the plan for promoting equal numbers of blacks and whites on Alabama's state police force doesn't violate the Constitution. While the ruling was an important show of support for affirmative action, the five-member majority couldn't agree on a clear standard that should be used to measure the constitutionality of such plans.    The court upheld a 1978 law that empowers the FCC to regulate rates that electric firms charge cable-TV systems for attaching wires to utility poles.    ---   THE U.S. SOUGHT to trade arms for hostages, the Tower report concluded.    According to a source on the president's special Iran-Contra commission, the arms-for-hostages swap was at the center of the White House's contacts with Iran. The source, quoted by the Associated Press, also said the commission was unable to explain how proceeds from the arms sales were diverted to Nicaraguan rebels. The report by the panel, headed by former Texas Sen. John Tower, is to be issued today.    Reagan sent a letter to the panel last week, and a source said it contained a third version about when he authorized the first arms shipment to Iran.    ---   A U.S. judge temporarily blocked an independent counsel from seeking a four-count indictment against former Reagan aide Michael Deaver for allegedly lying to a federal grand jury and a House panel. Whitney North Seymour Jr. said he had been planning to ask the grand jury to indict Deaver within hours.    ---   Italian authorities have issued an arrest warrant for Archbishop Paul Marcinkus, the American who heads the Vatican bank, in connection with the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, a Milan judge said. The warrant charges Marcinkus as &quot;an accessory to fraudulent bankruptcy.&quot; The prelate has denied wrongdoing.    ---   A car bomb exploded in South Beirut, near the Lebanese capital's airport, and police said at least two people were killed and about a dozen others wounded. Responsibility wasn't claimed. Separately, NBC News reported that three Americans and an Indian kidnapped in Lebanon last month are in the custody of Syrian forces.    ---   Gorbachev accused the West of fueling international tension to divert the Soviet Union's resources from domestic problems. The Kremlin leader, citing internal resistance, also said the Soviet Union must choose between &quot;broad democratization&quot; and social and economic stagnation.    ---   An Air Force official told Congress that if the U.S. establishes a missile defense system, its first phase likely would consist of ground-based interceptors and space-based platforms. The remarks came as Reagan aides assured London and Bonn that the U.S. doesn't plan early deployment of such a system.    ---   Robert Gates faces new questions from the Senate Intelligence Committee, particularly in connection with his role in shaping U.S. policy toward Libya. The panel's chairman said a decision won't be made on Gates's nomination as director of the CIA until after a closed-door hearing next Wednesday.    ---   Former Sen. Paul Laxalt has indicated he would be willing to accept a post in the White House. But Laxalt, of Nevada, insisted that while he has been in contact recently with the Reagans, discussions hadn't taken place about succeeding Chief of Staff Regan.    ---   Health specialists generally agreed that the AIDS blood test should be used more widely. While they failed to support a proposal to make it mandatory in some cases, the specialists, at a Centers for Disease Control forum, concurred that broadening its application could help control AIDS.    Researchers reported that patients scheduled for surgery aren't taking advantage of programs that permit them to store their own blood for transfusions. The study was based on a survey of 18 medical centers across the country.    ---   Chicago's Harold Washington defeated former Mayor Jane Byrne, winning 53% of the vote in Tuesday's Democratic mayoral primary election. He became the city's first mayor to be renominated since Richard Daley, who held office between 1955 and 1976.    ---   The Coast Guard said 18 of 19 crewmen from a capsized Filipino cargo ship were presumed dead. Authorities said rescue crews had abandoned an effort that was able to retrieve only one survivor from Tuesday's north Atlantic storm.    ---   A French official testified that a Lebanese charged in the 1982 slayings of American and Israeli diplomats wasn't the head of an extremist group and played only a secondary role in terrorist action. The counterespionage agent also said that data linking Georges Ibrahim Abdallah to the murder of the Israeli &quot;wasn't verified.&quot;    ---   Afghan and Pakistani officials resumed U.N.-sponsored peace talks in Geneva, with both sides proposing timetables for the withdrawal of about 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Separately, the U.S. again warned Pakistan that it needs to halt progress toward building an atomic bomb or face another cutoff of U.S. aid.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres arrived in Cairo for talks with Egyptian President Mubarak about an international Mideast peace conference, which Prime Minister Shamir opposes. Peres said it was too early to decide whether the dispute with Shamir over the parley would provoke early elections.    ---   Zambian President Kaunda freed four South Africans held in Lusaka for eight months. He said they had been duped into spying for Pretoria. The four men, widely reported to have been tortured while in detention, denied any espionage activities.    ---   The NCAA announced that it is barring football at Southern Methodist University this year because of illegal payments to players. It was the athletics organization's harshest penalty ever against the football program. Additional NCAA sanctions against SMU will last until 1990. </TEXT></DOC>