<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0049 </DOCNO><HL> Mubarak Seeks New Mandate for Leaner Times Ahead---Egyptian President Promises Fair Vote,But Opposition Still Grumbles---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><DATELINE> CAIRO, Egypt </DATELINE><TEXT>   A journalist recently asked Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak how he would like to be known among his people. He replied that, above all, he wanted to be known as &quot;a head of state who truly believes in democracy.&quot;    The burly, plain-spoken Mr. Mubarak often waxes eloquent about his desire to give Egypt true democracy. Now, 1987 is shaping up as the year when he has to back up his words with action. Mr. Mubarak already has liberalized Egypt's election laws, scheduled elections for the national legislature and begun laying the groundwork for his own reelection to a second six-year term as president. All this maneuvering, political observers agree, is designed to win an undisputed electoral mandate that will allow him to rule decisively in the tough economic times that lie ahead for Egypt.    But in a country with a history of sham elections, vote rigging and near-dictatorial rule by the president, many are skeptical that Mr. Mubarak will give Egyptians a truly free voice. Opposition politicians already are grumbling about the new election law, which sets rules for the April 6 national-legislative elections. They assert that the law, while fairer than the one it replaced, still is written to ensure that Mr. Mubarak's ruling National Democratic Party remains in control of the legislature, known as the People's Assembly.    Despite Mr. Mubarak's moves to open up Egypt's political system, he and his ruling National Democratic Party still hold nearly all the power. The president, a former air force general with strong ties to the military, makes foreign policy decisions with little interference. The 458-seat People's Assembly does debate and pass laws affecting domestic policy. But it is tame by Western standards and clearly run by the ruling party, which holds 389 of the seats.    There are four small opposition parties, ranging from the conservative Wafd to the leftist Progressive Unionist Grouping. They are noisy but have little clout, and only three of them are represented in the assembly. Still, serious political campaigning is under way by the ruling party as well as the opposition. Hundreds of handpainted campaign banners flutter in the Cairo breeze, candidates barnstorm the countryside and Islamic groups hold street rallies for their candidates.    The election is important mostly because the new assembly will nominate a single candidate for president when Mr. Mubarak's term expires in October. The nominee then will have to be approved in a national referendum.    The assembly almost certainly will nominate Mr. Mubarak if he wants to run again. While the president's supporters once thought he mightn't accept another term, they now say the flurry of political activity proves he wants to be reelected.    Mr. Mubarak seems deeply concerned that his reelection appear fair and legitimate. He apparently is bargaining that the public will consider the new People's Assembly to have been fairly elected, so a cloud of illegitimacy won't hang over his head when the assembly nominates him for reelection.    &quot;He is keen to be nominated by a constitutional body,&quot; explains Mohammed Sid-Ahmed, a writer and prominent figure in the leftist Progressive Unionist Grouping party. &quot;The coming period is a very critical economic period. He wants the central authority to be solid.&quot;    Mr. Mubarak, who took office when Anwar Sadat was assassinated by Moslem extremists in 1981, maintains that the development of democracy will keep Egypt stable at a time when low oil prices, fewer jobs for Egyptians in the Persian Gulf and galloping population growth are unsettling the economic climate. He also believes that the development of democracy in Egypt, the most populous Arab nation and a traditional leader in the region, will affect the entire Middle East.    Mr. Mubarak already has allowed opposition political parties to operate freely and to publish newspapers that often are harshly critical of the government. He also allowed relatively free campaigning for the previous People's Assembly election in 1984 -- though charges of vote-rigging arose after the ruling party won 73% of the seats.    Opposition politicians have sought in Egyptian courts to have the law under which the People's Assembly was elected in 1984 declared unconstitutional. They say that because the law required all candidates to belong to political parties, independents were effectively banned. Instead of fighting back in the courts, Mr. Mubarak issued a decree Feb. 4 dissolving the existing People's Assembly and scheduling elections under a new law allowing independent candidates.    But opposition parties still aren't happy because, while independent candidates are free to run, the new law still says that parties must win at least 8% of the national vote to get any seats in the legislature.    This threshold makes it difficult for the country's small opposition parties to win any seats at all. Only the conservative Wafd opposition party won more than the required 8% in the 1984 election, and it took 59 seats. Two other opposition parties are represented in the People's Assembly, but only because President Mubarak, in a goodwill gesture, appointed five of their members. He also appointed five other legislators from minority groups, increasing total membership in the assembly to 458.    Opposition politicians also are clamoring for direct presidential elections, rather than a referendum that simply approves a candidate chosen by the legislature.    Above all, opposition politicians simply doubt that the bureauracy will allow a fair vote even if President Mubarak says he wants one. They say government functionaries in towns and villages consider it their duty to protect the president and his officials, so they pressure citizens to vote for the ruling party. And opposition leaders charge that the Interior Ministry, which oversees elections, regularly inflates the vote for the ruling party.    There isn't much chance Mr. Mubarak can really lose from his election gambit. His party so dominates the scene that it surely will attract far more support than any other, regardless of how fair the vote counting is. But Mr. Mubarak's rhetoric about democracy will lose credibility if the vote appears unfair.    Despite their grumbling and the long odds, opposition politicians are remaining in the campaign. Some even are trying to improve their chances by combining forces. The small Labor and Liberal parties have allied with the Moslem Brotherhood, an Islamic political organization that is legally barred from forming a party of its own.    Formation of this alliance has meant that the demands of Islamic fundamentalists, particularly their insistence that Egypt adopt a strict Islamic legal code, have become part of the campaign. </TEXT></DOC>