<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Israel Seeks to Obtain the Kind of Financial AidThat NATO Members Get From U.S. Government---By Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Most U.S. allies envy the special relationship Israel enjoys with its American benefactor. So why would Israel take what looks like a step backward by campaigning for equal treatment with the other allies?    The reason is that with normal foreign aid in tight supply, Israel has designs on a category of benefits usually reserved for U.S. allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. These benefits, which translate into hundreds of millions of dollars, include having the U.S. pay about one-quarter of the construction costs of air bases in certain NATO countries and being eligible to bid on maintenance work for certain U.S. aircraft based in Europe.    Israel's share of U.S. foreign aid doled out by the State Department has leveled off at $3 billion a year -- more than the U.S. gives any other nation -- with no increases in sight. So Israel's supporters have come up with a new legislative strategy that reaches into the deep pockets of the Defense Department.    Their campaign, is dubbed &quot;equal treatment,&quot; and here's their sales pitch: Israel, which doesn't have a mutual defense treaty with the U.S., is America's most reliable ally in the turbulent Middle East. It is in America's interest to keep Israel strong. Unlike its Arab neighbors, Israel is unabashedly pro-American and militarily capable of protecting its -- and the U.S.'s -- interests in the region. So why not reshuffle the deck and make Israel eligible to share in the special benefits that NATO and other treaty allies enjoy?    &quot;This just gives Israel equal treatment. What we're talking about is including Israel on a larger list of countries,&quot; says Rep. Larry Smith (D., Fla.), a strong supporter of Israel. This won't cost taxpayers any additional money, he asserts.    But critics contend that this modest beginning could turn into a gusher for the Israelis, eventually leading to competition with U.S. defense contractors. &quot;Here we have a small, relatively minor country, not involved in the protection of Europe or other formal joint military undertakings with the United States, trying to find ways to finance its cash-short economy, and leaving in the end disgruntled defense manufacturers here,&quot; charges David Sadd, executive director of the National Association of Arab Americans. His pro-Arab group frequently opposes legislation to aid Israel.    The legislative foundation took shape last fall, when several amendments were slipped quietly into the mammoth defense authorization bill by a handful of lawmakers involved in national security issues. As required by the legislation, the defense secretary has sent Congress a list of countries that will be designated &quot;major non-NATO allies.&quot; Along with Israel, the list includes Egypt, South Korea, Japan and Australia. The bill then authorizes them to receive certain benefits similar to those now available only to NATO members, including participation in a $40 million cooperative research and development fund and prospects for joint military projects with the U.S.    Offering these benefits to a number of non-NATO nations provides perfect protective cover for pro-Israel lobbyists. It permits Israel to maintain a lower profile at a time when its supporters are somewhat concerned about Israel's role in the Iran-Contra affair. It also won the cooperation of the Pentagon, which expects to benefit from joint high-technology projects with Japan.    It's clear, though, that some parts of the program are tailor-made for Israel. One section of the bill, for example, sets aside funds to test non-U.S. weapons systems for possible use in the U.S. arsenal. The report that accompanied the House bill actually names six specific Israeli weapons systems for the program; the final bill dropped the list, but a pro-Israel lobbyist says he expects Senate staff members to be &quot;guided&quot; by the House language.    As a result, despite its low profile, the &quot;equal treatment&quot; campaign is beginning to make some waves. A former Defense Department official complains that the comparison between Israel and NATO nations is a bogus one. He notes that NATO countries are pledged to go to war if one member is attacked; Israel has no such commitment. Some NATO nations that take domestic political heat by having U.S. nuclear-tipped missiles installed on their soil are beginning to ask Pentagon officials why they have to share the benefits of NATO membership with Israel, which doesn't share their treaty obligation.    Moreover, Israel already gets unusual special treatment from the U.S. All of its $3 billion a year in foreign aid is in grants that don't have to be repaid. And when the Jewish state experienced severe economic problems several years ago, the U.S. gave Israel an additional $1.5 billion in emergency grants.    Even some of Israel's strongest domestic supporters worry that the drive for &quot;equal treatment&quot; is headed toward a formal alliance and negative consequences for Israel. The pro-Israel Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs says that &quot;an alliance would complicate the delicate non-relations Israel has with the Soviet Union. Israel avoids, wherever possible, directly antagonizing the Soviets for fear of increasing the persecution directed at Soviet Jews.&quot;    Nevertheless, the drive to give Israel NATO-like status is taking root in a variety of ways. During a visit last year, Shimon Peres, then Israel's prime minister, discussed the subject privately with President Reagan at the White House, according to pro-Israel sources. And, at a meeting last fall, senior U.S. and Israeli officials quietly removed some obstacles blocking Israel from competing with NATO nations to perform maintenance and repair work on F-15 and F-16 jet fighters based in Europe.    With the legislative base in place, Israel's supporters have already set their sights on other benefits received by NATO and certain other treaty allies. At a private meeting between U.S. and Israeli senior military officials last fall, for instance, Israel agreed to restrain itself for one year from seeking an exemption from paying certain research and development charges that frequently are added to the cost of U.S. weapons. Such exemptions for other U.S. allies have totaled about $2 billion during the Reagan presidency, according to a former U.S. official. He notes pointedly that Israel's agreement not to seek the exemption is only for a year.    Other possible targets include payments the U.S. now makes to some allies, such as underwriting 27% of the cost of constructing air bases for the Turkish air force, and the right to lease, rather than purchase, certain American military equipment. A leasing arrangement would reduce the cash-flow pressure on Israel.    For now, though, Israel's supporters -- lawmakers and lobbyists -- have adopted a low-key approach in pushing the new strategy, preferring to work quietly with a small number of influential legislators and Reagan administration officials rather than launch an aggressive, public campaign. &quot;It's a modest beginning,&quot; says an Israeli diplomat. </TEXT></DOC>