<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871216-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Boesky's Early Sentencing May Be a MoveTo Enhance His Credibility in Other Trials---By James B. StewartStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   The course of criminal proceedings involving former arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky has defied the predictions of most experts so far, and his sentencing scheduled for Friday is no exception. Why, veteran criminal lawyers are asking, is Mr. Boesky being sentenced months -- possibly years -- before he delivers the testimony against others he promised as part of his plea bargain?    &quot;It's highly unusual&quot; to sentence a defendant before he has completed his cooperation, says Stanley S. Arkin, a criminal defense lawyer who has handled numerous insider trading cases. &quot;While it's not unheard of, I can't think of another case of this magnitude&quot; where sentencing has occurred so early.    Some others, especially allies of potential defendants implicated by Mr. Boesky, have attacked the sentencing schedule as another example of &quot;special treatment&quot; Mr. Boesky appears to be getting in return for damaging testimony against others.    But the real reasons, which shed light on some of the arcane strategic considerations involved in any criminal sentencing, appear to be far more complex. According to some people close to the case, the early sentencing is an effort by the government to enhance Mr. Boesky's credibility in future trials where he will appear as a witness.    There isn't any doubt that Mr. Boesky's case is unprecedented, with every twist subjected to intense public scrutiny. Arguably one of the greatest criminals Wall Street has ever spawned, he is also, the government says, the most valuable witness in the history of the securities laws. Mr. Boesky has already settled civil Securities and Exchange Commission charges of insider trading for $100 million. Last year he pleaded guilty to a single felony that carries a maximum prison term of five years in return for his cooperation, a plea bargain that history will judge as lenient or harsh once the full extent of Mr. Boesky's cooperation is known publicly.    The reasons sentencings are usually delayed in most criminal cases are straightforward: The government maintains maximum leverage over a cooperating defendant by withholding sentencing until after the defendant has delivered testimony in other cases. If the defendant doesn't perform as promised, the government can abrogate any plea agreement or press for a more severe sentence.    Defendants, too, usually prefer to be sentenced after their testimony in other cases, so the full extent and value of their cooperation can be presented to the sentencing judge.    Finally, there is a public interest in delaying sentencing until cooperation is complete: The public can reach informed conclusions about whether justice has been served only if they know the full extent of a defendant's cooperation. When Mr. Boesky is sentenced on Friday, the public will be deprived of that knowledge. The government fears that disclosing the full extent of his cooperation would compromise numerous continuing investigations.    According to people familiar with some of the deliberations that led to the fixing of Mr. Boesky's sentencing date, those considerations were outweighed by others in his case. The primary impetus for the early sentencing, they say, came from government prosecutors, and not from Mr. Boesky.    The government's decision &quot;is a very shrewd move in anticipation of future cross-examination of Mr. Boesky&quot; by criminal defense lawyers, says one person familiar with the strategic considerations.    If Mr. Boesky has already been sentenced when he testifies in other cases, defense lawyers will be deprived of a standard attack on a cooperating defendant's credibility: that the defendant's testimony is colored -- even falsified -- in order to please prosecutors and curry favor in anticipation of a more lenient sentence.    Bruce Baird, the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the Boesky case, won't comment on why Mr. Boesky is being sentenced this week. &quot;Every sentencing is unique, involving many factors,&quot; he says.    But, speaking about criminal prosecution generally, Mr. Baird says that &quot;defense lawyers always argue that cooperating defendants are testifying in order to get lenient treatment. That's hard to do if the witness is already in jail.&quot;    Harvey Pitt, Mr. Boesky's lawyer, says Mr. Boesky wants to be sentenced soon, but denies vehemently that Mr. Boesky is being favored with special treatment. &quot;Quite the contrary,&quot; he says. &quot;There are two basic reasons why everyone agrees he should be sentenced now.&quot; The government &quot;knows what his cooperation is,&quot; and his disclosures &quot;have been amply corroborated&quot; by other evidence, he says.    There is another important aspect to the timing of the Boesky sentencing, say others familiar with the process. In a presentencing hearing before federal District Judge Morris Lasker, who is scheduled to sentence Mr. Boesky, the government placed heavy emphasis on the value of Mr. Boesky's cooperation. And in its sentencing memorandum, the government went so far as to praise Mr. Boesky's cooperation as &quot;unprecedented,&quot; saying that not since the passage of the securities laws in the 1930s has the government &quot;learned so much at one time about securities law violations.&quot;    Judge Lasker, in passing sentence, is expected to address explicitly the degree to which Mr. Boesky's cooperation influenced his thinking on sentencing. If he shows any lenience as a result, the sentencing is likely to send a powerful message to potential defendants who haven't yet been charged to surrender now and cooperate. Several of the government's investigations flowing from Mr. Boesky's disclosures are now at critical stages where additional cooperation could be valuable to the government.    And there are other factors that make the Boesky sentencing unique. Because of Mr. Boesky's plea bargain, the sentencing judge's options are comparatively finite. Virtually everyone expects Mr. Boesky to get some prison time -- probably at least the two years meted out to former investment banker Dennis B. Levine -- and he can't get more than five. In that sense, the government lost most of the leverage it might have had in the sentencing process when it reached the original plea bargain.    In any event, if Mr. Boesky fails to later deliver his promised testimony, the plea bargain can still be revoked. Indeed, the very lenience of Mr. Boesky's plea bargain could work in the government's favor, since if Mr. Boesky lies, he loses the benefit of the bargain. That, prosecutors are likely to argue, is a powerful incentive to tell the truth.    Practically speaking, Mr. Boesky is likely to be a witness in cases that continue for years. If the government were to wait until after all of these proceedings were over to sentence Mr. Boesky, the punishment might become too remote from Mr. Boesky's crimes. Mr. Boesky &quot;could be a professional witness for the rest of his life,&quot; says one lawyer involved in the case. </TEXT></DOC>