<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0115 </DOCNO><HL> West's PatienceMoves SovietsNearer Arms Pact---By Edward L. Rowny</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Notwithstanding the latest posturings by Viktor Karpov of the Kremlin, it is becoming increasingly clear that an agreement to reduce intermediate-range nuclear weapons (INF) may be within reach. The Soviets, having insisted at Reykjavik upon artificial linkage of an agreement in this class of weapons to other arms-control issues, have now removed this obstacle.    In their joint statement following the November 1985 Geneva summit, President Reagan and General Secretary Gorbachev agreed to accelerate progress in areas where common ground already had been identified, including an interim agreement on INF and 50% reductions in strategic arms. Recent evidence suggests the Soviets may be earnest about carrying out half of the commitment -- seeking progress on an interim agreement on INF.    But we shouldn't lose sight of the other half of the commitment -- accelerating progress toward 50% cuts in strategic arms. As in the case of INF, a strategic arms-reduction agreement was to be pursued without linkage to other arms-control issues.    Last October, when the two leaders met at Reykjavik, further agreements were reached on important aspects of START and INF as worked out among the arms-control experts of both sides. In INF, the sides agreed on a global limit of 100 warheads on U.S. and Soviet longer-range INF missiles, with no such missiles in Europe. We also agreed to reduce strategic nuclear-delivery vehicles to 1,600 on each side, with no more than 6,000 warheads on these delivery vehicles. We agreed, too, on a method of counting and limiting bomber weapons. Finally, we agreed to seek a solution to the question of nuclear-armed, sea-launched cruise missiles, but agreed not to count them in the 6,000-warhead aggregate. In the end, though, Mr. Gorbachev prevented further progress by linking all nuclear-arms-control issues into one package. This attempted to hold progress on arms control hostage to our acceptance of Soviet efforts to cripple the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative. The president, correctly, refused to accept such a package.    Thirteen years of negotiating experience with the Soviets has taught me that genuine progress in arms control comes only through patience and firmness. The Soviets watch for opportunities arising from rifts within and among the democracies. The U.S. and its allies can maintain negotiating credibility with the Soviets only when they follow through on commitments. Only when the Soviets are convinced, after long probing, that the West is determined to keep its defenses strong do they move to conclude agreements.    The West's record of patience and follow-through on INF is clear and should be credited with stimulating the Soviet decision to unlink INF and SDI. We kept our 1979 &quot;dual-track&quot; commitment to introduce ground-launched cruise missiles and medium-range missiles in European NATO while seeking to negotiate their elimination if the Soviets eliminated the threat that had necessitated the NATO decision. When the time came for installation of ground-launched cruise missiles and Pershing IIs in Western Europe, the allies withstood a massive, Soviet-fueled propaganda campaign. Our allies refused, however, to be bullied into making concessions simply because the Soviets had staged a histrionic walkout from the Geneva talks in December 1983. As the months passed and the Soviets recognized that neither Western leaders nor their public support was weakening on the INF issue, the Russians agreed to resume bargaining.    U.S. strategic modernization also has made the Soviets realize they will not be able to pressure the U.S. into a one-sided strategic-arms agreement. We improved the credibility of our deterrent forces and moved beyond the flawed framework of the unratified SALT II treaty.    The formula to reduce strategic nuclear weapons that Messrs. Reagan and Gorbachev agreed upon at Geneva and fleshed out at Reykjavik would significantly reduce the threat of nuclear war. It would get to the heart of the strategic balance between the U.S. and the Soviet Union -- the large, intercontinental ballistic missiles. Strategic stability would be enhanced and risk of nuclear war lessened by substantial reductions of the warheads on these and other strategic systems on each side.    The deep cuts in strategic systems discussed at Geneva and Reykjavik would be in our mutual interest. They would reduce the threat of a Soviet first strike. The Soviets also would have a great deal to gain, since we would be required to reduce significantly the potential of land- and sea-based ballistic missiles and limit our air-launched cruise-missile deployments.    In the INF negotiations, both sides now have pledged to work out verification provisions. While important details remain to be resolved, the Soviets have said publicly that they can agree to unprecedented, &quot;intrusive&quot; methods such as on-site inspection. The U.S. now has put on the table draft treaty language providing for a comprehensive verification regime. If the Soviets will accept such terms, similar verification accords on strategic-weapons reductions may be possible.    Throughout the INF negotiations, the U.S. and its allies have remained clear about their objectives and patient in the face of hard-line Soviet propaganda and negotiating tactics. The West's sense of purpose and unity on the fundamentals of defense and deterrence has given Mr. Gorbachev impetus to remove his demand that an INF agreement be linked to American concessions on strategic defense. There is ample reason, too, for him now to remove the same artificial obstacle he has introduced in the path of a strategic-arms agreement. There is still time for Mr. Gorbachev to keep both halves of the deal he struck with President Reagan in November 1985.    ---   Mr. Rowny is an arms-control adviser to the president and secretary of state. </TEXT></DOC>