<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880707-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Pentagon Buying Practices May Have Downed Flight 655 </HL><AUTHOR> Alexander Cockburn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><IN> AIR </IN><G> DEF EXE </G><TEXT>   Nine hours after either one or two missiles from the Vincennes disposed of the Iranian A-300 Airbus, Adm. William J. Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, proposed the official line, which was that the Iranians -- those flying the Airbus carrying 290 people and those who let it ply between Bandar Abbas and Dubai under such conditions -- brought it on themselves. The Airbus was off course. It was descending toward the Vincennes on a presumptively hostile flight path. Its transponder, designed to identify its civilian status and course, was not switched on. The crew failed to respond to seven distinct warnings on both civilian and military radio channels. There were electronic indications suggesting that an attack by an F-14 was starting.    On such analysis regrets but not apologies were in order and this, so far, has been the Reagan administration's posture. The press, mostly performing its fundamental role of offering support to the government and reassurance to the public, has duly followed along, with the exception, from what I've been able to read, of good coverage by Fred Kaplan in the Boston Globe.    But how is the official story standing up?    The Airbus was &quot;off course.&quot; Yes, but by about four or five miles, which is not in the least unusual, and on the far side of the corridor of the Vincennes. By comparison, KAL 007 was 365 miles awry, and this was not at the time taken by the Reagan administration as being an exonerating factor. Adm. Crowe also made much of the fact that the plane was at an altitude of 9,000 feet, unusually low for a commercial flight. And he claimed the plane had a &quot;threatening flight profile,&quot; notably in the alleged fact that it was descending.    He was correct in saying the plane was at 9,000 feet, but this was not peculiar, given that the Airbus had taken off only seven minutes earlier, and thus the normal flight profile would have been to keep climbing steadily to 25,000 feet before leveling off. Assertions of a menacing descent notwithstanding, there is nothing to suggest the Airbus was doing other than what it intended, which was to fly straight from Bandar Abbas to Dubai.    This suggests a panicky response from the Vincennes, particularly since a Pentagon air-combat specialist quoted by Mr. Kaplan in the Boston Globe said that an attacking F-14 probably would be traveling &quot;at at least 550 to 580 knots,&quot; 100 knots faster than Adm. Crow says the Airbus was flying, and &quot;well under 1,000 feet. . . . Someone flying straight and level at 9,000 feet ain't hostile.&quot; It seems, by the way, that the height-finding ability on all radar systems is their weakest function.    Much has been made of the fact that the Vincennes sent four warnings on a military radio channel and three on a civilian one. The military warnings are irrelevant since only a military aircraft would have been monitoring such a frequency. A common thread to such shoot-down incidents is that the attacker always claims to have given plenty of warning. It's not rare for pilots to be lazy about listening to emergency channels and the Airbus pilots could have had the relevant equipment down or off. The Russians made similar sorts of efforts to contact KAL 007.    The transponder is an automatic device that gets queried by air-traffic control and responds automatically with pertinent data. The Vincennes was equipped with the same querying device. If transponder and interrogator are both working there can be no misidentification. The U.S.'s initial claim that the Airbus's transponder was off was accepted in all U.S. press accounts, but there was no compelling reason for such credulity. The A-300 Airbus is equipped with a back-up transponder and the chances of both being either turned off or broken are remote.    Indeed, U.S. government officials are now sending out clouds of uncertainty on the matter of the transponder. Maybe it wasn't off, after all. Maybe the ambiguous signals were coming from another plane. And on the crucial matter of whether the plane was going up or down, Dubai air-traffic control insists it was ascending.    Suppose we abandon the theory very naturally espoused by the U.S., that the Iranians and their Airbus were either incompetent, malevolent or both and instead consider the theory that the Vincennes' equipment is an extrusion of the corrupt, inefficient and profiteering system now under major investigation by the FBI.    The Vincennes is an Aegis-class cruiser, billed by the Navy as the last word in high-tech wizardry in its ability to track and identify dozens of planes and missiles at the same time. But congressional suspicions of the Aegis radar system were once so high that the whole program was in trouble. Just in time for a major funding vote in May 1984, a test showed miraculous results in detecting low-altitude surprise attack. Critics at the time said the actual element of &quot;surprise&quot; in this test was highly questionable, and the General Accounting Office recently concluded a report on the matter that hasn't yet been declassified. The joy of Aegis from the contracting point of view is that it is extremely expensive. Along with associated systems, it accounts for half the $1 billion cost of the ship on which it is installed.    The Aegis system is known to be unreliable, and the allied electronic warfare system SLQ-32, whose job is to sort out incoming transmissions and determine which aircraft are Friend or Foe, is notoriously unreliable. The Vincennes couldn't tell the difference between an Airbus and an F-14, despite being loaded with equipment for high-tech fighting via radar screen, supposedly more reliable than a man standing on the bridge with binoculars announcing the passage of an Airbus flying south at 9,000 feet. But then, in military Keynesian terms, or in the brusquer language of the arms companies' bottom line, binoculars don't count for much.    Another point not being discussed is that even if it had been an F-14, this should not necessarily have provoked a speedy missile launching, as the F-14 is not designed to carry anti-ship missiles. Here we get to our old friends the fog of war and the actual circumstances of the men on the ship. They were in the midst of an engagement with Iranian gunboats. They no doubt also remembered the fate of Capt. Glenn Brindel of the USS Stark, forced to resign after an Iraqu Exocet missile killed 37 of his men. Capt. Brindel has complained of the unreliability of the SLQ-32.    The Reagan administration is urgently contesting parallelism between flights 655 and 007, but there are many parallels too evident to mention. On the matter of such terrible incidents in general, President Reagan is no doubt already rescinding his view that only an Evil Empire could accomplish such a vile deed, preferring to say the incident is closed. But the Soviets made major changes in their air-defense system after they shot down KAL 007. The best way to requite the 290 victims of Flight 655 would be to reform the corrupted technology and procurement system that almost certainly did them in.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>