<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0081 </DOCNO><HL> In the Philippines, Justice Delayed Is Still Justice Denied --- Two Years After Marcoses, The System Rumbles On; National Character Flaw? </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> MANILA, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The case against the Vitas municipal slaughterhouse should have been open and shut.    Scraggly chickens peck atop mounds of manure. Cow heads crusted with maggots lie rotting in puddles. In the parking lot, delivery boys toss unwrapped meat into motorcycle sidecars and slosh away through the mud. &quot;If you could only see how they handle livestock, you would probably swear you'd never eat beef or pork,&quot; says Efren San Juan, the national government's top meat inspector.    But however ample the evidence, Dr. San Juan and his colleagues haven't been able to close down the slaughterhouse, though they have been trying since 1964. Every time they snap on the padlocks, city-hall officials come and smash them off again. The slaughterhouse supplies more than half the meat sold in Manila's open-air markets -- a monument to the climate of impunity in the Philippines.    The slaughterhouse is a particularly gruesome example, but it isn't the only one. From food safety to criminal justice, this is a country where many are abused and few are punished -- even now that 20 years of dictatorship are over.    Try as it might, the Philippines seems unable to avenge the injustices of dictatorship. Evidence of that is the nation's apparent inability to prosecute the highly symbolic &quot;hidden wealth&quot; cases against former President Ferdinand Marcos, who was driven from office in 1986. The U.S., which considered Mr. Marcos an ally while he was in power, finally has moved against him and his cronies. On Friday, Mr. and Mrs. Marcos and a Saudi financier were indicted on charges of diverting enormous sums of public money for their own use.    In her first executive order upon taking office, President Corazon Aquino created a high-powered commission to recover the billions of dollars worth of public property the Marcoses and their friends allegedly siphoned out of the country. The mandate couldn't have been firmer, and the indebted Philippines couldn't have needed the money more.    More than two years later, the commission has yet to prosecute a single crony. Worse, some of the commission officials themselves now are being accused of pocketing the remaining assets, which they were assigned to protect. Some have resigned. Others have been removed from their posts.    Removal from office, however ignominious, doesn't necessarily mean punishment. Consider what happened to Emil Ong, the former head of the National Food Authority, the government agency that buys rice from Filipino farmers and helps regulate food prices. Last year, a tugboat captain hired to transport two barges of the agency's rice turned up in port saying the boats had vanished on the high seas. He spoke of strong winds, but his tale grew shakier and shakier the more he told it. Many suspected that Mr. Ong may have had something to do with the disappearance of the rice, worth some $850,000.    A Senate panel investigated. It found no evidence to suggest the rice had been stolen, but it unearthed enough administrative problems at the National Food Authority to declare Mr. Ong unfit to manage the agency. President Aquino dismissed him. The very next day, he received a new government post, with undersecretary rank and no cut in salary.    Mrs. Aquino herself is a victim of justice delayed, justice denied. Five years ago, her husband was gunned down, an incident that ignited the passions of the nation. Tens of thousands of angry citizens marched through the streets, convinced that Mr. Marcos and his military establishment were responsible.    After Mr. Marcos fell from power and Mrs. Aquino took office, a special prosecutor was assigned to the case. Defendants were brought to trial. But the months dragged on and the trial went nowhere. This month, the special prosecutor was disbarred for gross misconduct unrelated to the case. Now, it seems, Mrs. Aquino will never taste justice.    Incidents like these have deeply disappointed Filipinos, who had hoped social justice and accountability would blossom after Mr. Marcos was gone. Some blame the lingering Marcos legacy. Others cite economics, arguing that it is naive to think justice might prevail in a society so skewed toward a wealthy minority.    Other Filipinos are looking into their own culture to explain why so much can go wrong and so few can be held accountable. &quot;The matter goes beyond the Marcos and Aquino administrations,&quot; says Philippine Senator Leticia Shahani. &quot;It has to do with our national character.&quot;    Senator Shahani was so fed up after a violent coup attempt last year -- the ring leader was jailed but escaped, and is still at large -- that she ordered a team of social scientists to profile the Filipino character. The team honed in on half a dozen destructive traits. There was the &quot;crab mentality,&quot; for instance, a reference to the way Filipinos, like crabs heaped in a basket, will tend to pull any one down who tries to climb to the top. And there was the syndrome of &quot;ningas cogon,&quot; or &quot;burning the wild grass,&quot; which implies that people here work the way a brush fire burns: first a big flare-up, then quick burn-out.    Lito Misagal knows about ningas cogon. His mother and brother were aboard the Dona Paz inter-island ferry when it collided with an oil tanker and sank southeast of Manila last year around Christmas. The accident is thought to have been the worst in peacetime sea history. No one knows exactly how many perished, but estimates run as high as 3,000.    Ever since the disaster, Mr. Misagal and other victims' relatives have been trying in vain to affix responsibility. &quot;My parents went through a lot to give me an education,&quot; he says. &quot;Don't you think it's right that I pay them my proper respects?&quot;    In the days just after the ferry sank, authorities seemed eager for justice. President Aquino whipped 10 government and civic groups into a task force. A relief fund was set up. The Coast Guard called an investigation and took testimony.    Then the brush fire burned out. The Coast Guard wrapped up its hearings and retreated to deliberate. It has been doing so ever since. Victims' relatives sent in requests for transcripts of the hearings, but no one has bothered to answer them. Some families tried suing the ferry line, but their cases were thrown out on technicalities. (The ferry line offered to settle out of court, for about $1,500 per victim, the minimum required under Philippine law. Mr. Misagal wouldn't take it.)    &quot;It's a relatively simple case,&quot; says his lawyer, Jose Manuel Diokno. &quot;All we have to prove is that the passenger bought the ticket, he established the contract, he boarded the ship and then he never reached Manila. If we could just go ahead on the merits, we could get it solved fairly quickly. But we haven't been able to present one witness, file a single piece of evidence. Nothing.&quot;    Lawyers use procedural tricks to stall in any country, but Filipino lawyers are world-class champions of delay. At the Supreme Court, Associate Justice Antonio Sarmiento says he is just now sitting down to a case filed in 1938. At the Tax Court, a recent study shows that even if the judges were to work 50% faster, it would still take them 476 years to catch up. In the special court where the Marcos &quot;hidden wealth&quot; cases are filed, judges are so swamped by pre-trial pleadings in those cases that some say it would be better to forget about prosecution and simply settle.    Partly to blame, some say, is &quot;pakikisama,&quot; a Filipino term which means &quot;counting on the old boys' club.&quot;    Philippine Immigration Commissioner Miriam Defensor-Santiago, who used to be a judge, tells how it works in the courts: She says judges routinely schedule as many as 20 hearings at the same time, because they know the lawyers -- who get paid every time they appear -- will show up only long enough to ask for a postponement. The reasons are often inane, she says: &quot;In my experience, the most common grounds is diarrhea.&quot;    However frivolous the motion, the opposing lawyer doesn't object, because he knows he may be the one asking for a postponement next. The judge goes along for fear of offending the lawyers. The client gets lost in the shuffle.    Francisco Nemenzo, a political scientist with the University of the Philippines, thinks it is a mistake to blame cultural quirks without considering economic conditions. Filipinos wouldn't need &quot;pakikisama&quot; if they could count on the job market to reward them for their work, he says.    He believes President Aquino had a fleeting moment, upon taking office, when she could have dispelled the old ways. &quot;During the struggle against Marcos, there was an extraordinary sense of unity,&quot; he says. &quot;She could have consolidated it.&quot;    President Aquino missed her chance, he says, when during a series of coup attempts against her, she compromised with military factions instead of tapping her vast popular support. But Mr. Nemenzo finds it difficult to blame her. The military, after all, is one of the biggest purveyors of &quot;pakikisama&quot; in the country, with factions whose bonds transcend rank.    Cebu is an island of crystalline beaches and turbulent politics in the central Philippines. It has seen so many unsolved murders in recent years that locals have taken to calling it &quot;the killing fields.&quot; Military men tend to blame the deaths on left-wing insurgents. Residents tend to blame paramilitary vigilantes.    Alfonso Surigao was a lawyer in Cebu who delved into the controversy, defending civilian activists charged with guerrilla activity. The work made him highly unpopular with local military men. One evening last June, while Mr. Surigao was in his garden tending to his pigs, three men crashed his home. Two stood guard, and the third shot Mr. Surigao dead.    No one has been convicted of the killing -- but the case got farther than most, thanks to the bizarre chain of events that followed. A few days after the murder, a second body turned up in Cebu. It was identified as that of Alan Climaco, a one-time guerrilla who had become a military informant.    Mr. Climaco's grief-stricken father, thinking he had nothing to lose, spilled all: His dead son, he revealed, had murdered Mr. Surigao. He also said his son had pulled the trigger under the orders of Cebu's senior paramilitary officer, Maj. Rico Palcuto.    The case turned macabre: The younger Mr. Climaco turned up alive. Since he couldn't very well cover up a murder after his father acknowledged his guilt, Mr. Climaco called a press conference and confirmed the whole thing. Charges were brought against him and Maj. Palcuto.    That should have been that. But before the trials could begin, both men moved onto the local military base, where they have been living under the chaperonage of another military man, Gen. Jesus Hermosa.    &quot;I have faith in our legal system,&quot; said Gen. Hermosa when asked last August about the forthcoming trials. &quot;Justice will be rendered for Climaco and Palcuto.&quot; Soon after that, Mr. Climaco recanted his confession. And Maj. Palcuto has moved to have references to his alleged role stricken from the record. </TEXT></DOC>