<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871110-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID the U.S. would be willing to hold talks with the Sandinistas.    The president said such discussions, the first between the U.S. and Nicaragua in almost three years, would occur only if Managua engaged in &quot;serious&quot; cease-fire talks with the Contra rebels, and only if representatives of other Central American countries were present. The move, which came as the Pentagon announced a road-building exercise in Honduras involving 15,500 U.S. troops, followed Ortega's statement last week that the Sandinistas would negotiate indirectly with the anti-government rebels.    Nicaragua's army reportedly ended a unilateral cease-fire in three areas of the country, saying the Contras hadn't adhered to the monthlong truce.    ---   KENNEDY HAS EMERGED as Reagan's likely nominee for the high court.    White House officials confirmed that the California judge, who was subjected to new background questioning following Ginsburg's withdrawal amid a marijuana-smoking controversy, is the leading candidate to fill the Supreme Court seat left vacant by Powell's retirement. White House aides began trying to alleviate doubts about Kennedy among conservatives, who view him as too moderate.    Reagan said that harassment from outside rather than within the administration forced Ginsburg to withdraw his nomination to the Supreme Court.    ---   A BOMB BLAST KILLED at least 32 people in Sri Lanka's capital.    Police in Colombo said the bomb exploded in a mainly Sinhalese neighborhood where thousands of commuters were awaiting buses to suburbs. As many as 105 people were injured. Rescue workers said the death toll could reach 70. While responsibility wasn't immediately claimed, officials blamed nationalist Sinhalese opposed to an Indian-backed peace pact aimed at ending the island nation's ethnic strife.    The explosion was the first major bombing in Colombo since April 21, when at least 180 people were killed at a bus depot. Tamil rebels were blamed.    ---   The Soviet Union is rewriting its criminal code to abolish internal exile as punishment, Justice Minister Kravtsov said in an interview with the news agency Tass. The proposed overhaul of the nation's laws also includes narrowing the list of death penalty offenses and shortening the maximum prison term to 10 years from 15 years.    ---   U.S. intelligence sources said a CIA-owned airline delivered a small amount of munitions to Tehran months before Reagan authorized U.S. arms sales to Iran in 1986. Two shipments of Dutch, Belgian and Israeli explosives valued at about $1 million were sent to Tehran in July and August 1985, the sources said.    ---   Sen. Dole formally announced his candidacy for the 1988 Republican presidential nomination. In a speech in his hometown of Russell, Kan., Dole pledged to make a balanced budget the centerpiece of his presidency.    ---   The Irish Republican Army admitted planting a bomb Sunday that killed at least 11 people and injured more than 60 in Northern Ireland. The outlawed nationalist guerrilla group said that the explosive device was intended to kill security forces and that it went off prematurely. In Belfast, police defused a 1,200-pound bomb.    ---   Arab leaders sought a united front against Iran. At a summit of Arab states in Amman, the leaders also defined common goals of containing the Iran-Iraq war and getting foreign fleets out of the Persian Gulf. In addition, Jordan's King Hussein persuaded Syria and Iraq to attempt to reconcile differences over the gulf war.    Iraq said its jets bombed a ship off Iran's coast and an Iranian oil field in apparent retaliation for Tehran's missile attack Sunday on Baghdad that killed 11 people.    ---   Italians voted overwhelmingly for limits on the country's development of nuclear energy, according to early results from a two-day national referendum that drew a low turnout. Voters also approved two measures to change Italy's justice system.    ---   The U.S. and Greece opened negotiations in Athens on the future of American military bases on Greek soil. The current pact, which covers four major U.S. bases and 20 smaller installations, is to expire next year. As the talks began, left-wing groups called for the withdrawal of the facilities.    ---   Kim Young Sam was formally nominated for president by South Korea's main opposition party. Kim was the third candidate to officially enter the race, joining government candidate Roh Tae Woo and former Prime Minister Kim Jong Pil. Dissident leader Kim Dae Jung also intends to run. The election is to be held by Dec. 20.    ---   Moscow has dropped its demand for a PLO delegation in international peace talks on the Mideast, an Israeli official said. The Palestinians would be part of Jordan's delegation, an arrangement that is considered acceptable to both Israel and the U.S.    ---   Tunisia's foreign minister said the country's new regime, which seized power Saturday from President Bourguiba, would continue its crackdown on Moslem extremists. Meanwhile, the ailing Bourguiba, 84, was taken by military guards to a presidential residence in Mornaghia from Carthage.    ---   Abu Nidal terrorists claimed to be interrogating hostages taken from a boat reportedly seized Sunday off the Israeli-occupied Gaza Strip. While the group said that &quot;new details of the operation&quot; would be announced, both Israel and the Red Cross denied knowledge of the incident. </TEXT></DOC>