<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Consumer Medicine Causes Ill Will</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Your April 10 front-page article on &quot;Dispirited Doctors&quot; and April 24 &quot;Special Report: Medicine andamp; Health&quot; should be read in tandem because they present excellent counterpoints to an emerging national problem in health care.    In your description of dispirited doctors, you accurately portrayed the feelings that result from legal, governmental and economic intrusions into medical practice, as well as from the deteriorating relationship between doctors and their patients. Research we have conducted at the University of Illinois supports the reality of widespread demoralization of America's doctors. Unfortunately, when economic pressures supersede the climate of trust and caring so integral to medical practice, it is easy to conceptualize oneself as a &quot;vendor&quot; of services.    The medicine and health report provides some background understanding for this disturbing phenomenon. Businesses and insurance companies admit to involving themselves in medical decisions, getting between the doctor and patient, and upsetting that traditional relationship. Simultaneously, patients, in &quot;revolt,&quot; want more sensitive doctors who will enlist them as partners and share responsibility with them.    All may proceed satisfactorily unless a poor or untoward outcome occurs. The doctor alone is then subject to legal charges of incompetence, often for natural events over which he never could have control. These lawsuits often take years before vindication and are often totally unfounded. In Illinois, for example, the physician-owned insurance company reported that in its 11-year history, the plaintiff received no payment in 82% of the cases that have been filed and closed. Doctors are willing to assume legal responsibility for the care of their patients just as they are willing to accept the authority and special competence that flow from their years of education, training and experience.    It is enormously stressful, however, to feel constant pressure from the conflicting demands of integrating profit-making business practices with consummate professionalism. The challenge to America's doctors is to remain true to their professional ideals in the face of current economic and legal pressures and at the same time respond to patients' wishes that they become more caring and sensitive to those same people who lead a &quot;revolt&quot; against them.    The twin concerns of dispirited practitioners and distrustful patients suggest that the path upon which American health care is proceeding may not be in the best interest of either the doctor or the patient. The cruelest irony would be that the effort to radically change health care in order to improve it may result in irreversible damage to the health-care system.    Sara C. Charles, M.D.   University of Illinois   Department of Psychiatry   Chicago, Ill.   ---   The plea for hospitals and physicians to respect patients as intelligent adults who are quite capable of participating in the decision-making process comes at a time when economic forces demand more cost-effective use of time and resources. It is usually the personal amenities and the time spent on communication that are sacrificed under these constraints. The fundamental cause of these economic restrictions is not the liability overhead, but rather the costs that derive from the new technologies. The explosion of technological advances in health care, their presentation to the public at their first clinical trials, and the high expectations generated by the hype of a new procedure or &quot;breakthrough&quot; are the real root of why the cost of health care will soon exceed our capital resources.    We have led the public to expect everyone with angina to seek coronary-bypass surgery (for $25,000) or each head injury to involve a CAT scan (for $500). The health-care system and its underwriters have been reticent about informing the public that with limited resources we shall have to make some painful choices. For the first time in 2,000 years of medicine, physicians will be the messengers who will have to say to the sick and injured that the resources are not available to treat every patient with every modern available therapy. There is not enough for everyone. As science and technology continue their progress with their rising costs, there will be even greater need for facing this issue more honestly.    Roe Wells, M.D.   Stoughton, Mass.   ---   Saying that &quot;patients are in revolt against the doctors and other elements of the health-care system&quot; is an overstatement at best.    Changes in health-care delivery are coming about in much more subtle ways than that, as your report goes on to explain. If this is a revolution, it is quiet and low-key. The changes you have featured in this special report have been evolving over the years. They are not necessarily a byproduct of the consumer age because in medicine, physicians and other health-care professionals always have been concerned about our patients. We welcome their involvement with us in planning their treatment and care. I'm not advocating patient self-diagnosis or treatment. I am encouraging open communication between patient and physician. That kind of communication builds an understanding not just of the potential but also the limitations of the art of medicine.    James H. Sammons, M.D.   Executive Vice President   American Medical Association   Chicago, Ill.   ---   Although your report addressed important issues, including patient responsibility and diet voodoo, it failed to mention AIDS. Responsible medical authorities have described AIDS as being the plague of the 20th century. Your readership would have been well served had you discussed the importance of condom use and the need for AIDS education programs in the school and workplace. Education is currently the only effective approach to controlling this epidemic.    Joanne E. Mantell   City of New York   Department of Health   New York   ---   It seems that the purpose of the special report was to inform readers about the problems physicians have in common with other professionals, as well as those problems unique to doctors. We are not asking for sympathy, just compassion.    Roger D. Harman, M.D.   Fort Worth, Texas</TEXT></DOC>