<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880216-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Role Reversal: CIA Resisted Proposal To Give Afghan Rebels U.S. Stinger Missiles --- State Department, Congress Overcame Opposition And Forced Deployment --- The Rebels' 'Silver Bullet' </HL><AUTHOR> John Walcott and Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST GOVMT </CO><IN> MON ARO </IN><G> EXE CNG DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration's most ambitious covert operation is increasing pressure on the Soviet Union to withdraw from Afghanistan, yet the program encountered resistance from a surprising quarter: the Central Intelligence Agency.    Although William Casey, the agency's late director, championed covert operations, he and other high CIA officials delayed for about a year giving the Afghan guerrillas the weapon now credited with turning the tide against the Soviets: the Stinger anti-aircraft missile.    The story of how the administration, after a long debate, decided to send Stingers to Afghanistan in 1986 shows how the usually cautious State Department and Congress, which is habitually wary of secret wars, overcame CIA foot-dragging to force the deployment of the effective missiles.    Strangely, the CIA resisted a move that has enabled the Afghan guerrillas to create a military quagmire so costly that the Soviets last week offered to begin withdrawing their 115,000 troops from Afghanistan by May 15. &quot;We moved from a typical containment approach in 1980 to the first case ever since World War II of actually reversing a Soviet invasion,&quot; says Elie Krakowski, the Pentagon's director of regional defense.    President Carter started supporting the rebels in 1980, shortly after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Reagan administration has increased aid to about $600 million a year, yet the program's aims weren't clear until the administration worked out a presidential directive in the spring of 1985.    Officials say that Morton Abramowitz, the State Department's top intelligence officer, along with senior Pentagon officials, inserted into the directive language calling for an expansion of the program every year to force the new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, to decide whether he was willing to pay an ever-increasing price to keep Soviet troops in Afghanistan.    But the CIA moved cautiously. It was wary of provoking Soviet retaliation against Pakistan, precipitating a superpower showdown, or establishing a long and complex supply train to the Afghans that might actually hamper their fighting ability. It assigned to Pakistan just three officers, none of them paramilitary experts, to manage the secret operation.    The agency helped arm the Afghan mujahedeen with British-made, radar-guided Blowpipe missiles and with Soviet-designed heat-seeking SA-7s purchased in Poland. Intelligence sources say the Blowpipes and SA-7s were attractive to the CIA because they couldn't be traced to the U.S., but the missiles &quot;quite clearly weren't doing the job.&quot;    Officials say the CIA resisted giving the Afghans new radios and better weapons, claiming the SA-7s weren't effective because the rebels didn't take proper care of them. The agency later discovered the real reason the missiles failed: The Poles had sabotaged the SA-7s purchased by the CIA's front company. &quot;We'd give them to these guys, and they'd go out and get killed,&quot; says one U.S. official.    The mujahedeen and their supporters lobbied for more effective missiles. During the summer of 1985, Pakistani President Zia ul-Haq told a congressional delegation that he thought the mujahedeen needed Stingers, according to sources who were present. The CIA station chief in Islamabad, who attended the meeting, relayed the request to CIA headquarters, but senior agency officials decided to sit on it, intelligence sources say.    Then, late in 1985, the State Department's Mr. Abramowitz returned from a visit to Pakistan convinced that the mujahedeen needed Stingers. &quot;Mort Abramowitz became the proponent of Stingers,&quot; one intelligence official recalls.    The shoulder-fired Stinger, developed by General Dynamics in the 1970s, weighs only 35 pounds, but its heat-seeking guidance system can home in on aircraft up to 50 miles away. The U.S. Army has thousands of a basic model sent to the Afghans and has developed two improved versions of the missile. The Soviets lacked effective defenses against even the basic Stinger.    Senior administration officials say that Mr. Abramowitz and Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Michael Armacost began pressing the CIA to supply Stingers to the Afghans. At about the same time, a Pentagon group began recommending Stingers, and the issue arose separately at a White House meeting of the Planning Coordination Group, which oversaw covert operations.    But the CIA remained skeptical. At the White House meeting late in 1985, Bert Dunn, then the chief of the CIA's Near East operations division, said the Pakistanis opposed equipping the mujahedeen with Stingers, sources who were present say. That statement contradicted Mr. Zia's earlier advice.    The stalemate over sending Stingers to Afghanistan finally broke in January 1986, when another congressional delegation met with Mr. Zia in Islamabad. Rep. James Courter, a New Jersey Republican, asked the Pakistani leader whether he thought the Afghan rebels needed Stingers. Mr. Zia replied that he had asked for the weapons and had been turned down by the CIA. &quot;Zia couldn't have been more clear that this was the one weapon the mujahedeen needed or they would be butchered,&quot; Rep. Courter recalls.    The Planning Coordination Group met again in Afghanistan in late February, and this time the CIA's Mr. Dunn, who earlier had claimed the Pakistanis opposed Stingers for the Afghans, said the CIA had &quot;no objection&quot; to providing them, sources who were present say.    The battle wasn't over, however. New objections arose during a military review. Although the Soviets had obtained the manuals for the Stinger from the Greek army in an espionage operation and although the first Soviet copies of the missile, dubbed the SA-14, had begun to appear, aides to the Joint Chiefs of Staff warned that supplying Stingers to the Afghans risked a major loss of American military technology. The JCS staff also warned that Stingers for the Afghans might dangerously reduce U.S. Army inventories.    Nevertheless, the Joint Chiefs themselves recommended to Mr. Reagan that the Afghans get a limited number of Stingers, officials say, and in April Mr. Reagan directed the CIA to supply the missiles. The administration notified Congress of its decision.    But even the president's order wasn't enough to overcome the resistance from the CIA, which in May bought 50 Stingers from the Army but shipped them only as far as a secret warehouse in Virginia. Sixty days later, when White House officials asked where the missiles were, the CIA replied that they hadn't been shipped because they needed to be tested against a new defense that had appeared on a Soviet helicopter shot down in Angola. When the tests were performed at the White Sands Missile Range, Pentagon officials say, they revealed that the Soviets' new defenses were ineffective.    The Stinger already was proving to be a potent psychological weapon. The missiles showed up in news accounts long before they appeared in Afghanistan, and Soviet diplomats in Washington began complaining about them to U.S. officials before a single missile had been delivered. To the Afghans, the missiles signaled a new U.S. commitment that would have to be backed up by spare parts, training and replacements.    The first Stingers finally arrived in the mujahedeen camps at the end of the summer of 1986. For their own political reasons, the Pakistanis insisted that the first of the prized weapons be delivered to a rabidly anti-American group commanded by a pro-Iranian Islamic fundamentalist named Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. (And several Stingers eventually found their way to Iran.) Pro-Western resistance groups began to receive their allotments of Stingers during the fall.    The new weapons lived up to their advance billing. On Sept. 26, rebel forces downed three Hind helicopter gunships near Jalamabad. Within six months, senior U.S. officials say, the Stingers had a major effect on the war, improving the morale of the rebel forces and neutralizing the Soviets' air power.    Although the U.S. Army prescribes 136 hours of training on the Stinger, the largely illiterate Afghans seem to have mastered it largely by instinct. &quot;These guys take to weapons systems the way Americans take to baseball,&quot; says Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Armitage. &quot;If it shoots, they're good with it.&quot;    Among other things, U.S. officials say, the mujahedeen began using the Stinger as an offensive weapon, a tactic that hadn't occurred to the U.S. Army. On one occasion, intelligence sources say, a rebel band took its Stingers to the Soviet air base at Qandahar, set up shop not far from the end of the runway, blasted a few Soviet planes as they tried to take off laden with fuel and ammunition, then melted into the hills.    The Soviets have tried to defeat the Stingers by dropping parachute flares and by flying at higher altitudes. Neither tactic has proved effective. Last February, a congressional delegation observed that Soviet aircraft were flying so high that they sometimes bombed their own troops. According to Rep. Charles Wilson, a Texas Democrat, a pair of captured Soviet pilots told Pakistani interrogators that the best defense against the Stinger is to &quot;read the first two pages of the Koran.&quot;    Some officials claim intercepted radio communications and reconnaissance photographs of downed aircraft confirm that an astounding 90% of the Stingers fired by the mujahedeen hit their targets, a &quot;kill rate&quot; three times higher than that expected by the U.S. Army. Defense Intelligence Agency officials dismiss the figure as grossly inflated, cautioning that much of the information comes from the mujahedeen themselves and isn't reliable.    The weapon has been effective enough that U.S. officials still worry about its falling into the wrong hands. The CIA demands that rebels account for every missile fired and compare these counts with its own intelligence before issuing new missiles. But if the war ends, officials fear that the mujahedeen might sell the highly prized weapons to Iran.    For now, though, says Rep. Wilson: &quot;I never dreamed that the Stinger was going to be the silver bullet that it's become.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>