<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880428-0155 </DOCNO><HL> Buying American: Pentagon Eases Stand Against Foreign Stakes In U.S. Defense Firms --- Security Worries Continue, But Economic Goals Gain Weight Under Carlucci --- Main Target: Electronic Gear </HL><AUTHOR> Cynthia F. Mitchell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> UIC FORGN PLY VRO AVAK UTLC TSY </CO><IN> ARO ELE TNM MON </IN><G> DEF </G><TEXT>   The surveillance drone is a spymaster's dream. The unmanned plane, only 14 feet long, can soar to 10,000 feet and snap crystal-clear pictures. It costs a small fraction of the $40 million the Navy spends for the F-14 fighter, which did such surveillance of Libyan ships last year in the Gulf of Sidra.    For a long time, the U.S. wouldn't have wanted this technology to fall into foreign hands. But now it may happen -- and, surprisingly, with the Pentagon's consent.    The drone is built by AAI Corp., one of the companies engaged in the hush-hush business of defense electronics -- the kind of technological wizards that, among other things, are trying to bring you Star Wars. Nonetheless, AAI, a unit of United Industrial Corp., is a hot takeover prospect.    The interest in AAI isn't unusual. And many of the prospective buyers of such defense-electronics companies are foreign. Some bought into the U.S. companies in the past year; most are still shopping.    For years, the Pentagon discouraged substantial foreign investment in defense companies, for reasons still cited by opponents of such acquisitions. They say that allowing foreign companies to control vital defense weaponry would leave the U.S. vulnerable in the event of war. They add that a stake in a U.S. defense-electronics contractor could let a foreign company and a foreign government see potentially critical technology -- strengthening foreign competitors and increasing the danger of espionage.    The critics see yet another example of America's technological and industrial dominance slipping away. And their concern is all the deeper because of American defense contractors' increasing purchases of sophisticated parts from abroad.    But with Frank Carlucci's ascension to the Defense Department's top job, economic considerations have gained ground in foreign-investment decisions. Many at the Pentagon -- and in the industry -- now say that preventing jobs from drifting overseas and remaining able to crank out weapons at home are more important than lessening the risk of espionage or a loss of face as an industrial power. With the right controls, they believe, the national interest can be protected as well. &quot;We must not allow ourselves to use this issue as a shroud for protectionism,&quot; says Robert B. Costello, who oversees Pentagon procurement.    And so, while the fight continues, the tide of battle has shifted. &quot;It's a very emotional issue,&quot; says David J. Smith, a Washington-based international consultant. &quot;It's a political issue, it's a security issue and, fundamentally, it's an economic issue.&quot;    Much of the current foreign interest has been sparked by the weak dollar, which makes U.S. acquisitions a bargain for foreigners. Furthermore, access to American technology would help them sell in the world's most coveted defense market. &quot;It's very difficult to be a world player without having a significant participation in the world's largest market,&quot; says Warren J. Sinsheimer, the chief executive of Plessey PLC's U.S. unit.    Although efforts to shrink the U.S. defense budget have cooled enthusiasm for the defense-electronics market somewhat, it's still a $50 billion-a-year business. And with the current emphasis on high-tech defense, electronics is one segment expected to keep growing, to $55.9 billion by 1997.    As a result, both domestic and foreign shoppers are on the prowl. Last year, Loral Corp., of New York, added Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co.'s electronics business to its radar-receiver operations; Chrysler Corp. bought Electrospace Systems Inc., a Dallas maker of navigation and telecommunications gear, and Westmark Systems Co., an Austin, Texas, company formed specifically to acquire defense-electronics businesses, paid $694.4 million for Austin-based Tracor Inc., which makes sonar and aviation gear.    Among foreign companies seeking U.S. defense stakes are Paris-based Thomson CSF and a quartet of British companies -- British Aerospace PLC, Plessey, Ferranti PLC and General Electric Co. PLC (which isn't related to the similarly named U.S. company). Last year, British Aerospace bought a 41% stake in Reflectone Inc., a Tampa, Fla., maker of flight simulators and information systems, and it expects the Pentagon to approve its recent purchase of an added 10%. Plessey recently bought Sippican Inc., a Marion, Mass., maker of ocean-research and scientific instruments. Foreign investors have also shown interest in the defense units of Singer Co., which were put on the market after the recent takeover by investor Paul Bilzerian.    Emboldened by Washington's apparent change in attitude, Britain's United Scientific Holdings PLC is pursuing a hostile takeover of Varo Inc., a Dallas maker of night-vision equipment. The Pentagon, which has never approved a hostile foreign takeover of a defense-related business, has so far done nothing to stop the bid.    &quot;Just about any of the defense-electronics companies with revenues under $1 billion are candidates&quot; for foreign or domestic takeovers, says Byron Callan, a defense-electronics analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.    To some extent, foreign companies are buying the sizzle here, hoping to get in on Star Wars, President Reagan's ambitious effort to line the skies with laser defenses. But administrations and priorities change, and Star Wars remains a distant promise that may wind up as what some thought it was all along -- a bargaining chip in nuclear-disarmament talks.    If that's the sizzle, there's plenty of steak, too, including some projects so secret even the suppliers don't know how they'll be used. Defense-electronics companies are working on various remotely piloted weapons, such as Northrop Corp.'s Tacit Rainbow, which can spot and destroy anything equipped with radar. Several companies are working on Flash Gordon-like electromagnetic rail guns, which would zap enemy tanks with super-hard bullets able to penetrate the toughest metals.    Companies considered ripe for takeover include Avantek Inc., a Santa Clara, Calif., maker of microwave-based military products; UTL Corp., of Dallas, which makes electronic support systems for military aircraft, and Tech-Sym Corp. of Houston, which produces simulators that mimic Soviet defense systems.    Putting such sensitive defense and spy hardware up for sale still makes plenty of people nervous, especially because several major espionage cases have already called into question U.S. security measures around the globe. Earlier this year, the Pentagon yanked the security clearance of UTL's chief executive, C.C. Lee, pending an investigation of charges that he had disclosed classified information to a potential customer. UTL denies the information was classified.    Concern over secret weapons falling into the wrong hands was strong during Caspar Weinberger's seven-year Pentagon tenure, and the Defense Department, while approving many joint ventures, limited foreign direct investment mostly to top allies. It usually required them to operate the U.S. units as blind trusts, thus letting them profit from their investments but denying them a say in management.    Even now, defense officials haven't declared open season for corporate hunting teams. This country's main World War II foes, Japan and Germany, remain persona non grata with regard to direct investment. Hardliners point to Toshiba's sale of defense secrets last year to the Soviets as reason enough for caution. And to think the Pentagon would ever approve an investment by a German company is &quot;just fantasy,&quot; says an executive of AEG AG, of Frankfurt.    Citing national security, the Pentagon last year nixed Fujitsu Ltd.'s proposed purchase of Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. for $200 million to $225 million. Yet Fairchild was already foreign-owned -- by Paris-based Schlumberger Ltd. The real issue, say Schlumberger and Pentagon officials, was U.S. concern over Japan's growing edge in semiconductors.    A few months later, the government approved Fairchild's sale to National Semiconductor Corp., of Santa Clara, Calif., for just $120 million. &quot;It was frustrating to us in the extreme,&quot; a Schlumberger spokesman says.    Also last year, the Pentagon reportedly discouraged Plessey when it nosed around about acquiring Harris Corp., of Melbourne, Fla., one of the biggest defense-electronics concerns in the country. A Plessey spokesman says, however, that the company didn't consider a bid.    That's just fine with many on Capitol Hill and in the industry. Worried about the trade deficit and the U.S. losing more jobs to overseas competitors, several legislators have sponsored trade and defense bills designed to curb foreign investments and limit Defense Department purchases to domestically owned and located plants.    &quot;We need to protect our industrial investments,&quot; says Bernard Schwartz, Loral's chief executive. &quot;To see them migrate offshore is criminal.&quot;    To him and some other executives, allowing foreign companies to control a vital segment of the country's defense weaponry would expose crucial weapons and intelligence information to other governments. They add that foreign countries could also learn just how much the U.S. knows about their weapons and technologies. To develop an effective radar-jamming device, for instance, a company must know all about Soviet radar systems; but if the Soviets found out just what the U.S. knows about their radar systems, they would promptly try to change them.    But Mr. Costello, the Pentagon procurement chief, and others more amenable to foreign investment insist that built-in protections are sufficient. The government can demand that foreign purchasers divest themselves of particularly sensitive operations or require the U.S. acquisition to be operated as a blind trust. The Pentagon may also choose to withhold rather than grant the foreign investor security clearance. Or the Pentagon might agree to swap technology with a foreign company buying a U.S. defense contractor.    The important thing, proponents say, is to keep jobs from moving to cheaper plants overseas. &quot;Anything that strengthens the industrial base in the U.S. is beneficial,&quot; says Robert McCormack, who led a Pentagon study of U.S. policies on foreign investment. &quot;In other words, we're concerned that the ability to do that is here. We don't care who owns it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>