<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870702-0177 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   This nomination of Robert Bork to the Supreme Court is, I'm sorry to say, all due to a misunderstanding.    &quot;What do you think, Howard?&quot; Mr. Meese said to Mr. Baker the other day, as they mulled over likely names.    &quot;Well, Ed,&quot; answered the White House chief of staff, &quot;it's a hard call, but I can think of only one person whose strict constructionist philosophy reflects the outlook of this administration, and who probably would not encounter too much opposition from the Senate or the press.&quot;    &quot;Who's that?&quot; Mr. Meese cried.    &quot;Ed, I'm not sure I should be the one to say,&quot; Mr. Baker replied, all coy, &quot;but I'll give you a clue. His name begins with 'B.'&quot;    &quot;Bork!&quot; shouted Mr. Meese, and Mr. Baker sat silent, looking glum.    Right up until the moment President Reagan walked into the White House briefing room yesterday to disclose the name he is recommending to the Senate, everyone was saying in urgent tones that the tilt of the U.S. Supreme Court for the next generation will be decided by whoever the president nominates and the Senate confirms as Justice Lewis Powell's successor. Perhaps now these fretful souls will fall silent out of sheer relief that the president did not urge the name of Orrin Hatch. But given the peculiar circumstances under which this nomination is proceeding, they should surely think again and put the whole thing off for a while.    For one thing, has it been appropriate to have a nominee to the highest court selected by men now open to charges of obstruction and even perversion of justice? Leaving aside his Wedtech problems this may seem a harsh thing to say about Attorney General Edwin Meese, but even a charitable interpretation of testimony in the Iran-Contra hearings raises serious problems.    In his dry account to the joint congressional committee last week, Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper told how in November 1986 then-CIA Director William Casey proposed to lie to the House Intelligence Committee about U.S. arms shipments to Iran. State Department counsel Abraham Sofaer threatened to resign, and on Nov. 21 Mr. Casey ended up lying to the House intelligence committee anyway, covering up the measure of the Reagan administration's involvement.    Mr. Meese repeated these lies in his famous press conference of Nov. 25, 1986, declaring that Israel had twice shipped U.S. arms to Iran in 1985 without prior U.S. authorization. But Mr. Meese already knew from two meetings, with Robert McFarlane on Nov. 21 and Lt. Col. Oliver North on Nov. 23, that both shipments had been directly authorized by the administration.    In the June 25 Iran-Contra hearings Sen. Warren Rudman observed that the Justice Department had &quot;telegraphed&quot; to Col. North the type of evidence that Mr. Meese and his associates in the Justice Department would be looking for when they came over to peruse National Security Council files. So Col. North, said Sen. Rudman to Mr. Cooper, &quot;knew exactly what to do when he heard what you had.&quot; Inference: The attorney general created time and impetus for a cover-up, at which point Col. North and his loyal assistant Fawn Hall headed for the shredding machine.    They failed to destroy some compromising material and Mr. Meese's reaction to this news does not leave him looking particularly good either. As Mr. Cooper recalled the conversation to the Iran-Contra committee, Assistant Attorney General Bradford Reynolds reported finding a &quot;smoking gun&quot; memo in which Col. North laid out to then-NSC head John Poindexter, for the president's approval, the entire plan to sell arms to the Iranians in exchange for hostages and profits to go to the Contras.    Describing Mr. Meese's reaction to this news, Mr. Cooper recalled that he said &quot;something analogous to 'oh, darn'&quot; but perhaps &quot;more strenuous.&quot; Are we to believe that Mr. Meese, a man happy with the shipments to the ayatollah and happy with the secret war in Nicaragua, was somehow dismayed to find the former financing the latter? Isn't it more plausible to suggest that his was the disconcerted yelp of a man finding a cover-up unraveling and the cat already halfway out of the bag? The press conference of Nov. 25 was damage control, using the &quot;diversion&quot; as a diversion from excessive scrutiny of the president's own role with regard especially to Iran.    The president is in scarcely better shape than Mr. Meese. Members of Congress prowl about the armory, or &quot;smoking gun room,&quot; and piously announce that irrefutable evidence is not yet to hand. But testimony and documents already make it pretty clear that the president was closely informed of the secret operations administered by Col. North and made active interventions when it was deemed useful for him to do so. Would the Senate have looked kindly on a Supreme Court nomination from a Watergate beleaguered Richard Nixon, not to mention his Justice Department at that time of scandal.    Messrs. Reagan and Meese are the two men who were centrally involved in selecting a nominee for the Senate to consider. The Senate's own role brings us to another good reason for postponing the whole process: Joe Biden. Does this great nation really want to spend the summer, maybe the fall, watching the senator from Delaware, hour after hour, day after day, pacing the battlements of the Judiciary Committee, pouring boiling oil down the neck of the wretched nominee, preening for the cameras, all in an effort to persuade the voters of Iowa to remember him next January? And when Mr. Biden flags, Judiciary Committee member and presidential candidate Paul Simon will be there to seize the baton.    Judge Bork is a relict of the Watergate era in the sense that it was he, third in rank at the Justice Department, who at the urgings of Alexander Haig, obeyed the orders of his commander in chief and fired Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox. One might suppose that this deed would have been enough to finish him off with the liberals forever, particularly since he makes strange distinctions between the sorts of speech protected by the First Amendment. But Judge Bork has been a crafty tactician. Just over two years ago, he wrote a judicial opinion endorsing the right of the press to libel individuals (in this case Prof. Bertell Ollman) with impunity.    This opinion earned the fulsome praise of New York Times columnist Anthony Lewis, who wrote that it was &quot;extraordinarily thoughtful&quot; and &quot;rich&quot; in all-around profundity. Judge Bork, being no fool, had tucked a footnote into his opinion, acknowledging the all-around profundity of Mr. Lewis. Now, Mr. Lewis is a bellwether of the liberal crowd and a Supreme Court justice himself in all but name. The words &quot;extraordinarily thoughtful&quot; and &quot;rich,&quot; applied by Mr. Lewis to Judge Bork, have the same cachet with liberals and their representatives on the Judiciary Committee as three stars in the Michelin Guide.    So the four people who really matter -- Messrs. Reagan, Meese, Biden, Lewis -- are all compromised in one way or another. Best put confirmation on hold and leave the nation with eight justices for a while. They'll figure how to balance things out.    --   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>