<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880915-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Leaner and Meaner: Leveraged Buy-Outs Make Some Companies Tougher Competitors --- O.M. Scott andamp; Sons Cuts Costs, Chases Business Harder Since It Was Sold by ITT --- Paying Back the Large Debt </HL><AUTHOR> George Anders (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TNM PRO </IN><DATELINE> MARYSVILLE, Ohio  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tadd Seitz still remembers the apprehension that gripped him when Martin Dubilier showed up.    Mr. Seitz ran a profitable ITT Corp. division that made lawn fertilizer and grass seed. The little company, O.M. Scott andamp; Sons, had lost some market share in the early 1980s, but no one seemed worried. Scott fit in well here, buying youngsters' prize animals at the county fair and helping fix up the high-school football field.    ITT wanted to sell Scott in late 1986, however, and Mr. Dubilier's firm was about to acquire it in a leveraged buy-out. &quot;Your standards are going to increase drastically,&quot; Mr. Seitz remembers the blunt New York financier warning him over dinner in December 1986. Overhead costs were too high, inventories too big and management too relaxed about winning new customers, Mr. Dubilier complained.    &quot;If you don't think you're the guy to solve this, let me know, and we'll get someone else,&quot; he added.    For better or worse, leveraged buy-outs are sending tough marching orders throughout corporate America. More than 500 companies, including such well-known concerns as Hertz, R.H. Macy, Levi Strauss and Safeway, have gone private through LBOs in the past three years. In some industries, such as textiles and grocery chains, hardly any big public companies remain.    Almost all the money for these buy-outs is borrowed; that's the &quot;leveraged&quot; in LBO. In return for putting up some 10% or less of the purchase price, top executives and a few outside investors become owners of the company. If they can whittle down the huge debt fast enough, they emerge as financial winners.    If they can't, disaster follows. Sometimes, budgets for research and new equipment are axed to raise needed cash. Often, company payrolls are cut. Or worse. In July, Revco D.S. Inc., which had gone private in a $1.25 billion LBO 17 months earlier, couldn't meet its interest payments. The drugstore chain filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code.    But profits from some successful LBOs are legendary. Equity investors who put about $80 million into Dr Pepper in 1986 cashed out with more than $600 million last spring. Some investors in Anchor Glass Containers Inc. made more than 100 times their original investment in three years. In a confidential memo to big investors this summer, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. is boasting that its average annual return on 12 LBO investments has been 121%.    However elated they may be about such gains, many buy-out companies show Garbo-like shyness about how they achieve them. Because their stock is no longer publicly quoted, they don't report their earnings or brief analysts or shareholders. In some ways, they have become an invisible sector of the economy.    How do LBOs work?    Scott is a case study of sorts. To win the battle against debt, it pushed up its sales 20% while paring its work force a bit. It rewrote its contract with a huge oil-company supplier. It concocted a $25 million tax break. And Messrs. Seitz and Dubilier quickly teamed up to wrestle down the debt burden.    &quot;It can be a little scary at first,&quot; Mr. Seitz says, &quot;but it's ended up being a revitalization for me.&quot;    Founded in 1870, Scott is exactly the kind of traditional manufacturer that attracts LBO investors. Its Turf Builder fertilizer and other products are well-established; no huge research outlay is needed to keep them competitive. Its cash flow is steady and predictable. And its factories are built and operating; it doesn't need much new investment.    For 15 years as part of ITT, Scott pitched in modest profits without growing rapidly or getting much corporate attention. &quot;ITT's attitude was, 'Don't give us any surprises,'&quot; Mr. Seitz recalls. Scott's only diversification plan languished at ITT headquarters for three years before coming back with a rejection slip.    In the mid-1980s, big companies such as ITT began shedding many of their acquisitions -- and found buy-out specialists eager to snap them up. So, when ITT put Scott up for sale in late 1986, East Coast deal makers began trooping out to Ohio to size up the company. Their cutthroat ways made a quick impression, especially when investment bankers came to a factory bulletin board where a worker had tacked up a dollar bill.    In best Midwestern style, a note explained that the money had been found near the cigarette machine and was being posted so the rightful owner could claim it. &quot;Every investment banker looked at it and said: 'That's my dollar,'&quot; jokes John Cleveland, Scott's operations manager. At first, Scott employees laughed. Then, they began wondering how predatory Wall Street would be.    The top bidder was Clayton andamp; Dubilier, a New York firm specializing in leveraged buy-outs and run by Mr. Dubilier, a 62-year-old former McKinsey andamp; Co. consultant. Like most LBO firms, Clayton andamp; Dubilier gets much of its money from passive outside investors -- in its case including the Harvard and Princeton endowments.    At their first dinner, Mr. Seitz, an affable 47-year-old, could have been offended by Mr. Dubilier's regimen. But instead, he was won over. &quot;Martin made a lot of good suggestions,&quot; he recalls. Over time, the older Mr. Dubilier became a welcome, though demanding, mentor for Mr. Seitz.    In Dec. 30, 1986, Clayton andamp; Dubilier bought Scott for $211 million. Unlike conventional acquisitions, which are financed by cash or stock, this one was nearly all paid for with debt. Banks lent $121 million. Other lenders provided $70 million. Only the final $20 million or so came from Scott's new owners: mostly Clayton andamp; Dubilier and also Scott's top executives.    &quot;We didn't have a whole lot of margin for error,&quot; Paul Yeager, Scott's financial vice president, recalls. He ordered accountants to tell him the company's cash position each day at 8 a.m. so that he could be sure Scott wasn't running low. That hadn't ever mattered when Scott was part of ITT; it could always get an intra-company loan. Now, Scott faced annual interest bills of about $20 million -- and no one was likely to give it more credit.    The battle to pay back debt entered the personal lives of Scott's top executives, too. About 10 of them got a chance to buy 60,000 or more shares of stock at $1 each. It was an enticing price, and they all took the offer. But few of them had enough ready cash. So, they took out second mortgages or big bank loans. Robert Stern, a vice president, told his wife to sell her catering business to help raise money, adding that Scott alone would provide all the risk they could stand.    That early fear of disaster, though, is exactly what reassures outside LBO investors. &quot;It forces management to be more aggressive, to make the tough decisions,&quot; Mr. Dubilier says.    Scott acted quickly. It sold off a related seed company, Burpee, in March 1987. ITT once had thought Burpee and Scott would be a good fit, but Clayton andamp; Dubilier wanted cash fast. Such asset sales are typical in LBOs, says Richard Bennett, an ex-ITT manager who has gone on to do some LBO investing himself.    To raise more cash, Scott next started slashing inventory. It stepped up a $4-a-bag rebate program to empty out a warehouse full of Turf Builder bags. It unloaded obsolete sprinklers by slashing prices. Mr. Yeager started breathing easier as Scott's cash position quit shrinking.    Scott also made plans to close some production lines in the slow summer season and then hire temporary workers -- at about $4 an hour less than regular wages -- to deliver peak output in the fall. Year-round employment was trimmed, &quot;but we get small farmers or crop-duster pilots who are happy to work in the winter,&quot; Scott's Mr. Cleveland says.    Scott's next goal was to win better terms from suppliers. With annual sales of about $200 million, Scott hardly seems able to muscle a giant such as British Petroleum Co.'s U.S. unit. But it did.    Scott annually buys nearly 100,000 tons of urea, a bulk commodity it needs for fertilizer. Under ITT, Scott had spread its orders among three suppliers. Now, it went to BP and offered it more business if Scott could buy urea in the fall and winter and pay only after the fertilizer was sold in the spring. BP reluctantly agreed.    Scott finished its first fiscal year as a private company with a flourish: By Sept. 30, 1987, it had paid down $41 million of bank debt, to about $80 million -- lightening its interest burden. Earnings before interest, taxes and depreciation rose 30% to $26 million. Working capital declined more than $15 million, in this case a sign that cash was being used better.    The strong performance generated big bonuses for top managers. Under terms set at the time of the buy-out, Mr. Seitz earned $378,000 for the year, well above his $220,000 base salary. Other officials reaped bonuses running 20% to 50% of their pay. That generosity was a radical switch from ITT, where bonuses were smaller and depended heavily on overall corporate results far beyond local managers' control. The big bonuses were vital to the executives, who needed them to pay down the debts they took on to buy the stock.    Once Scott itself seemed out of any danger, a new goal arose: to see how big a winner it could become. &quot;We could have sold this after the first year and made 10 times our money,&quot; Mr. Dubilier says. &quot;But I think in another two years, Scott will really reach its potential.&quot; A Scott vice president shows similar zeal. He says his own stockholdings make him chase each financial target &quot;like a traveling salesman on commission.&quot;    To strengthen its earnings, Scott didn't touch its $4 million research budget. It didn't cut its charitable contributions. But it leaned hard on other areas. It cut its payroll to 782 from 828, mostly through attrition. The computer department was told to stop adding staff, even though its data load was rising. Temporarily idle secretaries were sent to fill in as order clerks during peak seasons. And Mr. Seitz decided new blood was needed in research and national sales.    Among the casualties was Robert Baldridge, a 20-year Scott veteran, who resigned this year as head of national sales. &quot;The LBO was a positive step in total,&quot; he says. &quot;I'd hate to be a competitor of Scott. But they aren't as patient with the old-timers anymore. If you aren't perceived as a star, you might become vulnerable.&quot;    Scott's executives say they have to be tough. Although earnings before taxes, interest and depreciation are up 20% so far this fiscal year, they're a little below target. The drought hurt sales this summer and could hold down the bonuses.    &quot;You have to be hungry every day,&quot; says William Foley, Scott's new consumer-products chief. On a recent Sunday, he left his family at home to attend a Chicago hardware show. Three years ago, Scott didn't bother setting up a booth; this time, it had a team of salesmen trying to coax a little more business from K mart Corp. and other retailers.    Meanwhile, a nervy decision taken at the time of the LBO is starting to pay off. The company generated a $25 million tax loss by raising the stated value of its inventory at the time of purchase, then immediately lowering it. That accounting maneuver created a loss, but only on paper; it didn't reflect any business catastrophe. However, it shields Scott from having to pay taxes until 1989.    Such &quot;creative asset write-ups&quot; are standard fare in the LBO business, though they have become more difficult since the 1986 tax act took effect, Mr. Dubilier says. He notes that the rapid, double change in asset values was accepted by Coopers andamp; Lybrand, the Big Eight accounting firm that audits Scott.    Nevertheless, the big paper loss from such maneuvers can churn stomachs. Mr. Yeager recalls explaining it to operations managers -- only to watch them turn pale. That fear was disturbing because 750,000 shares of Scott are owned by the work force through a profit-sharing plan. So, when Scott's top brass tells employees about profits, they talk strictly in terms of earnings before interest and taxes.    By this summer, Scott had paid down so much debt that its balance sheet was starting to look almost like a conventional company. But Clayton andamp; Dubilier and the Scott executives like what leverage can do. Now, they are trying to acquire a potting-soil maker, Hyponex Corp., with the idea of taking on more debt and expanding the two businesses together.    &quot;I'd like to see us become a Fortune 500 company,&quot; Mr. Seitz says. Fiscal 1988 sales are likely to total about $200 million, less than half that of the smallest company on the Fortune list. But acquisitions and robust internal growth could help Scott catch up. After that, Mr. Seitz hopes to take the company public again, maybe in the early 1990s. If he does, current stockholders are likely to chalk up big profits.    Does ITT regret letting Scott slip away? An ITT spokesman says no one at the company can answer that question; all the executives who oversaw Scott have left, too. But one of those men, Mr. Bennett, says the buy-out might have helped both ITT and Scott.    &quot;ITT got a good price,&quot; and a lot of the changes at Scott &quot;couldn't have happened any other way&quot; except under the buy-out, he contends. </TEXT></DOC>