<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881010-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   YUGOSLAVIA THREATENED a state of emergency over continuing protests.    President Raif Dizdarevic warned that emergency rule would be imposed unless demonstrations over financial hardship and ethnic issues ceased immediately. In a nationwide address, he also promised leadership changes during an emergency session of the Belgrade government. The 30-minute speech came as tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets throughout the country, and students in the southern republic of Montenegro began a hunger strike to protest police violence and demand the ouster of Communist leaders.    Unrest has intensified in Yugoslavia since protests first erupted in June, prompted by nationalism, labor grievances and concern over corruption.    ---   Soldiers in Algeria fired into crowds of demonstrators in Algiers and in the port city of Oran during protests over rising prices and a government austerity program. The government had ordered the army to shoot those refusing to disperse, and police and hospital officials said at least 200 people have died in five days of rioting.    ---   Opposition leaders in Chile said they will ask the government and the military to begin talks this week on holding early elections and hastening Pinochet's departure from power after his defeat last week in a presidential plebiscite. Protests calling for the general's resignation have been staged since the vote.    ---   Israeli soldiers searched for Arab agitators in 30 Palestinian villages as businesses closed in the occupied areas to mark 10 months of rebellion against Israel. Three Arabs were reported killed. Separately, Israel launched a nationwide polio immunization program following an outbreak of the disease during the past month.    ---   Foreign agents have gained access to U.S. weapons laboratories including the Savannah River arms plant in South Carolina, congressional investigators said. A report to be released tomorrow will say that some unsupervised visitors entered the labs before required security clearances were provided by the CIA.    ---   Bush campaigned in Illinois, marching in a Slavic parade. He pledged &quot;to never forget that there isn't freedom in Eastern Europe.&quot; According to published polls, Bush leads Democratic candidate Dukakis in Missouri, Kansas and New Mexico, as well as in the South. A large percentage of those surveyed, however, remain undecided.    ---   West Germany's Free Democrats named Otto Lambsdorff party chairman over the weekend. Lambsdorff, convicted last year of tax evasion, resigned as Bonn's economics minister about four years ago during a scandal over alleged illegal political contributions by the Flick industrial group.    ---   Latvians called for democratic changes in the Baltic republic. About 1,000 delegates to a two-day founding congress of the Latvian Popular Front adopted a charter demanding greater autonomy from Moscow, and elected a 100-member ruling council. The political group appeared to be modeled after a similar movement in Estonia.    ---   Thousands of Sri Lankans staged demonstrations to demand that Indian peacekeeping troops leave the island nation. Police in three towns used tear gas and batons to disperse the protesters. New Delhi sent about 52,000 soldiers to Sri Lanka's northern and eastern provinces last year to help enforce a pact aimed at ending an ethnic conflict.    ---   Pope John Paul II denounced anti-Semitism and racism, and launched an attack on &quot;weakening&quot; morality in Europe. The pontiff's remarks came on the second day of a four-day tour of eastern France, where he also called for a united Europe.    ---   Crime levels increased 1.8% last year, ending a five-year decline that the White House had attributed partly to vigorous law enforcement and tougher treatment of criminals. The Justice Department said the number of personal and household crimes rose 613,000 to more than 34.7 million.    ---   Diplomats in the Persian Gulf said hopes of a breakthrough in Iran-Iraq peace talks had been dashed by Baghdad's apparent failure to drop demands for a speedy clearing of war debris from the disputed Shatt al-Arab waterway. On Saturday, Iran agreed in principle to U.N.-backed proposals calling for discussing the issue at a later date.    ---   The Oakland Athletics won baseball's American League championship, defeating the Boston Red Sox in four consecutive games of the best-of-seven series. </TEXT></DOC>