<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871111-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Trade Figures Will Be Test for Markets---Many Economists DoubtValidity of Statistics---By Rose GutfeldStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Reaction to September's trade figures, due out tomorrow, will test whether the financial markets believe the U.S. has changed its focus to avoiding a recession from defending the dollar.    On Oct. 14, the markets nose-dived in response to the Commerce Department's report that the nation's trade imbalance had narrowed only slightly in August, to $15.68 billion from $16.47 billion in July. The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged 95.46 points, and the dollar and bond markets fell sharply as well. Investors feared that the massive gap would cause the dollar to plummet, thus forcing the Federal Reserve Board to tighten credit to defend the currency and head off inflation.    In some respects, the markets' preoccupation with the monthly trade numbers is puzzling. Most private economists and government officials consider the figures, which aren't adjusted for inflation or seasonal variation, a relatively unreliable indicator of real economic activity. They contend the figures mask the substantial improvement that has occurred in trade volumes, especially on the export side, in response to the decline of the dollar since early 1985. Nevertheless, it was the perceived chain reaction from the monthly figures to the dollar to interest rates that explains the market's sharp response to the trade figures so far this year.    Many analysts suspect that the market reaction will be much more muted tomorrow, even though they don't expect a sharp improvement in the trade figure. Since the stock market crash, which was caused by a variety of factors, Washington has emphasized that its goal is to keep interest rates low enough to fend off a recession, even at the risk of a lower dollar. If the markets believe policy makers mean what they say, a disappointing trade deficit number -- even one that causes the dollar to fall further -- shouldn't cause investors to sell bonds and otherwise push up interest rates, analysts say.    &quot;The movement of bond prices has become decoupled from the movement of the dollar,&quot; Lyle Gramley, chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association, says. Both interest rates and the dollar have fallen since Oct. 19. Reduced inflation fears after the crash mean that the Fed doesn't have to respond as quickly in anticipation of higher import prices from the dollar's decline, he adds.    The markets &quot;probably aren't going to pay a lot of attention (to the trade figures) unless something horrendous happens,&quot; says Bruce Steinberg, senior economist at Merrill Lynch Economics Inc. in New York. &quot;With the dollar already down and likely to go down even more the trade numbers per se aren't going to say much about the dollar.&quot;    Economists, however, stress that it's risky to predict how the release of any economic figures is going to be received by today's battered markets. &quot;If the overnight equity markets are disorderly and we have a bad day on the Dow, that could set up a chaotic environment,&quot; says James Cochrane, chief economist at Texas Commerce Bancshares in Houston. Yet he contends that following the recent declines in the dollar &quot;we're better-positioned than we were 30 days ago&quot; to weather a disappointing trade number.    Still, a sharp widening of the deficit could rekindle fears of a free-fall in the currency that would be unacceptable to policy makers. Yesterday, President Reagan said he doesn't want the dollar to fall further, causing the dollar to rally. Currency traders interpreted the comment to mean that the U.S. may try to keep the dollar at current levels. An unexpectedly low deficit tomorrow could also spark a rally.    Despite the market's fixation on the monthly trade report, most analysts pay more attention to quarterly figures on trade in goods and services in the government's figures on the gross national product. If oil imports are excluded, the deficit on this basis has improved substantially since the third quarter of 1986.    &quot;The sharp decline in the foreign-exchange value of the dollar since early 1985 is working,&quot; says Edward Yardeni, chief economist at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. &quot;You wouldn't know it by looking at the monthly trade deficit figures. But it's very clear from the real exports and imports data in the quarterly GNP accounts.&quot; Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan points to &quot;an extraordinary shift currently under way&quot; in the nation's trade balance that is helping revive the nation's industrial sector.    David Wyss, senior vice president at Data Resources Inc. in Lexington, Mass., expects tomorrow's report to show a deficit of around $14 billion, with $500 million of the improvement coming from lower oil shipments. Oil imports should decline from recent high levels that reflected efforts to build up inventories in anticipation of price increases and possible turmoil in the Mideast. Another $1 billion, in Mr. Wyss's view, will result from seasonal factors: Historically, exports are strong in September, while imports of autos from Japan and other items tend to be weak.    All the economists warn that the estimates are really just educated guesses. &quot;The monthly data just isn't all that reliable,&quot; says Lawrence Chimerine, chairman of WEFA Group, a forecasting firm in Bala Cynwyd, Pa.    In fact, most trade forecasters have been burned more than once by the seeming intractability of the deficit. The government and private economists generally expected the deficit to narrow last year, when instead it swelled to a record $156.16 billion. Now, the gap seems certain to hit another record this year; most estimates put it around $170 billion, and many forecasts are higher.    The huge gap, to a large extent, is a price phenomenon. The dollar's fall has pushed up the price of imports, causing the deficit to swell even as the volume of non-oil imports has receded. But long before now, these higher prices were supposed to lead to improvement in the monthly merchandise trade deficit as well.    Economists offer various reasons for the lag. Most important, imports in many areas remain relatively inexpensive. With the exception of autos and certain other areas, foreign producers have absorbed much of the price increase that has resulted from the dollar's drop to maintain market share in the U.S.    Janet Norwood, commissioner of the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics, says that &quot;foreign sellers, on average, have passed through as price increases only about one-half of the decline of the dollar.&quot;    Moreover, an increasing share of U.S. imports comes from South Korea, Taiwan and Pacific Rim nations other than Japan, whose currencies haven't appreciated sharply against the dollar and whose production costs remain well below those in the U.S. and Europe.    Perhaps most important, some economists contend that the deficit won't improve significantly as long as the U.S. economy continues to grow more robustly than the economies of its trading partners. One side effect of any slowdown in growth or a recession that results from the stock market crash could be a reduction in imports, although that could be offset if the downturn spreads to U.S. trading partners.    Still, while few economists expect any real improvement in the trade deficit this year, many remain optimistic over the longer term. If the dollar continues to drop, eventually that will push prices above a level that foreign producers will be willing to absorb. In the meantime, exports continue to surge: The August trade report showed that exports were 19.7% above a year earlier. Growth has been widespread with big gains in agriculture and consumer products. The volume of foreign sales of industrial materials and capital goods rose 13% over the past year.    &quot;Sooner or later the deficit's going to turn with a vengeance,&quot; says Kathleen Cooper, chief economist at Security Pacific National Bank in Los Angeles, &quot;but I just don't see it happening soon.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>