<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880208-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Money Machine: Little-Known Firm Has Become the Envy Of Options Industry --- Relying on Chairman's Math Chicago Research Moves Beyond Program Trading --- Behemoth, Bulldozer andamp; Ballet </HL><AUTHOR> Scott McMurray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> SCR CMD STK NDX BON FIN </IN><G> TRE </G><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Joseph Ritchie knows his math.    No mere statistician, he solved the often-frustrating Rubik's Cube by turning the puzzle a few times, then figuring out the algorithm on which it was based. When competitors were relying on mainframe computers, this options trader punched a 243-step program into a hand-held calculator.    And while Wall Street's top computer jockeys have been hamstrung by the controversy over program trading -- particularly its role in the Oct. 19 stock-market crash -- Mr. Ritchie and the little-known company he heads, Chicago Research andamp; Trading Group Ltd., are miles ahead of their rivals.    CRT's secret is a computer system that uses one of the most sophisticated trading models in the securities industry. By monitoring momentary differences in options and futures prices, the model -- developed mainly by Mr. Ritchie -- helps the firm execute more than $2.5 billion in trades each day.    &quot;It's like picking up dimes in front of a bulldozer,&quot; says a CRT trader. &quot;You can make a lot of money, but you have to keep your eye on the bulldozer.&quot;    CRT has done both. In the 11 years since it was founded, it has become the world's largest options-trading company and the envy of the industry.    The firm's initial $200,000 stake has grown to $225 million in capital. Trading solely with its own money, CRT at times is the biggest single player in the most important futures and options pits: It often accounts for more than 5% of the multibillion-dollar trading volume on the Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index and Treasury-bond futures, and 30% to 40% of the volume in most exchange-traded options markets here and abroad.    Though broadly similar to program trading's technique of profiting from small price differences between related investments, CRT's system is highly refined. The company was one of the first firms to give program trading between stocks and stock futures an electronic whirl, but abandoned it a few years ago as profit margins grew too slim.    At the heart of CRT's computer model are closely guarded mathematical formulas used to calculate the value of options contracts, depending mainly on the market's volatility and the time remaining until the contract expires. Most options traders use some type of formula to evaluate options, but CRT's is one of the best, traders say.    Its computer programs decipher complex changes in price relationships, enabling traders to lock in minute profits and move on before most pit traders even notice the price shift. The firm trades simultaneously among scores of futures and options markets from Singapore to Chicago, aiming with trades of dizzying complexity to get the biggest bang for its buck.    That can baffle its rivals. Says the head of a competing firm: &quot;I've seen their financial statements, and I still don't understand how they operate.&quot;    That suits CRT just fine.    Like a behemoth in ballet shoes, CRT glides through international financial markets but leaves few footprints. Almost unknown to the investing public because it trades exclusively with other professionals, CRT is at the forefront of an emerging generation of high-tech traders who increasingly are dominating world markets. Its strategies not only eliminate the risk of betting on the direction of the markets but also enable it to cope with -- and even profit from -- growing market volatility.    Before most investors even understood what was happening on Black Monday morning, CRT had stanched its losses. Within an hour, the company reversed thousands of transactions. While many competing firms took days to unscramble their trading and lost hundreds of millions of dollars, CRT knew its exact holdings as it continued to trade. It lost less than $10 million -- a mere nick for a firm its size.    And while regulators kept a round-the-clock vigil at some options-trading firms, they were satisfied that CRT was shipshape after a quick visit.    Central to CRT's success is the 41-year-old Mr. Ritchie, the firm's chairman and head trader. When he and three friends started the firm, Mr. Ritchie was so strapped for cash that he wore a borrowed business suit to meetings and laid an old door across two boxes for a desk. A tomato-juice can stuck in the doorknob hole doubled as a pencil holder. Even today a desk at one end of a conference room constitutes his office, and he still arrives for work most days in corduroy pants and an open-necked shirt. A suit -- bought, not borrowed -- gathers dust in a nearby closet.    Mr. Ritchie, who majored in philosophy at nearby Wheaton College after a three-year stint at an Oregon Bible school, also is responsible for the calculations needed to evaluate options contracts.    Using computer-generated charts, CRT's traders pair off one trade against another -- buying Treasury-bond options, for instance, while selling Treasury-bond futures -- and lock in a paper-thin but nearly riskless profit.    The profit on a single $100,000 Treasury-bond option trade, for example, typically is less than $4.50. But that amount multiplied by the 100,000 trades CRT executes daily makes the firm a low-margin, high-volume money machine.    One morning in CRT's trading room overlooking Lake Michigan, Mr. Ritchie, surrounded by six casually dressed traders in their 20s and 30s, calmly reviews possible foreign-currency options trades. The company's elaborate computer systems have updated valuation charts for traders in each market during the night. A team of computer programmers works all night if necessary to adjust CRT's complex software programs. The face on a clock in the department reads: &quot;One, Two, Three, Four, Who Cares?&quot;    Compared with the dozens of screaming traders crammed into most Wall Street trading rooms, the company's nerve center is remarkably subdued. CRT's octagonal trading desk -- which could easily be overlooked if placed in the cavernous trading rooms at Salomon Brothers Inc. or First Boston Corp. -- has banks of multicolored computer screens that carry the firm's confidential trading information.    Each pit trader has a specific amount of money allocated to his market. A trader in Treasury-bond options, for example, will buy when the market price drops below the line on his valuation chart and sell when it moves above the line. New charts are printed and rushed to the pits when prices change rapidly. Others at CRT are responsible for coordinating the hedging of one trader's positions against another.    The system also calculates CRT's consolidated risk position for all markets and shows how that position would change if the markets became more or less volatile. Since Black Monday, CRT has enhanced the system to calculate its total risk position on an unprecedented minute-by-minute basis.    Mr. Ritchie leads the currency-options group through 45 minutes of complex options valuations without once touching a pencil. CRT trades about 700 yen options and more than 3,000 Treasury-bond options in less than an hour after the group has broken up to monitor other markets.    A system designed to squeeze small profits out of each trade doesn't keep CRT from hitting the jackpot now and then. In the first few trading days of this year, CRT made nearly $5 million on several thousand foreign-currency options trades as the dollar rose sharply and most foreign currencies plummeted.    In mid-December, CRT's oil options and futures traders made nearly $1 million as oil prices dropped sharply. And last July, following the release of poorer-than-expected British trade figures, CRT traders made over $500,000 in a few hours on a $3 million investment in British government-bonds options. CRT's $3 million in margin money controlled about 10,000 options valued at $750 million.    The company's charts aren't the whole secret to CRT's success. Just as important is the company's unusual culture, an outgrowth of Mr. Ritchie's homey style. CRT encourages an informal, family atmosphere, including free meals served by five on-staff chefs. While many corporate executives pay lip service to their &quot;team,&quot; the soft-spoken Mr. Ritchie, who considers Walt Disney &quot;my hero for the 20th century,&quot; is genuinely uncomfortable talking about his role as the company's leader. &quot;I could've made a lot of money going off and trading for myself,&quot; he says, &quot;but I'm prouder of the group we have here than of the money we've made.&quot;    CRT's nearly 600 employees work in teams and are rewarded for their contribution to the firm, rather than for outshining one another. CRT also puts most recruits through an exhaustive series of interviews that focus on their psychological profiles as well as apparent trading talent. (No system is foolproof, however. Jeffrey G. Donnelly, a former CRT stock-index futures trader dismissed in 1986 for allegedly diverting profits from the firm, is under investigation by a federal grand jury here for possible criminal trading violations, according to people familiar with his case. Mr. Donnelly declines comment.)    CRT requires most professional recruits to take a pay cut to join the firm to ensure that money isn't their only motivation in changing jobs. Once on board, however, top employees can quickly earn six-figure salaries.    But as it expands, the firm has been forced to adopt a more corporate structure. Last year Roderick Smith, formerly a managing director of Hongkong andamp; Shanghai Banking Group in London, joined CRT in the newly created position of chief executive officer. Though it is aimed in part at giving CRT principals more time for other pursuits, a more corporate form could damp its vaunted esprit de corps and reduce productivity.    The growth is also taking CRT into riskier dealings. It is expanding into over-the-counter options trading, which exposes the firm to greater risks than trading on exchanges, where a clearinghouse guarantees against defaults.    In late December CRT was named to the select group of 42 primary government securities dealers who trade directly with the Federal Reserve Board. The move to primary-dealership status is aimed at increasing revenue from government securities trading, which CRT entered in 1986 by buying a small dealership, and at attracting clients in Europe and Japan.    Another market crash seems to be the least of the firm's worries. Mr. Smith, the chief executive, says that morale at the firm is higher than ever following the crash. He is more concerned about the effect of a steep recession. &quot;The thing we need as a machine is activity,&quot; he says. &quot;Our biggest worry is a slow bleeding to death if the markets dry up.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>