<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Old Tricks:Investors Lose MillionsIn Tax Shelters Set UpBy Ex-Convict Galanis---One-Time Broker With a FlairFor Raising and SpendingLots of Money Is Arrested---The Stake of Eddie Murphy---By Stanley PennStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESBANKRUPTCIES (BCY)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   At least one guest still can't get over the party that John Peter Galanis gave last year on his seven-acre estate in Greenwich, Conn. &quot;He hired a circus,&quot; the guest says, &quot;elephants, llamas, a merry-go-round, vendors. It just blew your mind.&quot;    When the private Brunswick School in Greenwich sought donations from parents of students, Mr. Galanis coughed up an estimated $250,000. &quot;John was generous,&quot; the headmaster says.    Mr. Galanis's wife, Chandra, was a beneficiary of his free spending, too. Her birthday gift a few years ago was a top-of-the-line Rolls-Royce Corniche. The price tag: $156,000.    How could he afford it all? Since leaving his job as a broker at Merrill Lynch Inc. in 1968, he has shown an amazing talent for coaxing money out of seemingly sophisticated investors. He has done well financially. They haven't.    He has also run into trouble with the law: a six-month prison sentence in 1973 on conspiracy charges stemming from the disappearance of $10 million in investors' funds; and a 1983 indictment on still-pending charges of being an accomplice in a fraud on Chase Manhattan Bank. But, undeterred by such mishaps, Mr. Galanis kept raising money on a huge scale -- though he was careful to keep his name out of his ventures, working instead through salesmen.    Now he is again in trouble with the law. Investors in quest of tax shelters poured some $350 million in cash and promissory notes into Galanis-linked limited partnerships that now have failed, leaving much of the money unaccounted for.    The ventures have been under investigation by the offices of U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani in New York and Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau. Yesterday, Mr. Galanis was arrested in California as Mr. Morgenthau announced a 57-count indictment charging him and three associates with the fraudulent sale of tax-shelter partnerships through an entity called Nashua Trust Co.    At the same time, Mr. Giuliani's office unsealed a criminal tax-fraud and racketeering complaint filed against Mr. Galanis last week in U.S. District Court in Manhattan. It charges, among other things, that more than $172 million in fraudulent partnership losses were passed on to 2,500 investors in ventures sponsored by another entity, Transpac Oil Co., in 1982-84. Mr. Galanis's attorney says he will fight all charges.    The investigators believe that a large chunk of the money wound up in Mr. Galanis's hands.    Investors say they were unaware of Mr. Galanis's involvement when they became limited partners in the ventures, which were syndications sponsored by Transpac, Nashua and a third entity, Consolidated Mortgage Co. Transpac promoted oil and gas exploration. Consolidated promoted property development in Florida, California, Illinois, Arizona, Louisiana and Utah. Nashua promised to refurbish decaying Atlantic City hotels in a section between the Resorts International and Sands casinos.    Nashua had hardly begun renovation work when it collapsed into Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings last June. Transpac and Consolidated Mortgage had failed earlier. Jack Birnberg, Nashua's court-appointed trustee, says he is investigating &quot;where millions of dollars have gone.&quot; And District Attorney Morgenthau's office says it is continuing to investigate the Nashua and Consolidated promotions.    The 44-year-old Mr. Galanis denies any wrongdoing. &quot;All my business activities were with the knowledge of principals and investors,&quot; he said before yesterday's actions. &quot;In each transaction, I relied on the advice of counsel and their memoranda. My role was that of providing financing for various projects, and any payments received by me were either for fees or repayments of loans.&quot;    Meanwhile, the limited partners have lost their investment, and their tax write-offs could be disallowed if the ventures are found to be fraudulent. In fact, the investors could end up owing taxes and penalties that exceed the amount invested.    Mr. Galanis and his wife, by contrast, &quot;benefited&quot; by at least $6.2 million in transfers from the Nashua venture and its subsidiaries between January 1985 and May 1986, according to Paul DeFilippo, a partner of the trustee's Newark law firm, Crummy, Del Deo, Dolan, Griffinger andamp; Vecchione.    Mr. Galanis's profits may have been far greater. District Attorney Morgenthau has contended that offering documents filed with New York state failed to disclose that nearly all investors' funds would be channeled to &quot;people and entities&quot; controlled by Mr. Galanis.    The Galanises lived in the fancy Lake Avenue section of Greenwich before moving to California. Their Greenwich estate, with a private lake, is valued at more than $3.5 million. &quot;It looks like a hotel,&quot; says a former neighbor. The two-story, 15,000-square-foot house has a heated indoor swimming pool, a gymnasium and an exercise room with Nautilus machines.    When Mr. Galanis ate out, dining companions say, he always insisted on paying. &quot;If you should pick up the check, he gets uncomfortable,&quot; says one. &quot;He has expensive tastes. Such as Louis XIII cognac -- that's $60 a shot in a good restaurant.&quot;    The Galanis family took ski vacations in Utah, flying there by private Lockheed Jetstar. They stayed at the Stein Eriksen Lodge in Park City, where a three-bedroom suite rents for $905 a night. One winter, Mr. Galanis threw a memorable birthday bash in a Park City restaurant.    &quot;The party had a Hawaiian motif,&quot; a guest says. &quot;John trucked in sand, palm trees, and ferns. There was a roast pig. Lobsters were flown in from Maine.&quot; Another guest recalls, &quot;Everything was in such quantities it seemed gross.&quot;    The lavish spending spilled over to the children. One son got a Ferrari for his 16th birthday. Mr. Galanis once hired stonemasons to build a 12-foot-high play castle for his children. During holidays, Mr. and Mrs. Galanis were familiar figures in Greenwich, Stamford and Norwalk toy shops. &quot;They spent thousands of dollars on toys,&quot; says a former neighbor.    Just how freely they spent is evidenced by Mrs. Galanis's &quot;household&quot; account at tiny Chilton Private Bank in Chilton, Texas. As of last June 29, her account was overdrawn by $1,492,000, according to Mr. DeFilippo, the trustee's attorney. Payments to American Express from that account in May through July of 1986 totaled $307,000, according to canceled checks in the trustee's possession.    Mrs. Galanis posted collateral with the Chilton bank in the form of a mortgage last April to cover any overdrafts, according to John Tigue, attorney for the bank's owner, John Landon, who is a former president of Transpac and one of the defendants named in the complaint unsealed yesterday. Mrs. Galanis &quot;is in the process&quot; of repaying Chilton, Mr. Tigue says. The attorney also says that Mr. Landon will plead not guilty at his arraignment today.    Mr. Galanis is a physically powerful figure: a six-footer with a voracious appetite whose weight has been known to exceed 300 pounds. To his face, he is &quot;John,&quot; or &quot;Big John.&quot; Behind his back, associates good-naturedly refer to him as &quot;Condo,&quot; or &quot;Fat John.&quot;    Former associates say he commanded loyalty. &quot;He wined and dined you,&quot; says one. &quot;He was your friend. He overpaid people, and there was the promise of riches to come.&quot; But he is also said to have a quick temper. &quot;If you questioned his motives, he'd rant and rave,&quot; a former aide says. &quot;I've seen him go into his Incredible Hulk routine, where he'd puff himself up and start pounding the table.&quot;    Dressed in pinstripes and penny loafers, Mr. Galanis would arrive at his Greenwich office in a chauffeur-driven Cadillac. A young employee once asked him why he spent so much time studying his financial quote machine. &quot;He didn't like the question. He went over to me, looked me in the eye and said, 'Don't ever ask me about my business.'&quot;    Mr. Galanis kept pet fish in his office. &quot;He had a lion-fish that puffs up and eats little fish,&quot; says a former Nashua Trust employee. &quot;John called it Fred the Fish. As soon as John came into the office, Fred would follow John with his eyes, and John would go over and feed it live goldfish.&quot;    Mr. Galanis's name never appeared on any of the material offering limited-partnership interests to investors. But Nashua employees say there was never any doubt that he was the principal. &quot;We knew that John Galanis was responsible for the entire operation,&quot; a former employee said in a deposition taken by the trustee's attorneys last October.    &quot;Galanis didn't have a title with Nashua?&quot; an attorney asked.    &quot;Oh, no, he didn't even have a scrap of paper with his name on it,&quot; the former employee replied.    &quot;Why?&quot;    &quot;So they couldn't tie him to anything.&quot;    Associates were aware of his criminal past. &quot;But he gave a romanticized version,&quot; a bitter former colleague says. &quot;As he told it, he was a bright, young, successful broker on Wall Street who never stole from anybody. There was a problem but, according to him, a partner was to blame. When he was indicted in '83, he swore to us on his kids' lives he didn't do anything wrong. He said the authorities were persecuting him for his '73 conviction.&quot;    Mr. Birnberg, the trustee, says the Atlantic City refurbishing project could have been a winner. &quot;The concept was brilliant,&quot; he says. &quot;Unfortunately, it wasn't executed.&quot; Investors who bought partnership units for $93,000 to $98,000 each were promised 100% financing and fat tax write-offs. Pitchmen targeted those with at least a $200,000 annual income or $1 million net worth. Purchasers included Jose Sanz, Avis Inc.'s executive vice president, and movie star Eddie Murphy. The actor's accountant says: &quot;Eddie has worked in Atlantic City. He wanted to own a piece of this revitalized area.&quot;    William A. Vitiello, a Long Island businessman, invested after consulting with his Manhattan accountant. Says the accountant: &quot;It was choice property right on the boardwalk. The concept was fabulous. The numbers made sense. I know accountants who were flown to Atlantic City to watch the construction going on.&quot;    &quot;The thing that helped make it a little believable was that they started buying parcels of land, some of it on option, and actually making payment,&quot; says Jay Fiedler, director of Atlantic City's planning division.    &quot;Galanis was a genius in packaging,&quot; says a one-time Nashua employee. &quot;He selected colors {for brochures}. He was fanatical about the printed image. He recognized that it lent credibility, that imagery created aura.&quot;    Nashua's promotional material touted Drexel Burnham Lambert Realty Inc. as its real-estate-management consultants. &quot;Galanis said he intended to acquire a whole slew of hotels, rehabilitate them, and would Drexel Burnham Realty be interested in managing the hotels?&quot; says Daniel Chill, attorney for Drexel Burnham Realty. &quot;When I discovered his previous history, we told him to go fly.&quot;    But the name of Alexander Grant andamp; Co. gave luster to the project. Grant, a major accounting firm, audited Nashua's 1984 financial statement.    In a suit filed in federal court in Manhattan, a group of investors in the Nashua venture say that Grant withdrew as Nashua's auditor in the autumn of 1985 after it learned that Mr. Galanis was the promoter, but that the investors weren't informed of Grant's discovery. Alexander Grant, now known as Grant Thornton, declines to comment.    According to Manhattan District Attorney Morgenthau, Nashua's offering documents filed with New York state contained inflated partnership assets and baseless income projections. A former Nashua employee says that Nashua overpaid for property but that nobody cared because it was resold at excessive prices to the partnerships. He says that appraisals were deliberately inflated.    The bubble burst in April 1986, when federal agents seized Nashua's records. The bankruptcy filing followed. So did a report in the Philadelphia Inquirer that Mr. Galanis was the secret promoter.    The Galanis group enjoyed cozy relationships with a number of banks that financed its promotions by purchasing investors' notes and by making mortgage loans on properties acquired by the Galanis partnerships. One of the banks was Columbia Federal Savings Bank of Westport, Conn. Mr. DeFilippo, attorney for the trustee, says Columbia Federal made $6.6 million in mortgage loans to the Nashua group in the last four months of 1985.    The chairman of Columbia's parent firm, CFS Corp., was Arthur D. Mason, senior partner of the Washington law firm of Leff andamp; Mason. Investors in the Nashua venture say the firm served as attorney for Nashua and its syndications. According to Mr. DeFilippo, Mr. Mason had acquired about 60% of CFS in 1985 &quot;in a transaction which involved some degree of Nashua funds.&quot; Mr. Mason, who declines to comment, resigned as CFS's chairman last August, a CFS spokesman says. The loans to Nashua haven't been repaid.    Peoples National Bank of Rockland County in Monsey, N.Y., was also helpful to the Galanis group. Leonard Slutsky, the bank's former chairman, admitted in federal court in White Plains, N.Y., that, as chairman, he asked for -- and received -- $165,000 from a company associated with Mr. Galanis. The payment, he testified, was to ensure continued good relations between Mr. Galanis and the bank.    Peoples National lent money to investors in Galanis-linked ventures. The bank was declared insolvent by the federal comptroller of the currency in 1985, and its assets were purchased by First National Bank of Highland, N.Y. Mr. Slutsky pleaded guilty this past March to bank bribery and income-tax evasion, and awaits sentencing. The complaint unsealed by U.S. Attorney Giuliani's office yesterday charges Mr. Galanis and two others with bribing officials of the bank to the tune of $370,000.    The complaint also charges that the Galanis group fraudulently gained control of a Salt Lake City bank, Heritage Bank andamp; Trust, in 1984.    Mr. Galanis, meanwhile, still awaits trial in the Chase Manhattan fraud case. Grand larceny charges were dismissed by a judge, but Mr. Galanis still faces charges that he was an accomplice of two Chase officers in the misappropriation of Chase money.    And a former brother-in-law of his, Thomas J. Williams, last month pleaded guilty in federal court in Manhattan to securities-fraud and conspiracy charges stemming from the Transpac promotion.    Mr. Galanis and his family have left Connecticut &quot;to protect the kids from bad publicity,&quot; says a longtime acquaintance. They have resettled in the San Diego suburb of Del Mar. Their beachfront house -- worth an estimated $3 million -- overlooks the Pacific. Mr. Galanis appears to be adjusting. He has joined the posh Fairbanks Ranch Country Club, where the initiation fee for golfing members is $50,000. He dines at Mille Fleurs, rated by San Diego Magazine readers as San Diego County's best French restaurant. &quot;John is developing a taste for California whites,&quot; an acquaintance says. </TEXT></DOC>