<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan changed his testimony on a key point regarding the Iran arms sales scandal after talking with White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan, administration officials said.    According to the officials, the president first told his three-member Tower Commission, which is investigating operations of the National Security Council, that he recalled giving general approval in advance for Israeli sales to Iran of U.S.-made arms in 1985. That recollection squares with congressional testimony given by former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane but conflicts with testimony to Congress by Mr. Regan, who said the president only condoned the Israeli sales after the fact.    At a second session with the commission, however, the officials said the president changed his testimony, agreeing with the chief of staff's version of events and saying he didn't remember authorizing the Israeli sales in advance.    The revision of the presidential testimony may be one element behind rising anger at Mr. Regan among some of the president's close supporters, including first lady Nancy Reagan. This unhappiness with the chief of staff led yesterday to new speculation that he soon may leave his post.    Mr. Regan's role in the revision of the president's account is also one of several factors that has led the Tower Commission, headed by former Sen. John Tower (R., Texas), to look into whether White House aides tried to cover up or misstate certain aspects of the scandal.    The commission and special counsel Lawrence Walsh are studying an official administration chronology of the arms sale, which was rewritten at least twice in the White House last November to omit certain important facts and misstate others, according to administration officials and documents. Among the items changed was the chronology's description of the U.S. position on the 1985 Israeli sales.    Three officials involved in preparing the chronology, which was used to prepare President Reagan and his aides for testimony, briefings, speeches, and news conferences, now concede that it is inaccurate, and one of them has called it &quot;fictionalized.&quot;    Investigators want to know, for example, why the final version of the chronology, dated Nov. 20, claims U.S. officials thought Israel had shipped oil-drilling parts to Iran in November 1985. In fact, an earlier account written by the Central Intelligence Agency reported that National Security Council officials had arranged for the Israelis to ship 18 Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Iran with help from the CIA.    According to current and former administration officials, former National Security Adviser Vice Adm. John Poindexter directed fired NSC aide Lt. Col. Oliver North to write and revise the chronologies. But some of the officials who helped prepare the chronologies, including Col. North, have told former associates that they believed the preparation of the accounts was part of a wider White House &quot;damage-control operation&quot; directed by Chief of Staff Regan and intended partly to &quot;protect the president&quot; from political damage.    But these officials, who may have reason to place the blame on others, and investigators concede that they haven't any proof that Mr. Regan was responsible for the faulty chronology or for misleading congressional testimony given by Adm. Poindexter and former CIA Director William Casey on Nov. 21.    Investigators say there isn't any evidence that the president knew of or approved any effort by his aides to falsify the history of the Iran affair. Moreover, there isn't any indication that the White House has destroyed or withheld evidence about its arms sales to Iran or aid to Nicaraguan rebels, investigators say.    But it's clear from records provided to the Senate Intelligence Committee that top administration officials launched a frantic effort to control the damage done when a Nov. 3 report in a Lebanese magazine disclosed the secret U.S. arms sales to Iran.    On Nov. 4, Secretary of State George Shultz wrote a memo to Adm. Poindexter warning that the press was trying to establish that &quot;the U.S. violated its own policy by cutting a big secret arms deal with Iran in order to get our hostages released.&quot; Mr. Shultz then suggested that &quot;the best way to proceed is to give the key facts to the public.&quot; The memo is contained in a draft report by the Senate Intelligence Committee but wasn't included in the panel's published account.    But Adm. Poindexter rebuffed this suggestion. In a memo to Mr. Shultz the same day, he wrote: &quot;. . . I do not believe that now is the time to give the facts to the public.&quot;    Adm. Poindexter's memo said he had &quot;talked with the Vice President, Cap (Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger), and Bill Casey,&quot; who he said &quot;agree with my approach.&quot;    During November, as President Reagan and his aides struggled to deal with the hostile public reaction to the secret Iran arms sales, officials at the White House and the CIA tried to assemble a coherent account of what they'd done from their files and from their own confusing, often conflicting, recollections. The problem was compounded by the fact that Col. North was absent much of the time because he was busy closing down a secret bank account in Geneva and meeting with Iranian representatives in an attempt to keep alive U.S. efforts to free Americans held hostage in Lebanon.    As the resulting chronologies were revised, however, they grew less accurate instead of more so. The final version of the document also is more supportive than earlier drafts of the administration's claims that the president hadn't approved Israeli arms sales in 1985, and that the U.S. sold arms to Iran mostly to promote a dialogue with moderate leaders there.    For example, the first chronology, prepared by the CIA early in November, according to administration and congressional officials, says Israel shipped TOW anti-tank missiles to Iran in September 1985 &quot;at NSC behest.&quot; It adds that &quot;in November 1985, as the next step in the operation, the NSC arranged for Israel to send 18 complete Hawk (anti-aircraft) missiles to Iran.&quot;    But the first White House chronology, written by Col. North with help from NSC staff members Alton Keel, Craig Coy, Robert Earle, and Howard Teicher, and from Mr. McFarlane and retired CIA agent George Cave, claims that: &quot;In late November 1985, the Israelis, responding to urgent entreaties from the Iranians, provided 18 basic Hawk missiles to Iran. . . . The Israeli delivery of Hawks raised U.S. concerns that we could well be creating misunderstandings in Tehran and thereby jeopardizing our objective of arranging a direct meeting with high-level Iranian officials.&quot;    The final White House chronology, which is dated last Nov. 20, claims the administration didn't find out until January 1986 that the November 1985 shipment had contained arms.    &quot;We were assured, at the time, that the Israelis were going to 'try oil drilling parts as an incentive' since we had expressed so much displeasure over the earlier TOW shipment,&quot; the Nov. 20 chronology claims. &quot;In January, we learned that the Israelis, responding to urgent entreaties from the Iranians, had (sent) 18 Hawk missiles to Iran. . . .&quot;    Mr. McFarlane, the former national security adviser, has said he twice reviewed drafts of the chronologies. On the evening of Nov. 19, sources close to Mr. McFarlane said, he helped Col. North and other officials assemble the final chronology from a variety of pieces of paper, including one that Mr. McFarlane knew to be false and another that seemed questionable to him.    One scrap of paper contained a statement that President Reagan hadn't authorized the September 1985 shipment of TOW anti-tank missiles from Israel to Iran. Although the statement was incorporated in the Nov. 20 chronology, Mr. McFarlane later contradicted it in sworn testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee. He said the president orally approved the shipment and told him to assure Israeli officials that the U.S. would replace American-made weapons Israel sold to Iran.    Both Mr. Regan and Adm. Poindexter initially confirmed Mr. McFarlane's account in background briefings for reporters, then told the Senate Intelligence Committee the president hadn't authorized the 1985 Israeli sales. Other senior officials, however, say that because Secretary of State Shultz and Defense Secretary Weinberger both had opposed arms sales to Iran, it's unlikely that Mr. McFarlane would have given the Israelis a green light without presidential approval.    Mr. McFarlane may immediately have had second thoughts about his role in preparing the chronology, a source close to the former national security adviser asserts. According to this source, after helping Col. North prepare the final draft of the chronology and the president's opening statement for his Nov. 19 news conference, Mr. McFarlane met with Attorney General Edwin Meese and Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper.    During the meeting, this source says, Mr. McFarlane told Mr. Meese: &quot;I'm prepared to take a lot of this on my own shoulders but you've got to know the president was foursquare for this from the start.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>