<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Explosive Issue:Europe Arms NetworkThat Supplies IraniansBegins to Draw Fire---Sweden's Karl-Erik SchmitzEmerges as Major Dealer;Why Nations Bend Rules---Dwarfing Iran-Contra Affair---By Marcus W. Brauchli and Mark M. NelsonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP MDEST FORGNAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   On a freezing day in early March 1985, a chartered jet carrying six top Iranian arms buyers landed on a snowy runway outside the small, industrial city of Karlskoga in central Sweden.    Stepping off the airplane into a biting winter wind, the men were greeted, then quickly hustled away by a contingent from Nobel Industrier Sverige AB, Sweden's biggest arms and explosives maker. After an informal tour of Nobel's sparkling-clean factories and an overnight stay in a modest hotel, the visitors were gone.    The brief trip to Karlskoga was part of a European tour arranged by Karl-Erik Schmitz, a 52-year-old Swedish businessman who has emerged as one of Iran's biggest single suppliers of munitions in its seven-year war with Iraq. In his best years, Mr. Schmitz estimates, his sales to Iran have amounted to more than $200 million. Though he recently was indicted by Swedish authorities under a law prohibiting exports of Swedish-made arms to countries at war or likely to become combatants, Mr. Schmitz is still in the business. But he says he has &quot;suffered tremendously.&quot;    He isn't alone in the business. Documents seized by customs authorities in Sweden and interviews with dozens of experts in the international arms trade suggest that Iran has built up a vast wartime supply network in Western countries. The tentacles of the munitions-to-Iran business stretch across the continents, from Argentina to Yugoslavia to Burma. One document seized from Mr. Schmitz's office is an end-user certificate from Kenya's Defense Ministry, although an official in Nairobi denies knowledge of the deal.    The seized documents show that the explosives industry in particular has exploited legal loopholes and weak enforcement of existing laws to build a flourishing trade in selling to Iran. Even some of the mines that Western navies are so anxiously trying to sweep out of the Persian Gulf are thought by defense specialists to contain explosives from Europe.    As much as a third of the $3 billion a year that Iran is thought to spend on imported armaments goes to meet an insatiable appetite for high-quality munitions -- powder and explosives, shells and bullets. During the most intense offensives, Iranian forces fire continuously for weeks at a time using the hundreds of heavy artillery guns Iran has lined up along the Iraqi border.    Like similar embargoes in the past, the ban by most Western nations against arms sales to Iran hasn't been very effective in general, and Iran is building up a defense industry of its own. Iran usually looks to the black market, China or Soviet-bloc suppliers for military hardware such as heavy artillery, tanks and spare parts. But for about a dozen European explosives makers, the Iranian guns have proved voracious, if illicit, consumers of their products.    &quot;The engine driving this industry has been the conflict in the Middle East,&quot; says a salesman for a big European explosives maker under investigation for selling munitions to Iran. &quot;It's a big engine,&quot; he says, with as much as half of Europe's estimated annual production of 100,000 tons of explosives channeled to the gulf war.    It is clearly an enormous business. Mr. Schmitz's Iran operations alone dwarf the Iran-Contra arms scandal, in which a handful of close aides to President Reagan arranged sales of $87 million at most in hopes of winning the freedom of American hostages held in Lebanon. Portuguese arms dealers were middlemen in those arms sales to Iran. Profits from the sales were to be channeled to guerrillas fighting Nicaragua's Sandinista government.    U.S. dealers apparently aren't involved in the European arms sales to the Middle East combatants.    Iraq receives an even bigger flow of arms than Iran, having spent about four times as much as Iran on imported arms since the war began. But much of the Iraqi trade is carried out legally through countries like France, which openly sell to Baghdad.    Though most Western governments have policies against selling arms to Iran, many have all but ignored the illicit flow of munitions, partly for the sake of jobs and partly because existing arms-trade laws are so riddled with holes that stanching the flow is nearly impossible.    In Sweden, for example, the government prohibits Swedish-made explosives from being supplied to Iran, but the law per se doesn't keep people like Mr. Schmitz from arranging deals from other European countries or anywhere else in the world if they get necessary clearances.    In addition, a division of Sweden's Nobel was permitted to construct a $110 million chemical factory in Isfahan that Iran could use for making its own explosives. (Iraqi warplanes destroyed the plant, still under construction, in early 1986.)    The Greek government, while officially disapproving sales to either Iran or Iraq, says it can't be responsible for what its private arms dealers do. &quot;We want to keep an equal distance from both&quot; Iran and Iraq, an official at the Greek Foreign Ministry says.    &quot;There is great hypocrisy on the part of the governments involved,&quot; says Aaron Karp, an analyst at the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, a government-financed organization that monitors the international arms trade. &quot;In the arms trade, everybody knows what everybody else is doing. The governments know and acquiesce.&quot;    Many European countries undercut their own prohibitions by permitting their munitions makers to sell to middlemen like Mr. Schmitz without knowing the true final destination. One of Iran's biggest explosives orders this decade, for example, was for 5,300 metric tons of propellant for use in heavy artillery shells. It placed the $50 million order with a private Italian munitions maker, Tirrena Industriale S.p.A.    Unable to meet the order alone, Tirrena farmed out the order to other European munitions makers, which could legally sell to the Italian company even though they couldn't sell directly to Iran. The order was ultimately suspended, however, when Italy banned exports to Iran in October 1984.    While the munitions companies arrange some of the deals among themselves, by far the greatest buying is done by middlemen. And Mr. Schmitz, a longtime trader with Iran, is one of the best-known of the middlemen.    Customs investigators in Sweden say that Mr. Schmitz has spun a web of deals that involved companies and governments in at least a dozen countries. Some transactions depended on falsified export documents and complex shipping arrangements designed to disguise the true destination of the explosives he was buying. His willingness to circumvent regulations surprised many who were more seasoned in the trade, but that didn't keep them from dealing with him.    &quot;He was treating the arms business without the necessary clearance from governments,&quot; says a southern European arms executive who has dealt with Mr. Schmitz. &quot;You know, this is a very carefully controlled business.&quot;    In an interview, Mr. Schmitz maintains that he didn't violate any laws in supplying Iran. In each transaction involving Iran, he says, he made certain that he sold the explosives legally. He concedes, however, that doing so sometimes required arranging sales through a third country.    In 1982, when Mr. Schmitz got involved in the arms trade with Iran in a big way, he was relatively new to the arms business. Since 1970, however, his trading company, Scandinavian Commodity AB, had been supplying fertilizers, pulp and paper, metals, and other materials to Iran and other Middle Eastern clients, including Iraq. Mr. Schmitz says Scandinavian Commodity, which employs 15 people, earns a &quot;trading agency's profit&quot; on yearly revenue of about $300 million.    Mr. Schmitz's success in the trading business also has earned him a good life, according to Swedish investigators and acquaintances. He lives in a sprawling house adjacent to a golf driving range in Malmoe, a southern Swedish port city just 22 miles from the small town where he was born. Friends, who know Mr. Schmitz by the nickname &quot;Bobbo,&quot; speculate on whether he buys his clothes in Paris or on London's Saville Row.    Before Iran's war with Iraq began, Mr. Schmitz says, he sold Iran only raw materials for industry. &quot;Suddenly,&quot; he adds, &quot;there came a need for chemicals with a military purpose.&quot; He agreed to supply the goods, but he emphasizes that &quot;we are never involved in guns.&quot;    Mr. Schmitz's first supplier of munitions for Iran was South Africa, one of his big fertilizer suppliers. But after South Africa sealed a big arms deal with Iraq in 1984, it cut off supplies to Iran, forcing Mr. Schmitz to turn to Europe and Israel for most of his purchases.    Munitions makers say it was at about this time that they recall first meeting with Mr. Schmitz. In 1983, on the recommendation of the AB Bofors arms-making division of Sweden's Nobel, Mr. Schmitz walked into the Brussels offices of the explosives division of Gechem SA, Belgium's largest powder maker, known in the industry as PRB.    &quot;He was introduced to us as wealthy and important,&quot; says a PRB executive, Lucien Pary. A year later, Mr. Schmitz came back with firm orders in hand, and PRB says it didn't question the origin of the business. &quot;He came out with contracts for Greece -- European countries and clients that we knew,&quot; says Mr. Pary.    Mr. Schmitz observes that munitions makers seldom ask questions. &quot;Normally, they are selling to countries they are allowed to sell to. But you never discuss it with them. They want to know who is the direct buyer, and that is all. But in their own mind, they must know where the demand comes from.&quot;    PRB pulled out of the deal with Mr. Schmitz only when it noticed telex messages suggesting that Bank Melli Iran was handling the payments. PRB immediately got cold feet, Mr. Pary says. &quot;Before, we didn't have any proof&quot; that the transaction was with Iran, he adds. Consequently, in the summer of 1985, PRB bought its way out of the contract for $250,000. The Belgian parliament is investigating PRB for a possible breach of arms-trading laws, but the company denies that it did anything wrong.    For Mr. Schmitz, losing suppliers was almost routine, but he developed wide-ranging contacts that kept his supply network running. Order books seized from Scandinavian Commodity by Swedish authorities show that he constantly shuffled his suppliers and their products, partly to expedite the flow of materiel to Iran.    The continual shifting was made easier by the close ties among explosives makers. European dealers have found that the best way to organize the flow of munitions to Iran is through cooperation. The powder makers are a close-knit group that has met regularly since 1977 under the auspices of the Paris-based European Association for the Study of Safety Problems in the Production of Propellant Powder, an organization that is long on name and big on secrecy. Its telephone number is unlisted, and its membership list isn't available.    Munitions salesmen who have attended meetings of the association say that the group's original purpose of discussing mutual safety concerns has long been eclipsed by business cooperation. Over the past five years, the meetings have evolved into discussions of how to parcel out and price the huge orders flowing into Europe from Iran.    By sharing the business among themselves, the explosives makers have avoided disruptive increases in their production capacity and taken advantage of Western nations' liberal rules about arms trading among themselves. The association's activities prompted Swedish authorities to begin an inquiry in May to determine whether the group is an illegal cartel, and the European Community's antitrust directorate is also looking into the matter.    Munitions makers defend the system. &quot;You get a large order, and you can't fill it -- you've got other customers, other obligations,&quot; explains PRB's Mr. Pary. &quot;So you send out telexes to ask who else can help you fill it. It happens every day. There's nothing so unusual about it.&quot;    Tirrena's president, Vittorio Amadasi, speaking about the portion of his company's contract for artillery powder that it filled before the order was suspended, says, &quot;We imported it legally. We paid customs and we shipped it out along with products from other European suppliers.&quot;    In part because of evidence uncovered by the Swedish customs department, investigations of illicit arms or munitions sales to Iran now have been started in at least a dozen countries. Many of those in Europe center on deals that Mr. Schmitz arranged or was involved with. In Sweden, both Mr. Schmitz and Mats Lundberg, a Nobel official, have been formally charged with violating export laws, and each faces up to six years in prison. Both deny that they are guilty of any crimes.    In Belgium, customs and police investigators are looking at a number of PRB transactions, although the company also denies wrongdoing. Dutch prosecutors are considering a case against Muiden Chemie, on which the company won't comment.    But selling to Iran has become a matter of survival for much of Europe's arms industry. Hit by falling oil revenues and balance-of-payments difficulties, Europe's traditional arms markets in the Mideast, Africa and Latin America are drying up. The giant French arms industry, for example, which employs some 300,000 people and had revenue last year of about $16.5 billion, is considering layoffs in the face of lower export orders.    &quot;The golden age of the arms industry is drawing to a close,&quot; one French parliamentary report said.    In Belgium, PRB last year registered a loss on continuing operations of about three billion Belgian francs ($79.7 million). And arms dealers in other countries say jobs and other economic factors have become important considerations when they decide which contracts they will sign.    &quot;We are business people,&quot; says PRB's Mr. Pary. &quot;The governments are going to have to decide whether or not they want an arms industry. We can't continue to work like this.&quot;    But for government officials in countries where the arms industry is about as popular as the gulf war, the arms trade is presenting an overwhelming management problem. Andre Bourgeois, a member of the Belgian House of Representatives who is the president of a special investigation into the Belgian role in shipments, says he has little idea where it all will lead. &quot;All we have discovered so far is that we've got plenty of bureaucrats,&quot; he says, &quot;but not much coordination among the various administrations that are trying to regulate the arms trade.&quot;    But it is clear that this is an industry with close connections to national sovereignty and foreign policy, jobs and national defense. And for the people who work in the industry every day, the ever-changing restrictions against them are too much to deal with.    Belgium's Zeebrugge port, which is used for transport of much of Europe's legitimate arms trade, is also the focus of some of the illegitimate trade. There, whether the boats are loaded with arms for U.S. barracks in West Germany or on their way from France to Iran, it is all in a day's work.    &quot;It's got to come from somewhere,&quot; says Andre Braet, the president of Transammo NV, a company that specializes in loading explosive cargos in Zeebrugge. &quot;The rest is hypocrisy.&quot;    ---   Also contributing to this story were E.S. Browning in Paris, John Carr in Athens, Laura Colby in Rome, Michael T. Kinnicutt in Milan and Margaret Studer in Zurich. </TEXT></DOC>