<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0211 </DOCNO><HL> Fear and Xenophobia in Silicon Valley---By Michael S. Malone</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SLB FENELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   By the end of this month, Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. in California's Silicon Valley will mail to the Department of Justice a 1,000-page report -- accompanied by 100 boxes of supporting documents -- justifying its proposed sale to Fujitsu of Japan. The entire company has been all but paralyzed for three months getting this report ready. Once it signs for this sizable parcel, the Justice Department will have 20 days to halt the deal, ask for more information (which it has already done once), or remain quiet and let the acquisition go through.    Business theorists glibly speak of &quot;The Globalization of Industry&quot; to nodding executives at industry conferences. But the gauntlet run by Fairchild through xenophobia, government bureaucracies, lobbyists and congressmen, a hostile press and industry peer pressure -- all in an effort merely to survive -- rebukes theory by example. As a window on our society, the Fairchild story can only instill deep doubt about the prospects of a vehemently parochial American industry ever competing with its internationalized competitors in Japan and other Asian countries.    Stripped of all its emotional baggage, the deal looks something like this: battered, also-ran, Silicon Valley computer-chip company sustaining lethal losses over the past few years wants to be bought by a giant foreign electronics company that desperately needs the U.S. operation it should have built five years ago. The deal will mean to the U.S. jobs, money and, remarkably, a net inflow of technology.    Sounds like a pretty good deal doesn't it? But now add to the scenario the fact that the buyer firm is Japanese and that the firm to be acquired is Fairchild, the &quot;mother&quot; firm of Silicon Valley and the world's semiconductor industry . . . and suddenly Sen. (and Armed Services Committee member) James Exon is writing to President Reagan suggesting the deal be nixed because, &quot;it is imperative for our national defense and overall security that we maintain our existing advantages over the numerically superior forces our potential enemies possess.&quot; Mercy.    In Silicon Valley, of course, semiconductor executives were shocked -- shocked -- that this sort of buyout could be allowed to happen. LSI Logic President Wilfred Corrigan was quoted as saying that the move was &quot;somewhat predatory&quot; and that &quot;various government agencies have to take a position on this.&quot; No mention was made whether Mr. Corrigan was grinning as he spoke. He was the president of Fairchild who sold the company in 1979 to French oil-industry giant Schlumberger, which apparently hadn't yet learned the precise translation of &quot;a pig in a poke.&quot; But that was in the old days, before the Japanese started beating up the U.S. semiconductor industry.    Back then, the sale of Fairchild was the subject of derision. The old &quot;Fairchildren&quot; who had gone on to create the U.S. semiconductor industry hardly shed a tear to see a competitor disappear into the bowels of a non-semiconductor multinational -- from which (as they knew) none had ever returned.    Silicon Valley's attitude toward Fairchild five years ago was best summarized in a famous Advanced Micro Devices ad that showed the Fairchild plant as nothing more than a false front propped up by boards. At that time Silicon Valley firms gleefully sold &quot;second-source&quot; rights to let the Japanese build the latest U.S. products . . . and then turned around and bought those chips to stuff in their own larger-systems products. That, of course, was then. Now, the same U.S. chip houses that used to announce that they didn't need government help to beat the Japanese are showing up in Washington asking for help in the form of investment, tariffs and other acts to create &quot;a level playing field.&quot;    It is in this enviroment that Fairchild, the joke of Silicon Valley, has somehow grown to become &quot;a major vendor of vital components to the U.S. Defense Department and the sole supplier of certain devices which are vital to important defense programs&quot; (according to Sen. Exon), whose sale &quot;may reduce domestic competition in the manufacture and sale of supercomputers&quot; -- an industry in which &quot;it is essential that the United States remain at the forefront&quot; (or so says Sen. Howard Metzenbaum in a letter to the Justice Department's Antitrust Division).    That is quite a mouthful about an outfit that over the past seven years cost its parent firm $1.5 billion and laid off two-thirds of its 30,000 employees.    It is important then to take a closer look at each of the arguments being made -- by Sens. Exon and Metzenbaum, by certain parts of the Defense Department (though not by others) and by members of the U.S. electronics community.    The Domino Theory -- The argument here is that, let the Japanese through the gates and they'll overrun the city. The obvious reply is that they don't have to come in; they already own most of the surrounding countryside. But more specifically: Nippon Electric (NEC) purchased Electronic Arrays in 1979. This did not set off a wild acquisition spree. Rather, NEC spent five years learning how to run a U.S. chip house, then built a huge plant 90 miles away near Sacramento that now provides steady employment for 700 Americans and pumped more than $100 million into the local economy. Fujitsu, of course, has been a presence in Silicon Valley since 1971, when it put up much of the money needed to start computer-maker Amdahl Corp. because no U.S. investor would. Here again, there was no buyout hysteria.    Surge Capability -- This is the reasonable notion that in the case of a national emergency, the U.S. must have enough domestic production to support our armed forces. The question here is whether a firm as small as Fairchild (generating only 2% to 3% of total U.S. semiconductor production) can be crucial for anything. Says Gene Norrett, vice president of market researcher Dataquest Inc., &quot;Military sales is a non-issue. The Department of Defense can get 95% of Fairchild's products from second sources. As for the few sole-source products, Fujitsu would be crazy not to continue supplying them.&quot;    Supercomputers -- Obviously this is a critical area, and America's leadership in this advanced technology is crucial for the nation's long-term success. But is it true, as Sen. Metzenbaum claims, that &quot;the proposed Fujitsu acquisition of Fairchild Semiconductor could permit Fujitsu to dominate the American supercomputer market?&quot;    Consider three things. First, all indications are that Fujitsu is attempting to buy Fairchild not to extend any world-wide hegemony, but because the company messed up. It should have come to the U.S. a decade ago, as NEC did. Now it's scrambling to catch up. That it would settle for a dying Fairchild is indicative of weakness, not strength. Second, in Fujitsu's home market of Japan, IBM is beating it badly in mainframe computers. Getting Fairchild's logic, for most of which Fujitsu already builds better alternatives, is not going to do much good competitively. Finally, and most important, is that Fujitsu is already in the door. As the government knows (but the public doesn't), Cray, America's leading supercomputer company, has as its ECL suppliers Fairchild, Signetics, Motorola and Fujitsu. On top of that, the devices Fujitsu supplies Cray are more advanced than Fairchild's.    Potential U.S. Buyer -- Fairchild has been privately on the block for several years. None of the giant U.S. chip firms have shown interest. Now, at the 11th hour, tiny ($20 million) AMCC of San Diego has expressed interest in acquiring $500 million Fairchild. Though AMCC can't afford Fairchild as is, much less as it must become to survive, and though AMCC has almost no compatible product lines with Fairchild, the mere fact that it is American has made AMCC a corporate white knight in Sen. Exon's eyes.    Technology Transfer -- In all of the wailing and teeth gnashing over the Fairchild sale, no one has asked, &quot;Just what does Fujitsu want Fairchild for?&quot; The answer is evident in the terms of the deal. Fujitsu, with its three- to four-times-larger semiconductor research-and-development budget and $10 billion in annual revenues, is understandably indifferent to Fairchild's technology. Fujitsu already offers just about everything Fairchild builds, and more advanced to boot. The reality is -- and this may be just what the U.S. semiconductor companies really fear -- that the transfer of technology will go the other way. Instead of having a harmless semiconductor dinosaur up the road called Fairchild, suddenly Silicon Valley's chip houses may find themselves eyeball to eyeball with an aggressive Fairchild/Fujitsu, combining Japanese technology with U.S. domestic marketing savvy.    Jobs -- This is a particularly cruel argument put up by opponents to the sale. The fact is that playing in the semiconductor game is nasty business. Fall behind just a little and you may never catch up. Fairchild fell far behind. The company tried to regain lost ground in 1984 by technologically leapfrogging to the next generation of semiconductors. It might have worked had the worst recession in Silicon Valley history not hit. Instead, Fairchild basically died as a company.    To keep it alive, the company was propped up by Schlumberger to the tune of $1.5 billion. But with the oil industry slumped, Schlumberger can no longer afford this expensive sideline. One can only ask, if the U.S. government was so concerned about the strategic value of Fairchild and of the welfare of its employees, where has it been the past seven years? If the company was so valuable to U.S. security, why was it denied its top-secret clearance when Schlumberger bought it? Or, at the very least, why wasn't that sale stopped? As for the employees, after 20,000 already have been dumped on the street by a collapsing employer, it's a little late to talk about preserving jobs. The alternative comes down to this: If Fujitsu buys Fairchild, thousands of new jobs are likely to be created. If the deal is quashed, Schlumberger will continue backing away until Fairchild finally closes down.    There are many reasons for the American electronics industry to resent the Japanese. Japanese electronics companies have used every trick and advantage they can find to carve out an increasingly wider share of the world semiconductor and computer businesses.    Nevertheless, to use that history as justification for a blanket indictment of any Japanese investment in the U.S. is not only blindly prejudiced but against our own self-interests. Instead of stopping foreign investment, we should be looking at shoring up our own. Fujitsu, according to Dataquest's Norrett, had losses of $125 million in 1986 and is going to have billions more over the next decade in its battle with IBM. Yet, because it's backed by some of the largest Japanese banks, Fujitsu not only can raise the cash to buy Fairchild but will continue to compete with lower profit margins than its U.S. counterparts. Had Fairchild (and all of the other chip houses in the U.S.) been allowed a similar arrangement, the firm might not be in its present predicament. But it is.    Fujitsu is taking a stunning risk here. In exchange for 80% of Fairchild, Fujitsu is to invest $400 million in the company over two years (with more, no doubt, to follow), making available all of its technology, and, most remarkably, turning over to Fairchild responsibility for all Fujitsu product sales in the U.S. and Europe. On top of that, Fujitsu intends, in short order, to reduce its ownership of Fairchild to 40% and put the rest up for public sale. What this means is that ultimately the Fujitsu-Fairchild deal may revive a once-great firm, create thousands of new jobs, restore to the everyday investor a publically owned U.S. corporation that has been entirely in foreign hands for nearly a decade . . . and most remarkably, again make Fairchild eligible to become an approved military top-secret contractor.    Since we aren't willing to do this for Fairchild, our only alternative is to let the Japanese do it for us.    ---   Mr. Malone, a free-lance journalist, has covered Silicon Valley for 10 years. </TEXT></DOC>