<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880120-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN DECIDED to resume CIA shipments of arms to the Nicaraguan Contras.    Shipments of the previously purchased military goods, suspended last week while Central American leaders met to assess regional peace efforts, had been authorized by Congress if a cease-fire wasn't in effect by yesterday. The move comes as the battle lines were drawn for a crucial vote in Congress next month on whether to provide more Contra aid. Meanwhile, Contra leaders agreed to meet, possibly as soon as next week, with Sandinista officials to begin direct cease-fire talks.    Managua said it has formally lifted a six-year state of emergency and disbanded its revolutionary courts. It also arrested five more opposition leaders.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT REFUSED North's independent counsel challenge.    Justices left intact a U.S. appeals court ruling that independent counsel Walsh's Iran-Contra inquiry is operating with proper legal authority conferred by Attorney General Meese. The Marine lieutenant colonel and former White House aide is a target of Walsh's investigation. The high court's action, however, doesn't resolve questions about the validity of other independent counsel inquiries.    Justices agreed to rule on a Colorado law that prohibits the sponsors of ballot referendums drives from paying workers who collect petition signatures.    ---   Israel's defense minister banned outside food shipments to Palestinian refugee camps in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Rabin said shipments by foreign governments and relief agencies would be halted in order to break a strike by shopkeepers. Israel also invoked emergency police powers to impose curfews in East Jerusalem.    Moscow said it will allow a visit by Israeli diplomats, the first since 1967. A foreign ministry spokesman said, however, that a resumption of ties depends on a Mideast settlement, a condition Israel said it regretted. Moscow hopes to participate in peace talks, but Israel insists it must first restore ties and allow free emigration.    ---   The State Department criticized Haitian presidential elections and said a U.S. aid ban will continue. A spokesman said that Sunday's vote was &quot;clouded&quot; by irregularities and that it was not a transition to democracy. The spokesman said, however, that the U.S. was likely to maintain relations with the government that emerges.    ---   Sen. Nunn told a private arms-control group that Reagan should set aside his drive for early tests of his Strategic Defense Initiative in order to reach an accord with the Soviet Union on halving superpower arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles. The influential Georgia Democrat is the chairman of the Senate Armed Services panel.    Shevardnadze warned that a NATO modernization of short-range nuclear weapons could obstruct arms-control progress. The U.S. said it welcomed a Shevardnadze proposal to separate talks on eliminating the weapons from conventional-force negotiations. The Soviet foreign minister ended talks in Bonn and traveled to Spain.    ---   Afghan rebel leaders said they would refuse to meet with a U.N. mediator during his tour of Pakistan and Afghanistan. The mediator is in the area preparing for bilateral talks next month aimed at reaching agreement on a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. Moscow has said its troops could begin to leave May 1 if a pact is reached.    ---   Initial local election results indicate victories for a majority of candidates endorsed by Philippine President Aquino, but the total could fall short of the 70% predicted by her aides. Unofficial returns show Aquino-backed candidates led in 20 of 33 gubernatorial races, but only about half led in Manilaarea mayoral races.    ---   Spain is offering to give NATO access to its military facilities in times of crisis as part of a proposal to forge stronger ties with the alliance, diplomatic sources said. The plan has been presented to NATO and could be approved by mid-April, the sources said. The U.S. last week acceded to demands by Madrid that it withdraw 72 jet fighters.    ---   Morton Thiokol has agreed to settle wrongful death claims lodged by the parents of two astronauts killed in the 1986 explosion of the space shuttle Challenger. Terms of the settlements with the parents of Judith Resnik and Gregory Jarvis weren't disclosed. Morton Thiokol manufactures the space shuttle's solid-fuel booster rockets.    ---   Opening arguments were made in the influence-peddling trial in Washington of former White House aide Lyn Nofziger. He is charged with four felony counts of violating the federal Ethics in Government Act's one-year ban on former officials' lobbying of the agency for which they worked.    ---   President Alfonsin said the crushing of an army mutiny has strengthened Argentina's young democracy. About 2,000 government troops forced the surrender Monday of a former army colonel who led a three-day revolt against human-rights prosecutions of officers. Buenos Aires said it had 282 rebels in custody and was searching for three.    ---   Chinese airline officials recovered flight recorders from an IL-18 airliner that crashed Monday in southwest China, killing all 108 aboard. Witnesses said the airliner, on a flight from Beijing, exploded about five miles from Chongqing, its destination.    ---   South Korea said it is planning a major amnesty for political detainees before the inauguration of president-elect Roh Tae Woo, scheduled for Feb. 25. Law-enforcement officials said they are screening 1,000 detainees, but gave no details about the exact scope and timing of the amnesty.    ---   A new study links cigarette smoking to strokes, and Boston University Medical School researchers say people can cut their risk of strokes by 50% if they give up smoking. The study, based on a 26-year survey of 4,255 residents of Framingham, Mass., was presented at a meeting of the American Heart Association in New Orleans. </TEXT></DOC>