<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871102-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Civil Rights Leaders of '60s Take Different PathsAs Movement Evolves, Issues Get More Complex---By John BusseyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Stokely Carmichael, a figure from a different era, is shouting to the packed auditorium at Howard University.    &quot;Everything we get in this country, we've got to shed our blood for,&quot; he declares. &quot;To get into college we must bleed, to get the vote we must bleed, to even fight in their damned army we must bleed.&quot; Suddenly it is 1967 again. The black audience comes to its feet, cheering.    Mr. Carmichael made &quot;Black Power&quot; a rallying cry 20 years ago. Now, his occasional reappearances, such as the one last month at Howard in Washington, D.C., underscore how much the old warriors of civil rights have slipped from public prominence, much like the movement they once helped lead.    Unlike people such as Andrew Young or John Lewis, most of the movement's organizers, strategists, freedom riders and militants aren't heard from much anymore nationally. They've become parents, teachers, and doctors, for the most part, melding into the mainstream.    Fred Shuttlesworth, for example, who helped build the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, is now 65 years old and tends a Baptist church in Cincinnati. Septima Clark, 89, whose literacy campaign helped blacks win the chance to vote, later served on the Charleston, S.C., school board and is now retired. On the other hand, Huey Newton, 47, militant co-founder of the Black Panther Party, is doing time in a California prison on a weapons offense.    Still, while the movement may have dissipated since the passage of civil rights legislation, the urban riots and the murder of Martin Luther King Jr., it left these people profoundly changed -- for better or worse. They took different paths as the fight fragmented and issues, such as economic integration, became harder to resolve. &quot;It's too much to expect the black community to be monolithic today,&quot; insists James Farmer, 67, former head of the Congress of Racial Equality and now a professor at Mary Washington College in Fredericksburg, Va. &quot;If the devil is a miasma, if the devil is a vapor, you can't organize against it. The issues aren't that simple now.&quot;    Some still passionately struggle for an elusive grass-roots groundswell -- &quot;singing the same solo,&quot; says one student of the movement about Mr. Carmichael. Others have left activism altogether. Those still involved, though, embrace a broad range of methods, from teaching algebra to preaching revolution. What they do today reflects their personal prescription for race relations in the U.S.    Here, along with Mr. Carmichael's, are a few voices from the movement:    The Philosopher   These days, Robert Parris Moses is busy renovating a big corner house in Cambridge, Mass., where he lives near his former graduate school, Harvard University. He has come full circle since traveling to Mississippi in the early 1960s as a strategist in the fight for voting rights. And while he takes pride in his historical role, the bearded, low-key former philosophy student is today skeptical about some of the results.    &quot;Working in the electoral system has resulted in very dramatic gains for a very small segment of the black population,&quot; while a bigger segment has languished, economically disenfranchised, he says. &quot;It just takes time for people to get it through their bones that the electoral system really isn't going to work for them.&quot;    Mr. Moses, 52, was one of the intellectual guides of the movement, particularly at the 1964 Democratic Convention. There he, Fannie Lou Hamer and others fought unsuccessfully to unseat the allwhite Mississippi delegation. He later fled to Canada and Tanzania to avoid the draft, returning to the U.S. in 1976. Life has been good to Mr. Moses since: He received a five-year, $232,000 MacArthur Foundation grant in 1982 and the first of his four children has entered Harvard.    But many blacks haven't been as fortunate. What the movement didn't anticipate, he says, was extensive urban white flight and fickle federal programs that left behind impoverished inner cities. &quot;What you got was black mayors who are political caretakers. When black people move into that domain, economic resources suddenly vanish. That's part of the new arrangement.&quot;    With it comes a new peril: The pathology of the inner city and the growth of technology-based jobs are leaving the poor unable to compete for work, he says. &quot;You're talking about a new standard of literacy that includes math and science, quantitative thinking.&quot; That standard is the new gateway to participation in society, he says, just as reading and writing were in the 1960s.    For his part, Mr. Moses is teaching algebra to inner-city students and is seeking funds for a larger community-based math and science program. &quot;The country is deaf on community organizing,&quot; he says, but &quot;it's to that tradition that I would look for hope.&quot;    The Gandhian   The segregated city of Nashville, Tenn., and a Fisk University student named Diane Nash had a lasting effect on each other. The young woman led the battle to integrate Nashville's lunch counters and explode its 1960s racial mores. The city and its metamorphosis, in turn, confirmed Ms. Nash's abiding belief in nonviolent activism.    &quot;It's a strategy, but it's also a philosophy of life,&quot; she says, now living on the South Side of her native Chicago. &quot;People aren't your enemy, social systems are. Segregation was, economic oppression is. I think Gandhi had a good way. My intention is to build a nonviolent army of people who know how to bring social change about.&quot;    To do that, Ms. Nash, 49, and former chairwoman of the vanguard Nashville student movement, has returned to school to bone up on science and psychology. She is a grandmother now, though her marriage to fellow activist James Bevel dissolved long ago.    &quot;One area we didn't take seriously in the '60s was psychology,&quot; says Ms. Nash, who since then has often worked as a community organizer. &quot;There is a mind-set that keeps (poor people) oppressed&quot; and makes the wealthy feel their control is legitimate, she contends. &quot;I want to be competent to address the mind-sets of the oppressor and the oppressed.&quot;    Recently, for example, she helped a group of poor tenants try to buy their building from a negligent landlord. Though they stood to benefit, the tenants undermined the effort by bickering and missing payments. &quot;When people have been born into poverty, the thought of wealth can be very frightening,&quot; she reasons. &quot;The person who has been oppressed has to die so that a new person can be born.&quot;    Studying psychology will help her ease that process, says Ms. Nash. In the meantime, she believes people must rely more on themselves rather than wait for a resurgence of national leaders. &quot;That's the essence of liberation,&quot; she says. &quot;Charismatic leadership has not freed us and never will.&quot;    That issue, though, may be moot. The Chicago Reporter newsletter recently asked 75 local figures to name five black leaders in the city under 40 years old. Only seven were able to do so.    The Executive Secretary   In a quiet building near the U.S. Capitol, James Foreman, 59, struggles to carry the torch. The former executive secretary of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee works in an office near groups with names like Council for a Livable World; a placard hanging askew on his door proclaims &quot;Free South Africa.&quot;    &quot;People who invested in the civil rights movement should be ecstatic at the developments -- I am,&quot; says Mr. Foreman, tortoise-shell glasses outlining his still-young face. &quot;Through protesting, we've won the right to participate.&quot;    Mr. Foreman now runs what he calls the Unemployed and Poverty Action Council, a volunteer group that he says lobbies on such disparate issues as education and Central American policy. One friend says the group is barely making ends meet, but Mr. Foreman won't talk about funding. &quot;We live a very difficult existence,&quot; is all he'll say. &quot;I live a very difficult existence.&quot;    In 1969, Mr. Foreman wrote the Black Manifesto, which demanded that reparations be paid black Americans. He still stands by that proclamation and says it helped prompt white churches to embrace social change. But today Mr. Foreman views the movement in more macroeconomic, if wishfully vague, terms.    &quot;The distribution of economic wealth tends to bypass the black community,&quot; he says. Government should work to reindustrialize the U.S. and set a policy of full employment. &quot;The idea of taking these jobs overseas has to stop.&quot; Then he adds: &quot;We're going to try to pull together some kind of seminar&quot; on the matter.    The Pan-Africanist   Stokely Carmichael has lost none of the charisma that propelled him to leadership posts in SNCC and the Black Panther Party. The tall, trim Howard graduate still delivers a well-greased oration, complete with skilled social satire and militant zeal.    Mr. Carmichael, 46, lives in a two-bedroom apartment in Conakry, Guinea, and has changed his name to Kwame Ture, to reflect his African roots. He returns to the U.S. college circuit mostly to drum up recruits for his All-African Revolutionary Peoples Party, a group he concedes is small. Years ago, he wrote that black Americans needed to close ranks and form their own political front to fight white racism. His message hasn't changed much.    &quot;The issue is still the same: arriving at political power commensurate with our strength.&quot; The answer: &quot;Revolution.&quot;    Mr. Ture's vision gets more doctrinaire from here on, but that didn't seem to bother the Howard students listening to him last month. Gesturing with his arms and pointing at them accusingly, he kept them transfixed. &quot;It's relevant,&quot; one young woman in the audience said later. A sampler:    &quot;The stupid, backward philosophy of capitalism must be trampled into the ground ruthlessly without mercy. . . . There is only one solution for the African masses scattered all over the world and that is Pan-Africanism: the total liberation and unification of Africa under scientific socialism. . . . The African bourgeoisie, which many of you are aspiring to become, is the most rotten and corrupt in the world. . . . Go throughout this country where naked white terrorism exists everywhere. In some areas it's organized on the level of the Ku Klux Klan, or of the police. They're one in the same.&quot;    In Mr. Ture's estimation, the nation is ripe for revolution. Political gains since the 1960s have let black Americans see that anything is possible -- including radical change. Enter his vision of a socialist Pan-Africa. It is inevitable, he says, because justice &quot;is eternal in its striving.&quot;    It may reflect the changed times -- and the size of his task -- that Mr. Ture's critique of capitalism coincidentally took place in Howard's business school. Just as his talk let out, so too did a class in financial management across the hall. &quot;Even Jesus said you must go into the lion's den,&quot; responds Mr. Ture. </TEXT></DOC>