<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870129-0159 </DOCNO><HL> Soviet Health Care's Critical Condition---By Kenneth M. Prager</HL><DD> 01/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   As a physician on a private visit to Moscow and Leningrad last spring, I had a unique opportunity to learn about the current state of Soviet medical care. As soon as my Soviet acquaintances learned that I was an American doctor, they organized makeshift clinics in various apartment houses so that I could examine patients and dispense medical advice. Even though I expected Soviet medicine to be below American standards, I was appalled by what I saw.    The Soviet medical-care system is decades behind the West in technology and stresses little more than keeping the mass of Soviet workers happy and on the job. It is a system that can adequately care for simple and self-limited health problems of its ordinary citizens, and it offers the privileged among them such amenities as resortlike sanitariums where they can bathe in mineral waters and rest. But the level of sophistication necessary to properly attend to such chronic and complex ailments of modern society as cancer and cardiovascular disease is what one would expect of a developing nation and not one of the world's great powers.    My impressions of Soviet medicine were reinforced by my care of refusenik David Goldfarb, who arrived in the U.S. aboard Armand Hammer's jet last October. After languishing for four months in several Soviet hospitals, Prof. Goldfarb finally received definitive treatment for his multiple medical and surgical problems in New York. He is currently learning to walk on a modern prosthesis. The fact that he did not use his heavy and crudely made Soviet prosthesis since losing his leg at Stalingrad in 1942 speaks volumes about Soviet care for the disabled. Long waiting lists for wheelchairs further testify to Soviet disregard for the needs of the handicapped.    One of my first patients on my visit was an 80-year-old man in severe pain because he was unable to urinate. His bladder was markedly distended and he obviously needed to be catheterized immediately. The urologist who had been summoned to his home complied with my request for a rubber glove to examine the patient's prostate gland. After examining him, I was startled when the physician requested that I wash the glove so that it could be reused. She then relieved the patient of his distress by passing her only, reusable catheter into his bladder after lubricating it with butter. She had sterilized the catheter by boiling it in a pot of water in the patient's kitchen.    There is a virtual absence of such disposable items as syringes, needles, catheters and intravenous tubing in hospitals and clinics. Patients pay a considerable price: Reused items increase rates of infection, while intravenous needles and scalpels that have become dull as a result of wear and tear increase pain and discomfort.    That this elderly man adamantly refused hospitalization pointed to another feature of Soviet medicine: The aged are afraid of being hospitalized. In a medical system that is chronically short of the most basic supplies, the elderly are considered expendable and will be the first to feel the brunt of such shortages.    Another patient I met was a 28-year-old man with a well-documented heart attack two years earlier who was still experiencing chest pain when he exerted himself. His entire evaluation by Soviet physicians consisted of an ECG stress test, and his only medication was nitroglycerin to be taken as needed for chest pain. A coronary angiogram, which might have disclosed a surgically correctable reason for his premature heart attack and persisting angina, was never suggested, and he was not treated with any of the potent cardiac medications that might lessen his pain, and possibly increase his longevity.    The case of this unfortunate young man discloses the unavailability of coronary angiography and surgery to all but a select few in the U.S.S.R. On a much more fundamental level, however, it reveals how few modern medicines are available to patients with serious problems. The tremendous strides made in the past two decades in development of potent and effective medications in all areas of internal medicine seem to have made little impact in the U.S.S.R. New medications are either totally unavailable from pharmacies or are in such short supply as to make them ineffective in treating chronic illness.    Such staples of modern medical treatment as Tagamet for ulcer disease, Sinemet for Parkinsonism, beta blockers and calcium channel blockers for angina and hypertension, and antihistamine-decongestant preparations for the relief of common cold symptoms are extremely hard to come by. Other useful medications, such as anti-asthma drugs and multivitamins, are of such poor quality as to discourage their use. Liquid antacids are completely unpalatable. While I was in Moscow, I was told that a drug such as Tagamet could sell for a small fortune on the black market.    A major health problem facing Soviet women is the absence of reliable measures for birth control. Birth-control pills are impure and produce intolerable side effects, and diaphragms are poorly fitting and of low quality; condoms are crudely made. The result is that abortion is the major method of birth control used by non-Moslem Soviet women. A conservative estimate based on Soviet statistics is that the average Soviet woman undergoes six abortions in her lifetime. It is not uncommon to meet women who have had 10 or even 15 abortions.    And this primitive health system is far from free. Hospitalized Soviet patients frequently bring a roll of rubles with them if they want to make sure that they obtain such basic nursing care as linen changes and reliable delivery of medications. Their families must bring them meals from home. Payments to physicians in the form of cash, goods or services are often necessary to ensure proper treatment or a skilled surgeon. Even more money is needed to obtain scarce medications.    Faced with a medical system that is too often ineffective in treating disease, Soviet citizens turn with desperation to a variety of quack medical practitioners. Starvation diets are commonly resorted to in treating chronic illness, with the unintended result of weakening an already debilitated patient. Psychic healers with a variety of potions abound, and amulets and other magical devices are frequently used.    Not everyone in the U.S.S.R. must put up with these gross deficiencies of the medical system. The &quot;classless&quot; Communist utopia has a very rigid hierarchy of medical-care facilities. The Fourth Department of the Ministry of Health consists of hospitals, sanitariums and clinics that are available only to the Communist Party elite and other notables. These hospitals are stocked with the most advanced medical technology -- all of it made abroad. It is to these flagships of the Soviet hospital fleet that groups of visiting foreign physicians are taken when the occasion arises. The unsuspecting doctors leave the country with a totally distorted impression of the true state of Soviet medicine.    Why does one of the world's two great superpowers tolerate such primitive conditions in so much of its health-care sector? The answer is that modern medicine is very expensive. The Soviets have chosen to spend their limited resources on missiles, heavy industry and space technology rather than on disposable medical equipment, modern drugs and costly life-saving devices. Excellence in medical care is simply not a high priority in the Soviet system. The best estimates available indicate that the Soviets allocated 9.8% of the gross national product to medical care in 1955, but only 7.5% in 1977. The trend is clear.    Whether Mikhail Gorbachev's attempts to modernize Soviet society will include an overhaul of the medical-care system remains to be seen. Unremitting Western publicity about human-rights abuses in the U.S.S.R. has sensitized the Soviets to this issue, and there seems to be some movement on Mr. Gorbachev's part to try to mollify his Western detractors with conciliatory moves, however few. If the sorry state of Soviet medicine becomes a focus of concern in the West, perhaps the Soviets will be similarly instigated into carrying out some badly needed reforms to bring their medical system into the second half of the 20th century.    ---   Dr. Prager is on the faculty at Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York and is a specialist in pulmonary medicine. </TEXT></DOC>