<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880411-0048 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY </HL><AUTHOR> Michael W. Miller </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT IOMG </CO><IN> ELE EDP </IN><TEXT>      Making It Easier   To Customize Chips   THE RACE is on to find faster and cheaper ways to build custom-designed microchips.    Specially commissioned chips are nearly a $2 billion business, representing a tenth of the total semiconductor market. Like clothes-horses buying directly from a dressmaker, many electronics companies prefer to have their own chips designed rather than picking them out of a semiconductor company's catalog.    Several companies are working on ways to speed up that process. One promising method is to give the customer a partially completed chip and a tool to finish off the job by electrically programming the last touches to the user's specifications. That takes less time than the usual procedure in which the customer sends out an order to the semiconductor maker and waits a month or so for the chip. But the do-it-yourself process isn't well-suited for the fastest, most complex chips.    Actel, a Sunnyvale, Calif., start-up, is expected to introduce a promising entry in this field later this year. The company will be competing against similar offerings from two Silicon Valley neighbors, Altera Corp. and Xilinx Inc.    Even faster than electrically programming chips could be writing on them with a laser, says Andrew Rappaport, president of Boston market researcher Technology Research Group Inc. He says a handful of small companies are quietly working on products using that technology.    Putting It on 'Paper'   To Save on Data Storage   THE NEXT TWIST in the search for new ways to store computer data could be something called &quot;digital paper.&quot;    Several companies are gearing up to make the new substance, which they claim will offer a cheaper, more versatile way to use the laser technology that crams massive amounts of data on optical disks. They say they've come up with a way to put the same kind of laser-sensitive coating on lightweight, paperlike polyester.    That could offer several advantages over other data storage products. A factory could produce continuous rolls of the stuff just like paper, which would cost less than making batches of disks on an assembly line. It could easily be sliced up into disks, tape, or any other design that can be used for data storage.    ICI PLC, the British chemicals giant, has been developing digital paper for four years and plans to market it in the 1990s. ICI says its product will fit a category of storage devices known as WORM -- &quot;write once, read many&quot; -- meaning users could store whatever data they wanted on the product. That would be an advantage over most optical disks -- such as the compact disks that play music -- which users can't &quot;write&quot; on.    ICI says a megabyte of storage, about a million characters, would cost 6.5 cents on a 5.25-inch digital paper disk, compared with about $2 for the same storage on a standard magnetic floppy disk of the same size. But unlike a floppy disk, the digital paper couldn't be erased and used again.    Any new storage technology faces an uphill battle, though. It's expensive and inconvenient to transfer data to a new system. And new machines have to be designed, built and marketed for the new medium. ICI is working with two small companies that are building accessories for reading the paper: Creo, a Vancouver company, is developing a papertape drive, and Iomega Corp. of Roy, Utah, is building a paperdisk drive.    Detectives Find Clues   Through New Network   WHEN THE CALL for help came, Leroy Cook, private investigator, was thousands of miles away from his Tempe, Ariz., office.    No problem. Mr. Cook unholstered his Zenith 181 portable computer, dialed up Investigators Online Network, and saw all the details of the case in his electronic mailbox. He relayed the dope via computer to a colleague who got right to work on the case: checking out an Arizona company for a nervous California creditor.    Electronic networks have been sprouting up to link workers in various fields, from firefighters to broadcast engineers. The gumshoe network, which Mr. Cook set up six months ago, could turn out to be an especially useful one. Investigators need to work fast, and they can get a big boost by putting out instant queries to counterparts around the country. The network today has some 100 subscribers, who pay $100 a year.    In one case, an investigator turned to the network to arrange a sting operation to trap a California inn suspected by a rival of exceeding its licensed capacity. The sleuth used the network to assemble couples from around the country to make reservations and converge at the inn, enabling the detective to catch it in the act of overbooking. -   Odds and Ends   FEDERAL researchers are designing a computer program to study how people react inside a building that's on fire. Data about the occupants is punched in, and the program, designed by the National Bureau of Standards, simulates what they would do if a fire broke out. Another program simulates how smoke moves through a building's heat, ventilation and air-conditioning systems. . . . Is it art or is it geography? Both, says Raven Maps andamp; Images, a Medford, Ore., high-tech concern. Raven sells pictures of landscapes generated by computer from topographic survey data and then rotated and colored to add a 3-D perspective. The results resemble psychedelic posters, yet are rigorously accurate glimpses of the San Francisco Bay, Mount St. Helens, and the Rockies rising beyond the Texas panhandle. </TEXT></DOC>