<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881017-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Should Drug Use Be Illegal? </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   How curious that your paper, which professes to favor limited government, should apologize for such an unwarranted, authoritarian intrusion of government power into the personal lives of its citizens as the recent House bill to punish users of illegal drugs (&quot;A Right' to Drugs?&quot; editorial, Sept. 26).    That people have a right to determine what substances to take into their bodies regardless of the prejudices of the Drug Enforcement Agency or the Food and Drug Administration bureaucrats would seem as fundamental as the right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Of course, the right to use drugs should not be taken to mean the right to abuse them so as to harm others, as in the drug-crazed murders cited in your editorial. Nonetheless, that doesn't make it right to punish the multitude of peaceful users (for example, of marijuana) who aren't harming anyone except perhaps themselves. After all, alcohol is involved in many murders, but that doesn't mean Americans don't have a right to drink.    Indeed, the Constitution would seem to clearly preclude federal laws against drinking or other drug use. If, as you pointed out, there isn't a word in the Constitution about the exclusionary rule, neither is there one giving the government power over drugs. On the contrary, alcohol prohibition was passed only with a constitutional amendment -- and even then, possession was never outlawed, but only manufacture, transport and sale. How then can federal user penalties be constitutional? Only by turning the Constitution topsyturvy, throwing out the Ninth Amendment, and ruling that all rights not explicitly granted to the people belong to the government.    Dale H. Gieringer   Oakland, Calif.   ---   Your editorial urges a tougher war on drugs and points out that the Constitution does not guarantee a right to take drugs. However, the Ninth Amendment states, &quot;The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.&quot; The right to take drugs is consistent with the intent of our Founding Fathers.    The people who wrote the Constitution believed that the government should not interfere with citizens' peaceful activities. So they set up a largely free-market system, restricted the government's ability to take private property, guaranteed that the government would not restrict or dictate religious and political views and wrote the Ninth and 10th amendments as catchalls for unforeseen circumstances.    The overwhelming majority of people who take drugs do so peacefully, and harm no one except, perhaps, themselves. Drug use is a victimless act and therefore no business of the government's. When our politicians ignore this, as they are doing in the war on drugs and as they did during Prohibition, we see the government resorting to police-state tactics and we see citizens denied the right to live their lives as they choose.    A free society cannot exist without tolerance. We do not need to approve of drugs. But we must recognize that each individual owns his own life and has the right to choose his religion, his politics, his life style and his form of recreation.    Robert E. Alexander   Waltham, Mass.   ---   Do you seriously believe that allowing warrantless searches and illegally obtained &quot;evidence&quot; -- unheard of since George III -- would be a victory for our citizens?    If the threat of imprisonment under current law is no deterrent to drug use, how would a civil penalty be better? No doubt we all have friends among the middle-class &quot;users&quot; who could afford to pay. But would you lock up the poor without trial when they couldn't come up with a $10,000 fine for simple possession?    It is simply ridiculous to assert that uncollectable fines and destruction of the Bill of Rights for all citizens would stop murderous attacks by the deranged.    Jon Holmes   Cambridge, Mass.</TEXT></DOC>