<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0107 </DOCNO><HL> The Other Power in the Kremlin---By Adrian Karatnycky</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   As Gorbachev fever continues to afflict Washington, the man over whom the Beltway bureaucrats are fawning may well be less than meets the eye. His title, too, may be something of a misnomer.    Indeed, if we are to believe Soviet Central Committee Secretary Yegor Ligachev, Mikhail Gorbachev is not quite general secretary of the Soviet Communist Party.    On Dec. 4, on the eve of Mr. Gorbachev's summit with Ronald Reagan, Mr. Ligachev gave an extraordinary interview to the French daily, Le Monde. The lengthy account, which received scant attention in the U.S. media, began with something of a bombshell. Prompted by Le Monde's Michel Tatu and Daniel Vernet, Mr. Ligachev explained the inner workings of the new Kremlin and provided the clearest glimpse yet into how power is shared in the Soviet Union today. &quot;Each CPSU Central Committee secretary has his own sector,&quot; he said. &quot;I chair the Central Committee Secretariat's meetings and, at the request of the Central Committee Politburo, I organize its work.&quot;    As if not believing what they had heard, his interviewers pressed on: &quot;Is it not the general secretary who acts as chairman?&quot;    &quot;Gorbachev chairs the Politburo meetings. The Politburo has entrusted me with the chairmanship and organization of the Secretariat's work, but Mikhail Gorbachev is always informed of all matters discussed at Secretariat meetings,&quot; Mr. Ligachev repeated matter-of-actly.    With these few words, Mr. Ligachev was telling the world that unlike Konstantin Chernenko, Yuri Andropov, Leonid Brezhnev, Nikita Khrushchev and Joseph Stalin, the current general secretary holds a post that has been drained of a crucial part of its importance.    Since the consolidation of power by Stalin, the influence of the general secretary (at times called the first secretary) has been based on the direct control of the vast party-state apparatus and on the ability to hire and fire. This control is exercised not by the Politburo, but by the Secretariat. Western Kremlinologists tell us that the Secretariat runs the entire party apparatus; supervises the execution of Politburo directives at the national, republic, regional and local levels; has control of the running of the country's affairs; is charged with the supervision of all government ministries; and, most significant, is responsible for the selection and promotion of cadres.    Mr. Ligachev's revelation, therefore, is something akin to George Bush telling the Washington Post: &quot;I've been entrusted with the functions of the commander in chief. And I've taken over responsibility of chairing cabinet meetings. Of course, I consult regularly with President Reagan on all matters, and I keep him informed about all cabinet activities.&quot;    Mr. Ligachev's assumption of these sweeping responsibilities is an important departure from past practice. As late as May of this year, Soviet officials were telling Western reporters that the differences between Messrs. Gorbachev and Ligachev were attributable to their different responsibilities within the Secretariat. Now, it seems, Mr. Gorbachev is not even part of the Secretariat. Mr. Ligachev, therefore, may well have become Mr. Gorbachev's equal rather recently -- perhaps as one of the consequences of the fall from grace of the vociferous champion of glasnost, the disgraced former Moscow Party Chief Boris Yeltsin.    What then do we know about the man who is clearly something more than number two in the Soviet leadership -- who, if we are to take him at his word, is playing the role of chief executive officer to Mr. Gorbachev's chairman of the board?    Born in 1920, Yegor Kuzmich Ligachev cut his teeth on Communist Party politics in Siberia. He joined the Communist Party in 1944 and is said to have supervised the construction of the Siberian branch of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, home of the economic avatars of perestroika, Tatyana Zaslavskaya and Abel Aganbegyan.    From 1965 until 1983, Mr. Ligachev served as first secretary of the regional Communist Party in Tomsk, a grim Siberian city almost directly north of Mongolia. His climb to national power has been recent and spectacular. It was occasioned in 1983 by the ascension of Yuri Andropov to the post of general secretary. No doubt aware of Mr. Ligachev's reputation as a strict disciplinarian, Mr. Andropov brought him to Moscow to serve as a secretary of the central committee. After Mr. Gorbachev became general secretary, Mr. Ligachev was elected a full member of the Politburo.    Mr. Ligachev has a Spartan life style. A family man, he neither smokes nor drinks. He is said to have deeply disapproved of the widespread system of corruption and conspicuous consumption that characterized much of the Brezhnev elite. A Communist Party official from Tomsk told Martin Walker of the British Guardian that Mr. Ligachev &quot;believed in the sanctity of family life and refused to promote men who had been through a divorce.&quot;    Such asceticism and teetotaling have helped to advance his career. And he has been entrusted with the implementation of the ruthless anti-alcoholism campaign that began under Andropov, flagged under Chernenko and has been given renewed impetus under the current Kremlin regime.    Yet despite his stodgy, conservative reputation, in his first months as theparty's chief ideologist Mr. Ligachev displayed a measure of open-mindedness unusual for a man from the provinces. He released for distribution the widely acclaimed anti-Stalin film &quot;Repentance&quot;; approved for publication Yevgeny Yevtushenko's rambling epic &quot;Fuku,&quot; with its attacks on neo-Nazis, Beria, Stalin's gulag, and the assassination of Trotsky; and intervened to protect a medieval Georgian monastery from destruction.    Since early 1986, significant differences in both nuance and approach have been discerned between Messrs. Ligachev and Gorbachev. Mr. Ligachev has emerged as a critic of the so-called excesses of glasnost. He also has gained a reputation for disciplining and intimidating the Soviet press.    As he told Le Monde, &quot;I criticized Ogonyok and and Moscow News, but we also criticized Pravda, Izvestia, Sovetskaya Rossiya, and others. We frequently have meetings with the editorial teams of various press organs. A large group of press representatives attends the weekly Secretariat meeting. We sometimes take that opportunity to make criticisms and, on other occasions, to express our approval. We are working closely with the press. The press is a tool without which it would be impossible to carry out our political work.&quot;    Through speeches and public statements, a clearer profile emerges of the man who appears to be Mr. Gorbachev's equal in the hierarchy. Mr. Ligachev does appear to be a genuine supporter of perestroika and acknowledges the necessity of drastic economic reform -- all the while emphasizing that it must be based on a disciplined top-down chain of command. He stresses the essential role of labor discipline and argues that any necessary reform must be channeled through the party. &quot;The democratization of Soviet society is impossible without discipline,&quot; Mr. Ligachev said in 1985. His speeches, moreover, reveal him to be a cultural conservative, deeply concerned with what he calls &quot;the moral atmosphere in society.&quot;    Mr. Ligachev warned last summer that preoccupation with &quot;the negative phenomena&quot; of Soviet history must not obscure the achievements of Communist rule. In a news conference in Paris earlier this month, Mr. Ligachev went so far as to assert that Stalin is a &quot;contradictory figure,&quot; who cannot be described &quot;in black-and-white terms.&quot;    Mr. Ligachev's role in the party as something akin to Mikhail Gorbachev's equal should not suggest that there is disagreement within the Soviet leadership on such key issues as arms control or the projection of Soviet power. Indeed, there is no evidence to suggest this. Nor should one conclude that President Reagan met with the wrong man.    Nonetheless, Mr. Ligachev's important role should suggest that the propensity of some American journalists and Sovietologists to overstate the power of a single man does a disservice to our understanding of the inner workings of the Soviet system. Last week's preoccupation with the charismatic general secretary must not lead to a disregard for the other players who shape Soviet policy.    As Mr. Gorbachev worked the crowds on Connecticut Avenue in Washington last week, one thrilled bystander gushed: &quot;It's like the coming of the second Messiah, or something.&quot;    She did not know, however, that another &quot;Messiah&quot; was back in the Kremlin, running the day-to-day affairs of the Communist Party and state.    ---   Mr. Karatnycky directs research and publications for the AFL-CIO Department of International Affairs. </TEXT></DOC>