<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880812-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Fading Picture: How Polaroid Went From Highest Flier To Takeover Target --- Firm Now Battles to Regain Its Creative Edge of Old And Fend Off Shamrock --- Kodak-Case Award Will Help </HL><AUTHOR> Lawrence Ingrassia (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> PRD </CO><IN> PIX PRO TNM BIO </IN><DATELINE> CAMBRIDGE, Mass.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The day after Thanksgiving in 1948, a new camera went on sale at a Boston department store. Worried it wouldn't sell well, nervous officials of the small company that made it cut the price to $89.75 from $95 at the last minute. They thought the 56 cameras they had produced might be gone by Christmas.    The cameras sold out that day.    After struggling more than a decade, Polaroid Corp. -- run by a young scientist named Edwin H. Land -- had a big winner. Its instant camera developed photos on the spot, in 60 seconds. It was a technological marvel, and it captivated America.    As Polaroid's laboratories made one breakthrough after another in the 1950s and 1960s, the company grew rapidly. By the early 1970s, its stock was one of the highest of highfliers, selling at more than 100 times annual earnings. Polaroid was more than just another success story, it was an icon to American ingenuity. Mr. Land exhorted his employees: &quot;Do not undertake a program unless the goal is manifestly important and achievement is nearly impossible.&quot;    But a decade ago, things started going wrong. Polaroid's market matured. Its visionary founder lost his vision. Newer, better gadgets captured the public's fancy. Today, perhaps inevitably, it is another famous company that has become a takeover target. It is trying to fend off Shamrock Holdings Inc., a television and radio concern owned by the Roy E. Disney family that is proposing to buy Polaroid for $2.28 billion.    Polaroid's history is, in some ways, the latest twist in the decline of American industry. But unlike the auto and steel producers, it isn't an old-line manufacturer. It is one of the earliest postwar high-tech pioneers, a nonunion company lauded for enlightened employee relations.    Yet its heady growth, too, has given way to hard times, for similar reasons. In becoming big, it became bureaucratic. The Japanese have emerged as industry innovators -- in Polaroid's case, indirectly, with 35mm and video cameras. Instead of adding jobs, Polaroid is cutting them.    Worse yet, it has lost its creative spark. &quot;Polaroid hasn't had a breakthrough product for years,&quot; says Peter Wensberg, a former Polaroid executive. Despite lavish spending on research, efforts to diversify have largely flopped.    &quot;The problem for so many big companies is that they don't have an encore,&quot; says Thomas V. DiBacco, a professor of business history at American University. &quot;No company can stay very long in a staid position. A lot of firms several decades old, what do they do after they achieve success? It's one of the biggest dilemmas, trying to find the next stage.&quot;    Some other companies have had trouble finding the next stage. Avon Products Inc.'s sales have languished because its door-to-door sales strategy faltered when so many women now work away from home, and Nike Inc. stubbed its toe when smaller competitors managed to sell athletic shoes as fashion items.    Polaroid, however, insists that it has a bright future. The 1990s will bring a new, more advanced stage of photography -- electronic imaging -- and Polaroid's technical know-how will make it a growth company once again, it says. And it is still trying to diversify. After years of hemming and hawing, it finally plans to begin selling conventional film, for example.    &quot;Throughout the Land era, he managed to reinvent the company a couple of times. Can Polaroid reinvent itself again? If it can, it's gangbusters,&quot; a company spokesman says. (Its executives declined to be interviewed).    The company's monopoly in instant photography virtually assures it of a solid, albeit unexciting, future even if its growth continues slow. &quot;Instant certainly doesn't cause the excitement it used to, but it has its part of the market,&quot; notes David Ritz, the president of Ritz Camera, the nation's largest photo retail chain. In addition, the prospect of a billion-dollar-plus award in a patent case against Eastman Kodak Co. could provide it with breathing room.    But skeptics say Polaroid can't easily recover its lost glory: The computer age has changed the world too much for instant photography -- no matter how much improved -- to amaze the public again.    &quot;Polaroid has been very myopic,&quot; comments Alex Henderson, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities. He says Polaroid's executives have failed to commercialize the good technology in its laboratories. &quot;They limited their definition of what markets they're in. . . . It's the 'not-invented-here' syndrome,&quot; he adds. He suggests that Polaroid's imaging technology might be valuable in developing products for the computer-publishing and medical-diagnostics markets, but only if the company enters joint ventures with companies offering expertise in those areas.    Exactly what Mr. Land thinks of all this isn't known. He has cut all ties with the company since retiring in 1982, and he doesn't give interviews. But for him, Polaroid has always been far more than a business. He once told an annual meeting in response to a question: &quot;The bottom line? The bottom line is in heaven!&quot;    Polaroid was his life's mission. By all accounts a genius, he quit Harvard University in 1932, one semester before graduating, to start a research lab. By aligning microscopic crystals in a specific pattern, he earlier had developed the first synthetic polarizing material -- which sharply reduced glare when light passed through it. That feat had long eluded scientists.    Initially, it was a technology in search of a product. Mr. Land tried to peddle it for car headlights, but auto makers rejected it. It was used, mundanely, for sunglasses and desk lamps. Though business was lousy, a steady stream of discoveries came out of Polaroid's labs.    &quot;The company resembled nothing so much as a research project run by a group of graduate students hell-bent on their Ph.D.s,&quot; writes Mr. Wensberg in his book &quot;Land's Polaroid.&quot;    During World War II, Polaroid survived on military work. And, in that period, came inspiration. While taking photos in 1943, his three-year-old daughter asked why she couldn't see them right away.    The instant camera took several years to develop and, ironically, didn't use Mr. Land's polarizing invention but rather other technologies from Polaroid's labs. But it was the right product at the right time. Americans were just becoming addicted to instant gratification. The baby boom had begun, and proud parents wanted to photograph their growing families. So what if instant cameras and film cost more? Postwar America was increasingly affluent.    Under Mr. Land, a savvy showman, Polaroid embraced live television to sell cameras. Entertainers such as Steve Allen took photos in front of the audience. &quot;The essence of TV is dramatization. We had viewers holding their breath. Would it work? Every now and then, it didn't, but that was OK,&quot; says Joseph Daly, an executive at DDB Needham Worldwide ad agency, which had the Polaroid account for 30 years. &quot;Never was a product more suited for TV.&quot;    It was a period of intense excitement. Many Polaroid employees worked six days a week -- and loved every minute. &quot;It wouldn't be unusual to work around the clock a few days in a row. Nobody got too tired because it was exciting. We'd sleep on a lab table or office desk or on the floor,&quot; recalls Richard Young, a former executive who joined the company in the early 1950s as assistant research director. Polaroid hands held Mr. Land in awe, and for good reason -- his 533 patents are second only to Thomas Edison's 1,093.    Polaroid sold its one millionth camera in 1956 and went public the next year. In 1960, sales hit $99.4 million; in 1970, $444 million.    In 1972 came Mr. Land's crowning achievement: the pocket-sized SX-70 camera. He was featured on the covers of Life magazine (&quot;A genius and his magic camera&quot;) and Time (&quot;Here come those great new cameras&quot;). His Polaroid stock was valued at more than $700 million.    The SX-70 scored a great sales success, but Polaroid's stock plummeted because the huge expense of developing the camera held down profit growth. Adding to the pressure, Kodak ended Polaroid's monopoly by entering the instant-camera market in 1976. Polaroid promptly sued, charging patent infringement, but the case wouldn't be decided, in its favor, until 1985.    Then came Mr. Land's greatest flop: Polavision instant movies, introduced in 1977. The camera cost too much, at $700, didn't have sound and took only 2 1/2 minutes of film at a time. Mr. Land had the right idea but the wrong technology. The Japanese had something better: video recorders, whose hours-long tapes could be reused and played back on a TV set.    Even worse, another Japanese product -- klutz-proof 35mm cameras -- took America by storm in the late 1970s and early 1980s. One-hour photo shops made instant cameras moot. From a high of 9.4 million in 1978, Polaroid's instant-camera sales plunged to 3.5 million in 1985. And during those years, the company's profits fared just as badly, skidding from a record $118.4 million on sales of $1.38 billion to $36.9 million on sales of $1.30 billion.    Polaroid's management was too in-bred to notice that the world was changing, critics say. &quot;Here's a company that had a field to itself for a long, long time. Many {executives} spent their entire careers on internal problems and technology. Some didn't consider it important to take a close look at the outside world,&quot; says Murray Swindell, a former marketing executive and one of many officials who departed in frustration in the early 1980s.    At age 73, Mr. Land himself left Polaroid in 1982, partly because the Polavision flop had forced him to share power and partly to pursue basic research on how the brain sees color. Mr. Land's successors -- William J. McCune Jr., now 73, who was named chief executive in 1980 and is now chairman, and I. MacAllister Booth, 56, who became chief executive in 1986 -- have spent their careers at Polaroid.    The company now finds itself in a strategic bind, with no easy way out. Some analysts and former executives think that it should try to diversify, others that it should stick close to home.    But the major problem remains: Instant photography has lost its magic, even despite the introduction of an improved third-generation camera, Spectra, in 1986. Camera sales picked up a bit, but last year they declined again because 35mm cameras are improving even more.    The 35mms &quot;have automatic everything: auto focus, auto load, auto rewind, auto zoom,&quot; says Jack Crunkleton, the general manager of Camera Shop Inc., an Eastern chain. &quot;Affluent people still count on 35mm for better-quality pictures. It will be hard for Polaroid to get back to the growth days.&quot;    At the same time, Polaroid has had only modest success in diversifying. Technical and industrial products that use its imaging technology -- cameras for instant identification photos and slide-making systems, for example -- have done fairly well.    But bolder efforts have failed. When Mr. Land was still around, Polaroid developed a copier, only to drop the idea because it couldn't make one cheap enough. Polaroid bought a one-man fiber-optics company in the early 1980s for $6 million and spent additional millions on research, but now it is considering scrapping the business. It has plunged into photo voltaics -- converting sunlight into electricity -- without anything to show for it.    Polaroid has decided, belatedly, to enter the conventional-film market. &quot;There's a lot of value in the Polaroid name,&quot; Mr. Swindell says. &quot;There are any number of products we could have marketed. . . . But we couldn't get Land's attention. He preferred to stick to instant photography.&quot; The move into a market that Mr. Land steadfastly avoided symbolizes the company's shift away from his notion that instant photography is the only photography worth pursuing.    However, &quot;conventional film will be marginally profitable at best for Polaroid because initially Polaroid won't be manufacturing the film,&quot; contends Elliott Novak, an industry consultant. Instead, it will buy the film from another company and put its name on it, just as it does with videotape. Since it began selling videotape a few years ago, Polaroid has built up an impressive 12% market share, making it the leader in the U.S. But fierce competition has kept videotape profits slim, and the conventional-film business isn't likely to prove any bonanza, either.    Polaroid will have a tougher time entering the conventional film business than it would have had in the 1970s, says Mr. Henderson of Prudential-Bache. Now, Polaroid must battle not only Kodak, with its 80% market share, but Fuji Photo Film Co., which began a big push in the U.S. a decade ago and has built up an 8% to 10% market share. &quot;Why was Fuji able to establish a strong second position? Because of the lack of anybody else there,&quot; Mr. Henderson says. &quot;Polaroid could easily have done that.&quot;    Polaroid itself argues that instant photography isn't just a quaint gimmick of the past, and it is working on a next-generation system combining electronics with the use of heat to develop film. The technology could be used to make photographic prints of images stored electronically and initially viewed on computer or TV screens. &quot;Instant imaging will become the dominant form {of photography}, surpassing conventional film. . . . We do not want to be just 'that other form of imaging'; we want to be No. 1,&quot; a spokesman says.    But that won't be easy. &quot;Japanese expertise in the imaging area will really put a lot of pressure on a company like Polaroid,&quot; says Mr. Young, the former executive.    Right now, Polaroid is under pressure from Shamrock's takeover proposal. Among other things, Polaroid has announced more job cuts -- employment will drop to 12,500 from a high of nearly 21,000 in 1978 -- and set up an employee stock-ownership plan holding 14% of its stock. The company's board will meet today.    Shamrock ridicules the moves as &quot;nothing more than short-term fixes -- not the kind of solutions that will lead to sustained growth or quality earnings.&quot; Shamrock's $40-a-share proposal is well above Polaroid's stock price for most of the past decade but far below its 1972 peak of about $75 (adjusted for a stock split). The stock closed yesterday at $43.125, up $1 on the day and up about $10 from its price before Shamrock entered the picture.    More than its forays into new technology, Polaroid's best defense against Shamrock may be its legal victory in the Kodak case. Polaroid is awaiting a trial on the damages, and its shareholders might hesitate to sell their stock too soon. It is seeking $5.7 billion; analysts estimate it will eventually get $1 billion to $2 billion.    &quot;That would give them a lot of flexibility to make acquisitions, spend more on research and development and put more into advertising,&quot; says Brenda Lee Landry, an analyst at Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. </TEXT></DOC>