<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Two Cheers for Independent Adoption---By Bryce J. Christensen</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Last month's tragic death of six-year-old Elizabeth Steinberg allegedly at the hands of her illegally &quot;adoptive&quot; father has provoked renewed debate over adoption laws in the U.S. Some observers regard the episode as justification for imposing new state regulations on independent adoptions arranged by individuals, usually lawyers, and not by public or private social-service agencies. Pressure is even mounting to outlaw independent adoptions altogether, a step already taken in 15 states. Both proposals could create more problems than they would solve.    The campaign to ban independent adoptions is dangerously misguided. Investigators into the ugly world of black-market adoption have found that outlawing independent adoption reduces the supply of babies available for legitimate adoption but does not stop the selling of babies. Since babies who have been obtained on the black market cannot be officially adopted, they have no legal status in their families. Although not a black-market baby, Elizabeth Steinberg died in precisely this kind of legal limbo because her &quot;father,&quot; lawyer Joel Steinberg, and his companion, Hedda Nussbaum, had never filed for an adoption decree. Forbidding independent adoption will only strand more children in a social twilight zone.    Harder to dismiss are the views of groups such as the National Committee for Adoption, which argues for tighter regulation of independent adoption but not its elimination. The National Committee's analyses usually use agency adoptions as the standard for comparison and as the model for reform.    Agency adoptions do provide more protection for everyone involved in adoption, principally because of the requirements for pre-placement home studies and counseling. Unethical practices -- including coercion, enticement and even deception -- occur frequently in independent adoptions and make them vulnerable to later legal challenges by birth parents. A nationwide 1978 study found that 13% of all independent adoptions are legally questionable. Nor is it easy to ignore studies that judge 25% to 28% of independent adoptions to be failures, compared with 8% to 14% of agency placements.    As the father of two sons adopted through a state-licensed church agency, I do not question the advantages of agency adoptions. But many birth mothers choose independent adoptions because they wish to avoid the red tape and delay of working with an agency. Such mothers express fears of embarrassing interviews with social workers, of foster-care placement of their babies while officials evaluate prospective parents, and of an impersonal process for selecting adoptive parents.    These feelings lie behind a trend away from agency adoptions and toward independent adoptions in states that permit them. In California, for instance, where public-agency adoptions predominated 20 years ago, independent adoptions now account for 44% of all adoptions, compared with just 42% by public agencies and 14% by private agencies.    Even if unjustified, negative attitudes toward agency adoptions probably will carry over to independent adoption if new regulations make the two processes much more similar. Now that less than 1% of unwed black mothers and only 12% of unwed whites choose adoption, birth mothers may be swayed by even slight reservations about adoptive procedures. It would require casuistry to explain to a young woman why her right to decide how to place her child for adoption must be more narrowly regulated than her right to an abortion. In &quot;The Politics of Adoption&quot; (1976), Mary Benet reported an anti-adoption bias among social workers that would probably prevent them from allaying fears about new restrictions on independent adoption.    Clearly, more government control of independent adoption would not simply redirect unwed mothers into the safety of agency adoption but would instead reduce the already low number choosing adoption at all (an estimated 50,000 in 1986 compared with 89,000 in 1970). Consequently, the baseline for evaluating independent adoption should be not agency adoption but non-adoption: Either a pregnancy ends in abortion or an unwed mother keeps her child. Independent adoption proves its worth most clearly by saving unborn lives. Children benefit in less dramatic but still discernible ways when they are placed through independent adoption rather than kept by their unwed mothers.    While 62% of children living with a never-married mother live below the official poverty line, only 2% of all adopted children do. More than half of all adopted children live in families whose incomes are at least three times the poverty level. On the other hand, single women who choose adoption for their children are one-third more likely to finish high school and only one-half as likely to require public assistance as those who choose to keep their children.    It is more difficult to assess the noneconomic aspects of life as an adopted child compared with life as the child of an unwed mother, given that some studies find more psychological and behavioral problems among adopted children than among children living with both biological parents. But the authors of a major 1984 study on adoption conducted at Rutgers warned against &quot;overinterpreting the data,&quot; since &quot;the majority of adopted children appear to be well-adjusted.&quot; A 1963 study that focused exclusively on independent adoptions likewise found that &quot;most of the adoptions were working out well,&quot; even though &quot;the proportion of poor outcomes . . . was not inconsiderable.&quot;    Adoption cannot change genetic endowments of intelligence or athletic ability. But in a 1966 monograph published by the University of Chicago for the Society for Research in Child Development, Harold M. Skeels found that &quot;adoptive children as adults are achieving at levels consistently higher than would have been predicted from the intellectual, educational, or socioeconomic level of the biological parents.&quot;    Even the &quot;poor outcomes&quot; of one quarter of independent adoptions should be interpreted against the pathological patterns found among the children of unwed mothers. Compared with children in two-parent homes, children raised by unwed mothers are much more likely to fail in school, to become juvenile delinquents, to use drugs and alcohol, and to be physically abused (typically by the mother's live-in lover). No wonder that a 1983 study conducted at the National Center for Health Statistics concluded that &quot;the child himself has much to gain&quot; through adoption.    Despite the problems of growing up with an unwed mother, one outcome is far worse for the child. Sometimes a mother contemplates adoption and temporarily decides against it, only to relinquish parental rights years later, leaving her child with no certain future. The Economist magazine recently blamed this scenario for the &quot;disaster&quot; of American children stuck in foster homes and public institutions. While the waiting list for infants is years long, relatively few couples wish to adopt an older child, who often ends up without any permanent home.    In a recent study in Missouri, researchers found that almost one-third of foster-care children had been in four or more homes in less than five years. The emotional effects of this bouncing around are devastating. Authorities also worry about the rising incidence of child abuse in foster homes. The risks for children caught in this cycle were illustrated only too well in the short, unhappy life of Tameka Lehmann, an 11-year-old foster-care child beaten to death last June in Bladenboro, N.C., allegedly by a couple employed as foster parents by state officials since 1975.    No arrangement will ever prove superior for children to loving care by two biological parents, happily married. Yet America's marriage rates have dropped 30% since 1970 while the illegitimacy rate has doubled, leaving a lot of children in far from ideal circumstances. Until more young Americans reconnect parenthood and marriage, adoption can provide a much-needed avenue out of poverty, crime and despair. In many instances, independent adoption is the only option birth mothers will consider.    Authorities should vigorously enforce existing legislation that prohibits payments to birth mothers except for medical costs, controls interstate movement of babies, and requires proper filing for adoption decrees. But to create new barriers to independent adoption may in the long run only doom more children to lives of economic hardship and emotional privation.    ---   Mr. Christensen is editor of The Family in America, a newsletter of The Rockford Institute, a research center focusing on cultural and social issues. </TEXT></DOC>