<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870625-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Say Religious Groups May UseFaith as Hiring Basis for Nonprofit Jobs---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORSUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court upheld a federal law that allows religious groups engaged in nonprofit activities to restrict their hiring to people of their own faith.    The high court ruled, by a 9-0 vote, that the Constitution isn't violated by exempting religious groups from the federal law that bars discrimination in employment based on religion. In an opinion written by Justice Byron White, the court rejected arguments that such an exemption promotes religion in violation of the First Amendment's separation of church and state.    The decision gives religious organizations the flexibility many of them want, and have enjoyed, to establish their own hiring criteria without worrying about the portion of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act that bars religious-based discrimination in employment. The appeal to the Supreme Court by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, known as the Mormon Church, was backed by such groups as the Seventh-day Adventist Church, the Baptist Joint Committee on Public Affairs, and the U.S. Catholic Conference.    The exemption covers a variety of nonprofit institutions such as hospitals, schools at all levels, and nursing homes.    The Mormon Church was sued by a person after he was fired in 1981 from his job as engineer of the Deseret Gymnasium, a church-run facility in Salt Lake City. He was fired because he didn't qualify for a certificate that he was a church member. A federal district court in Utah declared the exemption from the anti-bias law unconstitutional in January 1986, and the church appealed to the Supreme Court, joined by the Justice Department.    While the court was unanimous in upholding the exemption from the anti-bias law, four justices said separately that they agreed only because the case involved nonprofit activities. Justice William Brennan, joined by Justices Thurgood Marshall, Sandra O'Connor and Harry Blackmun, said the question of whether religious groups could hire only members of their own faith remains open when church-run, for-profit businesses are involved. They warned that Justice White's decision didn't draw a sharp enough line between nonprofit and for-profit activities.    In a friend-of-the-court brief, the AFL-CIO warned that upholding the exemption even for nonprofit activities could open the door to hiring discrimination by religious groups in a wide range of businesses. &quot;This phenomenon&quot; of church-run businesses &quot;is widespread,&quot; the labor group said.    Free Speech   The justices ruled 5-4 that the free-speech rights of a county clerical worker in Houston were violated when she was fired for commenting, after the 1981 assassination attempt on President Reagan, &quot;If they go for him again, I hope they get him.&quot;    In an opinion written by Justice Marshall, the high court said public employers must be careful to avoid stepping on the First Amendment rights of workers. &quot;Vigilance is necessary to ensure that public employers do not use authority over employees to silence discourse, not because it hampers public functions, but simply because superiors disagree with the content of employees' speech,&quot; Justice Marshall wrote.    The court applied a two-part test, concluding that the clerk's comments were protected by the First Amendment because they involved a matter of public concern and that the employer's interest in the efficient running of the office didn't outweigh the worker's right.    Justice Antonin Scalia dissented, joined by Justices O'Connor and White and Chief Justice William Rehnquist.    The majority rejected the Justice Department's view in a friend-of-the-court brief that argued that such comments about assassination are entitled to little First Amendment protection. &quot;Approval of such a serious crime is not a position . . . within the range of publicly debatable propositions,&quot; the department argued.    Mail-Fraud Law   By a 7-2 vote, the Supreme Court narrowly interpreted the federal law that makes mail fraud a crime, saying it is intended only to punish schemes to defraud people of money or property. In an opinion written by Justice White, the court said the mail-fraud law doesn't protect against fraud involving other rights, such as the right of citizens to honest government.    The ruling involved the convictions of a former Kentucky state official and a businessman who profited from a scheme in which $851,000 in commissions for state insurance contracts was shared with other companies from 1975 to 1979. The court said one company that benefited from these payments was set up by the former official, before he joined state government, just to receive the money. The Supreme Court decision voids the mail-fraud convictions.    Justice John Stevens dissented, joined by Justice O'Connor.    The decision may cut back on the Justice Department's ability to use the mail-fraud laws as a catch-all criminal provision when the mails are involved in an illegal scheme.    One case in which that may become an issue is the Supreme Court appeal of R. Foster Winans, a former Wall Street Journal reporter; David Carpenter, his former roommate and a former Journal news clerk; and Kenneth Felis, a former Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. broker. The high court this fall will hear the appeal of their convictions for securities, mail and wire fraud in connection with a scheme based on advance information about the Journal's Heard on the Street columns, some of which Mr. Winans wrote.    The mail-fraud convictions in the Winans case are based on a breach of trust and duty between Mr. Winans and his employer, the Journal. The fraud involves the misuse of information. The Supreme Court will have to decide, in light of yesterday's narrow reading of the law, whether the use of information is a form of property fraud, or whether it isn't covered by the mail-fraud law. </TEXT></DOC>