<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0103 </DOCNO><HL> ---President's Power Is Slipping;Soviet Chief May SufferFrom Turmoil at Home---Missile Treaty Worries Some---By John WalcottStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Eight years after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the election of Ronald Reagan plunged the United States and the Soviet Union into a frigid new chapter of the Cold War, detente is in the air again.    Other periods of detente, like crocuses in February, have bloomed early and then wilted. But on the eve of Mikhail Gorbachev's first visit to the U.S. next week for his third summit with President Reagan, both leaders are dropping hints about a lasting thaw.    Despite their hopes, it isn't clear that they can do much to ease the distrust and competition that have driven U.S.-Soviet relations since the Bolshevik Revolution 70 years ago. Mr. Gorbachev's reach for change at home and abroad may exceed his grasp. Mr. Reagan's own power is slipping as he enters the final year of his administration; some of his would-be heirs in the Republican Party already are balking at the treaty the president will sign with Mr. Gorbachev to eliminate medium- and short-range nuclear missiles. Moreover, the failure of detente in the 1970s has taught both the U.S. and the Soviet Union to expect less of it in the '80s.    &quot;Nothing ever rose as far or fell as far as the detente of the '70s,&quot; says Raymond Garthoff, a Soviet expert at Washington's Brookings Institution. Moscow's continuing military buildup and Third World adventurism in the face of arms-control agreements and expanding commercial ties with the U.S. embittered many Americans. If today's version of detente is slowed by greater skepticism, it may last longer than its headier predecessor. &quot;Any improvements now are likely to be smaller, but they may be more sustainable,&quot; Mr. Garthoff says.    Yesterday, Mr. Reagan said, &quot;Those of us who have lived through the last 70 years remember earlier moments of promise in Soviet history -- temporary thaws soon frozen over by the cold winds of oppression.&quot; But, he told a group of high-school students in Jacksonville, Fla., &quot;This time we're after true peace.&quot;    More than anything else, necessity has brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the threshold of a warmer relationship. The prospect of simultaneous, unfettered competition in nuclear arms, conventional weapons, high technology and global influence promises equal ruin to both superpowers: America's people, Congress and allies appear to lack the stomach for unending confrontation, and Mr. Gorbachev acknowledges that the palsied Soviet economy lacks the strength for it.    &quot;The geopolitical ice seems to be shifting under our feet,&quot; says John Lewis Gaddis, a diplomatic historian at Ohio University.    A sustained thaw in superpower relations, however, would require three things. First, Mr. Gorbachev must demonstrate that he means what he says about seeking an end to the arms race and resisting the temptation to exploit Third World troubles. Second, he must survive long enough to put his ideas into effect. Finally, the U.S. must resist the impulse to reject Mr. Gorbachev's entreaties before he has proved that he wants something more than a timeout.    Already, the superpowers have made enough progress to unnerve some American conservatives, and perhaps some hardliners in the Kremlin as well. Next week, Messrs. Reagan and Gorbachev will sign a new Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces treaty, which will abolish an entire category of nuclear missiles and allow on-site inspectors to monitor compliance for the first time. Although the INF treaty will eliminate a scant 4% of the world's nuclear weapons, it promises to halt at least part of the arms race in Europe.    The two leaders also will discuss more remote but more dramatic possibilities, including proposals to halve the superpowers' arsenals of long-range nuclear weapons and an understanding about how the Soviets might withdraw some 115,000 soldiers from Afghanistan to end a war that they apparently have concluded they can't win.    Yet critics worry that Mr. Reagan's romantic fascination with abolishing nuclear weapons and his belief that he has forged a special relationship with Mr. Gorbachev could lead the veteran Cold Warrior to give away too much.    &quot;I'm an advocate of detente in principle, but I've never been as uneasy as I am now,&quot; says former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, who helped negotiate earlier arms-control agreements. &quot;I don't know where we're going, and I don't know where we'll be when it's over.&quot;    The president is striving to counter fear that he is turning soft. In a recent meeting, Mr. Reagan privately assured worried conservatives that he believes the U.S.S.R. &quot;is still an evil empire,&quot; and in his weekly radio address last Saturday he felt compelled to add that he hasn't declared an end to the Cold War. &quot;Make no mistake,&quot; the president said, &quot;the Soviets are and will continue to be our adversaries, the adversaries of all who believe in human liberty.&quot; And Mr. Reagan has been pledging not to give up on his Strategic Defense Initiative, his space-based defense plan.    But Mr. Kissinger worries that the U.S. already has gone too far. He argues that removal of America's Pershing 2 and ground-launched cruise missiles from five European countries under the INF treaty will weaken the North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies' faith that the U.S. will defend them. &quot;Once our missiles are out of Europe, political conditions in the host country won't allow us to put them back, even if they put an SS-20 {missile} at the Brandenburg Gate,&quot; Mr. Kissinger says.    But Mr. Gorbachev, too, is driving fast on an icy road. &quot;The opposition to him is coalescing, and he's in considerable difficulty, although he's still ahead of the field,&quot; says Kremlinologist Malcolm McIntosh, a consultant to the International Institute of Strategic Studies in London.    U.S. officials say a recent survey of speeches by members of the Politburo, the executive committee of the Soviet Communist Party, found the nation's rulers divided into three camps. The survey concluded that if Mr. Gorbachev is to succeed, he must coax more of his colleagues off the fence and into line behind his economic and foreign-policy moves.    The first and largest camp, the study reports, shares Mr. Gorbachev's sense of urgency about reforming the Soviet system but includes some Johnny-come-latelies, such as Ukraine party boss Vladimir Shcherbitsky. The second group, including party ideologist Egor Ligachev, mouths the right sentiments but calls for limits on reform. The third, consisting of secret-police chief Viktor Chebrikov and Soviet President Andrei Gromyko, either doesn't support Mr. Gorbachev's campaign for &quot;perestroika&quot; (restructuring) or simply avoids talking about it.    &quot;The fact that Mr. Gorbachev may be on a winning track in foreign policy may not strengthen his standing at home,&quot; says Mr. McIntosh, the British Kremlinologist.    In the short term, the effort to streamline the Soviet economy under &quot;perestroika&quot; offers few attractions. Communist Party apparatchiks risk curtailment of their power and privileges. Most workers already are being asked to work harder for no more pay. Soviet consumers face the prospect of higher prices for food and other necessities but aren't likely to see a profusion of high-quality goods in stores any time soon.    An econometric study completed in September by the Central Intelligence Agency points up the Soviet dilemma. It forecasts that if Mr. Gorbachev succeeds in imposing his ambitious restructuring plans, Soviet economic growth will remain at a sluggish 2% a year for the next five years, then will accelerate slowly as investments in new plants, equipment and training begin to pay off. If the reforms founder and the current disruption is ended, the study says, the Soviet Union will be better off for the next five years but will remain essentially a Third World nation, exporting raw materials and importing technology and manufactured goods, forever after.    Nor does Mr. Gorbachev seem likely to borrow or import heavily from the West to accelerate Soviet development. He has repeatedly emphasized his goal of putting his country on a competitive economic footing with the West rather than increasing its dependence on its rivals, and he has blamed economic problems in Poland and Hungary on both satellites' heavy borrowing in the West. In 1986, the Soviet Union generated a hard-currency surplus of $986 million by curtailing grain and machinery imports.    Although Mr. Gorbachev has liberalized the rules governing foreign trade and a U.S. trade delegation will visit Moscow soon after the summit, most experts term the prospects for a sudden increase in U.S.-Soviet trade poor. A dearth of hard currency, difficulties assimilating imported technology and U.S. restrictions on high-tech exports will restrain Soviet purchases from the U.S. and drive Moscow toward Western Europe and Japan for what borrowing and buying it does, says Abraham Becker of Rand Corp., a Santa Monica, Calif., think tank. Nor does the Soviet Union have much to export to the West.    However, the Soviets have shown a growing interest in joint ventures with Western companies. Combustion Engineering Inc. recently became the first American company to conclude an agreement, for oil-refining equipment, with the Soviets under Moscow's new joint-venture laws.    But U.S. government analysts believe that such joint ventures will be rare. &quot;The joint-venture schemes we've seen are very timid,&quot; one government analyst says. &quot;The Soviets want export projects, not more Western access to their markets.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev will meet with some business executives here. But Jan Vanous, an authority on East-West trade at Plan-Econ, a Washington consulting firm, suspects that the Soviet leader may be more interested in their political connections than in their products. &quot;The best lobby the Soviets can get in the United States is probably businessmen,&quot; he says. &quot;They are conservative, but they want to sell.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev seeks a relaxation of political constraints on trade and exports. Moscow has removed some restrictions on the emigration of Jews and dissidents, an obstacle to improved U.S.-Soviet commercial relations. Still, a recent study by the New York law firm of White andamp; Case finds that the U.S.S.R. &quot;stands alone&quot; in denying its citizens the right to emigrate.    Even a modest thaw in U.S.-Soviet relations is likely to increase pressure on Washington to loosen trade restraints and to support Moscow's admission to such international economic institutions as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the World Bank, Mr. Vanous predicts. Says Edgar Bronfman, the president of the World Jewish Congress and the chairman of Seagram Co.: &quot;Our objective is to help them if they help us.&quot;    Conservatives worry that with Caspar Weinberger no longer defense secretary, the administration may be tempted to help the Soviets by relaxing controls on exports of militarily sensitive technology, a move they argue would help Mr. Gorbachev avoid hard choices between guns and butter. &quot;The last thing you want to do is feed the Soviet military machine,&quot; argues former Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Perle. &quot;Reagan would not knowingly do this, but this is an area where he signs what's put in front of him.&quot;    A Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan would remove another major impediment to improved superpower relations, but so far, U.S. officials say, they see no indication that Mr. Gorbachev is prepared to pull out without obtaining guarantees that Afghan Communist leader Najibullah will remain in power. &quot;If Mr. Gorbachev simply pulls the plug on the Afghans, that clearly will be a defeat for him,&quot; says Stephen Sestanovich of Washington's Center for Strategic and International Studies. Nevertheless, argues Dmitri Simes of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace: &quot;If the United States continues to apply pressure, a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan is inevitable and imminent.&quot;    Mr. Reagan sought for years to elevate such regional conflicts, along with human rights, to the top of the superpower agenda and to play down arms control. That effort failed, and although deep differences remain over the president's Strategic Defense Initiative and over the imbalance of NATO and Warsaw Pact conventional forces in Europe, arms control now appears to offer the best hope for speedy progress toward new East-West accords.    But few people expect summits and arms negotiations to reform the Soviet Union, end superpower scuffling in the Third World or weave unbreakable economic bonds between East and West. &quot;We're not expecting negotiations to alter the relationship,&quot; Mr. Sestanovich says. &quot;We're expecting the weakness of the Soviet system to transform the relationship.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>