<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870624-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Banks Feel Frustrated as Congress Gets Cold FeetAbout Allowing Entry Into Investment Banking---By John E. Yang and Bruce IngersollStaff Reporters of The Wall Street JournaL</HL><DD> 06/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Back home in Utah, says Jake Garn, the senior Republican on the Senate Banking Committee, people think that Glass Steagall played second base for the Chicago Cubs.    Actually, the Glass-Steagall Act is the last of a string of laws passed in the first 100 days of President Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, a divorce decree separating commercial and investment banking. Until recently, big banks thought that this would be the year when Congress would finally change the act so that they could charge full force into the lucrative area of underwriting corporate securities.    But in a sharp turnaround, it now looks as though that won't happen quite yet. The major reason: Lawmakers are coming under intense pressure from the securities industry, which wants to keep commercial bankers out of its protected preserve. The result is a case history of how members of Congress, in the words of one banking partisan, &quot;go weak in the knees at the thought of choosing between two lobbyists.&quot;    The Senate recently approved a one-year moratorium on new powers for banks. If the temporary ban becomes law, it could kill the chances of changing the Glass-Steagall Act any time soon. &quot;Congress would take all the heat off itself and continue fiddling while Rome burns,&quot; says William Isaac, a banking consultant and former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.    Right now, the moratorium is a matter of debate in a House-Senate conference. The outcome is uncertain, but the House seems to be leaning toward backing the barrier. Senate Banking Chairman William Proxmire says that the ban would give lawmakers time to study the issue and that Congress could pass legislation before the moratorium expires next spring. Last week, he began what will be a series of hearings on the need to review banking and securities law. But both the calendar and the political realities appear to be stacked against final action on the Glass-Steagall Act.    Meanwhile, pressure is building in the marketplace. The Federal Reserve Board has begun approving applications from some of the nation's largest bank holding companies for limited securities powers, and it may issue another ruling by the end of this month. Under retiring Chairman Paul Volcker, the Fed has been reluctant to take the lead. But Mr. Volcker warned the Senate Banking Committee earlier this year: &quot;If you don't make these decisions, they will be made for you.&quot;    The Fed is likely to become even more aggressive under Alan Greenspan, an ardent free-market advocate who has been nominated to replace Mr. Volcker. Karen Shaw, a Washington banking consultant, predicts that a board led by Mr. Greenspan &quot;would take a much more energetic role in going to the limits&quot; of Glass-Steagall.    Big banks contend that, at a time of huge losses on energy loans at home and increased competition from abroad, they need underwriting powers to remain competitive in the international marketplace. Of the 10 largest banking companies in the world ranked by assets, only one, Citicorp, is American.    &quot;If banks cannot evolve,&quot; agrees Treasury Secretary James Baker, &quot;the term 'countinghouse industry' may before long become an epitaph like 'smokestack' or 'rust bowl.'. . . The victim would be one more U.S. industry that would not -- or in this case could not -- evolve to meet the competition.&quot;    As for the securities industry, it is seeking to retain the remaining line of defense against bank intrusions. Investment bankers warn of conflicts of interest and self-dealing if commercial bankers are allowed to compete directly with them. Despite the bankers' dire warnings, they argue, the circumstances don't call for changing the half-century-old system. &quot;The sky isn't falling,&quot; says Robert Gerard, the head of Morgan Stanley Group Inc.'s municipal finance division. &quot;Securities underwriting isn't the answer for energy and agricultural loans.&quot;    Most small banks, too, oppose any change. They are generally too small to take advantage of any of the new powers, and they fear that the big banks entering the securities field would get so big that they would dominate the nation's banking system.    In February, Sen. Proxmire proposed legislation that would have granted banks the same securities-underwriting powers that they were seeking from the Fed. But when he met with fellow Democrats on his committee to see how much support he had, &quot;he had his head handed to him,&quot; says a committee aide. Only one, freshman Florida Sen. Bob Graham, was willing to go along.    Such Banking Committee members as California Sen. Alan Cranston, who has frequently sided with the securities industry and has received large campaign contributions from securities firms, opposed granting any new powers.    Others said that they simply weren't prepared to decide the issue. During a private caucus, participants say, freshman Sen. Terry Sanford of North Carolina said that he wasn't ready &quot;to cut anyone in on any new powers.&quot;    Within a week after offering his proposal, Sen. Proxmire retreated. He proposed instead a temporary ban on the granting of any new powers by the Fed and other bank-regulatory agencies. His purpose was to slow the pace of change in the industry, give lawmakers time to study the question and save the rest of his legislation, which the Senate did pass.    &quot;The moratorium gave them an easy out,&quot; says Richard Whiting, the general counsel of the Association of Bank Holding Companies, a trade group supporting revision of Glass-Steagall.    Now, the issue is in the House's lap. The temporary ban on new banking powers is a provision in the Senate version of a bill to recapitalize the insolvent Federal Savings andamp; Loan Insurance Corp. The House FSLIC measure doesn't have any other provisions.    At first, House Banking Chairman Fernand St Germain balked at discussing the moratorium in a House-Senate conference. He said it would be necessary to hold hearings and have the full House vote on the issue. But recently he relented, and the ban is being taken up in a House-Senate conference that began Tuesday. Rep. St Germain says that the issue has come to a head. &quot;Much pressure, much suasiveness has been applied {by} the advocacy corps that exists in Washington,&quot; the Rhode Island Democrat said. &quot;The time has come for us to make up our minds.&quot;    Members of the House banking panel are sharply divided over whether to accept the ban. But they might agree to it if, in return, the Senate would agree to certain provisions in the House bill affecting savings and loan institutions.    If the ban becomes law, it would run retroactively from March 5, 1987, to March 1, 1988. During that time, the Fed would still be able to approve applications for new powers. But the orders either wouldn't take effect until after the moratorium ended or would be superseded by new legislation.    Banking interests complain that passage of a ban would greatly reduce the likelihood of definitive congressional action on this issue soon. &quot;Instead of dealing substantively with reform over the next year,&quot; says Mr. Isaac, &quot;when the moratorium comes due, Congress will simply renew it, renew it and renew it.&quot;    Maintaining the status quo with a moratorium would be a victory for the securities industry. If lawmakers &quot;think they're freezing the situation by freezing banks, it shows they don't understand the problem,&quot; says Edward Yingling, the chief Washington lobbyist for the American Bankers Association.    Sen. Proxmire vows that he wouldn't allow the ban to be extended. The Wisconsin Democrat pledges to hold more hearings and says that his committee could draft legislation by October. Despite his intentions, though, it is unlikely that lawmakers could, or would want to, tackle such a complex issue in the short time remaining before the 1988 election campaign begins in earnest. And even if the Senate does pass legislation giving banks some sort of securities authority, getting a bill through the House would be difficult.    The focus of all the fuss is four sections in the Banking Act of 1933, the product of Sen. Carter Glass, a Virginia Democrat who was the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, and Rep. Henry Steagall, an Alabama Democrat who headed the House banking panel. The bill was nearly vetoed by President Roosevelt because of Rep. Steagall's then-radical provision-federal deposit insurance.    In the 1920s, commercial banks had become the dominant force in investment banking. Sen. Glass, a newspaper publisher who had served as President Wilson's Treasury secretary and had helped devise the Federal Reserve System, was convinced that the bank failures and Wall Street scandals of the Depression were brought on by &quot;stock gamblers&quot; who had wrested control of the banks from the &quot;legitimate needs of business.&quot;    In a rousing radio speech for Mr. Roosevelt on the eve of the 1932 election, Sen. Glass lambasted President Hoover for financial ineptitude and charged that &quot;with insatiable avarice, great banking institutions, through their lawless affiliates,&quot; had helped trigger the Depression by selling billions of dollars of worthless securities to the American public.    In recent years, however, interpreting Sen. Glass's Depression-era barrier to suit the needs of today's global economy has allowed banks to reach further and further into the securities business. James Robinson, the chairman of American Express Co., a diversified financial company that favors changing Glass-Steagall, argues that the act has become &quot;the regulatory version of the Maginot Line&quot; and that &quot;banks and bank holding companies have totally outflanked&quot; it.    Late last year, the Federal Reserve Board upped the ante. The Glass-Steagall Act has always allowed banks to deal in relatively risk-free securities such as federal, state and municipal obligations. But last Christmas Eve, the Fed ruled that Glass-Steagall also allows bank holding companies to underwrite commercial paper through subsidiaries.    Then in April, the Fed permitted three of the largest bank holding companies to underwrite mortgage-backed securities and municipal revenue bonds and said that it would consider adding consumer-backed receivables by the end of this month. Squeezing through a narrow loophole in the law is the only way that the Fed can attempt, in its words, &quot;to fit today's markedly different financial markets into the 50-year-old Glass-Steagall Procrustean bed.&quot;    The legality of the Fed's decisions has been challenged by the Securities Industry Association, a trade group. A federal appeals court has stayed the Fed's April order until the case is decided. On Monday, the Supreme Court upheld a lower-court ruling that Bankers Trust Co. may sell commercial paper for its clients, but the case has been overtaken by the recent Fed decisions.    If the Fed's latest decisions are upheld by the courts and if the Senate-passed ban doesn't become law, the inexorable march of the marketplace will continue and Congress will again be challenged to catch up.    Eventually, some predict, the changes in the financial-services industry will be so great that even the securities industry will want revision. &quot;At some point, the banks will have enough powers,&quot; says Mr. Yingling, the banking lobbyist, that it will be in the securities industry's interest &quot;to break down the wall so that they can get banking powers.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>