<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880107-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Hoffmann-La Roche Seeks Roots in U.S. --- Non-Prescription Line Sought in Sterling Bid </HL><AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> STY </CO><IN> TNM PHA </IN><TEXT>   F. Hoffmann-La Roche andamp; Co.'s first big seller was a cough syrup called Siropin, which Fritz Hoffmann started hawking in 1896 with then unheard of advertising featuring a small boy in a big top hat.    Since then, the company founded by Mr. Hoffmann -- a Basel, Switzerland, pharmacist who adopted his wife's name and became Fritz Hoffmann-La Roche -- has grown into a $6 billion a year giant mainly on the strength of selling such prescription drugs as Valium and Librium, rather than such over-the-counter remedies as aspirin and cough syrup.    Now, Hoffmann-La Roche is going back to its roots for growth. Its unfriendly $4.2 billion tender offer for Sterling Drug Inc., if successful, would get Hoffmann-La Roche back in a big way to selling non-prescription and generic drugs.    It would sell them largely in the U.S., where it already does about one-third of its business, using an existing U.S. sales force of more than 10,000. Until Valium's patent-protection expired in the U.S. in 1985, the sales force was kept busy selling the tranquilizer. But since 1985, Valium sales in the U.S. dropped about 30% in both 1986 and last year, to an estimated $300 million in 1987.    &quot;Roche's great asset is its U.S. sales force,&quot; says Erling Refsum, pharmaceutical-industry analyst for Normura Securities in London. &quot;But they need more things for it to sell. Despite relatively high research-and-development spending, they haven't really come up with any blockbuster drugs since Valium,&quot; which was first marketed in 1963.    The combination of competition from Valium clones and the falling U.S. dollar has in the past two years dented the company's earning growth, which had been slowing since the mid-1970s.    Most analysts estimate that 1987 net income remained flat or dropped a little from $320 million in 1986 and that sales fell slightly from $6.08 billion.    Hoffmann-La Roche officials refused to comment on the company's performance or on its bid for Sterling.    While the company continues to spend heavily on research -- an estimated $850 million last year -- it mainly has produced modestly successful drugs, such as the antibiotic Rocephin, the world's 23rd best-selling prescription drug last year.    All three of the major Swiss drug makers -- Hoffmann-La Roche, Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz Ltd. -- have fallen behind U.S. and British companies in developing innovative new drugs. However, Ciba-Geigy had four of the top-50 prescription drugs last year, including No. 6-ranked Voltaren, an anti-inflammation drug with 1987 sales of about $500 million.    Hoffmann-La Roche has sought to offset its Valium problem in several ways. One was to reach a &quot;co-marketing&quot; agreement with Glaxo Holdings PLC of Britain, under which Hoffmann-La Roche's sales force would market Glaxo's hot-selling Zantac ulcer medicine in the U.S. This arrangement has since been copied by other companies.    European analysts say Hoffmann-La Roche's bid for Sterling is a logical way for the company, which has fallen to third place in the Swiss pharmaceutical/chemical industry behind Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, to buy size and offset disappointing results from its new-drug development program. The combined Hoffmann-La Roche and Sterling would be the third-biggest pharmaceutical/chemical company in the world.    The bid for Sterling is also being seen as a step in Hoffmann-La Roche Chairman Fritz Gerber's strategy of looking for new products to replace the company's aging star performers.    &quot;It's not surprising, because they've been hinting about generic drugs for some time,&quot; says Mr. Refsum. But he says that because profit margins aren't as great in over-the-counter and generic drugs &quot;they're probably set for a lower growth rate overall.&quot; He adds: &quot;It's not such a sexy area. It doesn't have the tingle of discovering a blockbuster new drug.&quot;    That tingle was what kept the company growing from Fritz Hoffmann's cough medicine company. At the turn of the century it introduced several plant-derived drugs such as Digalen, a digitalis preparation used in heart disease. The 1917 Bolshevik Revolution closed a big Russian market, and the company nearly went bankrupt during World War I.    After Mr. Hoffmann-La Roche died in 1920, outside management revived the company, although the Hoffmann family, through the widow of the founder's son, controls about 75% of the voting bearer shares. The company has 16,000 bearer shares outstanding, which traded yesterday at 190,000 Swiss francs ($142,956) each. Hoffmann-La Roche also has 54,400 dividend-right shares outstanding which yesterday were quoted at 99,000 francs each. Its &quot;baby&quot; shares -- one-tenth of a dividend share -- traded at 10,000 francs each.    The widow, Maya Sacher, now 90 years old, is Switzerland's best-known patron of modern art. Her collection adorns the company headquarters along the Rhine -- there is a big Henry Moore sculpture in the courtyard -- and a new art museum she recently gave to Basel.    Her currrent husband, Paul Sacher, 81, is a well-known conductor and energetic champion of modern composers, among them Bela Bartok, Paul Hindemith and Igor Stravinsky. Mr. Sacher, a Hoffmann-La Roche director, founded the Basel Chamber Orchestra and Choir, as well as a center for Renaissance music and a center for the collection of contemporary music documents.    Hoffmann-La Roche declines to give precise details of the family-ownership arrangments, or to speculate on what might happen after the Sachers die.    But when ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., Costa Mesa, Calif, last year bought a 6.3% stake in the company, Hoffmann-La Roche officials quickly dismissed any possible takeover bid as impossible. At the time, Mr. Sacher said there were &quot;contracts&quot; with the family, which &quot;ensure the present ownership structure.&quot;    Hoffmann-La Roche has long been known as a solidly managed, closed-mouth company, not unlike its Basel neighbors Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz. During the 1970s, however, it received several unwelcome doses of publicity. In the early part of the decade, it was forced to reduce its Valium and Librium prices in the U.K. as part of a broad crackdown on alleged price-gouging by drug makers.    In 1976, Stanley Adams, a Hoffmann-La Roche employee, supplied the European Community's executive commission information indicating misuse of Roche's dominance in the vitamin market. The company was fined by the commission, but Mr. Adams was arrested for disclosing business secrets, a crime in Switzerland. During the affair Mr. Adams's wife committed suicide; he was convicted in a Swiss court.    Shortly after the Adams affair, an explosion at a Hoffmann-La Roche subsidiary spread toxic gas containing dioxin over the Italian town of Seveso. The cleanup, which took 10 years, cost the company an estimated $150 million.    Mr. Gerber, who took over as chief executive in 1978, has managed to put these problems behind him. He has also begun, analysts say, to shake off some of the company's corporate mustiness, and what some analysts claim was complacency during the years Valium sales effortlessly fueled growth.    Mr. Gerber told a Hoffmann-La Roche executive meeting in 1986: &quot;We are living in a changing world. Those who do not change will stagnate and in the end they will not survive. Change is not a threat, but a chance.&quot;    ---   Margaret Studer in Zurich, Switzerland contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>