<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0067 </DOCNO><HL> Sports (A Special Report): Doing It --- Labor or Love? Teen Tennis Stars Endure Pressure That Can Become Unbearable </HL><AUTHOR> Tom Herman and Paul B. Carroll </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   MONICA SELES RIPS a scorching two-handed backhand down the line for the 26th time in a row. Her two male practice partners grin and shake their heads in astonishment.    The 14-year-old Yugoslavian girl hits the ball with such force and precision that many tennis experts believe she is headed for greatness within a few years. And the pressure? &quot;You just tell yourself, 'I am not afraid,'&quot; she says with a giggle. &quot;It's fun.&quot;    Sitting nearby at the Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy in Bradenton, Fla., is Jimmy Arias, for whom tennis is not much fun anymore. His explosive forehand and burning competitive spirit helped him rise as high as No. 5 in the world when he was only 19; now, at 23, he has slipped to the 30s in the rankings and his zest for the sport has waned.    &quot;I've been on tour for eight years, and it's no fun,&quot; he says, staring at his sneakers. &quot;Sometimes I wake up in a hotel in a strange city and I don't know where I am. I know the grass always looks greener on the other side, but right now I'd love a 9-to-5 job. I'd like to live in one place and have a bunch of close friends.&quot;    Life on the pro tennis tour may sound glamorous -- days of endless sunshine, mounds of money, foreign travel and smiling, ever-admiring fans. The best players, including Ivan Lendl, Stefan Edberg, Gabriela Sabatini, Chris Evert and Martina Navratilova, have become wealthy beyond their dreams through their winnings and the endorsements that have made them walking billboards for companies around the world. But competitive tennis is also a brutal pressure cooker that has burned out many young players, sending them into retirement before most people even get fully started on their own careers.    Bjorn Borg, one of the best players ever to lift a racket, essentially retired from the game at age 25 because he couldn't handle it any longer. Tracy Austin, who won the U.S. Open at 16, and Andrea Jaeger, a Wimbledon finalist at 18, barely made it out of their teens before injuries and stress waylaid their big-time, competitive tennis careers.    Many promising young players wilt under that pressure long before they ever get near the top levels of the game. Lori Kosten dominated her peers in the younger age groups, walloping such eventual stars as Miss Jaeger. She was marked as a coming star, but she grew depressed, even suicidal, in the face of the unrelenting pressure and hung up her racket at 15.    Howard Schoenfield, another player of spectacular promise, encountered psychiatric problems that some say were at least exacerbated by tennis. &quot;He's ill right now,&quot; says his father. &quot;He is sick and under a doctor's care&quot; in Florida.    &quot;Of all the sports I've worked with, tennis is by far the toughest mentally,&quot; says Dr. James Loehr, a sports psychologist who has counseled athletes (including Mr. Arias) in more than a dozen sports. &quot;In pro tennis, you're all alone out there. There are no substitutions. There is no clock. There is no coach with you. Sometimes you have to concentrate intensely for more than three hours. You've got an opponent staring at you. Plus the amount of money at stake is enormous. I've had some players tell me the pressure got so bad they couldn't even lift their arms.&quot;    In tennis more than in most other sports, that pressure begins when the players are very young and emotionally fragile. Fourteen-year-olds can compete in international tournaments, and they know that their rankings determine whether they get the coaching, equipment and sponsorship they need to become stars.    Often, their parents only add to the pressure. Developing a young player costs tens of thousands of dollars, so most parents don't take kindly to a child's complaint that he doesn't want to practice. &quot;There are so many tennis parents looking to relive their lives through junior, or who want junior to earn them $1 million,&quot; says Donald Dell, a former Davis Cup captain and now chairman of ProServ Inc., a Washington sports marketing and management firm.    The young players on the fast track lead strangely constricted lives. Andre Agassi, a 17-year-old already ranked in the 20s in the world, dropped out of high school to turn pro and last year earned more than $200,000 in prize money alone. But he also traveled 100,000 miles and spent fewer than 10 weeks at home. &quot;You basically just see tennis courts and airports and hotel rooms,&quot; says his older brother, Phillip, who travels with him.    Mark Knowles, a 16-year-old who attends the Bollettieri Academy and hopes to turn pro, says: &quot;As long as you're winning, it (life on the circuit) is great.&quot; But the other side is pointed out by Jeff Etterbeck, a 31-year-old former touring pro who now coaches at the academy: &quot;If you're losing,&quot; he says, &quot;then it's the worst job in the world -- the absolute worst job in the world.&quot;    Mr. Etterbeck once went on tour for 2 1/2 months in Spain and Portugal and finished near the top of his group, but, after expenses, he wound up $1,200 in the hole. &quot;When I was on the circuit, I was struggling to eat,&quot; he recalls. &quot;I don't miss that a bit. You hear all about the great prize money, but the money is all made by the top people.&quot; And the competition grows more and more ferocious as talented teens from all over the world pour into the sport.    Nick Bollettieri, one of the world's best-known tennis coaches and the man for whom the academy is named, says the odds of getting into the pros are &quot;incredibly small, and then only a very small number of those that make it ever make big money, a comfortable living. Even if you're ranked 100 in the world, which is pretty good, it would be difficult to make much money after expenses.&quot; The Association of Tennis Professionals says the player who finished 100th on its prize money list last year was Claudio Pistolesi of Italy; he earned $63,384. However, four players -- Lendl, Edberg, Mats Wilander and Miloslav Mecir -- earned more than $1 million and 67 made more than $100,000.    Even when a player gets past the early years and breaks into the big time, even when he thinks he has achieved command of the pressure, it can rise again to do him in at crucial moments. Mr. Mecir, for instance, was serving for the match against Jimmy Connors in a major team event a few years ago when he lost all control of his serve. He wound up serving underhand, and lost. Two weeks later, at the French Open, the same thing happened. He lost again.    Says Mr. Dell of ProServ: &quot;Ninety-seven percent of all players will admit to having choked at one time or another, and the other 3% are liars.&quot;    Many tennis officials believe the sport must somehow ease the pressure it places on young players. The U.S. Tennis Association is considering dropping national championships and most rankings for players 14 and under, offering counseling for young players and their parents, and encouraging the youngsters to think of themselves as a team rather than a collection of individuals.    But to talented young players at the very beginning of what promises to be bright careers, pressure is what happens to someone else. That's how Karin Miller, 10 years old and not much taller than the net, sees it. She started hitting balls against a wall when she was 3. Now she attends the Bollettieri Academy on a full scholarship, and lives a life consumed by tennis.    Her parents and older sister live with her at the academy. Her mother is its nurse. She attends school in the morning, but her afternoons are taken up by drills, conditioning exercises and matches.    Karin is infatuated by the sport, thrives on the schedule, and is bursting with confidence. Asked why she thinks so many players burn out, she says: &quot;That's because they're old. They probably didn't even like tennis from the start.&quot;    ---   Mr. Herman and Mr. Carroll are staff reporters in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau and are occasional tennis doubles partners. </TEXT></DOC>