<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Debt Mediation in Iowa Gives Farmers a Way to Survive---They May Get to Keep Something,And Lenders Can Save Loans---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> DES MOINES, Iowa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Leland Anderson has just played a harrowing role in a program that is one of the Farm Belt's few success stories.    The federal Farm Credit System was threatening to foreclose on Mr. Anderson's 325-acre farm if he didn't begin repaying his $126,000 debt. So Mr. Anderson and his wife, armed with a financial consultant and their local pastor, trekked from their central Iowa farm to a small brick building. They came here to negotiate with his lenders under a new state program offering mediation services for troubled farmers.    The talks nearly ground to an abrupt halt. The Farm Credit representative suggested Mr. Anderson sell his house. Mr. Anderson refused, having already sold his cows and some of his hogs to help pay debt. &quot;We built it and we're going to do anything we can to save it,&quot; he said in a barely audible voice.    But after nearly five hours, a trained state mediator helped shape a tentative agreement: the Farm Credit System would write off some of the debt, defer another part of it and lower the interest rate on the principal. At least for the time being, Mr. Anderson can keep his home and continue farming as long as he regularly provides financial information to system's local branch office.    Iowa's program is arousing broad interest in other agricultural states. It guarantees farmers the right to mediate before lenders can foreclose on their farms, and often lets lenders make the best of a bad situation by recouping a better portion of the delinquent debt than they might through foreclosure and liquidation of farm property. In a time of increasing farmer anguish that has often resulted in hostility, including killings of farm lenders in recent years, the negotiating process has helped defuse tension and hostility.    &quot;It has relieved at least some of the frustration felt by the farmers,&quot; says Peter Brent, a member of a farm activist group. &quot;If they go to mediation, at least the lender has to listen.&quot; Nearly a dozen other states have inquired into Iowa's program. And mandatory mediation modeled on Iowa's program is currently being considered by the California and Missouri legislatures.    Iowa's program is financed mostly by the state and by client fees, which are $25 for each hour of negotiations. Trained mediators -- housewives, students, lawyers and even farmers' wives -- push each side along in the hope of reaching some accord, which could range from downsizing the farmer's operations to permitting him a more graceful exit from farming. Neither side, however, is required to reach a compromise.    The state's mediation program boasts a strong success rate. Of the 2,200 cases heard since the program's inception last summer, 62% resulted in some agreement. As a result, the program has met growing acceptance from an initially wary banking community.    &quot;It makes everyone stop and think, 'Is there one more chance here to work things out rather than going to court?'&quot; says Gale Cameron, an official with the Farm Credit System's Omaha district. Besides, &quot;it's a hell of a lot less costly, and hopefully it salvages a better relationship.&quot;    &quot;We've worked hard to show the creditor community that we're not a farm advocacy program,&quot; adds Micheal Thompson, director of the program.    But mediation isn't without its opponents. While lenders in Iowa have supported it, bankers in Minnesota have resisted every step of the way. Unlike Iowa's program, which is run by an independent, nonprofit agency, Minnesota's is run by the state agricultural extension service, which provides educational assistance to farmers. The lenders, already suspicious of the program's partiality, argue that in some cases mediation is used as a delaying tactic by farmers and merely forestalls the inevitable: foreclosure.    Indeed, under Minnesota's law, mediation can drag on for 114 days, compared with a maximum of 72 days in Iowa.    &quot;It's been a waste of time,&quot; says John Campe, president of Klossner State Bank in New Ulm, Minn. Mr. Campe calls mediation &quot;foolishness&quot; and &quot;silly meetings,&quot; and says that because of the cost of the program, credit is becoming more expensive.    At the behest of the banking lobby, the Minnesota Legislature is considering tightening up its rules governing mediation. Bankers in some other states have joined in the mediation-bashing. In Montana, the banking lobby helped persuade legislators to reject mandatory mediation and, instead, make it voluntary.    Some farmers also spurn mediation. In Iowa, 337 farmers have turned down offers to negotiate, and another 1,958 didn't respond to mediation requests. Others simply decline to cooperate, sometimes refusing to disclose the whereabouts of their farm equipment. In one negotiating session in Iowa, half an hour into the discussion, an audible click came from inside the farmer's briefcase. He was covertly tape recording the session. Outraged, the lender told the farmer he planned to foreclose, and then stormed out of the meeting.    &quot;The distrust is still there&quot; between farmers and their lenders, says Mr. Thompson of the Iowa program.    Nevertheless, incentives to avoid foreclosure are significant for both sides. Foreclosure proceedings can be costly, and banks don't want to be in the farming business. Also, rural lenders like to maintain good relations with the farming community. As a result, farmers and lenders &quot;are beginning to work together,&quot; says Mr. Thompson.    Take Leland Anderson's case. Upon entering the negotiating room, the short, stocky farmer, dressed in jeans and a brown velour shirt, refused to make eye contact with his nattily dressed adversaries. &quot;I'm not proud&quot; of being unable to pay debt, Mr. Anderson told the lenders.    But by the end of the negotiations, Mr. Anderson, who ordinarily speaks in near-whispers, was so relieved at being able to continue farming that he joked with his local banker -- &quot;I thought you'd forget about that $20,000 (loan),&quot; he said, chuckling -- and made a point of shaking hands and thanking both the local bankers and the Farm Credit representative.    Iowa bankers say the program pushes farmers to do their financial homework. Indeed, some farmers going to mediation hire attorneys or, like Mr. Anderson, financial consultants to help prepare cash-flow charts. Mr. Anderson, for example, came loaded not only with cash-flow figures, but also with plans for how he might alter his farming. He showed the bank that by concentrating on raising hogs, which is a profitable business, he can make regular payments on his debt.    Mediation can also cool down heated emotions. Before one mediation, a farmer threatened to shoot his banker. So the banker came to the talks with a sheriff, who sat outside the room during the talks.    Halfway through the eight-hour session, the farmer's wife became so frustrated that she ran out of the room crying. But in the end, the adversaries reached an agreement: the farmer would keep a small parcel of land, with the option of buying back more acreage if he could come up with the money.    But mediation isn't necessarily the farmer's savior. Recently, a private bank struck a hard bargain with a farmer who was unable to make his debt payments. The farmer deeded back his farm to the bank, and kept his house and four acres so he could keep a few calves or pigs and raise a garden.    Even for farmers, though, such settlements are often superior to the personal turmoil of foreclosure. &quot;Mediation gives rural America some stability,&quot; Mr. Thompson says. &quot;It gives people a chance to figure out if they have to leave farming, how they're going to leave.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>