<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870423-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Corporate Raiders Predict Hard Times for Hostile Bids---High Court Decision on Indiana LawMay Have 'Killed' Their Game---By Michael W. Miller and Laurie P. CohenStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   Until this week, Dallas investor Harold Simmons was one of the most aggressive corporate raiders in the takeover game.    Yesterday, he hung up his spurs. &quot;I've probably seen my last takeover fight,&quot; said Mr. Simmons, who last year stormed his way into control of NL Industries Inc., an oil-field services and chemicals company. &quot;This has killed the hostile-takeover business.&quot;    Mr. Simmons was speaking about the Supreme Court's decision Tuesday to uphold a strict Indiana law regulating hostile takeover bids. He was one of several corporate raiders, investment bankers and takeover lawyers who predicted the court's move will deal a severe setback to unfriendly takeovers.    Hostile bids will become considerably riskier, more expensive and more mired in lawsuits, merger professionals say. Major shareholders will discover they have much less power to control the outcome of merger battles. And corporate raiders will be forced to hunt for companies by waging proxy fights, in which shareholders vote their stock at a special meeting.    Currently, the favorite strategy of raiders is to mount a tender offer, in which they gain control by buying shares outright from holders.    The loudest cries of distress are coming from corporate raiders. After the insider-trading scandals, and with a big movement in Congress to regulate hostile takeovers, the Supreme Court's decision only poured salt into the raiders' wounds.    Mr. Simmons called the decision &quot;the entrenched-management relief program.&quot; A spokesman for the shareholder-rights group of T. Boone Pickens Jr., the oil industry's best-known takeover artist, said the law wrongfully &quot;cuts off the ability of big shareholders to have an impact.&quot;    Said New York takeover investor Asher Edelman: &quot;The mood both judicially and congressionally has certainly shifted against people and companies who acquire other companies.&quot;    The Indiana law says that an investor who buys more than 20% of a company's shares can't vote that stake unless he wins approval from a majority of &quot;disinterested&quot; shareholders. The law defines disinterested shareholders as everyone except officers, inside directors and the takeover investor. One of the law's most radical provisions gives a company 50 days -- an unusually long time in the takeover business -- to schedule a stockholders' meeting to decide to ratify or reject the investor's voting rights.    Takeover professionals predict that the Supreme Court verdict will spur dozens of other states to enact laws similar to Indiana's. They also anticipate that corporations will flock to incorporate in states that follow the Indiana model.    The upshot will be to make hostile takeover bids considerably harder to carry off, investment bankers say.    For example, suppose a bidder wages an unfriendly tender offer and wins 55% of a company's stock. Today, that would normally give him working control of the corporation and access to its cash flow and assets.    Under the Indiana law, the bidder's stock would be neutral unless its voting power were ratified at the shareholders' meeting, which the bidder would be required to subsidize. The company could wait for 50 days before it scheduled the meeting. Meanwhile the bidder's cost of carrying his stock would mount; often a large chunk of a bidder's stake is bought with money borrowed from banks or brokers.    At the meeting, minority shareholders would have clout disproportionate to their stake in the company, since management and the bidder couldn't vote. &quot;Not many bidders are going to want to put their welfare in the hands of a small hard-core minority, particularly in companies where there's a block sitting in the hands of an old family or a dissident shareholder,&quot; said Hamilton James, head of mergers at Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Inc., the securities unit of Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S.    If a chill sets in on tender offers, many takeover experts believe that raiders will try proxy fights to win control of a company. In a proxy fight, a dissident holder can seize control of a company's board (as opposed to gaining control of the company) by asking shareholders to vote in his own slate of directors. Although the tactic requires a relatively small outlay of money, raiders have recently shunned proxy fights because they usually aren't as swift and potent as simply buying up a company's stock at a premium.    Moreover, management's track record in proxy fights has historically been better than dissidents'. Without the allure of a premium price for their stock -- and absent evidence of blatant transgressions by management -- shareholders have been more likely to vote for the status quo.    But some proxy specialists suggested that raiders may fare better in the kind of shareholder vote the Indiana law mandates. They said a bidder could win more shareholder sympathy in a fight that simply concerns the basic right to vote his shares.    &quot;This issue hits home right to the shareholder; shareholders will side with the dissident,&quot; predicted Don Carter, president of Carter Organization, a large New York proxy solicitor.    The Supreme Court decision could also cripple investors' ability to finance hostile bids. Banks generally give bidders credit with the provision that they must obtain majority control of their target. That way the banks can be sure a bidder will have enough cash flow to service the debt.    &quot;Under this scenario, no lender in his right mind is going to lend you money,&quot; said Donaldson Lufkin's Mr. James.    &quot;It's a major change in the business,&quot; said a senior official at one major commercial bank. &quot;I don't think it will stop hostile takeovers by someone who has very deep pockets and some other way to service the debt,&quot; he said. &quot;But it certainly puts a very damp blanket over the whole process.&quot;    Some acquisitions specialists on Wall Street suggested that raiders with dire forecasts were merely posturing to discourage Congress from passing more severe anti-takeover measures. And not everyone believes the Supreme Court decision will neutralize hostile bidders. The ruling &quot;does not redress the (present) imbalance in favor of corporate raiders,&quot; contended takeover-defense lawyer Martin Lipton in a memo he sent to his corporate clients after the ruling.    A few raiders also expressed confidence that the ruling still leaves them plenty of leeway. &quot;There's not a chance that the hostile-deal business is dead,&quot; said Minneapolis financier Irwin Jacobs. &quot;It's just a slowing-down process.&quot;    Mr. Edelman also maintained a board would be unlikely to thwart a bidder with a majority of the company's stock, even if the bidder didn't have the power to vote his stake. &quot;When one guy ends up owning a majority of the company, I've never seen a case where the board doesn't step aside.&quot;    Finally, investment bankers and lawyers have already started searching for loopholes and end-runs around the Indiana law.    J. Tomlinson Hill, co-head of mergers at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., an American Express Co. unit, suggested that hostile bidders could resort more to a tactic already used in takeover battles. He said they could mount a double-barreled bid: a high price for a friendly acquisition and a lower price for an unfriendly one. The company might risk shareholder lawsuits by rejecting the higher price, he said. </TEXT></DOC>