<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861218-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/18/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NICARAGUA PARDONED imprisoned U.S. mercenary Eugene Hasenfus.    Hasenfus was immediately released and left Managua aboard a plane bound for Guatemala. His return to the U.S., expected today, could lead to an appearance before congressional panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair. The pardon was requested by President Ortega and approved by the National Assembly. Hasenfus had been a crew member on a cargo plane carrying arms to Nicaraguan rebels when it was shot down in October. He was convicted of gun running and given a 30-year sentence.    Ortega said Sam N. Hall, identified as an American charged with spying, would be tried by a tribunal like the one that convicted Hasenfus.    ---   U.S. OFFICIALS PAID discounted prices for arms sold to Iran at inflated costs.    Administration sources said Reagan aides deliberately paid the Pentagon bargain prices for weapons from military stocks and then overcharged Tehran in an effort to establish a source of military aid for Nicaraguan rebels. Meanwhile, as the House formed a 15-member panel to probe the Iran-Contra operation, Weinberger appeared before the Senate Intelligence panel, which rejected Reagan's request for limited immunity for witnesses.    Three congressional panels are investigating whether senior Justice Department aides impeded a review of Lt. Col. North's dealings with the Contras.    ---   REAGAN WILL UNDERGO surgery for an enlarged prostate gland.    The White House said the president will enter Bethesda Naval Hospital Jan. 4. A spokesman said Reagan, 75, recently had experienced discomfort, prompting the medical procedure, called a transurethral resection. The spokesman said doctors hadn't reported &quot;any sign of disease at all&quot; when Reagan had a urinary tract and bladder exam in August.    The spokesman said there wasn't evidence that Reagan has prostate cancer. About one-fourth of U.S. men will have such cancer by their 70s and 80s.    ---   Vietnam reported that three top officials resigned, citing their advanced age and poor health. A government official said Truong Chinh, Pham Van Dong and Le Duc Tho stepped down as part of an effort to deal with economic problems. U.S. officials said they didn't expect changes in Hanoi's foreign policy as a result of the move.    ---   The aircraft Voyager flew over the Indian Ocean, completing about a third of its around-the-world flight without stopping or refueling. The experimental craft has burned so much fuel while avoiding turbulent weather that mission control in Mojave, Calif., expressed concern that the plane wouldn't be able to achieve its goal.    ---   Philippine rebels accused the military of fabricating cease-fire violations, and the armed forces chief said it was &quot;too early&quot; to tell if the 60-day truce would hold. The statements came as witnesses in the central part of the country said five people were killed in a rebel clash with soldiers.    ---   Colorado Sen. Hart said the Iran-Contra controversy might delay progress in U.S.-Soviet arms-control talks because the administration &quot;is going to be preoccupied&quot; with the matter. The Democrat, who met with Gorbachev in Moscow, said the Kremlin leader expressed willingness to work toward an arms accord within the next two years.    ---   Pakistani groups battled in Karachi for a fourth consecutive day, as the death toll rose to at least 155. About 610 people have been injured since Sunday, when rioting erupted after police raids on Pathan gun and drug traffickers. Bulldozers razed buildings in the Pathan neighborhood where the violence started.    ---   A French study found that an experimental abortion pill safely terminated 85% of early pregnancies without causing any serious side effects. The drug, which has a generic name of RU 486, &quot;offers a reasonable alternative&quot; to more risky surgical procedures, the researchers said.    ---   British surgeons replaced the heart, lungs and liver of a 35-year-old woman in a seven-hour operation, said a spokesman for Papworth Hospital in central England. The surgery, performed by a 15-member medical team, was believed to be the first known triple transplant of its kind.    ---   Two Syrians were expelled Tuesday from West Berlin after they crossed over from East Berlin, sources in West Germany said. The step was in accordance with a ban issued by France, Britain and the U.S. -- which control the city's western sector -- after a court found Syrian involvement in a bombing in March at a West Berlin club.    ---   Fighting flared in Beirut and guerrillas loyal to PLO leader Arafat held the positions that they captured from Shiite Moslem militiamen in southern Lebanon. The sporadic mortar battles kept deadlocked Iranian attempts to end the recent fighting at three Lebanese refugee camps.    ---   Died: John D. deButts, 71, former chairman of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., in Winchester, Va. </TEXT></DOC>