<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870730-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Meese Says 'Pure Accident' Led to LackOf Notes on High-Level Inquiry Sessions---By David Rogers and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Attorney General Edwin Meese testified that it was &quot;pure accident in general&quot; that no notes were taken of his interviews with high-level officials immediately after learning of the transfer of arms-sales profits to the Contras last November.    Mr. Meese conceded that the procedure of his investigation changed after learning of the diversion from Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North Nov. 23, but denied there was any strategy behind this decision to no longer be accompanied by aides who could ensure a written record.    Mr. Meese took no notes himself of a key discussion Nov. 24 with former National Security Adviser John Poindexter, and a day later, he left a Justice Department aide outside while meeting privately with the late director of the Central Intelligence Agency, William Casey.    &quot;It may strike you that truth being stranger than fiction . . . but I take offense that it is hard to accept,&quot; Mr. Meese said in a pointed exchange with Sen. George Mitchell (D., Maine). &quot;I have told you the absolute truth of what happened.&quot;    Ending his two-day appearance before House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, Mr. Meese testified as the panels released new evidence that the Justice Department's criminal division had unsuccessfully pressed for an early role in the attorney general's inquiry. Separately, a December 1986 department document released yesterday alleged that funds from the arms sales were &quot;unlawfully converted&quot; in the diversion, and Mr. Meese said it is &quot;highly probable&quot; the money belongs to the U.S. Treasury.    Even before the diversion was discovered, the head of the criminal division, Assistant Attorney General William Weld, was expressing concerns that his division should be included in the inquiry because of pending criminal prosecutions related to illegal arms sales to Iran.    &quot;It didn't make sense to have (the attorney general) doing the investigation,&quot; Mr. Weld testified in a deposition given to the committees. In a telephone conversation with Mr. Meese Nov. 24, Mr. Weld recalled telling the attorney general, &quot;My only thought is that if you tried to carry too much water here that some may spill on you.&quot;    Mr. Weld testified the attorney general told him &quot;you should not be concerned that matters are . . . falling between the cracks.&quot; But even after the public disclosure of the diversion a day later, Mr. Weld said he believed he didn't have immediate authority to go forward with a criminal investigation into the matter.    That approval came on Nov. 26, said the assistant attorney general, who testified that there remained brief skirmishes when top aides of Mr. Meese sought unsuccessfully to have the criminal division focus on the diversion and leave the Iran initiative to a civil inquiry.    The conflicts are relevant now as the committees focus on what many members see as significant shortcomings in the inquiry carried out by Mr. Meese. Alerted to the inquiry on Nov. 21, Rear Adm. Poindexter and Col. North separately destroyed documents relevant to the Iran-Contra investigation. Even after meeting with Mr. Meese two days later, Col. North returned to his NSC office to shred more papers.    Mr. Meese denied prior testimony indicating he had given advance warning to Col. North about the inquiry. Though Justice Department notes indicate the Marine suggested in his Nov. 23 interview that the diversion memo be kept secret, Mr. Meese said this was never considered a reasonable course. The attorney general bristled at criticism that he was lax in protecting papers in NSC files and suggested that documents destroyed by Col. North after his interview may have have had no bearing on the inquiry.    &quot;Do you think Col. North spent from 11 o'clock in the evening to 4:15 in the morning destroying irrelevant documents?&quot; Sen. Mitchell asked with sarcasm.    The exchanges between Mr. Meese and the Maine Democrat, a former federal judge, reflected the continued skepticism facing the attorney general. On major legal points relevant to the scandal, however, Mr. Meese has struck an almost conciliatory note with Congress.    He endorsed a stricter standard yesterday for the timely reporting of covert operations to the House and Senate leadership, and though backing away from testimony Tuesday, Mr. Meese said it was an open question whether the NSC staff was covered by restrictions on U.S. military aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.    &quot;This is something in which we have not given an opinion,&quot; said Mr. Meese, referring to an issue that has run throughout the Iran-Contra controversy. In Tuesday's appearance, Mr. Meese said it is &quot;probable&quot; the NSC fell within the definition of an intelligence agency and was thus covered by the restrictions. But under questioning by conservative Rep. Bill McCollum (R., Fla.) last night, he said &quot;a strong case&quot; can be made that the NSC isn't covered because it is &quot;not normally deemed&quot; to be an intelligence-gathering entity.    In contrast to Col. North and Adm. Poindexter, Mr. Meese gave general support to the theory that all the proceeds from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran in 1986 belonged to the Treasury.    &quot;It is highly probable that those funds should be . . . the property of the United States,&quot; Mr. Meese said, and his construction appears stricter than his initial comments indicated last Nov. 25. Prodded by committee members, he has joined in condemning both the destruction of documents and misleading statements given by former administration officials. Yet at the same time, Mr. Meese has displayed little anger over the degree to which he himself may have been mistreated by his former colleagues.    In the same manner, his description of President Reagan's reaction to the discovery of the diversion was less one of anger than surprise and concern for the damage done to the Iran initiative and political support for the Nicaraguan rebels. The attorney general continued to personally praise Adm. Poindexter and Col. North, and despite a record of contradictory testimony, said Mr. Casey was an &quot;honorable man&quot; whom he believed had never lied to him regarding the covert operation.    As an investigator, Mr. Meese carried himself with the same apparent trust in the world around him. Even after his aides discovered a National Security Council memo outlining the diversion scheme last November, he waited until the next day before reading the document. He said the possibility of criminal wrongdoing became a concern after meeting with Col. North that afternoon of Nov. 23, but rather than tightening the procedures used in the inquiry, he proceeded alone.    Until that point, Adm. Poindexter hadn't been interviewed regarding the diversion. But when Mr. Meese spoke to the national security adviser, he did so alone without the note takers who had accompanied him with Col. North. He said the admiral's answers indicated he had given &quot;tacit&quot; approval to the secret transfer of funds, but Mr. Meese acknowledged that he never pressed the national security adviser to explain what authority he had to so permit the scheme.    In contrast, a day later and even before his criminal division was fully engaged, Mr. Meese said the legal circumstances were such that he didn't think it would have been proper for Mr. Reagan to question Col. North and Adm. Poindexter on the operation before they left the White House Nov. 25.    &quot;The president could not have ordered them to do that without reading them their rights under . . . the Uniform Code of Military Justice,&quot; Mr. Meese said. Yet hours later that day, Mr. Weld testified, he left a meeting with Mr. Meese believing any criminal inquiry was &quot;on hold&quot; until the next morning.    Mr. Meese said that nearly three weeks after a full-blown criminal investigation was under way, he participated in a meeting with the president, then-White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan and White House aides to discuss the possibility of granting a pardon or immunity to Col. North and Adm. Poindexter. Such a move was under consideration, Mr. Meese testified, because it would be a way to make sure that the two former aides publicly revealed what they knew about the affair.    However, the same day, Mr. Weld said in his deposition, he &quot;buttonholed&quot; the attorney general at a Christmas party to warn Mr. Meese that granting immunity was a bad idea because it would make prosecution more difficult. </TEXT></DOC>