<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870515-0032 </DOCNO><HL> Steve Swartz, James B. StewartAnd Janet Guyon in New York</HL><DD> 05/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GE WNEWSSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   General Electric Co. assumed direct control of operations at its 80%-owned Kidder Peabody Group Inc. securities unit, unseating three top Kidder executives and naming a GE director to head Kidder -- in a move prompted by the government's insider-trading investigation.    GE, which also said it will take control of the Kidder board, said the shake-up was a result of a corporate investigation that was undertaken after federal authorities charged one current and one former Kidder arbitrager with insider-trading violations.    Ralph D. DeNunzio, Kidder's 55-year-old chairman and chief executive officer, who still had run the company with considerable autonomy after GE acquired its majority stake last June, will step down as chief executive June 1. He will continue as chairman. However, GE and Kidder executives predicted that Mr. DeNunzio soon will depart from that position as well. Also leaving June 1 are John T. Roche, president and chief operating officer, and Robert A. Krantz Jr., general counsel.    The move that most surprised Wall Street was the choice of Silas S. Cathcart, 61, former chairman of Illinois Tool Works Inc., as Kidder president and chief executive. Mr. Cathcart, who has no previous Wall Street experience, has been a GE director for 15 years. Quipped a Kidder official: &quot;I was thinking just the other day that what we need in here is a good tool and die man.&quot;    Lawrence A. Bossidy, the GE vice chairman who oversees the company's financial services business, said the management changes were the direct result of an investigation of Kidder operations that began last February. Mr. Bossidy said the investigation disclosed substantial weaknesses in Kidder's financial, administrative, managerial and information systems controls.    GE began its investigation after the government arrested Kidder's head of arbitrage, Richard B. Wigton, and a former arbitrager, Timothy L. Tabor, alleging the two had made millions of dollars for the firm trading on inside information. A third former Kidder official, Martin A. Siegel, pleaded guilty to two felonies for his role in the insider-trading scandal.    Mr. Bossidy said GE has shared the findings of its investigation with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. attorney's office. He said GE didn't find any evidence of violations, either criminal or civil, on the part of Mr. DeNunzio, nor did it find evidence of criminal violations on the part of any other Kidder employee.    However, Mr. Bossidy declined to say whether GE found evidence of any civil violations by other Kidder employees, or whether GE found evidence of other trading abuses beyond those already charged by the government.    Kidder currently is negotiating a settlement with the SEC of possible civil charges related to insider trading. It wasn't clear whether anything GE found in its investigation also is a subject of the settlement talks. But GE's findings that financial and other controls were lacking raise questions about the adequacy of Kidder's supervisory staff and could explain the departure of Messrs. Roche and Krantz. Neither man responded to requests for comment.    According to people familiar with the situation, the removal of Mr. DeNunzio as chief executive enhances prospects for entering into a final settlement with the SEC. Mr. DeNunzio denied yesterday that his removal was a condition for any settlement. SEC officials couldn't be reached for comment.    GE denied yesterday that the ouster of the three men is part of any &quot;deal&quot; with the SEC.    Speculation about Mr. DeNunzio's possible involvement in insider trading has been intense since Mr. Siegel admitted that he engaged in insider trading, and implicated Messrs. Wigton and Tabor. Earlier this week, the government moved to dismiss indictments against Messrs. Wigton and Tabor and Robert M. Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., saying it needed time to seek a broader indictment.    Mr. Wigton, who was suspended earlier by the firm, was one of nine Kidder executives dropped from the firm's board yesterday.    This newspaper has reported that Mr. DeNunzio told Mr. Siegel, the firm's former top mergers and acquisitions specialist, to help set up an arbitrage department at Kidder, despite the so-called &quot;Chinese Wall&quot; intended to separate arbitrage from mergers and acquisitions, and told him not to make public his role in arbitrage. A Kidder spokesman denied this at the time. Yesterday, in an interview, Mr. DeNunzio acknowledged that &quot;I knew that he (Mr. Siegel) had a responsibility to assist Dick Wigton (Kidder's former head of arbitrage) in acting as a resource to the arbitrage department, as did other people at Kidder.&quot; Mr. DeNunzio denied any wrongdoing.    Mr. DeNunzio said he testified at length before a federal grand jury and was told by prosecutors that he isn't a target of their investigation. He also said Messrs. Roche and Krantz aren't targets of the investigation. Mr. DeNunzio wouldn't say what he told the grand jury, and one of his lawyers, former U.S. Attorney Robert B. Fiske Jr., declined to comment. Messrs. DeNunzio and Siegel are expected to be important witnesses in any trial of Messrs. Wigton and Tabor.    For Kidder's rising management star, Max C. Chapman Jr., yesterday's shake-up appeared to be a double-edged sword. Mr. Chapman, 43, whom Mr. DeNunzio had long considered the prime candidate to succeed him, was named executive vice president and chief operating officer of Kidder, in charge of all Kidder operating units. But while expanding his power, GE also placed Mr. Chapman directly under its own man, Mr. Cathcart, who also will be joined at Kidder by two GE executives. These executives will report directly to Mr. Cathcart.    The moves also raise the question of whether GE intends to have its own man in the top spot at Kidder permanently.    Mr. Chapman said, &quot;They've asked me to basically run the revenue side of the business, with Cathcart coming in, who is 61 years old.&quot; Mr. Chapman said Mr. Cathcart &quot;will help in some areas where we can use some help.&quot; He added, &quot;I have every reason to believe if I do the job . . . I'll have a chance&quot; eventually to run the firm.    Mr. DeNunzio said Mr. Chapman is the leading contender to succeed Mr. Cathcart, who, according to GE, will likely stay at least a year, perhaps two.    Joining Mr. Cathcart at Kidder will be Dan L. Hale, who will be in charge of new business development, and Charles V. Sheehan, who will be Kidder's top financial and administrative officer.    Mr. Bossidy said Mr. Hale will become an &quot;architect in setting out more clearly what the vision of Kidder will be.&quot; Mr. Bossidy said that while there might be someone at Kidder who could fill Mr. Hale's role, &quot;I think we (at GE) have been more advanced in setting forth strategy than most investment banking firms.&quot;    Mr. Sheehan's mandate is to improve technology and other systems to better monitor the firm's business. Kidder has run afoul of regulators before on the issue of financial controls, and many Kidder insiders have complained for some time that the firm's back-office operations were inadequate.    Early last year, Kidder was censured by the SEC for alleged misuse of about $145 million in customers' securities as collateral for bank loans and government securities trades by the firm. The alleged misuse took place from October 1983 to October 1984.    The New York Stock Exchange last February fined the firm $300,000 and fined Mr. Roche and a former Kidder official $25,000 each for, among other things, failing to properly supervise the firm's business practices, at various times from 1982 to 1986. Some of the allegations in the two cases overlapped.    Kidder and the individuals involved in both actions settled the matters without admitting or denying guilt.    Last May this newspaper disclosed that, according to Kidder executives, in the final week of 1985 Kidder skirted Big Board and SEC capital requirements when it couldn't meet year-end cash demands. The firm had gotten caught carrying a record inventory of municipal bonds and other obligations. It wasn't clear if this event is part of any discussions the firm is having with the SEC.    Mr. DeNunzio said yesterday, &quot;We did have to scramble for funds, as did everybody else&quot; on Wall Street at that time. But he added, &quot;We were never in jeopardy&quot; with regard to the firm's capital or the firm's ability to meet its demands.    Former and current Kidder officials say Messrs. DeNunzio and Roche never wanted to spend money required to install sophisticated computer systems and other controls necessary to adequately monitor the firm's burgeoning trading and other businesses. &quot;The operations area was a joke,&quot; says one former senior official.    &quot;I'm 100% behind efforts to build new systems in our trading area,&quot; Mr. DeNunzio said. &quot;I know our guys think we've been moving too slowly,&quot; he said, adding that he agreed with that assessment. He said the slowness is in part because of the difficulty of building such systems.    In recent years Mr. DeNunzio's stewardship of the firm had become an increasing topic of controversy inside the firm. Some officials have felt that Mr. DeNunzio was too conservative in his approach to such areas as merchant banking and increasingly complex fixed-income trading. &quot;You're looking at a firm that didn't exactly make it into the modern century,&quot; a Kidder official said yesterday.    Some Kidder officials said yesterday they felt the management changes were long overdue. And there were reports on Wall Street that some Kidder officials had actually pushed GE to make changes at the top.    GE last week also extended its reach into Kidder's investment banking, placing a group of General Electric Credit Corp. staff members in Kidder's high-yield bond and leveraged buyout areas.    Mr. Bossidy said GE doesn't intend to interfere in Kidder's day-to-day operations or to change the firm's compensation schedules.    He also said GE hasn't any intention of selling Kidder and that its purchase agreement didn't provide GE with any mechanism to rescind the purchase, which cost about $600 million. He said GE, which paid part of the Kidder price in notes, plans to pay the full amount due on those notes.    While GE portrayed Mr. DeNunzio's stepping aside as a &quot;mutually determined&quot; decision, it's clear that GE's top management made up its mind some weeks ago to replace him as chief executive.    Mr. Bossidy said he met with Mr. DeNunzio last Thursday to discuss how GE planned to correct the weaknesses identified in GE's investigation. Mr. Bossidy said he raised the issue at that time about whether Mr. DeNunzio should stay in day-to-day control of Kidder.    After thinking about it over the weekend, Mr. DeNunzio met again with Mr. Bossidy Monday and agreed that he ought to give up the chief executive job, Mr. Bossidy said. &quot;Talk to him and ask him if he thought we were exercising undue pressure,&quot; Mr. Bossidy said.    Mr. DeNunzio said that Mr. Bossidy had initiated the discussion that led to his decision to step down, but said, &quot;we both agreed that it was time for a change.&quot;    However, several weeks ago, Mr. Bossidy and John F. Welch Jr., GE's chairman, met with Mr. Cathcart to offer him the chief executive job at Kidder, according to Mr. Cathcart. &quot;They proposed that they would like very much to have me come down and be president and chief executive of Kidder since DeNunzio was going to relinquish his duties. I don't know whether that was clear to&quot; Mr. DeNunzio, Mr. Cathcart said.    Mr. Bossidy said Mr. Cathcart was the only person GE talked to for the chief executive slot.    While surprised at the offer, Mr. Cathcart said the GE men told him that they believed his wide management experience would help Kidder. &quot;They felt a manager that was perhaps not steeped in the tradition of the (investment banking) industry might make some contribution,&quot; Mr. Cathcart said. </TEXT></DOC>