<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:The Ladies-First Decision</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORSUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   Your March 26 news article on the Supreme Court decision in Johnson v. Santa Clara County Transportation Agency said the court found that employers may institute affirmative-action plans to correct &quot;sex discrimination&quot; or &quot;bias.&quot; In fact, what the court said was not that bias or discrimination should be corrected -- that is well established. What it said was that even in the absence of discrimination or bias employers can and should institute goals and timetables to correct &quot;manifest imbalances.&quot; It is this term, which the court does not define, that now must govern employers' decisions to hire and promote.    The court, and many people, believes that any disparity between the composition of any employer's workforce and the composition of the potential pool of applicants for jobs is an &quot;imbalance&quot; that needs to be corrected, no matter what the preferences of the employer or the job requirements might be.    The decision casts serious doubt on the commitment of the Supreme Court to protect individual rights and the rule of law. It should at least engender a vigorous debate. One question arises from the assumption that recruitment and promotion must be sex- and race-conscious and should reflect, in a mechanical fashion, the sexual and racial composition of the population. This assumption is incompatible with belief in individual rights, in merit or in the freedom of the employer to hire and promote.    Another assumption is that the government has the right to impose a certain social and cultural vision on the nation, regardless of individual preferences. If &quot;societal attitudes&quot; prevented women from holding certain jobs in the past, the government must now change those attitudes. The result of this assumption will be a further extension of political control of individual decisions to a degree unimaginable only 20 years ago.    Finally, this decision confirms that affirmative action plays the same role in America as ideology does in the Soviet Union: It produces a vocabulary to which all must subscribe but in which few believe, and creates a fog of hypocrisy, irrationality, dishonesty, corruption and disinformation that has had disastrous effects on the public life of this country.    David R. Gress   Senior Research Fellow   Hoover Institution   Stanford, Calif.   ---   Your March 27 editorial is aptly titled &quot;The Big Lie,&quot; but not for the reasons you suggest.    The Supreme Court's most recent affirmative-action decision is neither startling or new. In Johnson v. Santa Clara Transportation Agency, the court ruled, consistent with a long line of cases following United Steelworkers v. Weber, that the Civil Rights Act of 1964 does not prohibit taking sex or race into account as a remedy for inequity in the workplace.    Employers are not mandated to favor women or minorities, as you assert; rather, employers may voluntarily consider sex or race as a &quot;plus factor&quot; for jobs in which women or minorities are conspicuously absent. In the Santa Clara County agency, none of 238 skilled-craft workers were women. The court wisely declined to require this employer to have proved its own prior illegal conduct before it engaged in a modest affirmative-action program that had no quotas or fixed preferences. The program simply permitted a well-qualified woman, Diane Joyce, to receive consideration for promotion as the first female road dispatcher. Based on an oral interview, she had scored a mere two points below Paul Johnson, who later sued. Mr. Johnson had not been the top-rated candidate, but was ranked second, followed by Ms. Joyce.    An interpretation of the Civil Rights Act that would have blocked the agency's promotion of Diane Joyce would have undermined both the law and the discretion of employers to choose from among several well-qualified candidates.    Steven Woodside   San Jose, Calif.   The writer was attorney for the transportation agency in the Johnson case.    ---   If a woman is equally or better qualified for a promotion and is promoted, then more power to her. But this ruling has a sad twist for Paul Johnson and men in general. Although a man might be better qualified and just as deserving, there is a strong chance the promotion will be given to a less-qualified woman simply because she is a woman.    This ruling may have unfortunate rippling effects for those of us women who choose to work in the home to raise our children. It will become increasingly difficult to choose this option and rely on a husband's income to meet family financial needs. I hate to think that a woman who wants to be a full-time mother will have to leave her children for someone else to raise and enter the labor market because her husband (who happens to be a man) can't get deserved promotions.    My husband and I have spent several years and have made substantial financial sacrifices so that he could receive the education and gain the experience to be competitive in the labor market and provide for our family. Now it seems the rules have been changed in the middle of the game.    Cheryl Kemp   ---   Johnson v. Santa Clara Transportation Agency may have been Justice Brennan's way of honoring the passing on March 6 of the 130th anniversary of the Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford. In Dred Scott, 80-year-old Chief Justice Roger Taney substituted his will for that of Congress on the question of slavery in the territories, and helped unleash the Civil War. In Johnson, another 80-year-old justice, William Brennan, substituted his will for that of the Congress that enacted the 1964 Civil Rights Act, and in so doing has unleashed a civil war of another sort, one in which men will be pitted against women and blacks against whites in the proportional redistribution of individual rights along group lines.    M. Miller Baker   Washington</TEXT></DOC>