<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880204-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE HOUSE REJECTED Reagan's request for $36.2 million in Contra aid.    The Democrat-led chamber voted 219-211 to end military aid to the rebels fighting to overthrow Nicaragua's Sandinista government. Current assistance expires Feb. 29. The defeat came despite a two-week lobbying effort by the White House that included Reagan's offer to give Congress a role in the release of the more than $3 million of weapons and ammunition included in the aid package.    House Democrats are expected to propose a $10 million to $15 million aid package that would be limited to food, shelter, clothing and medical supplies.    ---   WALSH IS CONSIDERING criminal charges against McFarlane.    The special prosecutor in the Iran-Contra affair is closely reviewing the former national security adviser's role in the scandal, according to those familiar with the investigation. They said Walsh may seek charges against McFarlane for allegedly submitting false statements to Congress, or misleading it, about some of the Reagan administration's activities in support of the Nicaraguan rebels.    The sources stressed that a decision on the matter hasn't been made. It had been believed that Walsh had decided against prosecuting McFarlane.    ---   THE SENATE CONFIRMED Judge Anthony Kennedy to the Supreme Court.    Ending a political battle that left the court short-handed since June, the Senate voted 97-0 to approve the federal appeals court judge to succeed retired Justice Lewis Powell. The 51-year-old Kennedy, of California, is to be sworn into office Feb. 18, becoming the 104th justice in U.S. history. He is Reagan's third appointment. The president, in a statement, said he was &quot;extremely pleased&quot; by the Senate's action.    Kennedy was Reagan's third choice for Powell's seat. Bork was rejected by the Senate, and Ginsburg withdrew after admitting past marijuana use.    ---   The State Department said Assistant Secretary of State Murphy will leave soon for the Mideast to meet with leaders of Israel and neighboring Arab states to discuss some form of Palestinian self-rule in the Israeli-occupied territories. Murphy also will seek &quot;a broader political settlement.&quot;    An Israeli army officer killed a Palestinian protester in the West Bank, bringing to 42 the number of Arabs killed in nearly two months of unrest. Meanwhile, Shamir pledged support for the region's Jewish settlers.    ---   New Jersey's high court ruled that hiring a surrogate mother is &quot;illegal and perhaps criminal.&quot; The court also gave custody of the 22-month-old child known as Baby M to her father, but ruled that the mother, who reneged on a $10,000 surrogate contract, can't be denied visitation rights.    ---   Britain has proposed a U.N. arms embargo against Iran to cut off spare parts and military training as well as new weapons for at least two years unless Iran agrees to a peace accord with Iraq, the Associated Press reported. In the Persian Gulf, Iran twice attacked a Norwegian tanker.    ---   A Swedish news service reported an accident at a nuclear power plant in the Soviet Union. Moscow denied the report, and the Stockholm-based agency later said its report was based on rumors. The false report may have been prompted by an international nuclear agency's test of an early-warning system.    ---   British nurses ignored government warnings and staged a strike for higher salaries. During a march at the prime minister's residence, some nurses scuffled with police. It was their first nationwide walkout in 40 years of the National Health Service, and caused hospitals to postpone elective surgery and curtail some admissions.    ---   Taipei's ruling party announced political changes that will allow Taiwanese to elect all members of parliament, which currently is dominated by lawmakers from mainland China. They haven't faced re-election in nearly 40 years. The changes are said to be part of a liberalization begun by President Chiang Ching-kuo, who died last month.    ---   Canada's Mulroney has announced the dismissal of his supply and services minister. The Quebec politician, Michel Cote, failed to report a loan from a friend as required under conflict-of-interest rules. He is the eighth cabinet member to be fired or resign since Mulroney became prime minister in 1984.    ---   Police in Puerto Rico arrested three members of the Teamsters union on charges of murder, arson and conspiracy in connection with the 1986 New Year's Eve fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel in San Juan. The arrests came as a hotel worker pleaded guilty to reduced charges after confessing to setting the blaze that killed 97 people.    ---   Civil defense officials in Peru said at least 30 people were killed in an avalanche of mud and rocks in Huanuco Province, about 265 miles northwest of Lima. About 70 people were reported missing in the mud slide, which was caused by heavy rains.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci arrived in Lisbon for talks with Portuguese leaders, who are threatening to renegotiate a U.S. military base treaty because of cuts in American aid. In Madrid, Spain and the U.S. began talks on a new defense pact. Washington agreed last month to withdraw its bombers from Torrejon air base. </TEXT></DOC>