<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880506-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Panama Bungle: U.S. Tries to Salvage Its Muddled Campaign Against Gen. Noriega --- Propaganda Program Is Next But So Far Whole Thing Is a Foreign Policy Fiasco --- An Hombre-to-Hombre Talk </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger and John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM GOVMT </CO><G> EXE CNG JUS DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan, in a new attempt to rescue the clumsy U.S. effort to oust Gen. Manuel Noriega, has ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to begin using clandestine radio broadcasts, leaflets and rumormongering against the Panamanian dictator.    Senior intelligence officials familiar with the newly authorized propaganda effort don't expect much. Mostly, they say, it represents one more low-budget attempt to bail out a failing campaign to unseat Gen. Noriega. Telling Panamanians what they already know about their military stong man -- who is accused of drugdealing, corruption and human-rights violations -- is unlikely to succeed when American jawboning and economic sanctions have already flopped, they say.    The latest scheme is one more page in the growing case study of what so far is a major Reagan administration foreign-policy disaster. Throughout, it has been a policy crippled by conflict and confusion and paralyzed by presidential indecision.    --Senior officials complain that President Reagan has consistently remained passive and mute at numerous meetings while Secretary of State George Shultz and Adm. William Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, argued over Panama policy. He has done nothing to resolve disputes or shape his administration's policies, officials contend.    --The Defense Investigative Service is searching for the source of press leaks criticizing State Department proposals to kidnap Gen. Noriega and to give opposition leaders sanctuary on U.S. bases in Panama. Among the leading suspects: members of Adm. Crowe's staff.    --Early this year, the Justice Department's announcement that two Florida federal grand juries were about to indict Gen. Noriega on drug-trafficking charges caught the rest of the government off guard. That complicated ongoing negotiations to ease the Panamanian leader from power.    --As far back as late 1985, top officials selected then-CIA Director William Casey to tell Gen. Noriega to stop dealing with Colombian drug dealers and Cuban spies. But, according to senior administration officials, Mr. Casey botched the job.    After months of escalating administration bluster, Gen. Noriega stays entrenched, the Panamanian economy is a shambles and the U.S. looks weak and foolish. &quot;The U.S. has really put itself in a terrible box and will have one hell of an economic mess to clean up,&quot; says Ambler Moss, U.S. ambassador to Panama from 1978 to 1982.    Secret negotiations between Gen. Noriega and U.S. officials continue, and Gen. Vernon Walters, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, is traveling through Latin America in a belated search for support for Washington's dump-Noriega program. But even if the Panamanian leader finally leaves, the U.S. will be left with a badly damaged image in Latin America. So far, the administration has achieved the worst of all worlds: alienating its friends without toppling its enemies.    In the latest development, administration officials wrangled for a month before settling on what one intelligence official calls a &quot;bargain-basement&quot; propaganda campaign against Gen. Noriega. That alone illustrates the lack of coordination and commitment that has characterized the administration's Panama policy from the beginning.    Before agreeing to the new covert policy, the CIA and its cautious director, William Webster, rejected State Department proposals for financial or paramilitary aid to anti-Noriega forces. Senior CIA officials, believing they were being asked to bail out a botched State Department policy, refused to launch a major covert operation to depose the dictator. Any operation large enough to succeed, they argued, would revive unpleasant memories of Yanqui intervention in Central America and brand Gen. Noriega's opponents as U.S. stooges.    Even before it gets going, the new propaganda plan is being complicated by Pentagon refusal to let the CIA use U.S. bases to broadcast anti-Noriega messages. The military worries about provoking retaliation against servicemen, other Americans, or even the Panama Canal.    The campaign, which has been presented to congressional intelligence committees, &quot;is doomed to fail,&quot; predicts one intelligence official. One reason for such an assessment is that the operation's budget is a mere fraction of what the CIA spent on unsuccessful campaigns to unseat Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini and Libya's Col. Moammar Gadhafi.    The administration has garbled its messages of concern to Gen. Noriega since 1985, when it decided it couldn't any longer tolerate his ties to Colombian drug dealers, Cuban spies and Mafia money-launderers.    Officials first turned to Mr. Casey to tell Gen. Noriega to clean up his act. The late CIA director invited the Panamanian to CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., where the two had a friendly chat in Mr. Casey's seventh-floor office. Then the general was turned over to a CIA underling. That CIA official, assuming that Mr. Casey already had read the riot act to Gen. Noriega, treated the Panamanian to a gracious lunch in the Virginia countryside.    Gen. Noriega left filled with good feelings for his friends in the U.S. and convinced that the CIA, which had begun renting his services two decades ago, still supported him. &quot;Not only was the message not delivered, but the wrong message was delivered,&quot; says one senior U.S. official.    The administration tried again in mid-1987, suspending military and economic aid to Panama after rioters, led by some government officials, attacked the American Embassy in Panama City. By December, Mr. Shultz and Elliott Abrams, the assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, wanted Gen. Noriega out immediately. But the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the CIA and the civilian leadership of the Defense Department all warned that Gen. Noriega was a tough customer who was capable of turning American pressure around to rally support for himself.    So the administration decided it was time for a little hombre-to-hombre straight talk. Assistant Defense Secretary Richard Armitage, a brawny Vietnam veteran and bodybuilder, was dispatched to Panama at the end of December to see the dictator.    Over a bottle of Old Parr Scotch whiskey, according to sources present at the meeting, he made two points to Gen. Noriega: Mr. Abrams wasn't the only one who wanted a return to civilian rule in Panama, and the U.S. can work only with democracies.    But within a week, a different version of the meeting leaked out. There were press accounts saying that Mr. Armitage had demanded that Gen. Noriega leave Panama immediately. Defense officials blame the State Department for the leaks; &quot;State was so anxious they went off on their own,&quot; says one. State Department officials claim the Panamanian opposition leaked misleading information.    Two events in February finally forced a confrontation and at the same time limited the administration's options. First, the two grand juries in Florida indicted Gen. Noriega on drug-trafficking charges. A few weeks later, Gen. Noriega's hand-picked president, Eric Delvalle, encouraged by the State Department, tried to fire him during a live television broadcast. The dictator instead fired the president, who fled.    State and Defense department officials complain that Justice Department representatives, at meetings beginning last June, had consistently said investigations of Gen. Noriega hadn't yielded solid evidence and probably wouldn't produce indictments.    Then the prosecutors, after locating new witnesses, suddenly changed course. Early this year, William Weld, at that time head of the Justice Department's Criminal Division, told officials from other departments indictments would be handed up soon. But he refused to give much information. In an interview this week, Mr. Weld recalled that he cited grand-jury secrecy constraints and read only from a prepared summary of the charges.    The indictments &quot;limited the space in which we could deal with Noriega. It made it almost impossible to make a deal with him,&quot; a senior U.S. official says.    Mr. Delvalle's subsequent abortive effort to fire the general only served to expose an administration that talked tough but wasn't. U.S. officials' course with Mr. Delvalle had been to &quot;generally encourage him to stand up to Noriega and generally state that we'd be with him if he did, but to fudge when asked what we'd do specifically,&quot; concedes one Reagan administration official.    After Mr. Delvalle went into hiding, Mr. Abrams searched for other ways to pressure Gen. Noriega. Mr. Abrams, confident of success, publicly predicted that Gen. Noriega would be out within weeks, but the CIA and the military torpedoed his audacious plans, including schemes to kidnap the general or to shelter opposition leaders at U.S. bases.    The Pentagon argued that using U.S. military facilities in Panama to overthrow Gen. Noriega might give nations such as Greece, Turkey and Spain second thoughts about the American bases on their soil. &quot;The military did the right thing, and that was to wave a red flag in front of some really wild ideas,&quot; says a senior military officer.    Any support for the State Department's proposals quickly evaporated when the ideas wound up in the press. Infuriated officials demanded an investigation, which is focusing on the military. A spokesman for the Joint Chiefs says he has no idea who leaked the information. &quot;Adm. Crowe wasn't involved in any attempt to discredit State,&quot; the spokesman says.    The CIA, meanwhile, repeatedly warned that actions against Gen. Noriega would be difficult because Panama's armed forces were united behind him. After a failed March 16 coup attempt by Panamanian military officers, Michael Armacost, the under secretary of state for political affairs, turned to a CIA official at a meeting and asked: &quot;Would you consider this a division in the armed forces?&quot; The assembled officials laughed.    On April 8, with Gen. Noriega still in place and mocking the U.S., the White House imposed economic sanctions on Panama. State Department hardliners fretted that the move was too late; Defense Department officials worried about stirring anti-American feelings in Panama.    The administration hoped that -- like an economic neutron bomb -- sanctions could destroy Gen. Noriega without wrecking Panama's economy. &quot;So far, it hasn't worked as planned,&quot; says Robert Kimmitt, the former General Counsel of the Treasury, who worked on previous sanctions programs. &quot;He has so thoroughly permeated the body of the economy that it's difficult to excise the despot without damaging the vital organs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>