<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880721-0067 </DOCNO><HL> Democrats: The New Me-Too Party </HL><AUTHOR> Robert L. Bartley </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The big story of the week is that the Democrats managed to conduct a national convention without making fools of themselves. The Republicans got no gifts, and if they are to win in November they will have to do it on their own.    This is man-bites-dog news, because in recent years the GOP could count most Democratic conventions as a big plus. The 1984 San Francisco gathering was a particular lulu, with Sister Boom-Boom, Walter Mondale's promise to raise your taxes, and Geraldine Ferraro's vice presidential nomination. At the 1980 New York gathering, one Sen. Teddy Kennedy saw his bid to unseat the party's incumbent president come to an unhappy end. After the 1976 New York gathering, the only Democratic convention I have witnessed where the party emerged unified, an unknown Democratic governor went on to unseat an incumbent Republican president. However narrow Jimmy Carter's victory or tenuous Jerry Ford's incumbency, it is a clear warning for the GOP.    Especially so since earlier Republican victories were also rooted in Democratic convention disasters. In Miami in 1972, counterculture delegates delayed George McGovern's acceptance speech until the nation was asleep, and Mr. McGovern named Thomas Eagleton as his vice presidential pick, only to withdraw him for failing to reveal a history of mental problems serious enough to require electroshock treatment. And of course the granddaddy of them all, the 1968 Chicago convention, laid the basis for Richard Nixon's election as two Democratic constituencies, Mayor Daley's Chicago police and the anti-war movement bloodied one another's heads in Grant Park.    This week, the same party gathered here to accuse Ronald Reagan of being soft on drugs and indifferent to family values. And to lambaste the federal debt while promising day care for all children, more health care for the elderly, more help for college students, a cure for AIDS and, at least according to its presidential nominee, frugality and no increase in taxes. And make no mistake, the Democrats are carrying it all off handsomely.    Many Republicans naturally hoped instead for their usual luck. They could envision thousands of ultraliberal delegates descending on Atlanta like Sherman's Army, leaving the city ablaze with gay rights, abortion rights, tax-and-spend special interests and America as villain of the world. In particular, in Republican dreams, Jesse Jackson looked like an 800-pound spoiler.    The GOP dreamers joined with radical Democrats in hoping Jesse actually took his heady-left rhetoric seriously. But that is not what the Jackson candidacy was about; Jesse Jackson measures himself not against Michael Dukakis but against Martin Luther King Jr. He recognized that at this point the political advancement of black citizens lies in his being not a sore loser but a gracious one -- not in challenging Lloyd Bentsen for the vice presidency but in celebrating uplift from the slums. In the fall, that interest will lie in Mr. Jackson establishing himself as a net benefit to the ticket.    What possibility there remains of a debacle rests with the candidate himself. If George Bush lacks the common touch, Mr. Dukakis is not exactly endearing, and coolness and compulsive self-control occasionally have been known to be marks of inner fragility. More concretely, there is his current Massachusetts budget -- &quot;balanced&quot; by new borrowings and digging a bigger hole for the new fiscal year. But a nabob of the Washington press corps muses, &quot;I don't think you can sell that,&quot; and he is probably right. It took John Zaccaro's guilty plea to convince members of the national press corps that there may have been some reason to probe Gerry Ferraro's family finances. And it will probably take a Massachusetts financial crisis in 1989 or 1990 to convince them they should master the intricacies of state budgeting well enough to ask intelligent questions.    The bottom line is that the Democrats will come out of Atlanta shouting &quot;unity&quot;: Michael Dukakis and Jesse Jackson and Lloyd Bentsen and Jimmy Carter and Jim Wright and Jim Hightower and Barbara Mikulski pulling together for victory -- and for little else they care to explain. A lot of promises in the podium rhetoric of individual speakers; no talk of hard choices from Farmer Jim on agriculture or Aunt Barb on families. But officially, no party platform to speak of.    And a presidential candidate who doesn't like to be called a &quot;liberal&quot; but enjoys being described as a manager. A vice-presidential hopeful who probably would be a Republican by now if it had worked better for his soul mate John Connally. A lot of talk about the federal debt, Iran-contra, various scandals and pseudo-scandals of the Reagan administration, high budget deficits and &quot;caring.&quot; A lot of name-calling directed at Republicans, especially George Bush and not excluding Ronald Reagan. Why not, the same strategy meant victory in a whole series of very tight senatorial races two years ago, winning the Democrats back the control of that body they have used so well to check the initiatives and cripple the people of the Reagan administration -- fostering the image of managerial chaos against which their presidential candidate can now run.    Yet this unity, this campaign strategy, is not without its price for the Democrats. They are running away from what they really believe, and what voters may suspect they'd actually do in office. Their electoral strategy is based on co-opting their opponent's issues. In a historic role reversal, in short, the Democrats have become the new me-too party. What they now offer, officially at least, is Reaganism, better managed.    What this means is Ronald Reagan has already won on the battlefield of ideas. In foreign policy, his military buildup remade relations with the Soviet Union; the startling internal changes there were at the very least speeded by the frustration of external ambitions -- especially so because congressional Democrats backed aid to the Afghan mujahideen as they undermined the Nicaraguan contras. In domestic policy, Mr. Reagan's economic policies both checked inflation and restored real economic growth. His tax cuts and the rearguard effort to protect them represented an enormous if not complete victory on the size-of-government issue.    Intellectually, Democrats are left to carp at the margins. They can try to exploit the economic turmoil that growth inevitably causes, offering the nostrum of protectionism. They can castigate deficits, but sound silly also promising more social spending. Politically, though, it remains to be seen whether Mr. Reagan's party can repeat his intellectual victory on the electoral battlefield, where it meets a newly serious adversary. With the electorate no longer threatened by the dragons Mr. Reagan has slain, it may be ready for a fling with managerial-sounding Democrats.    Especially so if the Republicans repeat their traditional mistakes just when the Democrats are correcting theirs. While Democrats have torn themselves apart in ideological battles, the Republican mistake has been the opposite. They have courted blandness, willingly accepting their historic me-too role. Except of course in the two Reagan landslides, they've tended to offer the welfare state, better managed.    Even today, if the Democrats offer a protectionist monstrosity, the Republicans offer protectionist salami-slicing. If the Democrats threaten a big, new health program, Republicans propose a little one. If the Democrats promise day care, Republicans somehow fail to explain that if you wanted a recipe for day-care shortage, it would be turning the problem over to a chain of federal centers, inspected by OSHA, with conflict-of-interest rules about relatives, civil-service examinations for employes and so on.    The Republican me-too tendencies are vastly exacerbated by the pervasiveness of modern political polling. People of course want all sorts of good things, and polls will register these wish-lists. But polls record opinions before the debate, while elections record opinions after the debate. And the debate is or ought to be not over wish-lists but how these needs are best met -- in particular, whether they're met by redistribution or growth. Whether its better to meet needs by the government claiming more resources or by leaving the resources in individual hands. This of course is precisely the debate the Democrats hope to avoid coming out of Atlanta with their me-too stance.    Republicans can scarcely consolidate Mr. Reagan's intellectual victory until they recognize it's been won. They are no longer the me-too party, and need to avoid the me-too game. If one party finds its electoral interest in blurring the issues, the other party is stupid not to sharpen them. Harry Truman did not rout the me-too Republicans by moving to the center; he moved left, positioning himself against the &quot;do-nothing Congress.&quot; Similarly, Margaret Thatcher has dominated British politics by moving right. But except in the two Reagan landslides, Republicans have never been able to get this lesson through their heads.    Faced with a me-too campaign this fall, Republicans need to seize every opportunity, if not to move to the right, at least to make unapologetically clear where the mainstream of their party now stands. George Bush is off to an excellent start by proposing a new tax cut; a lower capital-gains rate would almost surely be self-financing and anyway may be needed if the economy turns down in 1989 when tax-cut stimulus fades. The Republicans' vice-presidential choice will clearly be an important signal; debates between Mr. Bentsen and a Bentsen clone would make the Democratic point perfectly.    The issue agenda also could be pushed further. Another imaginative tax proposal would be cutting the Social Security tax, balancing the system with a gradual extension of the retirement age; conventional political thinkers would blanch, but voters might recognize a good bargain when they see it. Republicans could also do well to follow Treasury Secretary Baker's lead on exchange rates, however esoteric it is to explain that their volatility is the real root of the economic anxiety feeding Democratic hopes.    Whether or not these particular ideas will appeal to George Bush and his Republicans in New Orleans, they need to emphasize what marketing experts call product differentiation. Coming out of Atlanta unified in a me-too stance clearly gives the Democrats their best shot at breaking the recent Republican dominance of presidential politics. But it's also an opportunity for the GOP to persuade voters to buy the genuine article over the imitation; if Republicans can win even without convention-time gifts, what will be left for the Democrats to try next?    ---   Mr. Bartley is the Journal's editor. </TEXT></DOC>