<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Where Is West Virginia? </HL><SO> </SO><IN> ECO </IN><TEXT>   Re your Sept. 21 page-one article on West Virginia's &quot;State of Despair&quot;: I am a West Virginia &quot;expatriate.&quot; My family came to rural Roane County about 1820 and almost all of the progeny remained in this vicinity until my generation. Of my 40-plus first cousins, only one-quarter have stayed and there is no doubt the prime reason the three-quarters left was because employment opportunities were better elsewhere. What happened? Who or what is to blame? What must change to reverse this situation?    First, let's face the historical music. West Virginia has always been a marginal economic unit. The Civil War caused Virginia to be unreasonably divided; existing Virginia has suffered little but West Virginia has lived with a major handicap from birth that has become even more exaggerated with the transition to the modern, world-wide economy. But there are some real strengths for West Virginia: abundant natural energy resources (coal and natural gas), abundant woodlands and fresh water, excellent waterway transport for bulk commodities, and a determined and proud but cautious people. Properly exploited and managed, the state's private-sector economy could support at least half its current population on a basis competitive with any of the other rural, mountainous states. I see the state's continuing population loss as an inevitable, albeit painful, adjustment to modern economic facts of life.    But this is only part of the explanation. West Virginia has always been a state of suspicious regional factions trying to divide a small pie too many ways. The state can really only afford to support each element of higher or professional education at one geographic location, e.g. one medical school, one engineering school, one teacher's college. In recent years, it has attempted to finance two or more in each category to appease regional interests.    Here we come to the missing key element that must be added to begin to solve West Virginia's problems -- political leadership and integrity. We have elected too many third-rate, less-than-honest people to state and federal offices, executive and legislative. To make matters worse, the state has been victimized by outsider political interests with hidden agendas not related to the state's prosperity -- not to speak of the broken promises once the votes were delivered. Our representatives and senators sent to Washington haven't delivered anything like the state's fair share of federal or defense installations and jobs.    Closely related to this failed political leadership is the state's &quot;death duel&quot; between business and labor. Union bosses and business owners have to stop fighting for pennies in the dirt, take a cooperative, long-term view and concentrate on adding stable, private-sector jobs in competitive business areas.    Properly approached, the major chemical and energy companies with existing plants in the state would invest heavily to ensure their continuing ability to do business and even expand in West Virginia. Other states' environmental regulations and popular dislike of &quot;dirty&quot; industries are providing West Virginia with an important economic opportunity. Using sensible and flexible attitudes all around, West Virginia can protect its environment, retain and add to its basic chemical and energy industries making them competitive.    The heritage of Mountaineers has been to distrust government, be independent and never to ask for help from anyone. This heritage needs to be modified to make government leaders accountable, cooperate for common survival and insist on a fair slice of the &quot;federal pie.&quot;    William Howard Taylor II   San Francisco   ---   Like many West Virginians, I am acutely aware of the many problems that have beset our state in recent years, but to paint the whole state as being in despair, &quot;mired in poverty, corruption&quot; and battling a deep gloom is grossly unfair and will hurt the state as we work to strengthen its economic base.    West Virginia, like many other states, is undergoing a transitional phase in its economy and the trends are positive. The state did experience a population loss, particularly in 1984 and 1985. Despite this loss in population, nonagricultural employment increased by 15,400 jobs between 1983 and 1987. Following the national trend, manufacturing and mining jobs are down, but service-industry employment is up.    Of course, all is not rosy, but statistics indicate that all is not as desperate. For example, from 1983 to 1987, the state's personal income rose by 16% and per capita income increased by 20%. Unemployment does remain a persistent problem, but this trend has decreased.    Furthermore, new business incorporations increased 11% in 1987. Business failures have shown a dramatic drop of 36% since 1985 -- the peak year. And business and industry invested a total of $1.6 billion in the state in 1987, topping the $1.2 billion invested in 1986.    West Virginia has the lowest crime rate in the country and the highest percentage of people who own their own homes.    Yes, we do have problems with illiteracy, health care, education and a tight state budget. But literacy volunteer organizations are proliferating throughout the state, a new state-of-the art hospital has just opened in Morgantown and the problems of education are being addressed intensely. The whole point is that many West Virginians are working hard to solve the state's problems.    Benjamin H. Hayes   President   Monongahela Power Co.    Fairmont, W.Va. </TEXT></DOC>