<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BRITAIN AND FRANCE DECIDED to send mine sweepers to the Mideast.    As U.S. and Omani helicopters scoured coastal waters just outside the Strait of Hormuz after four mines were found, Washington welcomed the allies' actions. Both Britain and France distanced themselves from U.S. convoy operations, however, saying the mine sweepers would be used only to protect their own ships in the Persian Gulf region. Meanwhile, a convoy of three reflagged tankers under U.S. Navy escort arrived in Kuwait to be loaded at the emirate's main oil terminal.    Iran's envoy to the U.N. said Tehran would cooperate in seeking peace in the gulf, but refused to take a stand on a U.N. resolution calling for a truce.    ---   A Soviet arms negotiator confirmed that Moscow has begun deploying a mobile nuclear weapon that the U.S. said is the first intercontinental ballistic missile designed for launching from railroad cars. Viktor Karpov denied that deployment of the missile, known in the West as the SS-24, violates the unratified SALT II arms agreement.    ---   Weinberger faulted a peace plan proposed last week by five Central American leaders, saying the regional initiative lacked deadlines for democratic changes and the removal of Soviet-bloc advisers from Nicaragua. The defense secretary also said the proposal didn't include assurances that the Contras remain as a military force.    ---   South Korea's government warned against violence in labor unrest that has spread across the country and said it might crack down on protests that followed Seoul's announcement in June of political changes. The labor disputes have crippled a number of firms, including Hyundai Motor, which again halted output.    ---   Opening arguments were presented in the espionage court-martial of Marine Sgt. Clayton Lonetree, with a prosecutor saying the former embassy guard in Moscow betrayed the U.S. by trading secret data for sex. Defense attorneys said Lonetree was a patriot who wanted to become a double agent.    ---   Canada introduced legislation to stem the flow of bogus refugees into the country. The measure, which would substantially increase fines and jail sentences for smugglers of immigrants, follows public protests over the arrival last month of a shipload of 174 Indians, all of whom claimed refugee status in Canada.    ---   The State Department rejected a visa request from a Chilean marksman who was to participate in the Pan American Games in Indianapolis. A spokesman said the request from the reputed member of Chile's secret police was rebuffed because of his links to &quot;extreme&quot; political violence.    ---   A Greek terrorist group claimed responsibility for Monday's bomb attack on a bus carrying U.S. Air Force personnel in an Athens suburb. The left-wing organization, called November 17, pledged to continue assaults on American military targets until all U.S. bases in Greece are closed.    ---   A South African miner was killed at his coal-mine hostel, Trans Natal Coal Corp. said. The 36-year-old black had defied the National Union of Mineworkers strike, which began Sunday, and continued to work. It was the first report of a strike-related death. As many as 340,000 miners at 44 gold and coal mines have joined the walkout.    ---   An ABA report said the law authorizing the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate government aides should be renewed next year. The report to the American Bar Association's House of Delegates, meeting in San Francisco, said the law was needed to ensure public confidence.    ---   A light plane crashed in Munich, West Germany, setting fire to a fast-food restaurant and a crowded city bus. Police said at least six people were killed and 14 others injured. The plane was headed for Munich Reim airport, about a mile from the crash site, on a flight from Augsburg.    ---   Medical experts in Boston said large-scale testing will begin soon to discover whether shock-wave machines can replace surgery for gallstone patients. The lithotripter, a machine that smashes stones in the body, has become the accepted treatment for kidney stones since it was introduced about four years ago.    ---   Libyan planes dropped bombs and napalm on the oasis of Faya Largeau in northern Chad in response to Ndjamena's weekend seizure of the main town in the Aouzou strip, which had been annexed by Tripoli. It was the third consecutive day that Libyan forces have attacked targets inside Chad.    ---   Three time bombs exploded in the Pakistani sugar-milling city of Mardan, killing at least 11 people and wounding about 40 others, officials said. Responsibility wasn't immediately claimed for the blasts, which sparked anti-government demonstrations.    ---   The Navy disclosed that its secret hostage rescue team, Seal Team Six, has been under financial investigation since late 1985. The inquiry by the Navy and the Justice Department has resulted in federal charges against three people for theft and falsifying expense vouchers, naval officials said. </TEXT></DOC>