<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881110-0111 </DOCNO><HL> The Next President: No Ideologue, Bush Is Likely to Be Pragmatic, Work With Congress --- Right Fears He Will Ease Off On Issues Like Star Wars; But He Can Be Stubborn --- A Battle Over Appointments </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BIO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   George Bush is no Ronald Reagan.    Though he swept to a clear electoral victory by running on the Reagan legacy, the president-elect is a far different man, philosophically and stylistically, from the president he served with unfailing loyalty for eight years.    Mr. Bush's presidency is likely to be more flexible and less predictable than Mr. Reagan's. By temperament and background, the new president is more inclined to work with Congress, and is far better prepared to run his own foreign policy.    But having emerged from the campaign without the easily identified policy mandate or congressional support Mr. Reagan enjoyed when he first took office, Mr. Bush may be forced into more accommodations with Democrats. He is less capable of using the power of personality to rally the public behind him, and he will be buffeted more by pressures from his party's right wing.    Mr. Bush isn't an ideologue. He believes strongly in basic Republican Party tenets -- especially low taxes and unobtrusive government -- but is more moderate and pragmatic than his predecessor. &quot;President Reagan came in with a strong core of inner beliefs,&quot; says Lamar Alexander, a former Tennessee governor and a Bush friend. &quot;I'm sure the vice president has them too, but they're not as apparent.&quot;    Because Mr. Bush doesn't have a Reaganesque core of a simple but clear philosophy, a battle for the soul of his presidency is about to unfold. The powerful figures around Mr. Bush -- particularly the politically astute James Baker and his former deputy, Richard Darman -- are poised to take command of the foreign and domestic agendas quickly. Mr. Bush promptly named Mr. Baker, perhaps his closest associate, to be his secretary of state, and some in Washington already are speaking of Mr. Baker as the &quot;prime minister&quot; of the Bush administration.    Mr. Darman, a Baker protege, is widely expected to become the director of the Office of Management and Budget, a position from which he could exercise much control over budget deliberations with Congress.    But some others, particularly Republican Party conservatives who supported Mr. Bush only grudgingly, will push to make their presence felt. This struggle will be played out in the next few weeks as Mr. Bush picks the people who will hold top jobs in his administration.    &quot;Personnel is policy,&quot; says conservative activist Richard Viguerie. &quot;No. 1, above all else,&quot; he says, is the job of White House chief of staff.    To offset the power of the moderates, conservatives want to force someone more to their liking into that crucial job, and are lining up behind New Hampshire Gov. John Sununu. More pragmatic Bush partisans prefer the current vice presidential chief of staff, Craig Fuller, a likable and low-key Bush confidant who yesterday was named co-director of the transition team, along with pollster Robert Teeter. As chief of staff, Mr. Fuller -- or, for that matter, Mr. Teeter -- would be unlikely to try to put a personal imprint on policy. Thus, Messrs. Baker and Darman would dominate foreign and domestic policy making.    Beyond handling relations with his own party's right wing, Mr. Bush's other big job before he is inaugurated Jan. 20 is to build bridges to Democrats in Congress, who may feel emboldened by their own election successes and embittered by the nastiness of the campaign. Bush associates predict that the new president, a former congressman, will move promptly, perhaps appointing a couple of Democrats to high positions in his administration.    &quot;There's a personal relationship to start with&quot; between Mr. Bush and many members of Congress, says Gov. Sununu. &quot;Now he has to convert that personal relationship into a presidential relationship, and he has to do that fairly quickly.&quot;    Some Republicans think Mr. Bush should quickly present a domestic legislative agenda and open budget deliberations, to take advantage of what they believe will be a period of Democratic disarray and recrimination over the Dukakis loss. &quot;If I were Bush, I would want to move fairly aggressively fairly fast and wouldn't pull any punches,&quot; says Rep. Dick Cheney of Wyoming, a leading House Republican who was Gerald Ford's chief of staff. &quot;Time is only going to strengthen their {Democrats'} position.&quot;    But no matter how deftly he moves, Mr. Bush simply won't have the kind of support that made Mr. Reagan's first 100 days so active and successful. In 1980, Republicans won a dozen new Senate seats and took charge of that chamber, and picked up 33 House seats. This year, Mr. Bush's party lost at least one seat in the Senate and two in the House, and may lose as many as five House seats when all votes are counted. Democrats maintained clear control of both chambers. &quot;It's a different hand he's been dealt,&quot; says Gov. Sununu.    Mr. Reagan was also able to move effectively because he had won a clear policy mandate to cut taxes, increase defense spending and squeeze domestic programs. The 1988 campaign, which focused on Mr. Bush's no-new-taxes pledge and issues like crime and patriotism, didn't produce anything like that.    As a result of Mr. Bush's own pragmatism and such political problems, some expect that he may stick with politically popular conservative causes, like the tax pledge, while sliding away from some less popular ones. Conservatives worry, for example, that despite his campaign talk, Mr. Bush may quietly scale back the White House commitment to Mr. Reagan's missile-defense system, the Strategic Defense Initiative.    &quot;The jury is still out on the vice president's personal commitment to deploying even a limited SDI system as quickly as possible,&quot; worries Frank Gaffney, a former Pentagon official who heads the conservative Center for Security Policy. Strongly backing the program &quot;will entail considerable costs to him politically as well as financially, and the willingness of George Bush to pay those costs . . . is far from clear.&quot;    Similarly, it will be hard for Mr. Bush to build support among skeptical Democrats for aid to the Contra rebels fighting Nicaragua's Sandinista government. Bush aides insist he will try. They suggest, though, that the effort will be part of a new policy tack in which Mr. Bush will place more emphasis on diplomatic contacts with Nicaragua's government and urge Democrats to support Contra aid with the goal of pressuring and containing the Sandinistas rather than overthrowing them.    Mr. Bush's precise course in such matters is harder to predict than was Mr. Reagan's because the president-elect seems guided more by his desire to be an effective problem-solver than by any drive to follow an internal ideological compass.    Over the years, Mr. Bush has shifted his positions on basic issues like gun control, abortion and supply-side economics. He prides himself on his ability to adjust his style to move through the diverse roles of businessman, legislator, ambassador and Central Intelligence Agency director.    Friends describe him as a man who decides issues according to practical guidelines rather than philosophy. &quot;He has basic principles that are strong ones, and they are manufactured out of a lifetime of dealing with problems on a one-by-one basis,&quot; says Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, a longtime Bush acquaintance. &quot;He didn't get them out of a textbook.&quot;    Yet despite his long record of flexibility, Mr. Bush occasionally surprised close associates during the presidential campaign by displaying a stubborn streak. He steadfastly refused aides' pleas that he distance himself more sharply from Mr. Reagan and tell more of his role in the Iran-Contra affair, for example. And he clearly ignored some top advisers when he selected Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate.    Although he insists on more thorough issues briefings than Mr. Reagan wants and prefers deeper involvement in decision-making, Mr. Bush also showed great willingness during the campaign to follow his staff's lead on details of his schedule and speeches. Some associates predict that he will adopt a management style of delegating broad authority to cabinet agencies to develop new approaches on a wide range of issues -- while reserving strong personal control on a handful of issues in which he is deeply interested, such as education, the environment and arms control.    &quot;I do think he would be very receptive to some new ideas that aren't big-dollar ideas,&quot; says Robert Zoellick, who was issues director for the Bush campaign.    Though some expect Mr. Bush to retain several top figures from the Reagan administration, he insisted yesterday that he will &quot;for the most part bring in a brand-new team of people from around the country.&quot; It's widely expected he will ask Mr. Brady, his friend, to continue as Treasury secretary. And aides think there is a good chance that he will ask recently appointed Education Secretary Lauro Cavazos, a fellow Texan, to stay. But most other faces in the cabinet will change.    Even Mr. Bush's closest associates caution that they haven't discussed personnel matters with him. And as the Quayle choice shows, he is capable of decisions that surprise everyone.    At the moment, former Texas Sen. John Tower is widely considered the leading candidate to become defense secretary, Bush aides say. But Mr. Tower's chances may be hurt by conservatives' suspicions created when he resisted changes they wanted to make in the Republican platform's SDI plank.    And Mr. Baker at the State Department will prefer a defense secretary who wouldn't be so assertive in policy making, associates say. Published reports have said he wants the Pentagon job to go to someone like Paul O'Neill, chairman of Aluminum Co. of America and former deputy director of OMB, who would be more interested in managing the department than in making national-security policy. (Mr. O'Neill says he is happy in his current job.)    There are other signs that Mr. Baker may be quietly assembling a team for the Bush administration; in recent days, he has sounded out at least one Reagan aide about whether he would be willing to remain in the government.    Several other names have emerged in recent days. Retired Gen. Brent Scowcroft, who was the national-security adviser under Mr. Ford, is likely to be considered for a top job, perhaps as national-security adviser or CIA director, Bush aides say. Richard Thornburgh could remain as attorney general, but some Bush aides predict the new president will want his own choice for the job, perhaps Illinois Gov. James Thompson or William Ruckelshaus, the former Environmental Protection Agency administrator. Some aides also think Labor Secretary Ann McLaughlin will be asked to remain in the administration, though perhaps in another post.    But some hard-liners don't consider such figures sufficiently die-hard conservative. So there will be people pushing Mr. Bush for some appointees who fit that description more closely. </TEXT></DOC>