<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870317-0044 </DOCNO><HL> In Reagan Defense of Weinberger, Shultz---By Jane Mayer and Ellen HumeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON </DATELINE><TEXT>   Barely two weeks into the honeymoon, new White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker already is confronting fractious infighting within the Reagan administration and Republican circles.    The internal White House problems erupted over Saturday's radio address, in which President Reagan absolved Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and Secretary of State George Shultz of criticisms lodged against them by the Tower Commission.    White House insiders said the speech was steered through by National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci after Mr. Weinberger personally complained to the president about the Tower Commission's criticisms of him and after Mr. Shultz publicly quarreled with the panel's findings about his role.    Republican congressional leaders privately fumed after learning last week of the intended speech, which originally planned not only to absolve Messrs. Weinberger and Shultz, but also to denounce the Tower board's criticisms, even though President Reagan had fully accepted them only 10 days before in an attempt to make a fresh start. Mr. Baker, who disagreed with this approach, made a last-minute fight to tone down the speech.    Some leading Republicans investigating the Iran-Contra affair, including Senate select committee member William Cohen (R., Maine) and committee Vice Chairman Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), also complained to the White House and succeeded in getting the speech watered down somewhat. But they still weren't happy. Asked yesterday what he thought of the president's radio address, Sen. Rudman answered: &quot;Not very much, frankly.&quot;    Other pressures are mounting on Mr. Baker as well. He faces several difficult personnel appointments, the most crucial being the next head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Since William Webster's nomination to head the Central Intelligence Agency, congressional pressure has been building for two possible candidates for the FBI post: Arizona Sen. Dennis DeConcini and defeated Michigan gubernatorial candidate William Lucas.    Sen. DeConcini, a strong law-and-order advocate, has the added appeal of being a Democrat, which would help speed confirmation and continue the tradition of the FBI director's being above partisan politics. Mr. Lucas, a black conservative Republican who formerly was Wayne County executive, would help the image of the White House and the Republican Party among black voters.    But Attorney General Edwin Meese apparently has his own ideas on the appointment, and Mr. Baker hasn't yet moved to resolve this growing conflict. A leading favorite of Mr. Meese, Justice Department officials say, is Lowell Jenkins, Mr. Meese's former deputy and now a federal judge in San Francisco. Mr. Baker wants to move swiftly on the matter, White House sources say, but so far Mr. Meese hasn't sent any names over to the White House.    Mr. Baker also faces tough strategy decisions on such critical fronts as the budget for fiscal 1988, which begins Oct 1. Congressional leaders aren't sure how he'll approach the issue. Some expected that the chief of staff, as a veteran legislator and compromiser, would move quickly to hold a budget conference. But recently his aides have suggested that the Democrats should first come up with their own budget plan.    Meanwhile, the White House has been ambiguous on excise taxes and on whether the administration will hold firm to the Gramm-Rudman law's deficit-reduction target of $108 billion for fiscal 1988. White House officials publicly have insisted on meeting the target, but privately have conceded it may slip.    Mr. Baker also faces problems that are more mundane, such as when to hold Mr. Reagan's first news conference since Nov. 19, when the president faltered on several Iran-Contra questions. Aides have suggested that the news conference will be this Thursday. But Mr. Baker's team hasn't yet set a firm date, despite growing press speculation.    What bothered some Republicans most about Saturday's radio address was that it seemed politically inept -- a recent White House problem that Mr. Baker was expected to remedy. &quot;You just don't reopen this thing,&quot; said Sen. Rudman, &quot;because there's always the possibility that when you do . . . people start saying, 'Just wait a minute, did you mean it this Saturday, or the Saturday before?'&quot;    Mr. Baker and his aides, in a meeting Friday, succeeded in removing the denunciation of the Tower Commission's report from the speech. But they were otherwise less successful, according to a senior White House aide. The episode, some observers suggest, shows that while Mr. Baker brings a keen legislative mind-set to the job, he may face more difficulties as a manager and executive, especially while the president is weakened by the Iran-Contra scandal.    It's too early to judge Mr. Baker's performance, however, and he undoubtedly will be helped when Kenneth Duberstein becomes deputy chief of staff next week. Mr. Duberstein, who headed the White House's congressional liaison office during Mr. Reagan's first term, is expected to handle much of the day-to-day management at the White House.    Mr. Baker already has scored some triumphs. He has improved White House relations with Capitol Hill on most issues and, surprisingly, has assuaged some conservative elements. The former Senate marjority leader has long been a nemesis of the Republican right wing, but some conservatives say he has provided more access than did his predecessors, Donald Regan and James Baker.    The new chief of staff is expected to complete his staff reorganization in 10 days. The need to complete this as soon as possible, Republican sources say, was underscored by what some see as an attempt by Mr. Carlucci's newly restructured National Security Council to expand its influence in the White House.    Some politicians who know Mr. Baker's style say he is so determined not to appear to be usurping the president's powers and prerogatives, that he may undercut his own authority in some critical decisions. </TEXT></DOC>