<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880927-0109 </DOCNO><HL> OPEC Seeking A New Course On Oil Policy --- Cartel Reportedly Ready To Patch Internal Rifts And Steer Price, Output </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST AFRIC LATAM </CO><IN> PET MON </IN><TEXT>   OPEC is setting a bold new course to reshape its approach to the world oil glut.    Several sources within and without the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries said the cartel is finally attempting to resolve its internal tug-of-war of recent months. What is intended is a final resolution from a majority of the OPEC nations on whether the cartel's chief target should be higher oil prices or higher oil production. OPEC, the sources said, is finally facing up to the difficult task of redefining its very reason for existence.    Hints of the new direction emerged from the meeting of the cartel's price committee, which ended yesterday in Madrid. The five oil ministers closed their two-day meeting with a call for prompt action by oil exporters both in and out of OPEC to reverse the recent sharp decline in petroleum prices, down $3 a barrel so far this year.    Initially, so far as OPEC is concerned, the &quot;prompt action&quot; means yet more meetings. The next, tentatively planned for late next month, will be a joint session of the five-member price committee and of the long dormant, six-member long-term strategy committee.    Of course, OPEC has held dozens of meetings in the past in mostly vain efforts to resolve deep internal divisions over price and market-share policies. There isn't any assurance that a new round of meetings will yield a solution.    Indeed, some oil traders and analysts were skeptical, and oil markets were whiplashed by the OPEC news. &quot;I think the market is getting tired of OPEC meetings,&quot; said one futures trader on the floor of the New York Mercantile Exchange, where West Texas Intermediate crude for November delivery ranged 40 cents higher to 15 cents lower during the day to close at $14.20 a barrel, up two cents. On European spot markets, North Sea Brent settled about five cents a barrel lower.    But OPEC sources maintain that combining the meetings of the price and strategy committees was especially significant because it brings together the cartel's founding members with the leading sources of the overproduction problem to decide a new long-term policy rather than just another quick fix. With overlap in the two committees, that means eight leading members of the 13-nation organization -- including former foes Iran and Iraq -- will come together to try to tackle the overproduction problem.    The calling of the joint sessions of the two committees was meant &quot;to give a signal to the market that OPEC is working on the problems of overproduction,&quot; Subroto, the cartel's secretary-general and the former Indonesian oil minister, told a news conference in the Spanish capital after the price committee's meeting ended.    But several OPEC sources disclosed that much more than a signal to the market is at stake. &quot;They (the ministers) are starting from the bottom -- to determine whether OPEC should defend the price of oil, the reason behind its 1960 founding, or provide its members a bigger share of world oil markets,&quot; said a senior OPEC official.    The joint session of the two committees may be followed by an emergency meeting of all 13 nations. But one delegate to the Madrid meeting said in an interview last night that an emergency conference might not be necessary, or logistically possible, with the full ministerial meeting already scheduled for late November.    The price committee consists of the oil ministers of Algeria, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela, Nigeria and Indonesia. The long-term strategy committee, which hasn't met for many months, is made up of the five founding members of OPEC -- Iraq, Iran, Kuwait, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia -- plus Algeria.    With the notable exception of the United Arab Emirates, a veteran violator of OPEC quotas, such a joint session thus will bring together the major competing factions in the cartel. OPEC officials said, for example, that the fact Iraq and Iran are willing to go to the bargaining table and discuss production quotas within a general OPEC policy review is a major step.    Among the problems that can be addressed, and perhaps resolved, at the joint session is the output currently escaping OPEC's quotas. That includes crude oil produced by Iraq and by the Saudi-Kuwait Neutral Zone and the so-called condensates produced by Venezuela. It also brings together those countries who call for higher production at lower prices -- specifically, the Persian Gulf's Arab members -- and those who want higher prices now, including Venezuela, Nigeria and Iran.    A press statement issued by the five ministers on the price committee after their Madrid meeting briefly touched on the possibilities of such a joint session by noting: &quot;It is essential that OPEC must review its objectives and strategies . . . concerning the price of oil and the production mechanism to support it.&quot;    But Rilwanu Lukman, Nigeria's oil minister and president of OPEC, was much more specific about OPEC's new game plan. In an interview with Dow Jones International Petroleum Report, he said OPEC's different groups can ascertain what they really want in terms of a pricing and production policy. &quot;Now the time has come to sit down and say, 'OK, this is what we want, this is how we're going to do it (and) let's go ahead and do it,'&quot; Mr. Lukman said. &quot;All the major actors will be there. At the end of the day we'll get something.&quot;    Although neither Mr. Lukman nor others would forecast the direction OPEC may go in the future, it was clear that none of the cartel's members is satisfied with the current system, which has become unworkable. Others said that OPEC has been adrift in the oil market and cannot waste further time in deciding whether its members seriously want or intend to shore up oil prices.    &quot;We have problems in OPEC. . . of quotas, of discipline and of production,&quot; said Belkacem Nabi, Algeria's oil minister, according to Dow Jones International Petroleum Report. He said the current, widely ignored system of OPEC production quotas set up in December 1986 with an $18-a-barrel price target collapsed in July 1987 and cannot any longer cope with market factors in the real world.    Industry sources outside OPEC agreed with Mr. Nabi but had mixed reaction to the likely results of the cartel's new course. OPEC is being forced to face the realization &quot;that there is almost no bottom to the pit into which oil prices can fall without production cuts,&quot; said Thomas Burns, manager of economics for Chevron Corp. &quot;And OPEC is close enough now to the brink to peer over the edge and see the abyss.&quot;    Alfred Munk, manager of Amoco Corp.'s foreign affairs department, said that OPEC is &quot;just marking time&quot; as it attempts to implement a plan of action. Mr. Munk said that before the oil ministers can seriously return to the negotiating table, there first must be a &quot;formal&quot; cease-fire between Iran and Iraq, then the two warring countries must agree to production quotas that will satisfy both, and the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait must agree to return to the fold and stop overproducing.    OPEC is currently &quot;in a transitional period between war and peace&quot; and a solid production-cutting plan is unlikely until the first quarter of next year, Mr. Munk concluded.    ---   Allanna Sullivan in New York contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>