<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:What We Need Are a Few Good Bank Runs---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   I missed my one chance to take part in a bank run. As a youngster in the early-1930s, I went off to camp one summer day. Two weeks later I stopped by a local bank to check on my $6 deposit and found that the institution had closed, never to reopen. There hadn't been much of a run -- only a little shouting and profane language, I was told -- when the bank president revealed that the bank was bankrupt. But I even missed out on that.    Bank runs hardly happen any more. The plight of small depositors like me so stirred the hearts of congressmen that they established federal deposit insurance. Deposits were insured up to $2,500, partly to keep small depositors from launching foolish runs on solvent banks.    The Federal Reserve System had been established in 1913 to see that sound banks didn't fail because of a lack of instant liquidity, but in the early-1930s it wasn't handling the job very well. Between 1929 and 1933, more than 10,000 banks failed, and by no means all of them were even technically insolvent; many merely lacked the currency to pay off worried depositors. When one federal agency fails to do its job, the usual government solution is to add another agency, and so we got the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., later supplemented by the Federal Savings andamp; Loan Insurance Corp. to do a similar job for the savings and loans.    This is not to say that deposit insurance was or is totally useless. It helped to bring a lot of cash from under mattresses after 1933. With faith in the banks mostly restored, failures dropped to less than 100 a year through the rest of the 1930s, and from World War II to the 1980s failures all but disappeared.    More important, federal insurance stopped bank failures from spreading. When one bank went under, the problems were confined to that institution and did not hit other banks and the general economy. That was no small achievement.    Bank failures have risen sharply in the 1980s for a variety of reasons. In the late-1970s and early-1980s, interest rates soared. Thrift institutions were holding a lot of low-rate mortgages and borrowing money from depositors at ever-higher rates. Many of our savings-and-loan associations now are zombies -- they're dead, but they're still walking around.    Many banks, with at least some government encouragement, got stuck with Third World debt. Trouble on the farms and in the oil country snared banks that lent heavily in those areas. And, let's face it, some banks were badly, and occasionally dishonestly, managed.    George G. Kaufman, an economist at Loyola University of Chicago, has long argued that an unintended bad result of deposit insurance has been to encourage poor management. Deposit insurance has been raised to $100,000, taking it far beyond the original idea of protecting small depositors. In some cases in the 1980s -- Continental Illinois Bank andamp; Trust Co. is the prime example -- actions of the Federal Reserve and the FDIC have suggested that, in the case of large banks, all depositors, no matter how large, will be protected.    With that sort of roof over bank managers' heads, why shouldn't the managers gamble? If they lose, the government will pay off. Mr. Kaufman and others have proposed that the maximum level of insured deposits be substantially reduced and that banks pay insurance premiums scaled to reflect the risks they are taking. He still likes those ideas, but at a recent Washington conference sponsored by the Cato Institute, a conservative research group, he said &quot;political, industry and even academic opposition&quot; had been great enough to convince him he couldn't hope for early action.    So he came up with another idea.    Stripped to its essentials, the plan calls for banks to be quickly closed, reorganized and recapitalized when the market value of their net worth falls to zero. The idea is to close the bank while there are still resources left to pay depositors and creditors. The policy would be clearly announced and consistently followed. The job of closings would be handled by the insurance agencies, not by the agencies that initially issued the banks' charters.    Liquidation would be a last resort. More often the banks would be sold or merged with other institutions. This sort of operation, Mr. Kaufman notes, would make it clear that deposit insurance is really a guarantee, not insurance.    All banks would be treated alike. At present, small banks often are allowed to fail, with losses to depositors, while larger institutions are bailed out, often at heavy cost. &quot;By effectively eliminating depositor losses,&quot; Mr. Kaufman says, &quot;timely closure permits more equal treatment of banks regardless of their size, location or nature of their business. No bank would be too large to fail.&quot;    The present system that tries to keep banks going at almost any cost is based in part on an exaggerated fear of the damage that would result from bank failures. Since liquidation would be only a last resort, failure doesn't mean that a bank would necessarily disappear. It could become a branch of another institution or it could be revived by an injection of new capital.    Mr. Kaufman notes that between 1980 and 1985 the number of savings-and-loan associations in the U.S. fell 30%, and yet there was no outcry from the public about loss of services. One reason is that most of the decline in the number of Sandamp;Ls was offset by a sharp increase in new branches. Some branches, of course, had been independent associations before.    It wouldn't be easy to convert all banks to market-value accounting. Banks hold many assets, such as home mortgages, that are infrequently traded or are not traded at all. But persistent use of book-value accounting obscures a bank's actual condition, which may be one reason why banks prefer book value to market value. As Mr. Kaufman asks, &quot;How is it possible for policy makers to evaluate the condition of a bank without an accurate statement of its accounts or for management itself to manage the bank systematically?&quot;    A great deal of research would be needed to institute a timely closure system. It should be possible to work out procedures to assure that no area would be starved for banking services during a closure. In most cases customers would have access to other institutions, many of which would supply bridge credit on the assurance that the new system would protect depositors' funds.    A prime advantage of such a system would be the discipline imposed on bank management. Managers would not be bailed out by the FDIC; they would be forced to keep their institutions above water.    By confusing runs on individual banks with runs on the banking system, Mr. Kaufman says, bank runs have been given a bad rap. At least the threat of a run would help to impose discipline on an individual bank.    &quot;The challenge,&quot; Mr. Kaufman stresses, &quot;is not to eliminate bank runs, but to harness their power in such a way that the financial system will be both safer and more efficient.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>