<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870720-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID Reagan was infuriated when told of planned concessions to Iran.    The secretary of state told congressional Iran-Contra investigators that the president reacted angrily when informed of a White House-backed offer to help Iran free 17 imprisoned terrorists. Shultz's account appears to conflict with testimony by Adm. Poindexter, former National Security Adviser, that Reagan endorsed the offer. A former Poindexter aide also told the panels that he saw two memos proposing arms-sale diversions to the Contras, another conflict in testimony. Besides Shultz, Weinberger, Meese and ex-White House aide Regan are to testify publicly soon.    Senators kept close watch on ailing CIA chief Casey to confirm that his May 6 death was from natural causes, U.S. News andamp; World Report said.    ---   Portugal's Social Democrats won 147 seats and the first absolute majority in the 250-seat parliament in 11 years, projections in yesterday's election indicated. With 79% of the votes counted, Prime Minister Silva's Social Democrats won 51%, Socialists 22%, Christian Democrats 4.6%, Communists 12% and Democratic Renewal 4.6%.    ---   Landslides and floods killed at least 14 people in northern Italy as heavy rains swept away or blocked roads, bridges and railroad tracks. Most of the deaths occurred Saturday when a landslide buried a hotel near the Swiss border. Bridges and dams broke in severe flooding in Austria and Switzerland, where evacuations were ordered.    ---   Navy frogmen worked to defuse mines in the Persian Gulf in preparation for U.S. escorts of Kuwaiti oil tankers flying American flags, set to begin Wednesday. Shipping sources in the region said Iranian forces will probably mount attacks on the U.S. escort fleet, comprised of 15 warships and more than 50 carrier planes in or near the gulf.    ---   Paris and Tehran negotiated for the exchange of embassy personnel after France broke relations with Iran Friday in a dispute over an Iranian Embassy interpreter wanted for questioning in connection with bombings. Prime Minister Chirac's move could prove to be a bold stroke or a first step into a quagmire.    ---   South Korea's Roh called for opposition leaders to begin talks soon on constitutional reform. The ruling party leader said talks should be completed next month and presidential elections held Dec. 20. Meanwhile, dissident Kim Dae Jung sought support for his bid to challege Roh, President Chun Doo Hwan's nominee, for the presidency.    ---   Meese was approached by Nofziger on behalf of Wedtech Corp., according to a six-count U.S. indictment of the ex-White House aide on charges of violating ethics laws in his lobbying activities. The indictment has drawn the attorney general deeper into the influence-peddling scandal involving the defense contractor.    ---   Italy's highest court voided arrest warrants for three top Vatican bank officials, including Archbishop Marcinkus of the U.S., issued by Milan magistrates in connection with the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, at the time Italy's largest private bank. The action has sparked calls for reevaluating church-state relations.    ---   Molly Yard was elected president of the National Organization for Women Saturday in Philadelphia. She will succeed Eleanor Smeal Aug. 18. Yard, a grandmother in her mid-70s, vowed to continue the group's fight for abortion rights and the Equal Rights Amendment, and said she opposes Judge Bork's Supreme Court candidacy.    ---   Nicaraguan President Ortega told a crowd of about 50,000 people that the Reagan administration isn't interested in a peaceful solution to the war between Managua and the Contra rebels. His remarks came in a speech marking the eighth anniversary of the Sandinista revolution.    ---   Nine campers died and one is missing and presumed drowned after Guadalupe River floods carried away a church bus and van loaded with 43 counselors and teen-age campers Friday in Comfort, Texas. Rescue workers continued their search.    ---   South Africa should be completely isolated economically by the international community, according to the Congress of South African Trade Unions, the country's largest union federation. Meanwhile, police fired tear gas at 4,000 mourners who defied emergency restrictions and attended an African National Congress guerrilla's funeral.    ---   Kohl completed a trip to Tibet, the first Western leader to visit there since China's 1949 revolution. The West German chancellor questioned officials on human rights and called for preserving Tibetan culture.    ---   Marcos would be tried on the World War II island fortress of Corregidor if he is allowed to return home to answer charges that he plundered the Philippines of $10 billion during his 20-year rule, Manila officials said. The former president threatened to file his own $15 billion suit to counter the $22.6 billion civil suit Manila filed last week.    ---   Britain's Nick Faldo won golf's British Open by one stroke at Gullane, Scotland. </TEXT></DOC>