<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880426-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Florida Race: GOP Spring Training </HL><AUTHOR> Stuart Rothenberg </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   The result of this year's Florida Senate race should tell us much about future GOP prospects in the Sun Belt and throughout the nation. A Democratic victory -- in a state where Republicanism is on the rise and the GOP has recruited a strong candidate -- would be a clear message for Republicans to return to the drawing board. A Democratic loss -- given the early strength and positioning of the party's likely nominee -- would offer the GOP a blueprint for the future.    Connie Mack III, 47, and grandson of the legendary baseball owner and manager, is the GOP candidate for Florida's open U.S. Senate seat. Good-looking, personable and politically conservative, he is one of the energetic stars of the party.    But Mr. Mack, a three-term Republican congressman from the Gulf Coast, may not win in November. The problem he faces -- how to persuade voters to vote against a personally popular Democrat, Reubin Askew -- will be replicated dozens of times across the country by other Republican candidates. Unless Republicans learn how to win those sorts of races, they will never transfer their victories from the presidential to the congressional level.    By November, Florida will rank fourth (behind only California, New York and Texas) in voting-age population, according to current projections issued by the Bureau of Census. Just eight years earlier, the state ranked seventh. During the same period, the state grew by more than 20%, more than double the national rate.    The state's population trends have been a gold mine for the GOP. Eight years ago, self-described Democrats outnumbered Republicans two to one. But polls by Florida State University's Survey Research Center showed Republicans taking the lead in 1985. The most recent poll, completed in February, shows the parties at parity. Given Republican Gov. Bob Martinez's abysmally low job-approval ratings, it is surprising that Republican partisanship has not dropped even further.    The state now has a Republican governor and has supported GOP presidential candidates in seven of the past nine elections. But promises of a great Republican tide sweeping the state have been only partially fulfilled, and Democrats control both Senate seats and dominate at the local and congressional levels.    Mr. Mack's likely opponent in this year's Senate race is Mr. Askew, 59, a former two-term governor whose &quot;good-government&quot; approach earned him kudos nationally and a solid reputation in the state. One of the first &quot;New South&quot; governors, Mr. Askew is perhaps best remembered as a populist who persuaded the Legislature to institute a corporate income tax. During his second term, however, he altered his image to that of a racial moderate who supported environmental and consumer-protection legislation.    Mr. Mack's problems are twofold. First, although the state's electorate is basically conservative, the voters seem wary of overly ideological politicians. &quot;Being labeled a liberal is worse than a conservative, but it's better for politicians not to be either down here,&quot; says Marc Gertz of the Research Network, a Tallahassee-based polling firm. Recent polling data from the Survey Research Center show the state with more than twice as many self-described conservatives as liberals, but even more &quot;middle-of-the-roaders.&quot; Since the party's further growth also depends on its ability to maintain penetration into outspoken conservative groups such as south Florida's Cuban-Americans and to expand support into the politically conservative but historically Democratic areas of the Panhandle, the Republicans are torn between two paths.    Second, although population growth has resulted in increased GOP identification, it has brought with it the sorts of local problems Republicans traditionally have difficulty handling -- traffic, pollution and quality of life. State polls repeatedly show that when Floridians are asked to identify the most important problems facing the state they cite things associated with rapid economic development. In north and central Florida that means roads and community planning (or lack of it). In south Florida, it also means drugs and crime, both of which are usually linked to outsiders.    &quot;The people here see Florida as a national resource, and many are convinced that the state can't deal with growth management by itself,&quot; says Florida Atlantic University political scientist Robert Huckshorn.    But although growth is an issue, the state is split over how to handle it. While 53% of Floridians responding to the most recent state survey said population growth in their area should be limited, almost four in 10 opposed any limitation. The bottom line is, Floridians want growth, but they want it managed.    Naturally, voters are also concerned about so-called national problems. But Florida is a place where some national problems have a uniquely local impact. Census projections for November estimate that 23.7% of the Florida voting-age population will be at least 65 years of age, giving the state the largest senior-citizen population by far in the country. That means issues such as Medicare, catastrophic health insurance and Social Security have a potentially decisive impact. Similarly, in a state with a large and politically active Cuban-American population, it is not surprising that American policy in Nicaragua is an important issue. And in a state without a personal income tax and with serious revenue problems, taxes and deficits are both local and national concerns.    Crime and drugs are two other &quot;national&quot; problems that have a very local impact. While both invariably show up in surveys, it is doubtful political candidates can mine these issues, since all candidates know that they cannot appear weak on crime and drugs -- or on capital punishment -- and win in the state.    Mr. Mack begins his race far back in the polls, suffering in part from low name identification. But his far greater problem is how to persuade the state's voters to choose him rather than Mr. Askew. The former governor developed a reputation for honesty and forthrightness during his eight years in office (1971-79), and he is given high marks for managing the state's transition to a high-growth, cosmopolitan state. Usually characterized as a political moderate who looks out for the interests of the average person, Mr. Askew is perfectly positioned to appeal to a broad spectrum of voters.    Mr. Mack already has begun to attack Mr. Askew as &quot;just another tax-and-spend liberal,&quot; and has used recent events in Panama as a springboard to criticize Mr. Askew's role in the Panama Canal &quot;giveaway.&quot; &quot;As the voters learn what Askew did as governor,&quot; says John McLaughlin of Arthur J. Finkelstein andamp; Associates, Mr. Mack's polling firm, &quot;they will find out he is a liberal. The race will be a clear contrast between Mack's record in Congress and Askew's record as governor.&quot;    Mr. Askew is certain to resist a liberal label, and it is far from clear that Mr. Mack can succeed simply by repeating conservative platitudes about less government.    While Mr. Mack probably would benefit if the race were a simple choice between conservative and liberal visions, the Republican might take advantage of state polls that show an increased level of voter cynicism about and dissatisfaction with government. &quot;In general,&quot; says pollster Gertz, &quot;the voters aren't impressed with their party leaders.&quot; Unfortunately for Mr. Mack, voters are particularly unimpressed with their Republican governor.    Perhaps Mr. Mack's best chance of defeating Mr. Askew would be to position himself as a &quot;new&quot; leader eager to offer creative solutions to today's and tomorrow's problems, while portraying Mr. Askew as an &quot;old&quot; politician whose time has passed. That might turn one of the former governor's strengths into a weakness, as well as highlight a contrast that will be apparent during Mr. Askew's primary with Rep. Dan Mica, 44, for the Democratic Senate nomination.    If Republicans are going to make gains at the congressional level, they must address issues of local concern and ideologically loaded national issues that take advantage of natural cleavages within the Democratic Party. They must come up with solutions that come from their conservative instincts but are pragmatic enough to deal with real problems, thereby convincing voters that they can be both good managers and good listeners.    Part Yankee, part Southern, Florida reflects the diversity of the country as a whole. Like the country, it faces some serious challenges. How it deals with them in the next year or two -- including whether it chooses Mr. Mack or Mr. Askew -- could tell us a great deal about how the rest of the country also will respond.    ---   Mr. Rothenberg is editor of The Political Report, published by the Free Congress Foundation. </TEXT></DOC>