<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Chip Makers' Sematech Venture Rushes To Vanquish Foe, but Path Is Questioned </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Waldman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN GOVMT NSM CYPR VAR </CO><IN> ELE MON </IN><G> DEF </G><TEXT>   Now that the U.S. semiconductor industry has won $100 million a year of federal money and a cushy home -- Austin, Texas -- for its new research group, the fun part is supposed to begin: vanquishing the Japanese challenge in microelectronics. But will it?    Sematech, as the venture is called, is the U.S. chip industry's answer to Japan's government-aided efforts to target the semiconductor industry for global domination. The group's goal is to develop state-of-the-art chip making techniques with exclusively U.S. materials by 1993.    As Sematech rushes to produce its first experimental chips by fall, however, many chip executives and specialists who have studied the industry say the group already has lost its way. These critics wonder whether the project -- which many say originated essentially as a government-bailout proposal during the industry's painful recession of 1985 and 1986 -- can fulfill the much loftier goal of returning the U.S. to the lead in microelectronics in the 1990s.    &quot;They're targeting Japan of 1984 instead of 1994,&quot; says Sheridan M. Tatsuno, a senior industry analyst who specializes in the Japanese chip industry for Dataquest, a market research concern.    Mr. Tatsuno and other industry specialists say Sematech, which is dominated by the largest U.S. chip makers, is preoccupied with developing high-volume chip making techniques, while profits in the industry have been flowing toward smaller companies that make multiple products on flexible machines. This focus on mass-production technology also has distracted Sematech planners from what many specialists say is the more pressing U.S. problem of factory management and organization.    Moreover, a main beneficiary of Sematech was supposed to be the semiconductor equipment industry, which has been crippled by a protracted slump. But some executives of that industry say Sematech could hurt more than it will help.    &quot;I know of very few equipment suppliers who aren't discouraged by what they see&quot; at Sematech, says Larry Hansen, founder of the chip equipment business for Palo Alto, Calif.-based Varian Associates Inc. Mr. Hansen recently resigned as Varian's executive vice president.    Meanwhile, in Washington, where Congress ponied up $100 million for Sematech in the defense appropriation for the year ending Oct. 1, government analysts who studied the chip makers' pleas for help say the industry never proved its point. Rather, these analysts say, chip makers received the government's largesse not because they in fact face extinction at the hands of unscrupulous foreigners, as chip executives often claim, but because their lobbyists adroitly turned chips into a cause celebre of the trade war with Japan.    &quot;The problem was wildly overstated,&quot; says one economist, a principal researcher in an interagency survey on the chip industry led by the National Science Foundation.    Participants in that study, the most exhaustive of several government-sponsored looks at the industry, say their report hasn't been published because White House officials thought it could embarrass President Reagan, who supports Sematech. They say some of the study's conclusions contradict the premise of the chip industry's basic argument: that federal aid is needed to combat Japanese government targeting.    &quot;The study probably won't ever see the light of day because it says the U.S. industry's problems are that it is badly structured to handle the cyclical nature of its business,&quot; says one Pentagon analyst who contributed to the report. &quot;That implies a whole different set of conclusions about government policy than if you believe Japan is out to ensure the demise of U.S. chip makers.&quot;    T.J. Rodgers, president and chief executive officer of San Jose, Calif.-based Cypress Semiconductor Corp., adds, &quot;The older semiconductor companies have become very good lobbyists.&quot;    Charles Herz, the National Science Foundation general counsel charged with writing the interagency report, acknowledges there was some &quot;sensitivity&quot; to some of the study's findings, but says he is planning to have the study published within the next few weeks.    Sematech was the brainchild of Charles E. Sporck, president and chief executive of Santa Clara, Calif.-based National Semiconductor Corp. Conceived about two years ago when the U.S. chip industry was having losses of roughly $1 billion a year in its worst slump ever, the federally aided group was initially planned to catapult the U.S. back into the commodity memory-chip business dominated by Japan. But as the joint-manufacturing idea circulated, and companies such as International Business Machines Corp. said it looked too much like a government bailout, Sematech's focus shifted.    Now, the group plans to spend $250 million a year for six years on research, with about half coming from the government. Some of that money will be distributed in special grants, but most will go toward equipping and operating a cutting-edge chip-making plant in Austin, where fabrication techniques will be tried out for use in member company's factories. If the group is successful, it will save the chip industry, including the makers of semiconductor manufacturing equipment, millions of dollars in research outlays for modernization.    &quot;We have to come to grips with how to react to the Japanese trade success,&quot; Mr. Sporck says. &quot;The only way is to do things so that each of our companies doesn't have to replicate the same development process.&quot;    But how? Many chip specialists say Sematech is attacking the wrong problem. By choosing high-volume chips called static random-access memory, or SRAM, chips as its experimental vehicle, the group is latching onto an outmoded segment of the market, critics say. That's because the industry has been moving rapidly away from commodity products and toward specialty devices, called applied-specific integrated circuit, or ASIC, chips that are custom-made in small quantities. These chips, once thought to be the preserve of technologically superior U.S. companies, will account for 25% of the total chip market by 1990, according to Dataquest, and Japan is expected to have a large share of that.    &quot;Even if we succeed in developing a state-of-the-art SRAM, only a handful of companies will benefit,&quot; Mr. Tatsuno of Dataquest says. &quot;It will be so expensive that only the largest companies in the country will be able to afford it. And some of the most creative chip makers are the smallest ones.&quot;    By choosing SRAMs and bucking the trend toward greater chip making flexibility, Sematech also is neglecting important organizational weaknesses in U.S. chip making, critics say. In particular, chip specialists say, making specialty chips requires a totally different managerial approach and attitude than mass production, because the frequent line changes and increased customer interaction necessitate much greater factory integration.    &quot;The Japanese plant managers tell me it's not U.S. technology that is inferior but the way we organize our people,&quot; Mr. Tatsuno says. &quot;All Sematech is doing now is designing in some of the organizational inefficiencies that we've already been suffering from.&quot;    Another sore point among some chip executives is how Sematech has evolved from a joint-manufacturing project into a research concern. &quot;Win or lose in this business depends on yield and reliability,&quot; says Mr. Rodgers of Cypress Semiconductor, a small, highly profitable maker of specialty chips. &quot;Neither of those statistical quantities can even be measured with Sematech, because they're not producing in high volume.&quot;    But perhaps most worrisome of all to many chip specialists is the skepticism about the group among semiconductor equipment makers. That industry has been ailing for almost a decade, executives say. Proponents billed Sematech as a breakthrough for equipment suppliers, because it is supposed to cut their soaring research costs by providing a forum to develop new, standardized equipment.    So far, however, the cooperative venture has caused nothing but acrimony. Late last summer, the equipment suppliers' main trade group withdrew from Sematech, because the trade group's membership includes foreign companies, which are forbidden from participating in Sematech. And more recently, bad blood churned when Sematech sent signals that it would pay equipment vendors only &quot;on acceptance&quot; of a product, meaning the group wouldn't help defray suppliers' development costs. To make matters worse, the group also hinted it was compiling a short list of eligible equipment vendors to supply its equipment.    &quot;If the chip companies really want to help the equipment industry, the easiest thing to do would be to just spend more money on equipment,&quot; says G. Dan Hutcheson, president of VLSI Research Inc., a semiconductor-equipment market research firm. Mr. Hutcheson notes that Japan's five largest chip makers spent about one-third more on new equipment than their U.S. rivals between 1981 and 1985.    &quot;Sematech,&quot; Mr. Hutcheson adds, &quot;is boiling down to something that's an attempt merely to reduce the development costs of the top five U.S. chip companies.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>