<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Gov. Dukakis Learned There Is Life After DefeatIf a Politician Proceeds With Calculated Caution---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   {This is the second in a series of personal profiles of 1988 presidential candidates.}    BOSTON -- The call came shortly after Michael Janeway resigned under pressure as editor of the Boston Globe. Suddenly Gov. Michael Dukakis, almost a stranger, was on the line inviting him over to the Statehouse, and there, alone, the two talked about how much it hurts when a man works hard at a job he loves -- and is judged a failure.    That had happened to Gov. Dukakis in 1978. He was running for re-election when Edward King, a relative political unknown treated with contempt by nearly everyone in the Dukakis circle, upset him in the Democratic primary. In retrospect, it shouldn't have been so stunning a defeat -- Mr. Dukakis was disliked even by Democrats in the Legislature, was perceived as arrogant by the voters and had muscled through a tax increase just as the storm of the tax revolt was gathering -- but it shattered the young governor. His wife called it &quot;a public death.&quot; His friends wondered whether Mr. Dukakis, an almost compulsive achiever, would ever be the same again.    He retreated to Harvard, perhaps the only political figure ever to go to the Kennedy School to learn how to be a politician rather than to learn how to govern. But he did grow more attuned to the political process, more appreciative of its frailties and imperfections and those of his colleagues. &quot;I'm a better listener,&quot; he says now, having made a virtue of defeat. &quot;I have a better understanding of how to achieve in a political environment.&quot;    But the 1978 defeat also made Mr. Dukakis, who entered politics as an insurgent, more deliberate, more calculating. He's more inclined than ever to master the details, less inclined to take risks. The other day he got on a small jet for a flight to Los Angeles and announced that he had learned a new Greek word: &quot;epifelacticos.&quot; It means cautious.    The loss to Mr. King, whom he defeated four years later, was the fulcrum in a life that Sandy Cohen Bakalar, his sweetheart at Brookline High School, says was remarkable for its &quot;predictability and consistency.&quot; Until then, Michael Dukakis had been a relentless achiever: student council president, honor student, state representative, governor. He had learned about everything, it seemed, but failure.    &quot;The loss made it possible for him to run for president today,&quot; says Paul Brountas, a Harvard Law School classmate who today is chairman of the Dukakis campaign. &quot;It sounds crazy, but he needed that lesson. He wasn't a good politician before and now he is.&quot;    In the years that he has dominated a political scene that only a decade ago seemed the secure province of the Kennedys, the image of Mr. Dukakis has become a caricature: He is the governor who does the family marketing at Stop andamp; Shop (generic products preferred), who commutes to work on the streetcar (the state car is a conspicuously modest 1986 Chevrolet Celebrity), who grows Early-Girl tomatoes in his front yard (the other day he was mulching at 6 a.m. before a campaign trip) and who asks for change for a quarter at a lunch counter (so he doesn't leave too big a tip).    Despite his well-cultivated image of frugality, Mr. Dukakis is a devout believer in government and in its ability to fashion change. &quot;I believe in putting public resources to work to achieve important public ends,&quot; he says often, and he is basing much of his appeal in the presidential race on his success in using government to sustain the economic boom in Massachusetts. Even so, he is less a liberal than a reformer. &quot;He wants change,&quot; says former Rep. Michael Harrington, once a Dukakis ally in the Massachusetts House, &quot;but without ideological fervor.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis says he was marked by spending three days at the United Nations as a college student in the days when the organization was a symbol of pride and possibility, but he has little foreign-policy experience and takes conventional Democratic views on diplomatic questions. His skepticism of most major new weapons systems troubles some party leaders trying to dispel the party's image of weakness on defense.    Mr. Dukakis has a highly personal style of governing and was much given in his second term to rolling up his sleeves and trying to get government officials and business leaders together. Already he envisions moving around the country as president, staying in a region for a few days, talking about problems, coming up with programs. It often seems on the campaign trail, however, that Mr. Dukakis sees the nation more as a challenge for government programs than as a people to lead.    &quot;Dukakis is a carbon copy of Jimmy Carter's obsession with details,&quot; says former state Senate President Kevin Harrington, a Democrat who sparred with the governor in his first term. &quot;He can tell you how many cars run over any road in Massachusetts, but he can't synthesize information at all.&quot;    Michael Stanley Dukakis was born during the Depression to Greek immigrant parents. His father, who entered Harvard Medical School only eight years after he arrived in America unable to speak English, chided him for not working hard enough at his schoolwork. But the boy who wore sweaters with little Nordic figures embroidered on them was -- several of his classmates use this precise phrase -- a &quot;straight-arrow kid.&quot; He may have been the only teen-ager in Brookline who had to be pushed into learning how to drive.    &quot;There was a purity of intent in those years,&quot; says Frank Sieverts, his college roommate, &quot;and Michael epitomized it.&quot;    His upbringing was strict -- Panos Dukakis, his father, wore a suit at the dinner table and then returned to the office -- with life revolving around back-yard barbecues, family gatherings with Greek records on the Victrola, and the traditional red eggs of Easter. Young Michael came to believe what his teachers and his civics books taught him, growing up with a strong sense that salvation lay in education and good works.    &quot;All of us grew up being browbeaten with the idea we were to be well-educated and to become someone the community should be proud of,&quot; says former Sen. Paul Tsongas, another Greek-American who found success in Democratic politics in Massachusetts.    Later Michael Dukakis's belief that the work ethic and essential integrity of the individual are enough to prevail in politics would leave him an estranged and, eventually, defeated figure.    In his early years in the Massachusetts House, the Democratic leadership couldn't count on his vote; many of his colleagues came to think he had good ideas but an annoying sense of moral superiority. He never became part of the old Statehouse network, he never joined in telling political stories, he never hung around. His friends thought the only time he'd ever been in a bar was to shake hands and distribute campaign leaflets. He left the impression of sleeping in starched pajamas.    Now Mr. Dukakis brandishes his ability to work with others, especially the business leaders he was quick to alienate, as his chief asset. Just as he transformed his 1978 loss into an asset, he has managed to project through his austere style a sense of integrity and competence.    He has a good relationship with the Massachusetts House but an uneasy peace with the Senate, and often he is in the position of going, hat in hand, to Senate President William Bulger of South Boston, the very picture of the traditional Boston politician. &quot;In the early years, he'd rather fight the lonely fight and lose than win,&quot; says House Speaker George Keverian. &quot;He's still very stubborn, but he's more willing now to compromise and listen.&quot;    For all his aloofness on Beacon Hill in the first term, Mr. Dukakis has always been an approachable figure on Perry Street in Brookline, where he has lived for years, and in the parent organizations revolving around the Lawrence Elementary School, where there were Dukakises enrolled for 21 consecutive years. &quot;He's almost old-fashioned as a parent,&quot; says school principal Nathan Purpel, who remembers the governor walking his children to school and sometimes popping by to drop off a forgotten lunch bag.    Mr. Dukakis depends on John Sasso, a longtime aide who ran Geraldine Ferraro's vice presidential campaign, for political advice. But his principal influence is his wife, the former Kitty Dickson, who remembers upperclassmen at Brookline High talking about &quot;that brilliant Greek kid&quot; and who, divorced with a young son, fell for the earnest young lawyer with an eye on public service.    She is, moreover, the governor's antidote, a strong-willed woman who acknowledges she spends too much, eats too much and smokes too much for her husband's taste. Mrs. Dukakis has been known to upbraid the governor in public, answering his pleas that she not smoke with colorful expletives. This summer, she admitted receiving treatment for a mild drug addiction growing out of her use of diet pills. Mr. Dukakis has said he was unaware of his wife's addiction, but even aides agree it's a mystery how such a condition could have escaped the attention of a man who is compulsive about household details.    But Kitty and Michael Dukakis have provided their three children with a stable environment, drawing equally on her Jewish upbringing and his Greek heritage, attending both Passover Seders and Christmas services. The Dukakis children lived in the town their parents grew up in, they went to the school system their parents attended, and their grandparents on both sides live in the same community.    Yet seldom has a man so often described as bloodless spawned so many anecdotes. He disappears from his own dinner parties to buy the early editions of the Sunday papers. His father-in-law, hinting for some gubernatorial interference, once told him he got a parking ticket: Gov. Dukakis told him he had 10 days to pay it. Gilmore Stott, former associate dean at Swarthmore College, enclosed in his Christmas card a dollar and a note saying his old student was the only presidential candidate he liked; Mr. Dukakis, not yet contemplating a candidacy, wrote back saying he enjoyed being governor. He kept the dollar.    ---   IN BRIEF   Michael Dukakis   -- 53 years old   --Married 24 years, 3 children    -- Swarthmore College, Harvard Law School   -- Democrat of Massachusetts   State representative 1963-70; moderator of public television's &quot;The Advocates&quot; 1971-73; elected governor 1974, defeated 1978; lecturer at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government 1979-82; re-elected governor 1982 and 1986.    Proudest accomplishment in politics: &quot;Helping turn Massachusetts from an economic basketcase into an eocnomic showcase.&quot;    Most influential book: &quot;The American Mind&quot; by Henry Steele Commager. &quot;At 17, it was my first introduction to the intellectual and philosophical base of American history.&quot;    Foreign leaders he most admires: Corazon Aquino of the Philippines and Raoul Alfonsin of Argentina, &quot;both of whom put their lives on the line for democracy every day.&quot;    (Revised WSJ Sept. 17, 1987)</TEXT></DOC>