<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880121-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN PLANS to ask Congress to provide about $50 million in Contra aid.    The request, much of it for &quot;nonlethal&quot; assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels through July, will be submitted to Congress next week, administration officials said. The administration appears to have been forced to scale back previous plans for a $270 million request for all of 1988 because of steps Nicaraguan President Ortega has taken to try to show he is interested in seeking peace with the Contras.    Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, in Spain for talks, proposed a Moscow-Madrid dialogue to improve Central American peace prospects.    ---   Israeli troops killed three Palestinian guerrillas who had cut through a fence along the Lebanese border, foiling what Defense Minister Rabin said would have been a &quot;murderous attack.&quot; In the West Bank and Gaza Strip, troops apparently acting under a new policy announced by Rabin began administering beatings to protesters.    Lebanese militiamen lifted a three-year siege of Palestinian refugee camps outside Beirut, turning over control to Syrian troops. Shiite Moslem leader Nabih Berri said he lifted the blockade as a sympathy gesture to Palestinian protesters in Israel.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled, 6-2, to limit the power of public school officials receiving federal aid for disabled students to expel or suspend emotionally handicapped students for disruptive behavior. Justices said, however, that in emergency cases a dangerous student may be suspended for 10 days.    ---   Hart's presidential campaigns were subsidized by a California home-video producer through apparently illegal means, the Miami Herald reported. The newspaper said Stuart Karl spent $15,802 in Hart's 1984 campaign, and paid a $3,000 monthly salary to Dennis Walto, currently a high-ranking Hart campaign official.    ---   Ileto resigned as defense secretary of the Philippines, saying the communist insurgency had grown &quot;alarmingly strong.&quot; Ileto criticized the Aquino government for failing to address the welfare of the people.    ---   A federal safety agency cited a Conrail engineer's marijuana use as a prime cause of a 1987 collision of an Amtrak passenger train and a string of Conrail locomotives that killed 16 near Baltimore. The National Transportation Safety Board also cited failures involving automatic train controls as a cause of the wreck.    ---   The U.S. added North Korea to its list of terrorist states and announced other sanctions over the November bombing of a Korean Air Lines jet that killed 115. The State Department cited &quot;compelling&quot; evidence of North Korean complicity after a confessed North Korean agent said on South Korean television that she planted the bombs.    ---   A commuter plane crashed, killing nine of 17 people aboard when it went down in a snowstorm near Durango, Colo. Some survivors had to hike out in heavy drifts. Storms generated tornadoes that killed five in the South Tuesday. At least 28 weather-related deaths were reported this week.    ---   A medical research report indicates that more than half of heart pacemaker implants may not be needed. The report, published in the New England Journal of Medicine, is based on a survey of Philadelphia hospital records showing that 20% of 368 pacemaker implants weren't needed and 36% were only &quot;possibly indicated.&quot;    ---   Vietnam has agreed to fly as many as 12,000 children of U.S. servicemen and as many as 22,000 of the children's close relatives to the U.S., according to two congressmen who visited Ho Chi Minh City. The congressmen said a final accord is expected to be worked out in talks next month.    ---   The Air Force said the crash of a B-1 bomber on a training flight last fall was caused by a bird striking the airframe and starting fires inside.    ---   Bonn said it found no evidence that Nukem, a West German nuclear-fuel processing firm, illegally shipped weapons-grade nuclear material to Libya or Pakistan.    ---   A Haitian opposition leader was arrested on his return from a U.S.-Canada trip to lobby against Sunday's military-run presidential vote. Preliminary results show Leslie Manigat, a long-exiled political science professor, won the sparsely attended vote.    ---   NATO announced that the 16 heads of its member governments will hold a summit in Brussels March 2-3. Diplomats said the purpose is to show alliance solidarity in advance of a Reagan-Gorbachev summit.    ---   Cambodian peace talks resumed in France. Prince Sihanouk, a resistance leader, and Hun Sen, premier of Phnom Penh's Hanoi-backed government, seek accord on a Vietnamese troop withdrawal.    ---   East Germany began a drive against dissidents following a weekend march to commemorate German revolutionaries in which about 100 people were detained. A church official said about 40 people have been arrested so far under the crackdown.    ---   Buenos Aires said that about 300 Argentine soldiers will face courts-martial for taking part in a rebellion earlier this week led by a former army colonel seeking to block human-rights prosecutions of officers.    ---   The Census Bureau reported that nearly one U.S. youngster in four now lives in a single-parent household. The figure is based on a 1986 survey of 57,000 households.    ---   Died: Baron Phillipe de Rothschild, 85, winegrower and member of the influential Anglo-French banking family, in Paris. </TEXT></DOC>