<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861231-0013 </DOCNO><HL> New York Rules State-Chartered BanksCan Form Units to Underwrite Securities---By Phillip L. ZweigStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/31/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BT JPMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The New York State Banking Department ruled that state-chartered banks could set up units to underwrite corporate and other securities currently off-limits to banks.    Bankers said the New York agency's decision poses a potential jurisdictional challenge to the Federal Reserve Board's regulation of bank holding companies and of banks that are members of the Federal Reserve system. Under the federal Glass-Steagall Act, banks generally are prohibited from underwriting corporate securities. The ruling is also the latest move to bring pressure on the Fed to grant banks new investment-banking powers.    The ruling was issued in response to a request from Bankers Trust New York Corp. and J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. for an interpretation of the &quot;Little Glass-Steagall Act,&quot; a New York state law nearly identical to the federal statute that generally separates commercial banking and securities activities.    The state regulatory body said the New York law, passed in the early 1930s shortly after enactment of the federal statute, permits a state-chartered bank to be affiliated with a securities firm as long as currently disallowed underwriting activities don't exceed 25% of total underwriting activities.    Industry sources said that in issuing its ruling, New York in effect is asserting that it has primary jurisdiction over the activities of state-chartered banks, even though those banks may be units of bank holding companies. These sources said that if state-chartered banks such as Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., Bankers Trust Co., Chemical Bank, and Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. -- all of which are units of bank holding companies -- sought to establish such securities units, they likely would meet strong opposition from the Fed on jurisdictional grounds.    Officials at the Federal Reserve couldn't be reached for comment.    Bankers Trust, J.P. Morgan, Citicorp and other big New York banks have sought approval from the Federal Reserve to underwrite commercial paper, municipal revenue bonds, mortgage-backed securities, and consumer-related receivables through bank holding company subsidiaries that currently underwrite government securities. In these applications, the banking companies have argued that these activities wouldn't violate provisions of the Glass-Steagall Act prohibiting banks from being &quot;engaged principally&quot; in such lines.    In a decision last week allowing Bankers Trust to distribute commercial paper through a lending subsidiary of the bank holding company, the Fed directed that the unit's gross revenue from commercial paper activities can't exceed 5% of the unit's total gross revenue, and that its share of the total dealer-placed commercial paper market can't exceed 5%.    The Fed's decision came just one day after a federal appeals court upheld the Fed's earlier approval of the commercial paper activities of Bankers Trust's banking unit, Bankers Trust Co. The Fed also said it expected to hold public hearings in early February on the remaining requests by Bankers Trust, Morgan and Citicorp, and to decide those issues by the end of April.    The New York ruling is far more liberal than last week's Fed decision since it limits currently nonpermissible underwriting activities to 25% of total underwriting activities as measured by average assets.    Rodgin Cohen, partner with Sullivan andamp; Cromwell, a New York law firm, said the New York state ruling, taken together with the recent decisions by the Fed, appeals court, and the comptroller of the currency, has &quot;created an atmosphere more likely to produce congressional action on Glass-Steagall than at any time in the last 50 years.&quot; In recent days, the Comptroller of the Currency has given several big banks, including Morgan Guaranty and Bankers Trust Co., permission to operate in the District of Columbia.    According to David Halvorson, first deputy superintendent of banking and general counsel, New York-chartered banks seeking state approval to establish a bank securities unit still would be subject to &quot;prudential guidelines&quot; imposed by the New York State Bank Board. These guidelines could include minimum capital standards and &quot;safety and soundness&quot; requirements.    Moreover, banking sources pointed out that the units still would have to comply with Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. guidelines on banks' securities activities, which also are considered more liberal than those of the Federal Reserve. But Mr. Halvorson indicated that the state board would be favorably disposed to approving such applications.    Mr. Halvorson said the banking board in the past has allowed banks to conduct certain activities, such as travel agencies and certain commercial lending affiliates, that would have required Fed approval if operated as units of bank holding companies. &quot;It hasn't traditionally been imperative to go to the Fed for approval of bank subsidiaries,&quot; he said. He added that the state's ruling provides an &quot;alternate route&quot; for the banks. &quot;We're intimating to people that it's there.&quot;    Banking sources pointed out that banks that are neither members of the Fed system nor units of bank holding companies could seek approval to conduct these activities without provoking a Fed challenge. But these are mostly small banks that haven't sought new securities powers anyway. The sources speculated, however, that if the Fed refuses to grant the big banks new powers, the banks might seek to strengthen their case by dropping out of the Federal Reserve System and dismantling their holding company structures.    Sources said such a move would be easier for companies like J.P. Morgan and Bankers Trust New York than for Citicorp, parent of Citibank. That's because Citicorp operates a wider range of businesses, including out-of-state savings and loan institutions, under the holding company umbrella. Moreover, Citibank would have to convert from a nationally chartered bank to a state-chartered institution to fall under the New York agency's jurisdiction.    Banking lawyers noted that even if the new securities powers are approved by the Fed, a ruling by the state also would have been necessary for the state-chartered banks to begin such operations.    Bankers Trust New York and J.P. Morgan declined to say whether they would risk a confrontation with the Fed by applying to the state for approval to set up securities units. Bankers Trust would say only that &quot;we now know we have the approval we need from the state to go ahead with whatever the Fed does approve.&quot;    A Morgan spokesman said, &quot;We welcome examination by regulators of the existing legal framework in which banking is conducted to see how it can conform to developments in the financial marketplace. We look upon the New York Superintendent of Banking's interpretation as a positive step and we are studying the implications it may have for Morgan's business in New York.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>