<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A U.S. ATTORNEY CRITICIZED the administration's handling of Noriega.    Leon Kellner, whose office in Miami brought the drug indictments against the Panamanian strongman, said an offer to drop charges in return for Noriega's leaving power has hurt the morale of &quot;every law enforcement person dealing with narcotics.&quot; Kellner has said he is resigning for personal reasons. Separately, the White House said there was &quot;no conflict&quot; in Bush's implied criticism of the administration on Noriega.    A White House aide said Reagan didn't approve the indictments in advance, and that the administration views them as a way of pressuring Noriega.    ---   A PROPOSAL WAS INTRODUCED in the Senate to overhaul the War Powers Act.    A bipartisan group of influential senators, including Majority Leader Byrd and Armed Services panel Chairman Nunn, backed the proposed reforms. The proposal would remove time limits from the current law, allowing the president to send troops to a trouble spot for an unspecified period of time unless Congress votes to remove them. It would also create a congressional group to consult regularly with the president.    Every president has opposed the law since it was enacted over Nixon's veto in 1973. The latest fight involves the use of the Navy in the Persian Gulf.    ---   A federal jury in Florida convicted Carlos Lehder of running a smuggling operation that shipped tons of cocaine from Colombia to the U.S. He faces life plus 150 years in jail and forfeiture of millions in real estate. The verdict against the reputed Medellin Cartel leader followed seven days of deliberations and a seven-month trial.    ---   An arms-control treaty could be ratified before Reagan leaves for a summit meeting with Gorbachev in Moscow, Senate Majority Leader Byrd said. Conservative Republicans, however, urged colleagues to ignore the May 29 start of the summit and debate the U.S.-Soviet treaty banning intermediate-range nuclear weapons for weeks.    ---   A Soviet official said 100,000 people demonstrated in the Azerbaijani capital of Baku to protest the burning of a home by Armenians. Ethnic violence in Azerbaijan killed 32 in February and has resulted in one homicide conviction so far. A Foreign Ministry spokesman said the conviction and 15-year sentence fueled the latest protests.    ---   A Missouri man was indicted on charges of threatening to kill presidential candidate Jesse Jackson. He and his wife also were indicted on a weapons charge and two counts of threatening to kill an informant. Londell Williams faces three years in prison on the first count, and he and his wife, Tammy, face 10 years on each of the other three.    ---   A State Department official said there are indications the Soviets will turn over facilities and equipment valued at up to $1 billion to Kabul after the Red Army leaves Afghanistan. Separately, a Soviet news agency said as many as 15,000 Soviet troops were killed in the 8 1/2-year war. Moscow in the past has refused to estimate casualties.    ---   Syria and Iran were deadlocked in efforts to end a battle between rival militias for control of Shiite Moslem slums in southern Beirut. Police said one man was killed and 10 wounded as Amal, bottled up in its last stronghold, traded fire with Hezbollah. U.S. envoy Vernon Walters flew to Syria to try to arrange a release of U.S. hostages.    ---   Hungary's Communist Party begins a conference today at which Janos Kadar, head of the party since the 1956 revolution, may step down or begin a process of leaving power in stages. The conference debate, unusual for its openness, will likely raise questions that barely have been mentioned before in the East bloc.    ---   A South Korean funeral turned violent as thousands of protesters battled police after carrying the coffin of a dissident student through the streets of Seoul. The student had killed himself Sunday in protest against U.S. and South Korean government policies. Street battles involving at least 32,000 people erupted in 34 locations across the country.    ---   NASA said the first post-Challenger space shuttle mission probably will be launched Aug. 22, about 2 1/2 weeks later than last announced. The space agency said the new delay was the result of minor problems involving rocket motors and the shuttle.    ---   A federal prosecutor alleged that about 400 doctors took illegal kickbacks from four Pennsylvania medical labs, and letters are being sent to all the doctors to ask them to pay triple the amount of the alleged kickbacks or face fraud suits. It is probably the largest single enforcement action ever taken against U.S. doctors.    ---   A Reagan administration official said $10 million in grants has been approved for a verification commission to monitor compliance with peace agreements between Nicaragua and U.S.-backed Contra rebels. The official also said Managua was engaged in a campaign of intimidation and militarism in violation of the agreements.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked a Norwegian-owned tanker in the southern Persian Gulf, wounding a crewman as the ship headed toward Kuwait. The raid was the second by Iran in two days and came despite a U.S. policy expansion that allows the Navy to aid neutral ships under attack.    ---   U.S. and Soviet officials held an unscheduled second day of talks in Portugal aimed at ending the 13-year-old war and gaining independence for Namibia. The officials warned against interpreting the extended talks as a sign of a breakthrough.    ---   New smoking studies showed that a widely used blood-pressure drug helped block smokers' craving for nicotine, and that smoking sharply reduces the presence in blood of a type of cholesterol thought to help prevent heart disease. The studies were reported in the Journal of the American Medical Association. </TEXT></DOC>