<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Budget Card Tricks and Dollar Levitation---By Martin Feldstein</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Although political leaders around the world were quick to praise the recent budget accord, financial investors have appropriately been more skeptical. As they come to understand more fully the true character of the agreement and where it may lead, their reaction is likely to be even more negative.    Contrary to the claim of a $30 billion deficit cut, the actual relief to the capital markets is likely to be only about half as large. Even worse, the budget agreement has given foreign governments an excuse for trying to cajole the U.S. into a new G-7 accord to stabilize the dollar by pushing up U.S. interest rates in a way that would threaten the current recovery and send the stock market into a new tailspin.    It was obvious from the start that the budget negotiations would at best yield a symbolic achievement, sending, in President Reagan's words, &quot;a strong signal both at home and abroad that we can and will get our deficit under control.&quot; But to be useful even in sending such a signal required that the deficit reduction go beyond the $23 billion that the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law would have automatically achieved. And at that it failed miserably.    The new budget package will, if enacted into law, take far less pressure off U.S. capital markets than the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings sequestration would have. With Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, government spending would fall by $23 billion, cutting government borrowing by $23 billion. The U.S. capital markets would have $23 billion more to finance domestic investment in plant and equipment and in housing. Alternatively, the U.S. could reduce the inflow of capital from the rest of the world without any decline in investment here at home.    In contrast, the $30 billion budget agreement contains so many phony savings that we'll be lucky to see $15 billion of reduced demands on the domestic credit market. For starters, the $30 billion total must be reduced by the $5 billion sale of government-owned rural electrification loans that would crowd out private borrowing by just as much as the sale of $5 billion of government bonds. Eliminate also the $1.6 billion projected to come from improved IRS collection procedures and the $1.2 billion of reduced interest on the national debt that is not counted in the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings calculations, and the budget negotiation package is down below the $23 billion Gramm-Rudman-Hollings guaranteed deficit reduction.    But the key point that appears to have escaped the budget negotiators is that much of the $9 billion of proposed tax increases would simply replace government borrowing with the borrowing of private corporations and individuals, producing no net relief for the U.S. capital market. Although some of the proposed tax increases (like the excise tax on telephone services) would cut private consumption and therefore reduce pressure on the capital markets, other proposed tax changes would leave private spending unchanged and simply induce taxpayers to borrow an amount equal to their increased tax burden.    Of course, not all tax increases lead to offsetting borrowing by the taxpayer. A permanent across-the-board rise in personal income taxes or increase in excise taxes (on tobacco, alcohol or gasoline) would not be offset by increased consumer borrowing. The primary effect of such tax changes would be to reduce consumer spending. Since the increased tax revenue would mean less government borrowing while the consumer-taxpayer would not be induced to borrow more, the overall pressure on the capital market would fall.    But some taxes do merely cause the taxpayer to borrow more. The proposal to raise $1.8 billion in this fiscal year by faster collection of estimated corporate taxes is an obvious example of such a no-effect shift of borrowing. Corporations would not reduce investments or wages or dividends in order to make their estimated tax payments sooner. They would simply borrow the $1.8 billion. The reduction in government borrowing would be offset by an increase in private borrowing.    A similar zero net effect on the capital markets would probably also result from the proposed changes in the taxation of firms using the completed contract method of accounting and from the proposed increase in individual estate taxes. Although only a careful provision-by-provision analysis would indicate how much of the $9 billion of proposed tax changes would actually reduce capital-market pressure, the options proposed by the House and Senate are often on the wrong track.    When the world financial markets understand the realities of current budget policy, the signal from Washington will be read as just the opposite of what is needed. Instead of enacting a multiyear, gradually increasing reduction in future deficits or even accepting the second-best solution of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings spending cuts, Congress and the administration will have shown that they can perform the fiscal card tricks that make deficit reduction more apparent than real.    Despite the lack of real progress in cutting the budget deficit, some of the foreign finance ministers who have been pressing the U.S. to reduce its budget deficit have seized upon the budget deal as an excuse for proposing a new G-7 agreement to stabilize the dollar. It is easy enough to understand why. The dollar's decline of more than 12% this year has significantly increased the competitiveness of U.S. products and decreased the competitiveness of the products of Europe and Japan. Stabilizing the dollar would help those regions maintain their export markets and limit competition from imports.    Any attempt to stabilize the dollar at the present level would be wrong on two counts. First, it would once again be pitting government policy against an ineluctable market force. The dollar must decline further because investors around the world are no longer willing to finance the trade deficit implied by the dollar's current level. Although U.S. exports have increased sharply in the past year and the volume of our trade deficit is down significantly from its peak, actually getting to a trade balance will require the dollar to drop at least an additional 10%. Keeping that trade balance while U.S. prices are rising some 3% a year faster than prices in West Germany and Japan will require an additional 15% decline of the dollar over the next five years. So there is no point in pious communiques proclaiming exchange-rate stability when the dollar is inevitably heading down to 100 yen and 1.20 marks.    Second, in addition to being futile, another Louvre-like campaign to stabilize the dollar would require the U.S. to risk a serious recession or stock market slide by raising interest rates. Dollar levitation through incantation and sterilized intervention is no longer feasible. For a very short while earlier this year it was possible to slow the dollar's decline by vague declarations of currency accords and by threats of currency intervention. When that failed, the central banks turned to actual massive exchange-market intervention that temporarily frightened speculators and portfolio investors.    But it soon became clear that the only way to keep the dollar from falling was to raise U.S. interest rates relative to interest rates abroad. That increase in our interest rates and the fear that the Fed would push interest rates higher whenever the dollar came under attack played a central role in triggering the stock market crash.    Although the world-wide stock market fall and the sharp decline of the dollar in the past month have forced the Europeans to cut interest rates in an attempt to stimulate their own economies and slow the dollar's decline, they are reluctant to pursue an easier monetary policy or to provide a fiscal stimulus and cannot get the labor-market changes that would be an alternative route to faster growth and lower unemployment.    The Europeans therefore want the U.S. to help them slow the dollar's decline by raising interest rates in the U.S. so that they won't have to cut their own interest rates as much. British Chancellor Nigel Lawson has been very explicit about this. Other finance ministers have been more elliptical, calling only for U.S. &quot;cooperation&quot; and seeking a G-7 meeting in which dollar stabilization could be agreed to.    Any U.S. agreement to raise interest rates in order to maintain the dollar at its current level would be a serious mistake. Treasury Secretary James Baker was right when he said that U.S. monetary policy should be free to focus on achieving an appropriate rate of expansion of the domestic economy while the dollar finds its own level in the world currency market. The European and Japanese governments should recognize the inevitability of the dollar's continuing decline and get on with the task of providing the stimulus to their own economies that can create the rate of expansion that they want. Unfortunately, we in the U.S. must wait until after the 1988 election to begin the critical task of dealing with the massive deficits that still cloud our long-term future.    ---   Mr. Feldstein, past chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard. </TEXT></DOC>