<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Activist Holders Target Northern Ireland---Campaign Against U.S.Firms Stirs Concern---By Elliott D. LeeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP LABOR DD AMB AHP AS BLL HT OCQ TRW UTXFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   With South Africa in the win column, political activist shareholders have set their sights on Northern Ireland.    Shareholder resolutions this spring will ask nine U.S. companies to guarantee equal job opportunity for Catholics by adopting affirmative-action guidelines in their Northern Ireland operations.    While some observers fear pressure to adopt the so-called MacBride Principles could discourage much-needed foreign investment in Northern Ireland, proponents say support for the guidelines will force the companies -- some which have been accused of discrimination -- to play a more socially responsible role there.    &quot;Our reasons for involvement in North Ireland are the same as those for our involvement in South Africa,&quot; says New York City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, custodian for most of the city's pension funds, which have almost $10 billion invested in equities.    &quot;We must act in a manner that maximizes returns for retirement beneficiaries, whose needs are compromised by firms that discriminate on the basis of race or religion,&quot; adds Mr. Goldin, who is spearheading the resolution effort.    The MacBride resolutions come amid growing efforts here to influence events in British-ruled Northern Ireland, a poor, predominantly Protestant province of 1.5 million people where anti-Catholic bias and sectarian violence have marred the landscape for centuries. MacBride backers trace many of the province's political problems to job discrimination.    The MacBride campaign, directed by the Irish National Caucus, a Washington, D.C.-based lobbying group, has won the support of the AFL-CIO and of several religious institutional shareholders, including several Catholic orders and several major Protestant denominations. Most of these groups have also supported South Africa-related shareholder efforts.    But the MacBride Principles have been opposed by the companies, the Reagan administration and the British government, which all claim that U.S. companies have been among the most progressive employers in Northern Ireland. And the principles have received only grudging support from the largest Catholic political party in Northern Ireland, which fears adoption may discourage much-needed foreign investment in the province.    Twenty-five U.S. companies employ more than 11,000 people in Northern Ireland, nearly 11% of the province's manufacturing work force, according to the British government. Britain estimates that U.S. investment in the province totaled about $1.2 billion in 1984, the last year for which figures are available.    The nine MacBride Principles were drawn up by Irish and American civil rights activists in 1984 and named for Amnesty International founder and Nobel Peace Prize winner Sean MacBride. In essence, they call for U.S. companies in Northern Ireland to establish affirmative-action hiring and training plans for Catholics and to protect them from Protestant harassment on the job and to and from work through Protestant neighborhoods, where most of the plants are located.    MacBride backers cite Catholics' 40% unemployment rate -- double that of Protestants -- as among the evidence that Northern Ireland companies, including some U.S.-owned concerns, discriminate on the basis of religion or don't do enough to promote equal employment opportunity for Catholics. At 22%, Northern Ireland has Western Europe's highest overall unemployment rate.    So far, New York and Massachusetts have passed legislation directing their pension funds to invest only in signatories to the MacBride Principles. Bills are pending or will be introduced in nine other states. Should they all become MacBride backers, the policy would affect the largest block of public pension funds in the U.S., according to the Investor Responsibility Research Center in Washington.    Moreover, Rep. Hamilton Fish Jr. (R., N.Y.) is expected today to introduce a bill that would prevent the importation from Northern Ireland of products of U.S. companies that don't comply with MacBride. New York Republican Alfonse D'Amato introduced a similar bill in the Senate last week.    The targets of this year's shareholder resolutions deny that their Northern Ireland operations discriminate against Catholics and contend that existing British laws are sufficient to handle any discrimination cases. &quot;We think (MacBride) is unnecessary,&quot; says John R. Malloy, senior vice president for external affairs for Du Pont Co., one of the largest U.S. employers in Northern Ireland. &quot;We've been there 27 years and we've never had a discrimination charge filed against us.&quot;    American Brands Inc. says its tobacco subsidiary in Northern Ireland doesn't discriminate and opposes MacBride Principles on the ground that they may constitute reverse discrimination under British law. However, a U.S. district court last year ruled in a suit brought by the New York City employee-retirement system against American Brands that the principles &quot;could be legally implemented by management in its Northern Ireland facility.&quot;    The other target companies are: American Home Products Corp., Armco Inc., Ball Corp., Hughes Tool Co., Oneida Ltd., TRW Inc. and United Technologies Corp. Shareholders of General Motors Corp., Ford Motor Co. and VF Corp. previously rejected MacBride resolutions.    The Reagan administration opposes requiring U.S. companies to adopt the MacBride Principles on the ground that it might discourage further American investment in Northern Ireland. The British government agrees, saying that existing fair-employment laws are &quot;adequate,&quot; according to Nigel Sheinwald at the British Embassy in Washington.    The leadership of the largest predominantly Catholic political party in Northern Ireland contends that British laws aren't tough enough, but worries that support for the principles could deter more U.S. investment or at worst lead to divestment.    &quot;We wouldn't argue with the MacBride Principles,&quot; says Mark Durkan, vice chairman of the Social Democratic and Labor Party, which favors reunification with Ireland but opposes the violent tactics of the Irish Republican Army. &quot;But some people in U.S. see the MacBride Principles as the issue. They aren't, they're just one way of dealing with the issues&quot; of more investment and more jobs.    &quot;We're talking about principles&quot; to enhance the investment climate and thus &quot;can't be advocating divestment,&quot; responds Rev. Sean McManus, national director of the Irish National Caucus, which has a policy of nonviolence. &quot;But it is obvious that people who are sympathetic to the IRA would be sympathetic to ending discrimination in Northern Ireland,&quot; he says.    It's too early to tell how much support the MacBride Principles will garner and what impact the campaign will have on U.S. companies or on events in Northern Ireland. Some observers expect that companies will consider moves short of endorsing the principles. And Britain is talking about toughening anti-discrimination laws.    But Mr. Goldin says adopting the principles is the only acceptable corporate response. </TEXT></DOC>