<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0143 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Film: Documentary Portrait of Israel </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>      Two young men, an Israeli and a Palestinian, take to one-upping each other:   &quot;My brother was killed in Lebanon,&quot; says one.    &quot;My uncle was killed in '48,&quot; says the other.    &quot;My father was wounded in '48,&quot; retorts the first.    The argument goes nowhere, which is precisely the point of director Victor Schonfeld's impassioned documentary, &quot;Shattered Dreams: Picking Up the Pieces,&quot; which opened this week for a limited run at New York's Film Forum and at the York Theater in San Francisco. Five wars in 40 years have left Israel bigger, more militarily secure and less united than it's ever been. The country founded as a haven for an oppressed people has found itself playing the heavy to the Arabs living within its borders.    This impressionistic, emotional piece of film making is a powerful -- and sorrowful -- account of a country in agony. Israel's hapless incursion into Lebanon in 1982 was the breaking point. The instant that Israeli soldiers looked away while Phalangists massacred the Sabra and Chatilla refugee camps, Israel lost its virtue. The valiant underdog of the Six-Day War had become a vicious bully -- or, at least, that's how it looked on the evening news.    &quot;Here we are in an Arab capital destroying homes,&quot; says an Israeli soldier in Beirut. The camera filming him has already shown glimpses of dazed Palestinian women, staring at the rubble. &quot;It's not very inspiring.&quot;    One response within Israel to the massacre was shame -- 400,000 people marched in protest. At the other end of the political spectrum the response also was vehement -- and hateful. Meir Kahane, the radical-right rabbi, recruited sizable support from the fundamentalist fringe and others sorry to see his anti-Arab version of the Nuremburg racial edicts voted down in the Knesset, Israel's parliament.    Tensions had been building for years among Israel's factions, particularly since the country annexed Gaza and the West Bank. Right vs. left. Jews with European ancestry vs. those with Arab ancestry. Orthodox sects vs. the secular majority. Militarists vs. pacifists. And, of course, Jews vs. Arabs.    Mr. Schonfeld, raised in a liberal Orthodox Jewish family in New York, clearly favors the Israeli civil rights organizations working to establish some kind of Palestinian state in the occupied territories. Just as clearly, he is repelled by the Kahanites. His examination of the Palestinian point of view, however, is cursory and suspect. Certainly the Palestinians to whom he devotes screen time are thoughtful and well-meaning. If they are fully representative of their constituency, however, who has been bombing buses and throwing Jews off cruise ships all these years?    But this isn't really a movie about Palestinians. Nor does it pretend to be an objective analysis of the historical and geopolitical reasons for and consequences of Israel's existence. There are no maps, few statistics and barely a mention of the way the giant Arab nations have manipulated the Palestinians into fighting their battle against Israel. A far more comprehensive and evenhanded picture recently was painted in Ted Koppel's remarkable &quot;Nightline&quot; debates between Israelis and Palestinians.    &quot;Shattered Dreams&quot; is a movie about Israel -- a forceful and vibrant presentation of the individual impulses of a country's collective psychology. Almost every Israeli Mr. Schonfeld interviews -- military men, Holocaust survivors, pacifists, Arab haters -- shares a yearning for a not-distant, idealistic past. That past is brought to life by means of old film clips. They show beaten down refugees wearing yellow stars transformed into jaunty kibbutzniks hammering and nailing and planting, wearing shorts and always singing.    Who knows if they were really as happy and industrious as they looked in those silent films. The Zionist pioneers, Mr. Schonfeld points out, weren't truly living out the ideal of social democracy even in those early days: Jews from Morocco and Yemen found the housing allocated to them handed over to Eastern European immigrants.    One thing is certain, though. It's easier to feel nostalgic toward struggling survivalists digging irrigation ditches than it is toward soldiers kicking civilians held in custody.    &quot;They had a dream,&quot; says Tom Segev, an Israeli historian about that earlier generation. &quot;We have no dream.&quot;    But they do have everyday lives despite the political situation. Mr. Schonberg and his co-producer, Jenifer Millstone, are so intent on exploring a nation's state of mind that they don't show us much about normal life in Israel, except for a brief excursion to a mall to interview shoppers. There's little acknowledgement of the miracle of Israel's scientific accomplishments, except for the probability that it possesses the atomic bomb.    The film makers concentrate on illuminating the sense of death and danger that must always linger with those who live in Israel -- and the effect it has had on them. This country that was created as a war reparation hasn't been granted a minute of real peace. The film makers show children visiting Yad Vashem, the memorial to the Holocaust. They show the moment of silence that falls once a year to commemorate the dead. Yet war isn't a distant memory in this country; there's always a fresh supply of fallen soldiers.    People respond to the ongoing conflict in extreme -- and opposite -- ways. Some think the way out is retribution; others demand conciliation. &quot;I'm raising sons to be killed,&quot; shrieks a hysterical woman. &quot;Wipe out the terrorists.&quot; At another cemetery, grieving parents mourn their son, killed in Lebanon, and read from a letter to former Prime Minister Begin, begging for peace. &quot;We have a full cemetery,&quot; the father says.    The film makers opt for the peaceful solution. But as they demonstrate with this sorrowful and complicated piece of work, not even the questions about Israel are simple, much less the answers. </TEXT></DOC>