<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871020-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. BOMBARDED an Iranian oil platform in the Persian Gulf. The strike by Navy warships, ordered by Reagan in retaliation for Friday's attack on a U.S.-flagged Kuwaiti oil tanker by Tehran's forces, destroyed the platform, which had been converted to a military command center in the gulf. The U.S. had broadcast warnings prior to the raid. American forces also destroyed some Iranian radar and communications equipment, according to the Pentagon. The attack was presented by the U.S. as a moderate military response, but one that demonstrated Washington's willingness to respond with force to Iranian provocation.    Iran's president said that the U.S. attack was a &quot;big mistake,&quot; and that Tehran would &quot;take decisive retaliatory action.&quot; Moscow also faulted the action.    ---   NAKASONE SELECTED Noboru Takeshita to succeed him as Japan's premier. The choice by Nakasone came after the former finance minister and his two rivals were deadlocked over who should be named president of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. Because the conservative party controls the parliament, the winner of the top party post also becomes prime minister. Although Japan's policies won't change radically under Takeshita, 63, his lack of foreign-policy experience could worsen Japan's international relations.    The ruling party is expected to confirm Takeshita as party leader Oct. 31, when Nakasone steps down after five years as prime minister.    ---   Indian troops captured a Tamil separatist stronghold in the town center of Jaffna after penetrating Sri Lankan rebel defenses, officials in New Delhi and Colombo said. Casualty figures weren't reported. In eastern Sri Lanka, at least 40 Tamil refugees were killed when a guerrilla land mine exploded near Batticaloa, police said.    Prime Minister Gandhi said in a speech in New York that India's peacekeeping forces would remain in Sri Lanka for security purposes, but &quot;only as long as they are welcome.&quot; New Delhi sent the troops to the island nation to enforce a July 29 truce.    ---   The Supreme Court failed to resolve a dispute over the Reagan administration's interpretation of federal immigration law. The court's 3-3 vote, which sends the case back to a lower court, could limit the government's power to deny visas to foreigners invited to speak in this country who are tied to communist groups.    ---   Mississippi Sen. John Stennis said he will retire next year, leaving a vacancy that will affect the leadership of both houses in Congress. The announcement by the 86-year-old Democrat, chairman of the Appropriations panel, came after he underwent surgery for what was described as a routine prostate procedure.    ---   Jury selection began in Washington in Deaver's perjury trial as the Supreme Court rejected the former Reagan aide's bid to allow attorneys to question prospective jurors in private. Deaver is charged with lying to a federal grand jury and a House panel investigating his lobbying activities.    ---   The Philippines vice president dismissed U.S. threats to withhold aid to Manila's government if President Aquino is overthrown, saying Washington would deal &quot;with whoever is on the saddle.&quot; Laurel also said that Aquino wouldn't last her full term in office, which ends June 30, 1992, unless she defuses dissent within the military.    ---   Bernhard Goetz was sentenced to six months in jail and five months of probation on his conviction for illegal gun possession in the December 1984 shooting of four youths on a New York City subway. Goetz, who was acquitted in June of attempted murder charges, also was fined $5,000 and directed to undergo psychiatric treatment.    ---   Two Indonesian commuter trains collided head-on in the southern outskirts of Jakarta, and authorities said as many as 100 people were killed and about 300 others injured. The cause of the accident wasn't known, but investigators were examining a possible communications breakdown between two rail stations near the crash site.    ---   The Supreme Soviet convened a two-day session to review the first two years of Gorbachev's current five-year economic plan. The 1,500-member nominal parliament, meeting in the Kremlin, heard criticism of the country's failure to meet targets in light manufacturing and machine building.    ---   Belgium's King Baudouin accepted the resignation of Prime Minister Martens and his center-right coalition, which offered to quit last week after failing to resolve a French-Flemish language dispute. The king asked Martens to form a new government.    ---   Police in South Africa said students, teachers and civil-rights groups demonstrated in defiance of new government curbs on campus protests. The regulations require university councils to report anti-government activity by students and teachers. </TEXT></DOC>