<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Let Open Doors Swing Both Ways --- 'Brain Drain': A Make-Believe Malady </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Dowty </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST FORGN </CO><TEXT>   China, fearing the loss of badly needed professionals, announced this spring that it would reduce the number of its citizens allowed to study abroad by as much as 75%. Coming only a few years after a substantial liberalization of Chinese emigration policy, this retreat adds credence to the widespread idea that developing nations cannot afford to allow their skilled citizens to move about freely.    This idea may be lent further credence, unfortunately, by a study on the right to leave one's country due to be issued shortly by the United Nations Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. Under pressure from East Bloc and Third World sources, the terms of reference under which the study was set up include &quot;the need to avoid the phenomenon of the brain drain from developing countries.&quot; It appears likely that the final document will accept the brain-drain argument as justification for some limits on the basic right of emigration.    Both China and those seeking to influence the U.N. study are assuming that 1) the exit of professionals from a country significantly hampers its development, and 2) direct curbs on the right to leave are a proper and effective means for dealing with this problem. Both of these assumptions can and should be challenged.    Soviet and East Bloc spokesmen have long cited the brain drain as justification for barring free emigration. Peter Vas-Zoltan, a Hungarian economist, argues that &quot;the human capital&quot; created by professional training &quot;becomes part of the nation's wealth in the broadest sense of the term,&quot; and consequently an unrestricted brain drain is unacceptable because &quot;it condones the continuous enrichment, without cost, of the prosperous, developed countries, at the expense of the less developed ones.&quot;    Such arguments should be viewed skeptically, since professionals in these countries who apply to leave are often dismissed from their positions anyway. Moreover, Hungary, which has the most liberal emigration policies in the Soviet Bloc, also has an economy that has outpaced most if not all of its socialist neighbors. But brain-drain theories find a ready audience in the Third World, where arguments stressing externally imposed obstacles to development have a strong appeal.    A Mozambican official I interviewed in 1984, for example, argued that because of the need for skilled people, the right to leave &quot;must be implemented in accord with the situation in the country.&quot; For this reason, he says, Mozambique officially &quot;discourages&quot; emigration, and an applicant for an exit visa must justify his case. Even countries that do not interfere with freedom of movement often take it for granted that development needs may override human rights.    But does free emigration slow Third World economic development? A 1984 study by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (Unctad) estimated that about 500,000 professionals had left Third World countries in the postwar period. The incidence of brain drain varies enormously, however, and the bulk of professional emigrants come from a limited number of nations: India, the Philippines, Iran, South Korea, Pakistan, Egypt, Greece, Turkey, Colombia, Argentina and some Caribbean countries. Most of these countries are at a mid-level phase of development, while the least-developed countries -- most African nations, for example -- are notably absent from the list. Thus, any simple correlation between brain drain and lack of development must be rejected.    Other evidence reinforces this conclusion:   --Countries with high emigration rates often have impressive rates of growth. A study by Myron Weiner of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has shown that of the eight countries with the highest levels of emigration during the 1960s, five had above-average growth rates; so did seven of the top nine in the 1970s. To take one case, North Yemen is often cited as a country whose rural sector declined as a result of large-scale emigration, but according to the World Bank, its agricultural production actually increased 3.7% annually during the 1970s.    --Many countries benefit substantially through remittances from unskilled or semi-skilled workers abroad, which makes it difficult for them to put up barriers to movement. Pakistan, South Korea and the Philippines are examples of countries that have supported free movement because of their interest in the export of labor. Rather than calling on the West to tighten its immigration laws, which would be one way of keeping brains at home, they and nations like them often denounce the tight restrictions on immigration elsewhere. In fact, developing nations expanded the terms of reference for the new U.N. study to include not only the brain drain but also &quot;the possibility of entering other countries, without discrimination, or hindrance, especially of the right of employment.&quot;    --Among the 109 nations that responded to the Fifth U.N. Population Inquiry in 1982, only 12 indicated that emigration had a negative impact on their development. Thirteen of the responding states claimed that it had a positive impact. Of the 81 developing nations in the survey, 62 did not mention emigration as a significant factor in their development, and only three -- the Philippines, Thailand and Jamaica -- mentioned brain-drain concerns at all.    --When the U.S. State Department, at the peak of the brain-drain debate in the mid-1970s, polled U.S. embassies in 76 nations about concern over students who failed to return from the U.S., only 16 replied that the local government perceived a problem. In short, the level of interest in the issue actually demonstrated by ThirdWorld countries has not matched the level of rhetoric.    The rhetoric has, however, occasioned an impressive number of brain-drain studies by the international community -- more than 20 by Unctad alone. If one common theme were to be picked out of this mountain of material, it would probably be that the principal motivation for emigration is lack of suitable jobs. As a landmark study by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research put it in 1970, &quot;the chief general cause of brain drain appears to be the lack within developing nations of effective demand for professionals despite the presence of almost unlimited need.&quot; William Glaser, who conducted an extensive multination survey of the brain drain for the same organization in the 1970s, also concluded that &quot;a crucial criterion is the balance between the education of professional persons and employment opportunities.&quot;    Countries with a reasonable balance between the number of professional graduates and jobs available, such as Brazil, Venezuela and Saudi Arabia, have had little problem with a brain drain. This has also been the case with the least-developed states, which have few jobs available but also few graduates to take them. The brain-drain problem exists, then, primarily in those states -- listed above -- where education has outpaced the development of infrastructure. These are typically states with a large population base, where a relatively advanced educational system is turning out graduates faster than professional openings become available. (Pakistan, for example, for many years graduated more than twice as many doctors as it could employ.)    This is why the second assumption -- that direct curbs on emigration will prevent the drain -- is faulty. Prohibiting emigration will bring little benefit to nations that can't offer suitable jobs to those kept at home. Their talents still will be lost. Likewise there is no &quot;drain&quot; if they leave, since they contribute little or nothing to development by remaining. The solution is to find a balance between training and employment, preferably through positive measures that increase job openings. As a 1979 World Health Organization study put it: &quot;When a country reaches the point where it can afford its expatriates, most are likely to return of their own accord, given that ties with family, culture, and homeland are not easily broken.&quot;    This perspective helps to explain another oddity: that there is little correlation in the Third World between those nations with a serious outflow of skills, and those attempting to limit freedom of movement. Those countries with the strictest curbs on emigration -- for example, Angola, Mozambique, Afghanistan, Burma, South Yemen, Ethiopia -- have not been driven to such desperate steps by a threatened exodus of doctors and engineers. They have acted on the basis of political and ideological impulses that have other roots.    To keep professionals from leaving requires, in any event, police-state methods. Partial measures to curb exit have only the unintended effect of encouraging it, pushing professionals to get out while they still have the chance. This has been the experience of Pakistan and Sri Lanka, both of which have experimented with heavy-handed measures to discourage the exit of professionals, only to find such an approach ineffective and counterproductive.    There remains, however, one final question. Given these doubts both of diagnosis and prescription, why have East Bloc nations promoted the brain-drain issue so fervently? The answer seems to be that this issue comes closer than any other to providing a respectable rationale for delegitimizing the basic human right to leave one's country. Accordingly, the solicitude for Third World interests as &quot;victims&quot; of the brain drain should be regarded with a large measure of skepticism.    ---   Mr. Dowty is a professor of government at Notre Dame and author of &quot;Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on Freedom of Movement,&quot; a Twentieth Century Fund report (Yale, 1988).    (See related story: &quot;Migration Helps Poorest of Poor&quot; -- WSJ June 15, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>