<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Financial Fraud: Theories BehindNationwide Surge in Bank Swindles---By Charles McCoyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Bank fraud is exploding across the nation, and regulators aren't sure why. But David Messer has a few ideas.    Last spring, Mr. Messer, a 29-year-old Florida banker, sat in his Tampa office and listed, down the left side of a yellow legal pad, the &quot;cons&quot; of bank fraud: &quot;Fugitive on the run . . . Money won't last forever . . . If caught, will go to jail.&quot;    Then, down the right side of the page, he listed the &quot;pros&quot;: &quot;Travel anywhere . . . Live on islands . . . Meet many women . . . Party and prevent heart attack.&quot;    In his case, the pros apparently won out. The Federal Bureau of Investigation says that during a few days in April, Mr. Messer stole about $200,000 in cash, checks and securities from the Southeast Banking Corp. branch he managed, then lit out for a life of ease. Within hours, however, the FBI found his little list, and Mr. Messer was arrested three weeks ago after trying to rent a car with his own credit card in Savannah, Ga. He has been charged with embezzlement.    U.S. financial institutions are in the grip of an unprecedented epidemic of fraud. Although Mr. Messer's memo might not explain everything, it isn't a bad commentary on what's going on.    The FBI says losses from bank fraud -- which covers a range of scams and embezzlements used to steal money from banks, thrifts and other lending institutions -- totaled more than $1.1 billion last year, up 30% from 1985. Those figures don't even include huge losses from recent fraud-related failures at scores of thrifts and banks, which often take regulators and investigators years to sort out. By some estimates, losses from frauds perpetrated just since 1980 could eventually top $12 billion. Although the FBI doesn't have complete figures for the 1970s, investigators believe that fraud losses for that entire decade were less than $1.5 billion.    The toll goes beyond costs to banks and the regulatory agencies that insure their depositors. Consumers get stung too, because banks pass along their losses in the form of higher fees and service charges. And some banks can no longer afford insurance; their premiums have skyrocketed since fraud losses began to pile up. &quot;Fraud has become a very costly plague for the nation,&quot; says Richard Dailey, president of Dadeland Bank in Miami.    Just what is going on here?    Prosecutors, regulators and investigators offer lots of theories on the fraud outbreak. Some are predictable, some novel. But they all begin at the same point:    GREED   &quot;At rock bottom, the real culprit is old-fashioned, pure, unadulterated, materialistic, gimme-gimme greed,&quot; says John Arterberry, a trial lawyer in the Justice Department's fraud division.    He and many other prosecutors and sociologists see the fraud outbreak in the same light as the recent insider-trading scandals. &quot;Both are sad symptoms of Boesky-era ethics,&quot; says Anton Valukas, the U.S. attorney in Chicago, who last month announced indictments against 40 prominent local bankers and businessmen for bank frauds totaling $7.6 million. &quot;There is an attitude today of being far more concerned about getting rich than about the manner of getting rich,&quot; Mr. Valukas says. &quot;It's pervasive.&quot;    Such attitudes aren't limited to young comers. Last month, former Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker pleaded guilty to frauds involving more than $1.5 million against First American Savings andamp; Loan Association, of which he had been chairman, and five other banks and thrifts. Mr. Walker used doctored financial statements to get loans. He also arranged loans for his son and for a close friend totaling more than $265,000, then used the money himself for, among other things, payments on his 80-foot yacht. First American later failed.    DEREGULATION   If greed often provides the motive, financial deregulation has provided rich new opportunities -- especially at thrifts. In 1982, savings and loans were allowed to move from their traditional area of lending for single-family housing into lending for condominiums, office towers and other high-risk ventures.    The result has been a well-documented frenzy of questionable loans to friends and insiders, phony asset appraisals and other misdeeds. In Texas alone, fraud-related losses at thrifts -- primarily since deregulation -- may eventually top $5 billion, some bankers estimate.    Fraud investigators say deregulation has overwhelmed bank and thrift supervision, making it easy for fast-buck artists to get control of financial institutions.    Jerry D. Smith, a Walla Walla, Wash., real-estate investor now under indictment in Seattle for fraud, gained influence over the board of troubled Queen City, Wash., Savings andamp; Loan Association in the early 1980s. Prosecutors say he had impressed the thrift's management with a promise that he would eventually buy the savings and loan (he didn't) and with claims that he was a confidant of Paul Roper, a wealthy California businessman best known for representing Jessica Hahn in her talks with the Praise the Lord ministry of since-deposed Rev. James Bakker. (Mr. Smith wasn't, Mr. Roper says.)    Through his lawyer, Mr. Smith denies he did anything illegal. But prosecutors allege that Mr. Smith persuaded Queen City to loan him almost $10 million for land deals in Texas. They add that the land appraisals that Mr. Smith presented to get the loans allegedly were fakes and that the appraiser, Western Appraisals andamp; Surveys Inc. of Lewiston, Idaho, never even saw the properties. Western Appraisals denies any wrongdoing.    Now, Mr. Smith's Texas properties &quot;aren't worth beans,&quot; says Gene Anderson, the U.S. attorney in Seattle. &quot;The money is gone.&quot; So is Queen City Sandamp;L; it failed and was merged into another thrift.    CRASHES   Investigators say the fraud outbreak may never have come to light without some disastrous slumps in the energy, agriculture and real-estate industries. Frauds are easy to hide when profits are good. Moreover, many normally honest bankers have resorted to fraud in efforts to save institutions battered by bad loans.    At Aurora State Bank in Colorado, two officers allegedly tried to save the troubled bank by involving it in a convoluted scheme to buy $9 million of stolen currency for about $2 million. According to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. in a civil lawsuit pending in federal court in Denver, the bank eventually loaned more than $3 million to a cast of accused narcotics dealers and reputed mobsters, but the stolen money never showed up and the loans weren't paid. The bank collapsed last year.    TECHNOLOGY   New technologies in the workplace are leading to a rash of new frauds. &quot;High tech and computers make it easier to move money, easier to hide it, easier to steal it,&quot; says James R. Dudine, chief of the special-activities section at the FDIC.    Val Costley, an up-and-coming branch manager at Family Bank of Ogden, Utah, tried to cover up a bad $75,000 loan he had made to a gambler by loaning the gambler still more money; the gambler said he would go to Las Vegas and win enough betting on sports to repay the loans. Mr. Costley used the banks' computers to help set up phony accounts through which he eventually channeled some $4 million to the gambler. The scheme was only uncovered because the bank's president, unable to find a magazine to carry with him into the rest room, picked up a sheaf of computer records instead and discovered that a usually dormant account held some $800,000. Mr. Costley pleaded guilty to fraud in federal court in Salt Lake City shortly after the bank collapsed in 1986.    EASY PICKINS'   Traditionally, fraud has been one of the easiest crimes to get away with. Banks often choose not to prosecute employees caught stealing to avoid bad publicity. And they frequently don't mention the episode in employee checks.    Miami's Dadeland Bank once hired an experienced teller named Victoria Perez, whom they later found was stealing. When they turned the case over to prosecutors, they discovered that Ms. Perez was already on trial for the same offense at another bank. After Ms. Perez was convicted of bank fraud in federal court in Miami, Dadeland officials found out that she had allegedly stolen funds from at least two other financial services companies where she worked. Neither pressed charges nor disclosed the thefts during reference checks, Dadeland says.    &quot;To paraphrase someone,&quot; says the Justice Department's Mr. Arterberry, &quot;man's ability to work a fraud on his fellow man is infinite.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>