<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861222-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Untoward Tips:How William SimonLed Some Rich FriendsAstray on Oil Venture---He Didn't Mention Fees HeGot for Bringing Them InOn Deal That Went Sour---Not All of Them Fault Him---By Edward T. PoundStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/22/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PETROLEUM (PET)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   William E. Simon, the millionaire businessman and former cabinet member, is known as a man with the Midas touch. But for some wealthy investors who put money in an oil and gas drilling venture on Mr. Simon's advice, his golden touch lost some luster.    &quot;I lost $500,000,&quot; says William Marquard, the former chairman of American Standard Inc. The $30 million investment program had collapsed by 1985. But Mr. Marquard says what disturbs him and others is that Mr. Simon never told them of his special deal: In return for his bringing in investors, the Louisiana company that ran the program gave him half of the mineral interests or royalties that all investors agreed to give the company for handling their accounts.    &quot;I do blame him for not telling me the facts,&quot; Mr. Marquard says. &quot;I'm not a sorehead. I just don't like to feel that someone has taken me.&quot;    Mr. Simon, who also invested, denies deceiving anyone. But some investors question the ethics of his private deal and whether the failure to disclose his arrangement with the company, Century Mineral Corp., may have violated securities law. The investors also contend they lost money because of mismanagement by the company, which was headed by a longtime Simon friend whom Mr. Simon endorsed.    The Century Mineral story shows how the rich and powerful can be influenced by investment advice from a well-connected friend. In this case, advice on oil investment was coming from the financially astute Mr. Simon after his stints as federal energy czar and Treasury secretary.    Investors brought in by Mr. Simon starting in the late 1970s included Secretary of State George Shultz; former Internal Revenue Commissioner Mortimer M. Caplin; television personality Barbara Walters; First Boston Corp. Chairman Alvin V. Shoemaker; and the late Justin Dart, a California businessman who was a confidant of President Reagan. Investors brought in by others included former auto executive John De Lorean and actress Candice Bergen.    Some investors reacted angrily when Mr. Simon's special arrangement was disclosed at a 1985 meeting in New York. According to several investors, Stephen Dart, Justin Dart's son, was preparing to sue Mr. Simon but backed off when his mother opposed the action. The Dart family suffered substantial losses on an investment of about $4 million. Mr. Marquard and Harlan K. Schlicher Jr., a New York stockbroker who lost $100,000, say they still are considering suing Mr. Simon.    &quot;I did absolutely nothing wrong,&quot; says Mr. Simon, who began stepping up his investments through Century Mineral and bringing in friends while trying to rebuild his personal fortune after five years in government. He says he didn't disclose his arrangement to other investors because &quot;it didn't affect their investment one iota.&quot;    &quot;In retrospect, I'm sorry I didn't {disclose}. I didn't realize until afterwards that there are a couple of people who took umbrage,&quot; Mr. Simon says.    Mr. Simon estimates he made $300,000 from his side arrangement -- &quot;peanuts in my universe of operations.&quot; But he says that he, too, invested large sums in drilling and ultimately had a net loss of about $595,000. His former tax accountant, John Pretto, speaking for Mr. Simon, contends that at tax time Mr. Simon couldn't take advantage of most of those losses because he had enough tax shelters and deductions so that he didn't pay any federal income tax from 1977 to 1982 and in 1984.    The 59-year-old Mr. Simon has enjoyed spectacular financial success through Wesray Corp., a Morristown, N.J., investment firm that he co-founded in 1981. He made millions of dollars through leveraged buyouts of companies that were sold or taken public at huge profits. His net worth is estimated at $200 million, up from about $2.5 million when he left government in 1977. A few months ago, the University of Rochester announced it is renaming its graduate school of business administration for Mr. Simon, who has helped it raise $15 million, some of it his own money.    Some principals in Century Mineral question whether Mr. Simon lost money on the oil ventures. And Alan R. Bromberg, a respected securities-law professor at Southern Methodist University, says the failure to disclose Mr. Simon's side benefits may represent a violation of federal securities laws.    Under the anti-fraud provisions of the securities laws, he says, someone promoting securities, such as oil and gas interests, is prohibited from misleading potential investors or omitting &quot;material&quot; information. He says if a suit was filed, a court would have to decide, among other things, whether Mr. Simon's benefits were, indeed, material and whether his recommendation was &quot;a substantial factor&quot; in any investor's decision to go into the venture. The court would also have to decide whether Mr. Simon had acted inadvertently or &quot;recklessly or with intent to deceive.&quot;    Some investors who went into the Century Mineral projects on Mr. Simon's advice say they were disturbed by his failure to disclose.    Mr. Schlicher, the New York stockbroker and a conservative Republican who had worked closely with Mr. Simon in political campaigns, says, &quot;I've lost in other investments, but I was aware of all the facts. I was never kept in the dark like this. I was completely taken advantage of by Simon.&quot;    &quot;You feel a little deceived,&quot; says one prominent investor, who lost more than $150,000. The investor says that he relied solely on Mr. Simon's advice that the investment was sound. &quot;When someone of Simon's stature gives a blessing, that was it,&quot; he says.    Mr. Marquard, a director of Shell Oil Corp. and of Chemical Bank, says that he consulted Mr. Simon, who lauded Century Mineral's program and mentioned that &quot;there were some pretty savvy investors, Justin Dart, George Shultz.&quot; Mr. Simon said he was an investor but gave no indication that he was receiving side benefits, says Mr. Marquard, who invested more than $1 million over several years.    Others defend Mr. Simon. &quot;I lost my shirt,&quot; says Mr. Shoemaker, the chairman of First Boston, a New York-based international investment-banking firm, who put in more than $1 million and declines to specify his loss. But he says, &quot;Bill Simon didn't drill those {dry} holes.&quot;    Stanley Rumbough, a prominent Palm Beach, Fla., entrepreneur who lost $500,000 but hopes to recoup $250,000, says that Mr. Simon's side deal &quot;didn't in my opinion affect whether I made money or lost money on the deal.&quot; He says that Mr. Simon raised funds from friends because &quot;he felt all of us would make money&quot; and that he would have invested even if Mr. Simon had disclosed his side dealings. But he acknowledges that he was &quot;disturbed&quot; to learn last year about Mr. Simon's deal.    Secretary Shultz didn't return a phone call for comment. A trust set up for his grandchildren lost about $250,000 in the venture, an attorney for the trust says.    Mr. Simon says that he received side benefits for also acting as a consultant to Century Mineral and that he promoted investments during a period when the company was having great successes. He says that he began reducing his investments in 1981 and that he had nothing to do with the investments of many of Century Mineral's clients, though he says that he allowed the company to use his name to promote its program.    But Charles W. Cossey, a Denver energy consultant who was retained by some investors and by Century Mineral, says that investors went with the company largely because of Mr. Simon's savvy reputation for financial investments or because &quot;Bill Simon told them it was a good deal.&quot;    &quot;I can tell you that from my past experience in dealing with people from high-income brackets, they take the word of somebody they respect without looking too carefully,&quot; says Mr. Cossey, who for years on Wall Street evaluated energy deals for securities firms. Mr. Cossey believes Mr. Simon had a &quot;conflict of interest&quot; because &quot;he was on both sides of the transaction.&quot;    It was Frank &quot;Bud&quot; Bailey, 57, Mr. Simon's roommate at Lafayette College in Easton, Pa., who got Mr. Simon interested in energy exploration in Louisiana. Mr. Bailey, a geologist, set up Century Mineral in Lafayette, La., in 1963. He made money investing in energy and real estate, and had only a few clients, including Mr. Simon, who was a millionaire senior partner at Salomon Brothers, a Wall Street investment firm, before he joined the government in 1972.    In 1977, Mr. Bailey declined to sell Mr. Simon part of Century Mineral, but the two men made another arrangement. Mr. Bailey says that Mr. Simon agreed to &quot;talk up&quot; the company's investment program to his wealthy acquaintances. In return, Mr. Bailey agreed to cut Mr. Simon in on his take from Century Mineral's investors, including those Mr. Simon didn't bring in. All told, the company made investments on behalf of about 40 wealthy people.    Clients gave Mr. Bailey 25% of their working interests in fields where oil or gas was found, and he gave Mr. Simon half of the 25%. Under its arrangement with investors, Century Mineral got a &quot;free look&quot; at the first hole, or exploratory well, in a field.    This meant it didn't pay any drilling costs, the costliest phase of oil-finding, but paid its share of completion and operating costs on successful exploratory wells. Mr. Simon shared this benefit. But he also put a lot of his own money in many of these same wells between 1977 and 1980. On later wells developed in a field, the company paid its proportionate share of all costs, including drilling, and Mr. Simon also paid his share.    Unlike other investors, according to Mr. Bailey, Mr. Simon often picked what exploratory wells he wanted to risk his money in. He also didn't pay a 10% management fee that other investors paid annually, based on their exploration budgets, because, Mr. Bailey says, he &quot;was part of management.&quot;    In 1981, Century Mineral changed its compensation arrangement to take a 10% royalty on investors' revenues from all producing wells, without sharing in the costs. Mr. Simon got half of the royalties. Though the special arrangements weren't disclosed, Mr. Simon insists that he told Justin Dart, who died two years ago.    During 1981, Mr. Bailey turned over much of Century Mineral's operations to his son Richard, a graduate of Harvard Business School who was then 28. Richard Bailey, who now lives in Tahiti, complains that the deal with Mr. Simon was &quot;a heavy financial burden on us.&quot;    Mr. Simon acknowledges that his agreement diminished the cash available to Century Mineral, but he says it is &quot;ludicrous&quot; to suggest that it impaired the company's operations. He says that the senior Mr. Bailey was a competent oil man who ran into problems in part because he let his inexperienced son run Century Mineral.    In interviews, investors say the Baileys were unable to manage large amounts of investment funds and unwisely took on the operation of some wells. The Baileys also got into financial trouble trying to expand into other businesses.    Century Mineral closed last year under the weight of several million dollars in debts. Many Louisiana creditors have sued the company and the Baileys. Members of an oil-drilling partnership have accused the Baileys in a local Lafayette court of diverting funds, and a Texas partnership has sued them in a federal court in Dallas for alleged fraud. Mr. Simon, who wasn't involved in the company's operational decisions, isn't named in any suits.    Frank Bailey, who lives in Martha's Vineyard, Mass., says, &quot;I feel very badly&quot; that investors lost money and says that he was a victim of oil-industry problems such as reserve devaluations. The Baileys deny any wrongdoing. &quot;We may be stupid,&quot; Richard Bailey says, &quot;but we are not crooks.&quot;    In 1984, the mineral holdings and related debts of Century Mineral and most of its investors were consolidated into a new entity, CMC Energy Limited Partnership. Mr. Simon, who was then earning substantial net income on his holdings, reluctantly agreed to the rescue plan. But in return, Frank Bailey says that Mr. Simon asked him to arrange to &quot;cash out&quot; some of Mr. Simon's mineral holdings for $500,000. Mr. Bailey says he couldn't obtain a loan for the $500,000 based on Mr. Simon's holdings, and after CMC was formed, Mr. Simon asked him to use the CMC partnership for the loan.    But G. Bruce Kuehne, a Lafayette lawyer, says he warned the Baileys against going forward. Speaking with the Baileys' permission, he says he warned them they could expect to be sued by some investors for alleged securities violations on the ground that the cash-out plan was a &quot;special deal&quot; that wasn't offered to others and &quot;a material fact&quot; that wasn't disclosed in CMC's offering memorandum.    Frank Bailey says that Mr. Simon then dropped the idea. Mr. Simon says there wasn't anything improper about his cashout effort.    The Baileys failed in an effort to exchange the CMC partnership assets and debts for cash and units in a publicly traded master limited partnership last year, and resigned as general partners.    It was during this effort, in September 1985, that Stephen Dart convened a meeting of prominent East Coast investors at First Boston's New York offices. Mr. Dart brought a Los Angeles attorney, James R. Andrews, whom he had hired to investigate Century Mineral's dealings. Mr. Andrews, according to several participants, reported that he had discovered that Mr. Simon had been receiving undisclosed benefits from the Baileys.    Those in attendance included Mr. Marquard; Mr. Shoemaker, the First Boston chairman; Benjamin V. Lambert, the chairman of Eastdil Realty Inc., a New York real-estate investment company; Martin LeBoutillier, former president of Paine, Webber, Jackson andamp; Curtis, a major New York-based securities firm; and representatives of several other investors. Mr. Simon wasn't present.    Recalling the meeting, Mr. Bailey says one investor, Mr. Lambert, asked him incredulously, &quot;'Bud, you mean that Bill got some of my interests?' I told him that he {Mr. Simon} did.&quot; But Mr. Bailey says he stressed that Mr. Simon's benefits came from his {Mr. Bailey's} share of the take, which had been disclosed. Mr. Lambert, who has business dealings with Mr. Simon, didn't return calls.    Another investor who was at the meeting, John L. Grant, a former American Standard executive, says that Mr. Dart was &quot;so indignant&quot; that he was &quot;all gung-ho to go after Simon.&quot;    The East Coast investors agreed to retain Mr. Andrews to see if he could sell their dwindling assets. (He couldn't.) They also asked him to review their possible rights to seek recovery for their losses from the Baileys and any other person.    Several weeks later, Messrs. Dart and Andrews held a pivotal meeting with Mr. Dart's mother, Jane, and West Coast investors. According to Dale Reis, an investor who worked for Justin Dart for 50 years, Stephen Dart was preparing to sue Mr. Simon and the Baileys in an attempt to recover his family's losses.    &quot;Mrs. Dart stopped the suit from being filed,&quot; Mr. Reis says. &quot;Mrs. Dart wouldn't go along with that. She didn't feel that Mr. {Justin} Dart would do that because of the close relationship {he} had had with Simon.&quot; (Stephen Dart and his mother decline comment.)    With the Darts out of the picture and the Baileys thought to be broke, the movement to sue lost steam. Most investors say their CMC holdings have become virtually worthless. &quot;I got wiped out,&quot; Mr. Simon says. He says he invested about $4.1 million through the Bailey operation and got back a little more than $3.5 million.    Richard Bailey says that he twice analyzed Mr. Simon's holdings and that Mr. Simon's revenues exceeded expenses. His brother, Kenneth Bailey, who was Century Mineral's vice president in charge of finance, also says he believes Mr. Simon &quot;was in the black.&quot;    Mr. Simon says he takes &quot;great umbrage . . . I mean really great umbrage&quot; at any suggestion that he made money at the expense of other investors. He says no Century Mineral investor complained to him directly and adds, &quot;I would have written a check to anyone who complained to me.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>