<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0087 </DOCNO><HL> Prairie Squall:Cross Winds BuffetLand-Grant CollegesAs States' Needs Shift---At Kansas State, Farm CrisisStirs Debate on How BestTo Teach 'Common Man'---Selling Out to Agribusiness?---By Dennis FarneyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><DATELINE> MANHATTAN, Kan.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Irate farmers marched onto the leafy campus of Kansas State University last year, charging this old agricultural school with writing off their dreams and their lives.    Then they went looking for Prof. Barry Flinchbaugh. Outsized, outspoken and occasionally outrageous, the agricultural economist had committed heresy by calling the farm crisis exaggerated. He looked up to find &quot;40 angry people packed into my narrow hallway.&quot;    The confrontation ended peacefully. But it was another indication that Kansas State is something far more complex than the &quot;hip boots and hog jowls&quot; stereotype a spokesman fears outsiders may conjure up. In fact, you can find almost anything here, from an entomologist who serves students french-fried insects -- tasty, he says -- to a geologist busily mapping Ganymede, Jupiter's largest moon.    Here also, in microcosm, is the sprawling U.S. land-grant university system -- a system under stress and, increasingly, a battleground for competing interest groups.    The land-grant university, perhaps the single most revolutionary innovation in American higher education, observes a double anniversary this year: the centennial of the agricultural experiment station and the 125th anniversary of the Morrill Act, which authorized the new colleges and gave states federal land they could sell to pay for them.    But the twin milestones come amid flat enrollments, internal debate and a searching reassessment. More than a million students attend the nation's 72 land-grant unversities. Yet some observers question the continued relevance of schools originally proposed to &quot;teach men to feed, clothe and enlighten the great brotherhood of man.&quot;    &quot;We have lost our way,&quot; contends G. Edward Schuh, a former head of the University of Minnesota's agriculture department who is now with the World Bank.    Jeffersonian in spirit, the land-grant university embodied sweeping commitments to agrarianism and egalitarianism. It offered higher education to the common man. It still does.    &quot;Our role, unlike Harvard, is the democratization of information,&quot; says Mark Lapping, the Kansas State architecture dean and an eloquent Vermonter who has turned down elite Eastern universities to stay here. &quot;I welcome, literally, every student who walks through my front door. And I believe every one has a right to be here.&quot;    A campus of ivy-covered limestone buildings, Kansas State is by one measure the oldest land-grant university in the nation. Kansas was the first state to legislate acceptance of the Morrill Act, signed by Abraham Lincoln in 1862. (Michigan State University has an equally strong claim to being first; it was founded as an agricultural college years before the act was even passed.) The Kansas legislature's move transformed a struggling Methodist school huddling on the edge of Indian country into the forerunner of today's modern Kansas State University.    At first, the new school couldn't decide whether it was a trade school for farmers or something more. An early president promised no &quot;Latin or Greek rubbish, no useless 'abstract' mathematics, and no fancy 'oologies' or 'osophies.'&quot; But his successor said: &quot;College is not so much to make men farmers as to make farmers men.&quot;    The broader view prevailed. But today's Kansas State is buffeted by an identity crisis no less profound.    Rural and small-town Kansas, the school's traditional recruiting ground, is drying up. Kansas State's enrollment has fallen to 17,500 from a peak of nearly 20,000 in 1981. The university has nine recruiters this year, up from one full-time and one part-time recruiter last year, and they're working suburbia hard.    &quot;We're at a critical juncture here,&quot; says Jon Wefald, the new president of Kansas State. So are land-grant universities generally, and for reasons more fundamental than sagging enrollment.    &quot;They are growing increasingly irrelevant to the problems of our society,&quot; concludes Mr. Schuh, the World Bank official.    A lengthy paper he presented at the University of Minnesota in 1984 found land-grant universities abandoning their original mandate, applied research, for more glamorous -- and sometimes less relevant -- basic research. Professors, it said, are preoccupied with pleasing other professors, not farmers in the field. And there is an &quot;almost total failure&quot; to educate students for the international economy.    &quot;Society will let you sit around and contemplate your navels,&quot; Mr. Schuh tells land-grant professors. &quot;But it won't necessarily pay you for it.&quot;    Other observers fear that these schools, the very embodiment of pluralist ideals, are becoming &quot;captured institutions&quot; -- adjuncts to agribusiness corporations and other narrow interests. That trend is being accelerated by static public appropriations and an aggressive search for private grants.    &quot;Land-grant universities don't sell their souls to private industry -- they willingly give them away,&quot; charges Harold Breimyer, a respected University of Missouri professor emeritus.    Frederick Buttel, a Cornell University rural sociologist, contends that &quot;the early 1980s saw a full-scale corporate offensive against the land-grant university.&quot; The so-called Winrock Report of 1982, which reflected the thinking of President Reagan's Office of Science and Technology Policy, strongly suggested that universities leave applied research -- and, by implication, its profits -- to private industry.    Meanwhile, rural activists are pushing from the opposite direction, catching academicians in the middle. Dairymen, for example, have demonstrated against the University of Wisconsin's agriculture dean because he backs use of an experimental bovine growth hormone. The hormone would radically increase milk production at a time of surplus, probably driving more dairymen off the farm.    Angry rural advocates charge that land-grant universities are too wrapped up in high-tech, high-production agriculture to worry much about smaller, marginal farmers struggling to hang on.    &quot;We still have a million Kansans living on farms and in small towns,&quot; says Fred Bentley of the Kansas Rural Center. &quot;I get very upset when experts at Kansas State say there's nothing they can do, or even should do, to reverse the rural decline. To me it's like signing a death warrant for those people out there.&quot;    All these currents swirl around Kansas State, an institution in the midst of fundamental change. Besides its new president, it has a new administrative team, several new deans, new recruiting brochures -- and new internal disputes to resolve. One top official talks of a &quot;silent struggle&quot; for resources between the old-line college of agriculture and the growing liberal-arts departments.    The agriculture college still stamps this campus with its special identity. Each week, bakery-science students here turn out miniature loaves of bread as they test the characteristics of different kinds of wheat; out beyond the campus roams a strange research herd of genetically deficient cattle, the only one of its kind in the country.    But the growth areas are outside the college of agriculture, whose undergraduate enrollment has dropped to about 1,560 from a peak of 2,330 a decade ago. &quot;To be realistic, we're not telling students that their best opportunity is to go back to the farm,&quot; says Walter Woods, the dean of the college. The emphasis has shifted decisively to such things as the agricultural service industry.    Meanwhile, the faculty members are choosing sides in a polite but potentially far-reaching debate over curriculum revision. A minority of younger faculty members are urging greater emphasis on a movement called &quot;sustainable&quot; agriculture. It stresses cost reduction and conservation -- low-tech, practical innovations that can reduce a farmer's need for commercial fertilizer, herbicide and fuel.    &quot;We haven't really looked into low-input agriculture since the 1930s,&quot; says Cornelia Butler Flora, a sociologist on Kansas State's new sustainable-agriculture committee. A source of inspiration to her is Texas Agriculture Commissioner Jim Hightower, a flamboyant activist who has persuaded some Texas farmers to find market niches like blueberry cultivation.    But the notion riles traditionalists like Barry Flinchbaugh, the professor whom farmers demonstrated against. He dismisses sustainable agriculture as little more than a romantic gesture. &quot;You're not going to save these distressed farmers with blueberries and asparagus,&quot; says the blunt-spoken Mr. Flinchbaugh, waving an unlit cigar for emphasis.    Steering a cautious middle course is Kurt Feltner, associate director of the college of agriculture. He sees &quot;at least a modest shift&quot; in the direction of sustainable agriculture. But he is wary of pressures to skew the college's program for special causes -- in this case, to help the small farmer. Ultimately, he argues, the best thing the university can do is offer unbiased research.    That's not easy, if only because of budget constraints. The entire budget of the Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station, including the college of agriculture, four other colleges and seven branch experiment stations, is a modest $30 million a year, and some $7.5 million comes with strings attached.    Prying more money out of donors and the hard-pressed legislature is one of the tasks facing President Wefald, who must compete with the archrival University of Kansas -- &quot;Snob Hill&quot; to generations of Kansas State basketball fans -- and four other major schools. Searching for a niche, he is trying to position Kansas State as the lead institution for state economic development.    Some think Kansas State's greatest challenge may be to retain its soul, the pluralistic vision that infused the original land-grant movement. &quot;We must deal with the peripheral Americans -- the rural kids, displaced farmers, the elderly -- because nobody else will,&quot; says architecture dean Lapping.    There is a sense here, as Kansas State enters its 125th year, that the land-grant unversity represents a unique outgrowth of 19th-century idealism and pragmatism that could never be replicated.    &quot;Could we reinvent the land-grant university in today's political and economic climate?&quot; asks Mr. Woods, the agriculture dean. &quot;No, I don't think we could.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>