<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Iraq Is Said to Demolish Kurd Villages---Diplomats Say Regime SeeksTo Dent Rebels' Sway---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><DATELINE> BAGHDAD, Iraq  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Iraqi government forces have razed more than 100 Kurdish villages and relocated tens of thousands of their inhabitants in a campaign against dissent in the northeast near the Iranian border, Western diplomats and intelligence sources here say.    The sources say Iraq began its campaign in March after increased activity by Kurdish guerrillas seeking greater autonomy from Baghdad. The two main Kurdish political groups in Iraq sorted out differences last November at an Iranian-sponsored meeting in Tehran and have since attacked Iraqi economic and government targets more effectively with logistical help from Iranian revolutionary guards, the diplomats say.    Iran has recently stepped up its support of the Iraqi Kurds as part of its effort to win the seven-year gulf war with Iraq. Western and Asian embassy sources here say Iraqi forces since March have destroyed the villages in areas where guerrillas were operating, literally flattening their mud-brick houses with bulldozers. The Iraqis have also burned agricultural fields and relocated villagers around the country, some of them in camps in desolate desert areas near the Saudi and Jordanian border, the sources say.    &quot;We are witnessing a ruthless campaign of pacification,&quot; says a West European diplomat. &quot;The Iraqis have grown increasingly concerned about what the Kurds could potentially do if they unite with the Iranians and they decided to preempt this.&quot; Iraqi authorities have either denied the reports or refused to comment on them.    The outcome of Iraq's drive to quash the guerrillas' base of popular support in an area inhabited by an estimated two million Kurds is important in determining how effectively it can continue fighting Iran and keep the internal peace once the conflict ends. So far, the insurgents have been more a nuisance than a strategic threat to the regime of Iraqi President Saddam Hussein. But increasingly, he has feared attacks against oil fields near Kirkuk and on an oil pipeline to Turkey that is critical to Iraq's war financing. A second pipeline through Turkey is due to be opened late this year.    Iraq worries that an alliance with the Kurds might enable Iran to seize portions of northern Iraq. Though the territory is of little strategic value, its capture could boost flagging Iranian morale.    Western diplomats warn, however, that Iraq's unprecedented clamp down on Kurdish rebels could boomerang by stiffening resistance in the region and tying down troops that might be needed at the more critical southern war front.    Kurdish resistance to outside rule is centuries old. Kurds have long dreamed of an independent state stretching over the mountainous regions of Iran, Iraq, Turkey and Syria, where today 20 million of them live.    Last week, Kurds in neighboring Turkey attacked two southeastern villages, killing 28 Turks in a defiant rejection of Prime Minister Turgut Ozal's appeal for them to abandon their fight for autonomy. Faced by what the Turkish government considers its worst security crisis in more than 50 years in its southeastern provinces, Ankara has reinforced troops and curtailed political rights in Kurdish areas. Late last week, it announced plans to appoint a special governor to supervise the region.    Diplomats in Iraq believe Saddam Hussein's actions have been far tougher than Turkey's. But his government has managed to keep its operations hidden from Western scrutiny through repression and restrictions on the movement of foreign diplomats, they say.    Iraqi officials deny that any such activity is taking place, giving different explanations to Western envoys who recently have seen some 20 flattened villages along the main roads between Kirkuk and Irbil and between Mosul and Irbil alone. These diplomats also claim to have reliable reports of dozens of other destroyed villages nearer the Iranian border, along the pipeline to Turkey and around Kirkuk oil fields.    Officials in the area have variously explained to visiting Westerners that the villages were removed to widen the roads, that the razed settlements -- which the government had supplied with both water and electricity -- were illegal anyway or that the campaign is limited only to active supporters of guerrillas who attacked government targets.    Western diplomats are skeptical that President Hussein's efforts will pay off. They say many previously acquiescent Kurds have been pushed into anti-government activity, abandoning villages for the more secure mountains or crossing the border to Iran to take up arms. One Iraqi writer says widespread reports of increased guerrilla activity have prompted his Baghdad family and hundreds of others to cancel usual summer retreats to the northeastern mountains.    The severity of the regime's response to the Kurds could also undermine Iraq's efforts to win Kurdish hearts and minds. The government, for example, has allowed Kurdish men to serve in local militia groups rather than forcing them to join the Iraqi army.    The anti-guerrilla offensive might also diminish international backing for Iraq in its war with Iran, diplomats say. &quot;We all think they are biting off more than they can chew,&quot; says a Western diplomat. &quot;They probably can't do it clean enough, quick enough or make it stick before they've got to turn their energies to Iran's winter offensive in the south.&quot; He estimates that Iraq now faces 5,000 to 8,000 Kurdish guerrillas and that Iraq currently has some 35,000 troops in the Kurdish region.    Diplomats believe Iraq chose this time to take on the Kurds not only because of increased guerrilla activity but also because it was emboldened after holding off Iran's all-out offensive on the southeastern city of Basra in January and February. Given the lull of war activity in the heat-stricken south, it was also able to concentrate more energies on the north.    President Hussein was also prompted to act more decisively after two Kurdish attacks on oil installations, the diplomats say. Although the guerrillas inflicted only minor damage, their use of Iranian-supplied rocket-propelled grenades and mortars raised new fears in Tehran about their striking capability.    One diplomat points on a map to scattered villages that Western embassies say have been cleared by the Iraqis. Some are west of the Kirkuk oil installations and near the pipeline to Turkey. Some are closer to the Iranian border.    &quot;In the short term, nobody can stand up to them {the Iraqis},&quot; says one Asian diplomat. &quot;We are watching to see what happens in the autumn, when the Kurds may infiltrate back to cause disruptions while Iran carries out a new offensive on the south.&quot; He says there is also some evidence that Iraq has used chemical warfare against the Kurds in recent weeks and that Iran may send some Kurds to Western hospitals soon as proof.    Diplomats who have tried to visit areas where there are believed to be Kurdish relocation camps have been turned back, despite permission granted to drive through those areas. The only through road to Saudi Arabia is believed to lead past some of the camps; it has been closed for a couple of weeks.    Western diplomats visiting Kurdish cities were barred from visiting vacation resorts in mountain Kurdish villages on the grounds that their amply flexible schedules didn't allow them time.    &quot;We still don't know the full extent of the Iraqi campaign or the location and size of all the relocation camps, but we do know this is an extraordinarily large operation, the kind of which this government hasn't ever undertaken before against the Kurds,&quot; the Asian diplomat says. </TEXT></DOC>