<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Most Bilateral Trade Pacts Carry a Penalty </HL><AUTHOR> C. Michael Aho </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Rep. Richard Gephardt has been roundly ridiculed in the editorial pages of this and other newspapers for his amendment that would require retaliation if other countries' trade surpluses with the U.S. are not reduced. Much of this criticism is deserved, but Mr. Gephardt's objective is to open markets, not to discriminate among them. Little or no criticism has been leveled against the Reagan administration's proposal to negotiate a series of bilateral trade agreements. Such moves would be just as damaging to the open trading system, if not more so.    The administration proposal comes on the heels of its successful negotiation of a bilateral agreement with Canada, our largest trading partner. (A less comprehensive agreement was negotiated with Israel in 1985.) The administration deserves credit for successfully negotiating the Canada pact, which signals that trade liberalization is still possible and that international negotiations can still bear fruit. The Canadian pact has gone further than the multilateral General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and could be a catalyst for those talks. But additional bilateral agreements could result in increased trade frictions and eventually could fragment the trading system.    Bilateral agreements are justified only in special cases. Canada and Israel are special cases for the U.S. -- Canada because it borders on the U.S., and Israel for domestic political reasons. Mexico may also be a special case, as President Reagan indicated in this year's State of the Union address. (The European Community is a precedent for a North American regional grouping.) It is hard to see Congress and the U.S. private sector going along with any other bilateral free-trade agreements.    Resentment would prevail among outsiders. Inefficiency would be spawned by the fragmentation of markets. Bureaucratic nightmares would result for the government and private firms trying to cope with the discrimination among countries. And stupid signals would be sent to those policy makers in developing countries who are proponents of markets and multilateralism. Last, other countries would protest if the U.S. tried to go beyond these special cases.    And yet the administration persists in pushing its strategy of bilateral agreements. Has it forgotten the lessons of history? Several can be learned from the experience of the 1930s. In the wake of the Smoot-Hawley tariff and subsequent retaliation, many countries tried to establish bilateral or regional agreements.    But attempts in the interwar years to establish some predictability for trade, largely through discriminatory bilateral agreements, failed because the kind of certainty gained was illusory: The conclusion of the second or third discriminatory bilateral agreement in a series necessarily disappoints expectations created by the first. (If, for example, the U.S. and Mexico were to sign an agreement covering auto parts, Canada certainly would have something to say about it.) Frictions, if not downright hostility, are bound to arise. Furthermore, if other countries were to follow the U.S. lead and negotiate bilateral agreements, predictability and stability would be destroyed for everyone.    The experience of the 1930s shows how difficult it becomes for businesses to bear the risks of trade-related investment when changes in trade protection become less predictable. It demonstrates that heavy losses in output and employment occur when investment is reduced and directed into less rewarding projects. It shows that discrimination breeds discrimination, and that beggar-thy-neighbor policies are self-defeating, because they end up impoverishing all countries. Finally, it makes clear that trade-policy conflicts resulting in a decline in trade and output can provide fertile ground for political radicals to seize the reins of government.    Discriminatory bilateral agreements cannot combine to form a globally consistent, stable system of national trade policies. Such a system requires effective equality of rights and obligations among countries, and can be ensured only by general acceptance of the principle of nondiscrimination or most-favored-nation treatment. This principle mobilizes large nations to support the aspiration of small ones to be treated equally. In no other way can the sovereign equality of nations that differ enormously in size and power be realized, or even approximated.    Bilateral groupings are an inferior alternative when compared with multilateral liberalization on a nondiscriminatory basis. Inevitably, some countries will be left out. How will they be chosen and who will decide?    In this country, Congress will have to play a role. Consider how members of Congress will be whipsawed by country interests. Legislative action on separate agreements also opens up the possibility that trade will be used as a weapon of foreign policy against countries that don't follow U.S. foreign-policy initiatives. Some legislators, pressed by special interests, may seek to discriminate in the application of domestic law. All of this would raise trade policy from &quot;low-level&quot; to &quot;high-level&quot; foreign policy. The secretary of state would end up spending more time on the balance of trade, leaving him less time to spend on the balance of terror.    Bilateral or like-minded agreements also could smack of colonialism to developing countries. Even for those given preferential treatment, such an arrangement would add fuel to domestic political battles, to say nothing of the domestic political battles in countries discriminated against.    The major pillars of the trading system (the U.S., Japan and the European Community) cannot afford to be in rival blocs. Although the U.S. has expressed some frustration with the European Community (and some of its members) for slowing the multilateral process and with Japan over market access, Western cooperation remains important for strategic and security reasons and must not be undermined. The best message of security cohesion the Western nations can send to Eastern Bloc nations is a flourishing, unified, nondiscriminatory trading system. A fragmented trading system with friction and discrimination would send the wrong signal.    Finally, if the trading system should fragment as a result of a misguided bilateral strategy, how will the U.S. be able to generate current-account surpluses of up to $100 billion to service its trillion-dollar foreign debt in the 1990s? Without an open multilateral trading system, that will be next to impossible.    ---   Mr. Aho directs economic studies and the International Trade Project at the Council on Foreign Relations. </TEXT></DOC>