<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880311-0095 </DOCNO><HL> Lofty Project: Against Sizable Odds, A Small Firm Is Poised To Run a Space Station --- James Caloway's Outfit Gets Aid From NASA Alumni And Kindergarten Friend --- A Belated Client: Uncle Sam </HL><AUTHOR> Paulette Thomas (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> ARO </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   James D. Caloway, a newly minted philosophy graduate from Oxford, met two friends for their usual Saturday brunch seven years ago. While well-heeled patrons nearby celebrated the skyrocketing price of oil, the three friends toasted their own lofty business plan: to build and launch their own space station.    &quot;We had two minor problems,&quot; recalls Mr. Caloway, then 24 years old and long a space nut. &quot;First, we had no money. Second, we didn't have any technical capability.&quot;    Those obstacles would seem ridiculously insurmountable, but they were only the first in Mr. Caloway's effort to get from ground zero to zero gravity. Mr. Caloway and his group (his initial partners dropped out of the project early on) would face a tangle of federal agencies, radical shifts in U.S. space policy and skeptical investment bankers in their effort to become the first capitalists in space.    Yet today, Mr. Caloway's Space Industries Inc. is poised to establish the first for-profit outpost in the final frontier. Last month, the Reagan administration announced a $700 million plan to lease quarters on a private orbiting station. With six years of work behind it, Space Industries is the only real contender for the contract, giving it a lock on the $700 million -- plus any revenue paid in by private companies clamoring to do research in space.    The new federal commitment may help launch other companies into space work as well. In addition to Space Industries, Seattle-based Spacehab Inc. hopes to lease space for experiments to customers on pressurized modules inside the space shuttle's cargo bay, and Houston-based Space Services Inc., the first private concern to launch a rocket into space, seeks to begin regular launches soon.    But Space Industries, more than other nascent space companies, dramatizes how a small band of entrepreneurs turned government disarray into opportunity by hiring away disaffected space-agency leaders and by helping fill a need in the wake of the Challenger tragedy. It also illustrates the value of personal connections, including a kindergarten classmate who brokered essential but hard-to-get insurance.    &quot;It's one of those situations where if you knew how high the mountain was, you never would have started,&quot; says David H. Langstaff, the chief financial officer of Space Industries.    And despite the White House hoopla about private development of space, the Space Industries story shows that many pioneers don't get far without a big dose of government help -- just as Christopher Columbus was backed by Queen Isabella I and the westward expansion of the U.S. railroads was government-subsidized.    &quot;It's an entirely appropriate role for government to play,&quot; the effervescent, boyish-looking Mr. Caloway says. &quot;We are starting a business in an industry that doesn't yet exist.&quot;    The construction, launching and leasing of Space Industries' Industrial Space Facility still isn't a sure thing. Besides clearing the usual federal bidding and procurement procedures, the company must avoid getting whipsawed by yet another abrupt change in the U.S. space program. McDonnell Douglas Corp., for example, had to write off millions of space-research dollars amid the dearth of launches following the Challenger disaster.    No one has suffered from space-policy changes more than the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, whose plans for a much grander, manned space station have been scaled back as a result of eroding congressional support. Many at NASA fear that Space Industries' small, unmanned station will give the budget cutters an excuse to scrap NASA's station.    While the high-tech NASA station, with its extensive life-support and power systems, conjures images of Star Trek, the bus-sized Industrial Space Facility is closer to Jules Verne -- &quot;kind of a dirty little workshop where you can do good things, but not many of them,&quot; says Charles Walker, a veteran of two shuttle flights and now a scientist at McDonnell Douglas, a major contractor for the proposed NASA station.    The Industrial Space Facility, scheduled for launching in 1991 from the space shuttle's payload bay, would enable visiting workers to conduct research but would support life only when docked to the shuttle. The racks and lockers for experiments would be interchangeable with those of the NASA station, which Space Industries publicly supports.    Back in 1982, when the project was still in the blue-sky stage, Mr. Caloway knew he couldn't launch the company on the strength of his credentials from studying &quot;the vertical migration of man&quot; at Oxford. So he approached Maxime A. Faget -- the Henry Ford of space-vehicle design who had worked on the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo and space-shuttle craft. Mr. Faget, now 66, was intrigued by Mr. Caloway's enthusiasm and ideas as well as disenchanted with NASA's bureaucracy.    Mr. Faget, in turn, persuaded Joseph P. Allen, a 50-year-old astronaut who had flown two shuttle missions, to forgo a slew of high-paying job offers from established aerospace companies and take a long shot. After three years as NASA's congressional liaison, Mr. Allen was a lobbyist as well as a scientist, and, together with Robert Gilruth, the retired director of the Manned Spacecraft Center at Johnson Space Center, brought instant credibility to the philosophy graduate's far-out idea.    &quot;They are the greatest men in space in America,&quot; Mr. Caloway says.    Messrs. Faget and Allen relished the challenge of becoming businessmen. Initially, each of the principals kicked in $15,000 to study the station. They listed the pros and cons of the project on the blackboard in a closet-sized office near Houston. One of the cons: the need to raise huge sums for a venture whose initial risks soared far beyond those of junk bonds.    Space Industries -- a name that Mr. Caloway thought had a ring like General Motors -- had no firm plan and no customer in sight. But it soon had a money man when Mr. Langstaff, an investment banker at Inverness Securities of Houston, began acting as its chief financial adviser. Messrs. Langstaff and Caloway went to investors who were inured to huge risks, whose blue-chip names would provide further credibility -- and whose acquaintance with Mr. Caloway's socially and politically prominent family helped him get a foot in the door. Early investors included such Houston civic leaders as James A. Elkins Jr., a former chairman of First City Bancorp., and Walter Mischer Sr., the chairman of Allied Bancshares -- huge banks recently forced into mergers.    &quot;In some ways, they were reminded of the wildcatting days of the oil wells,&quot; Mr. Allen says. &quot;It was very Texas.&quot; Space Industries declines to specify anyone's individual investment but says its equity is widely dispersed. Mr. Caloway's group retained the Big Eight accounting firm of Arthur Andersen and Co.; and Andrews andamp; Kurth, a tony Houston law firm, agreed to represent it for half-price after the exuberant young man talked his way into an interview with its management committee.    On New Year's Eve of 1983, Space Industries celebrated an agreement with Inverness to raise $1 million. W. McComb Dunwoody of Inverness, an early skeptic, told potential investors he was seeking &quot;adventure capital.&quot;    &quot;They started early, and they started strong,&quot; says Alden M. Richards, vice president of the Space Systems Group of Johnson andamp; Higgins, a leading insurance-brokerage firm that represents Space Industries. Although Space Industries was seeking insurance on its own in a largely untested market, Mr. Richards volunteered his services as a broker after reading that Space Industries had hired from Inverness Mr. Langstaff, an old kindergarten classmate.    Helping win over key players in the financial and insurance communities were Space Industries' efforts to keep abreast of NASA's evolving space-station plan and its willingness to modify its own design to preserve compatibility. The company's engineers designed modular parts for easy repair and replacement and planned for a second, identical station, on the ground and ready for launch -- also helping to reassure potential insurers.    The company leveraged each breakthrough in financing into another. In 1985, NASA agreed, in an unusual contract, to launch the station in exchange for a percentage of cash flow two years after it was aloft. On the strength of the launch contract -- as well as the merits of the station design -- Westinghouse Electric Corp. and Boeing Co. each agreed to invest several million dollars and to act as contractors for certain construction. Shearson Lehman Hutton Group signed on as financial adviser, as well as First Boston Corp.    Ultimately, the company raised $30 million in the private sector -- 70% from individuals, 20% through venture-capital firms and 10% in corporate investment. Alas, that still fell far short of the estimated $700 million, including interest and insurance costs, needed to build, launch and begin operating the station.    Meanwhile, searching for customers, Space Industries occasionally charged down the wrong path. More than a year after raising its first $1 million, it found itself all but out of cash because it was chasing McDonnell Douglas to get it to do zero-gravity pharmaceuticals research aboard the station. Even after a dozen meetings, the perfect anchor tenant for the station was refusing to commit itself.    &quot;Quite frankly, we didn't understand the market,&quot; Mr. Caloway recalls. With the private sector leery of federal policy changes and continued shuttle delays, the only initial group of potential space-station customers, the company learned, was federal agencies such as NASA and the departments of defense and energy.    Although the principals grieved over the shuttle disaster, they were helped by the resulting congressional impatience with NASA. The NASA station, as planned now, would require $25 billion and at least 19 shuttle flights to build it in space.    Mr. Allen tirelessly marketed the company to Congress as a &quot;bridge&quot; to provide the U.S. a research platform in space until NASA's station was built. He was joined by Mr. Caloway, who opened a Washington office last fall. With proven technology, a five-star staff and NASA's budget on the chopping block, &quot;you really didn't have to be a great lobbyist,&quot; Mr. Caloway says.    When the White House last month unveiled a policy committed to commercializing space -- and, as part of the package, a plan to lease space on a small, private station -- Space Industries finally had its long-sought anchor tenant. Although the government won't make its first rent payment until the station is in orbit, Space Industries feels certain that the promise of the U.S. lease has given it the financial leverage to get its station aloft.    To some space enthusiasts, everything but democracy and apple pie is at stake -- just as the New World was up for grabs in the 15th century. &quot;The future of capitalism depends on whether we or the Soviets make best use of this new continent 100 miles up,&quot; says Arthur Dula, a space lawyer here. &quot;It's just a shame this didn't happen sooner.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>