<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Under Siege:Revitalized for a Time,The CIA Is Now JoltedBy Variety of Setbacks---Its Iran-Contra Role DamagesRelations With Congress;Fighting for More Funds---How Not to Train an Agent---By John WalcottStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMT FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Six years ago, Ronald Reagan came to office promising to restore the budget, morale and credibility of the Central Intelligence Agency. He did much of that, but the agency is back in trouble.    Mr. Reagan and his director of central intelligence, William Casey, roughly tripled the nation's intelligence budget, improved the CIA's analytical capabilities and launched new intelligence-gathering programs. However, Mr. Casey's involvement in the Iran-Contra affair, along with several serious blows to U.S. intelligence during his watch, now threatens to eclipse his accomplishments.    The agency's fragile human intelligence network in the Soviet Union is in ruins. Mishaps in the U.S. space program, while not the CIA's fault, have left the nation with only one of the highly sophisticated photo-reconnaissance satellites it uses to provide detailed pictures in time of crisis. What's more, the budget crunch finally has begun to catch up with the intelligence community, and the CIA must fight for funds as it withstands bruising congressional investigations into its roles in the sale of arms to Iran and aid to Nicaraguan rebels.    Mr. Casey won't be leading this fight himself. He is recuperating slowly from the removal last month of a cancerous brain tumor and isn't expected to return to his seventh-floor office at CIA headquarters in the woods of suburban Langley, Va. To succeed Mr. Casey, White House officials are trying to decide whether to pick an intelligence professional, such as Lt. Gen. William Odom, who heads the National Security Agency, or a politician, such as former Republican Sens. Howard Baker or John Tower.    Perhaps the most important task any new CIA director will face is rebuilding the intelligence agency's relations with Congress. One senior administration intelligence official says Mr. Casey's worst mistake was squandering a golden opportunity to improve the political foundations on which secret agencies must operate in a democracy. He never accepted the web of laws governing intelligence operations that was woven after Watergate and the CIA scandals a decade ago, nor did he seek to amend them.    Instead, Mr. Casey, a lawyer himself, too often tried to outsmart or outflank the laws and the Congress. At the same time, he ignored some of the key judgments of his own analysts. His penchant for going his own way was particularly evident in his passionate efforts to help the Nicaraguan insurgents, or Contras, and to win the release of American hostages in Lebanon, including CIA agent William Buckley.    &quot;Bill selectively used intelligence to prove -- and gain -- political points,&quot; says Sen. David Durenberger, the Minnesota Republican and former chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.    Referring to congressional hearings a decade ago that disclosed political manipulation of the CIA and other irregularities, Allan Goodman, a former CIA officer who now is associate dean of Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service, says, &quot;The agency has never fully recovered from the earlier trauma, and it's been hit by other shocks and losses in counterintelligence, in technology and in human intelligence.&quot;    Despite these problems, Mr. Casey has strong defenders. &quot;The analytical side of the agency functions much better now because Casey reorganized it,&quot; says former CIA Director William Colby. In addition, Mr. Colby says, Mr. Casey has &quot;rebuilt morale. He's a risk taker, but you don't get anywhere in intelligence without taking risks. He may have stepped over the edge a few times; he probably did. But overall, I'd give him very good marks.&quot;    The CIA may be spared the sort of wholesale inquisition it endured 10 years ago. One reason is that Mr. Casey turned the management of the Contra operation over to the National Security Council in 1984 after Congress prohibited CIA aid to the Nicaraguans. In addition, he sometimes bypassed the agency's chain of command and relied on a handful of trusted subordinates to manage sensitive operations.    But &quot;the damage the Iran-Nicaragua operation has done could be 100 times worse than a decade ago,&quot; Mr. Goodman says. When the Nixon-era investigations began, he explains, &quot;morale was high and the scandal could be deflected onto a corrupt presidency.&quot;    Although the Iran-Contra scandal dominates the headlines, the U.S. intelligence community has suffered two other setbacks during the Reagan years that could prove to be far more serious: the virtual destruction of its spy network in the Soviet Union and a major blow to the nation's network of spy satellites.    Administration officials say the CIA's mishandling of a recruit named Edward Lee Howard handed the Soviets many of the secrets of how American agents operate overseas, helped them arrest U.S. spies in Moscow, and alerted the Soviets to some American eavesdropping and communications capabilities.    Mr. Howard was hired in 1981, trained extensively for a post in the CIA's Moscow station, then fired in 1983 after a lie-detector test helped show that he had a history of drug use and alcohol abuse. He evaded U.S. surveillance in September 1985, disappeared from his New Mexico home and went to Moscow.    &quot;You cannot permit a Howard case,&quot; says a senior intelligence official. &quot;We only had a handful of penetrations in the U.S.S.R.; the {inside information} he gave away was precious.&quot;    One casualty of the Howard affair was A.G. Tolkachev, a staff member at a Soviet aviation-research institute. According to U.S. intelligence sources, he had been passing information on Soviet research and development of &quot;stealth&quot; aircraft to CIA officers in Moscow before he was arrested by the KGB.    &quot;The loss of Tolkachev alone is serious, and it has a chilling effect on the CIA's efforts to recruit other agents,&quot; says Jeffrey Richelson, an intelligence expert and professor of government at American University in Washington.    The CIA and its acting director, Robert Gates, declined to comment on this article, and most of the current and former intelligence officers who agreed to be interviewed demanded anonymity. Because most details of intelligence operations are necessarily secret, public assessments of the changes in intelligence capabilities are difficult.    But intelligence officials say the Howard case is a textbook example of how not to recruit and train agents for the CIA's most sensitive posts. Mr. Casey was blunt in his own internal assessment of the debacle. &quot;I am appalled,&quot; he wrote.    However, some say the case revealed gaping holes in Mr. Casey's own management and security operations. &quot;It wasn't exactly incompetence but a series of human failures,&quot; says one CIA official. &quot;Casey didn't address the problems until it was too late.&quot;    A former agency official says that Mr. Casey &quot;had no interest in institution-building. He was content to live with five separate baronies, each one headed by a career official who didn't talk to the others. He thought: 'Why bother? It won't pay off while we're here.'&quot;    Mr. Casey and others have moved aggressively to prevent a repeat of the Howard case and a series of other embarrassing defections and spy cases in recent years. But they concede that it will take years to get over the damage done by Mr. Howard, by Soviet defector Vitaly Yurchenko (who walked away from his CIA handlers at a Washington, D.C., restaurant and returned to Moscow amid charges he had been a Soviet double agent), and by the Navy's Walker family spy ring.    The tragic explosion of the space shuttle Challenger, along with the loss of two Air Force rockets and more than one multimillion-dollar spy satellite, has dealt an equally serious blow to the technical side of the American intelligence community during the past two years.    Still, senior Pentagon and CIA officials say the nation's technical intelligence capabilities remain the world's best and point out that the chain of events that led to the recent disasters was set in motion long before Mr. Reagan and Mr. Casey took office. Moreover, these officials say, Mr. Casey and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger have committed the resources needed to make sure that, beginning next year, the U.S. will always be able to get its spy satellites into orbit.    For now, however, the U.S. has a serious problem. According to U.S. intelligence sources, among its various spy satellites, the U.S. now has only one KH-11 photoreconnaissance satellite in orbit, instead of the normal two, and won't be able to send another &quot;bird&quot; aloft until next year. The lone KH-11 was launched Dec. 4, 1984, and its normal life expectancy would keep it in action until sometime between June and December of this year, according to Prof. Richelson.    &quot;We're vulnerable, and if we have one more disaster we'll be blind,&quot; says one official. &quot;Already we're working with stuff we normally would have replaced.&quot;    To preserve the KH-11, U.S. intelligence sources say, top officials have sharply curtailed its use, passing up what one official calls &quot;hundreds&quot; of photo opportunities. U.S. spy agencies have tried to fill in with high-flying reconnaissance planes and other satellites, but none offer the KH-11's combination of security, detail and immediacy. (KH-11 cameras are so accurate that they were used, for example, to try to locate the American hostages in the U.S. Embassy in Tehran in 1980.)    By contrast, says Nicholas Johnson of Teledyne Brown Engineering, who writes an annual report on Soviet spy satellites, the Soviets now have five photoreconnaissance satellites in orbit, and last year they demonstrated a new ability to launch spy satellites in groups and to operate some of them in pairs. Moscow has sent aloft three new photoreconnaissance satellites -- Cosmos 18-10, 18-11 and 18-13 -- since Dec. 26, when the first of the trio was put into a low orbit over the Perisan Gulf for several days, apparently to observe Iran's Christmas Eve offensive against Iraq.    While the U.S has concentrated on long-lived satellites that can perform a number of functions for several years (one U.S. spy satellite is nine years old and still going strong), the Soviets continue to rely on satellites that last as short a time as two weeks. But the Soviets can replace some dying satellites within 24 hours, says Mr. Johnson, who adds: &quot;On our side, if you had six months' notice, it wouldn't do you any good.&quot;    Because of decisions made during the Carter administration, the nation's new KH-12 photoreconnaissance satellite, which can take high-resolution pictures and transmit them immediately, was designed so that it could only be placed in orbit by the shuttle, which now is grounded until next year.    Current and former intelligence officials say other gaps have developed during Mr. Casey's tenure. For instance, CIA officials say the agency has fewer Arabic and Farsi-speaking agents today than it had six years ago. (Farsi is the main language of Iran.) One intelligence official says the CIA hasn't recruited members of the large Shiite community in Dearborn, Mich., to operate as agents in Lebanon or Iran.    The administration a year ago created a new counterterrorism group at the CIA, but before then the agency's war on terrorism was half-hearted, intelligence sources charge. True, the agency had enjoyed some successes. For example, several years ago, it supplied explosives with hypersensitive fuses to sabotage a Middle Eastern terrorist group. The explosives went off prematurely when the terrorists tried to load them onto a truck, intelligence sources say.    However, the agency has blundered badly in Central America, some intelligence officials contend. In 1981, it rushed in to prop up a ragtag anti-Sandinista movement without first trying to create a political basis for a counterrevolution against the leftist government in Managua. Then the CIA got caught mining Nicaraguan harbors and creating a guerrilla manual for the Contras, and now investigators want to know whether the agency violated congressional restrictions on aid to the rebels.    Intelligence officials attribute the CIA's poor judgment in Central America mostly to Mr. Casey's passionate support for the rebels. In 1983, administration officials say, analysts prepared an intelligence estimate that warned, among other things, that the Contras' political prospects within Nicaragua were poor and that improving them wouldn't be easy because of the Sandinistas' East-bloc-style internal-security apparatus.    Mr. Casey expressed his displeasure with the estimate but approved it. Then, intelligence officials say, he ignored it and continued pressing for more U.S. support for the Contras.    &quot;It didn't matter what the intelligence community wrote,&quot; says one senior administration official. &quot;Casey went ahead anyway because he believed in the program.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>