<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881017-0015 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Closing In: Bush Is Near Victory; Rival Now May Need GOP Slip-Up to Win --- Conceding Nothing, Dukakis Goes All Out to Sweep Midwest and West Coast --- Bush's Coattails Aren't Long </HL><AUTHOR> James M. Perry and David Shribman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Vice President George Bush enters the home stretch of the presidential campaign with victory clearly in his grasp.    By most analyses, Mr. Bush leads in too many places by too much for Michael Dukakis to catch up. The Massachusetts governor almost needs a political miracle to win.    &quot;The other team is ahead, and they're running out the clock,&quot; says Harrison Hickman, a Democratic consultant. The only hope for Democrats, he says, is that the Republicans stumble badly. &quot;Dukakis's fate now rests as much in Bush's hands as his own,&quot; Mr. Hickman believes. Mr. Bush vows he won't &quot;mess up&quot; and says he has &quot;not one scintilla of overconfidence.&quot;    The consolation prize for the Democrats seems to be that Mr. Bush and the Republicans aren't poised for a party-wide victory like the one Ronald Reagan fashioned in 1980, when resurgent Republicans captured control of the Senate. Kevin Phillips, the GOP political theorist, thinks a big Bush victory might mean a few House seats and conceivably a Senate victory or two. But &quot;there's nothing there for an '80-type sweep,&quot; he says.    Mr. Dukakis is redoubling his efforts in the critical industrial Midwest and the West Coast. He and his campaign strategists insist that there is time -- and enough close state races -- to pull out a narrow electoral victory against what they still believe to be a vulnerable GOP ticket.    &quot;There's no electoral-vote challenge that we face that winning the popular vote won't deal with,&quot; contends John Sasso, the chief Dukakis campaign strategist. He says the Republicans are &quot;insulting the American people&quot; by claiming the election is over, a tactic he says will backfire. Democrats also believe their task isn't quite so daunting because Vice President Bush's popularity is being exaggerated. &quot;I don't think America has fallen in love with George Bush,&quot; argues Charles Campion, Mr. Dukakis's national political director.    But polls following Mr. Dukakis's disastrous showing in the final debate indicate Mr. Bush is surging and widening his lead with only 22 days left until Nov. 8, Election Day.    Even a big Bush victory is unlikely to provide a sweeping mandate for the Republicans to govern the nation in 1989 and beyond if he isn't able to bring along many GOP congressional candidates. Mr. Bush has run a generally negative campaign, and has offered few specific proposals for dealing with such crucial issues as the federal budget deficit. Thus if he is elected he may find it hard to rally the public behind him when he negotiates with what is likely to be a Democratic-controlled Congress.    &quot;Unless something dramatic happens, Bush is going to sail into the White House without much of a mandate,&quot; says Larry Bartels, a University of Rochester political scientist who specializes in presidential elections. &quot;To have a mandate, he'd have to have some kind of commitment to doing something that makes a big change one way or the other.&quot;    First, though, Mr. Bush must safely negotiate the final three weeks of the campaign. And he does have a record of sometimes self-destructing when he's ahead. The guiding principle: caution. &quot;There's going to be no stunt-flying here at the end,&quot; says campaign manager Lee Atwater.    Mr. Bush already has nailed down the South. &quot;The election is over down here,&quot; says Merle Black, a University of North Carolina expert in Southern politics. &quot;I can't see Dukakis winning any states in the South -- and the border states are just beyond his reach now.&quot;    All told, the Bush strategists believe they have roughly 200 electoral votes (out of 270 needed to win) locked up in the South and mountain West alone. This frees them in the final three weeks to concentrate on seven major electoral prizes: California, Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, Missouri, New Jersey and Pennsylvania.    Mr. Dukakis warns that it would be a mistake to consider the election over. &quot;They're popping champagne corks in their penthouses,&quot; he told a hometown audience in Boston's Faneuil Hall yesterday. &quot;I've got news for those Republicans -- we're going to be the ones celebrating on election night.&quot;    But for Mr. Dukakis, the campaign more and more seems a case of might-have-beens. He allowed Mr. Bush to seize the initiative, painting him as a typical far-out liberal who is soft on crime and defense. And, on a personal level, Mr. Dukakis has simply failed to connect in any meaningful way with the majority of the American people.    As a result, the numbers for the Democrats are forbidding. Gov. Dukakis has a much smaller base than Mr. Bush, and has failed to wrap all of that base up. For example, polls indicate that New York, which should be in his pocket, is still up for grabs. The final, desperate Dukakis plan is to junk his original 50-state strategy and concentrate on about 20 key states. If he won them all, he would gain a close electoral victory.    Mr. Dukakis's priorities are highlighted by this week's travel schedule. He begins campaigning this morning in the blue-collar Cleveland suburb of Euclid, Ohio, and by midweek he will have visited Michigan, Illinois and Missouri as well. Other target states: California, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Washington and Oregon.    Texas remains a priority, but only because Texas Sen. Bentsen is the running mate. &quot;As long as there's Lloyd Bentsen and as long as there's Dan Quayle, we're alive in Texas,&quot; insists Charles Baker, Mr. Dukakis's national field director.    Mr. Bentsen grumbles about a campaign strategy that all but writes off the South outside Texas. &quot;Some of those states I frankly don't agree with them on,&quot; the senator says of the Dukakis strategists. &quot;I think we're going to pull off some surprises.&quot;    If there are to be surprises, though, the Dukakis forces are going to have to show a lot more sophistication -- and a substantially more personable candidate -- than they have since relinquishing the double-digit lead they held over Mr. Bush shortly after the Democratic convention in July.    Bush strategists believe the Dukakis effort never successfully made the transition from a primary campaign aimed at traditional Democratic voting groups to a general-election campaign aimed at a larger pool of voters, and at the television cameras. They and other observers say that the Democrats devoted too much attention to the convention and the selection of a vice presidential candidate -- and too little to finding a simple explanation of why voters should turn to them and away from the GOP when the nation was at peace and the economy was mostly perking along.    As a result, says Bush campaign manager Lee Atwater, &quot;We're where we always hoped we would be: a situation in which the other side has to draw an inside straight to win.&quot;    Meanwhile, Mr. Dukakis never did reach beyond a small circle of advisers with little experience in presidential politics and with little patience for outside advice. &quot;I can't tell you the number of people who tried to help them, and they wouldn't listen,&quot; says a leading Democratic strategist. &quot;The campaign's slogan really ought to be: 'We'll do it our way, thank you.' None of them has ever run a tough campaign against a Republican and won.&quot;    What has gone wrong is neatly illustrated by the Dukakis effort in California, a state the governor must win to have any chance for election. Polls have shown the state's race to be extremely close, but the Bush forces clearly have been outmaneuvering their rivals.    To save money, the Dukakis strategists actually closed down their headquarters in the most important state in the union from June through July. The Republicans already had been at work getting California ready for a year. The Bush campaign opened its TV attack Sept. 6 with a barrage of commercials attacking Mr. Dukakis's record on crime, especially a blockbuster of an ad criticizing the Massachusetts prison-furlough system.    &quot;We had nothing to put on the air ourselves,&quot; says Tony Podesta, the Dukakis campaign coordinator for California, &quot;except an ad about education that had been produced for the Iowa caucuses.&quot;    Polls show most Californians are worried about crime and related issues, and to this day the Dukakis campaign has failed to address those questions. Bobi Johnson, field representative in San Bernardino for Democratic Rep. George Brown, points to a recent public-opinion survey taken for Mr. Brown's campaign. Respondents said the big issues were drugs (34%), crime (18%) and gangs (11%). Smog and air pollution finished next to last (6%). Some 70% of the respondents strongly favored the death penalty for drug dealers whose sales resulted in someone's death.    &quot;I took one look at that poll and junked all our soft, squishy ads about the environment,&quot; says Ms. Johnson.    So even Mr. Dukakis's own supporters were distressed about the way he handled the first question in the final debate: How he would react if his own wife were raped and murdered? &quot;The question was in poor taste,&quot; says Ms. Johnson. &quot;But we needed a strong answer. We didn't get one.&quot;    Jadis Blurton, a Dukakis precinct worker, says that &quot;all along, we have wanted to see Mr. Dukakis get angry&quot; about crime and drugs. &quot;I don't think he realizes how bad it is.&quot;    While millions of Californians were reacting viscerally to the tough Bush commercials, Mr. Dukakis's campaign was airing a series of commercials showing actors playing the parts of Bush campaign strategists sitting around a table being cynical. &quot;Those ads are either terrific or simply awful,&quot; says Mr. Podesta. They are no longer on the air in the state.    The Dukakis forces are pinning their hopes on a $4.5 million canvass of some 11,000 target precincts in California in which they hope to energize loyal Democrats, persuade the ones who vote only occasionally and convert those who have been voting for Ronald Reagan. It's Chicago-style politics in a huge media state, and some critics doubt it will work. &quot;You can win {legislative} assembly districts door to door,&quot; says Steve Merksamer, former chief of staff to Republican Gov. George Deukmejian and now senior California adviser to the Bush campaign. &quot;No one has ever thought to try it at the state level.&quot;    Meanwhile, the Republicans have put together a $4.8 million get-out-the-vote campaign of their own, relying principally on direct-mail and telephone banks, and targeting especially those California Democrats who have supported Mr. Reagan.    Republicans initially feared that the aristocratic Mr. Bush would be a cultural misfit with California voters, and he still isn't any Ronald Reagan, a major reason the contest there remains as close as it is. &quot;But,&quot; says Jim Blunte, the GOP's executive director in San Bernardino County, a principal battleground, &quot;he's playing a lot better than Dukakis.&quot;    &quot;Dukakis is the one who's fallen short,&quot; says Mr. Merksamer, the Bush adviser. &quot;He talks compassion but he doesn't get people to feel he's compassionate. Californians always look to connect with people. Dukakis has no empathy.&quot;    Mr. Podesta, the Dukakis campaign manager in California, isn't so sure of that. But he acknowledges that &quot;this is not the state that leads the nation in wing-tips.&quot; The governor's favorite pair is black.    ---   Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Michel McQueen contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>