<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Profit-Taking, Investor Jitters Interrupt Soybean Rally; Wheat Climbs to Highs </HL><AUTHOR> Scott Kilman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PCS MIN </IN><TEXT>   A late wave of profit-taking and investor jitters broke a big rally in soybean futures prices.    Meanwhile, several wheat futures contracts set new high prices on expectations of more dry weather.    Trading was volatile. Futures prices jumped across-the-board at the opening of trading on news of the latest National Weather Service forecast for a continuation of dry and warm conditions in much of the Midwest for the next six to 10 days.    However, profit-taking ignited when the soybean contract for November delivery shot past $8 a bushel, its highest level since 1984, said Victor Lespinasse, floor broker for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago.    The downturn quickly steamrolled on conjecture that the big rise in soybean futures prices in the past two weeks might motivate some farmers to plant more soybeans. The soybean contract for November delivery closed at $7.82 a bushel, down one cent. Meanwhile, the soybean contract for July delivery closed at $7.68 a bushel, up 1.5 cents.    The speculation centers on whether some farmers would plow under their wheat crop, some of which is nearing harvest, to make the switch in time to grow soybeans, said Richard Loewy, senior grain and oilseed analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York.    Many analysts already have dismissed the possibility that Midwest farmers would plant less corn, which is heavily subsidized, to ride the soybean rally. Among other things, the recently planted soybean and corn crop in the Midwest could escape unscathed if rains return shortly.    The attention is turning to winter wheat farmers because their crop is the most vulnerable to the current spell of dry weather. Wheat farmers have switched to soybeans under similar conditions in the past, analysts said.    Such a shift would tend to deflate soybean prices and boost the futures prices of wheat, as the winter wheat crop shrinks. The wheat contract for July delivery closed at a new high of $3.425 a bushel, up 10.75 cents a bushel.    In reaction to yesterday's price volatility, the Chicago Board of Trade lifted for the second time this week its margin requirements on grain and soybean futures. The initial margin requirement, or downpayment, on all soybean futures contracts was raised to $2,000 a contract from $1,200, for the highest across-the-board level since November 1984.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   PRECIOUS METALS: Most precious metal futures prices fell. The market's tone was set mostly by the rise and retreat of soybean prices, analysts said. July platinum ended with a loss of $5.80 an ounce to $557.50. Silver for July delivery was down 7.50 cents an ounce at $6.6750. June gold ran counter to the trend, rising 10 cents an ounce to $458.20. Analysts cited several reasons for associating the action in soybeans with that in precious metals. One was that the fervor in soybeans is spilling over to other commodities that also are sensitive to inflationary expectations. Another factor in the market was that the fluctuation of the Commodity Research Bureau Index, which is heavily weighted toward agricultural commodities and also is watched as an inflation indicator, followed the fluctuations of soybeans and in turn influenced precious metals. Analysts were particularly impressed by gold, which on Wednesday resisted a rally in silver and platinum and yesterday didn't follow a drop in those metals. The independent steadiness of gold reflects Far Eastern demand for the metal, one analyst said. Some late easiness in platinum also was attributed to a report that said South Africa wouldn't curtail shipments even if stronger sanctions against it were taken by the U.S. South Africa is the world's major supplier of platinum and gold.    SUGAR: Futures prices rose in sympathy with a surge in soybean prices and retained most of their gains despite a late soybean sell-off. July delivery sugar ended 0.30 cent a pound higher at 9.49 cents, after trading as high as 9.53 cents at one point. One dealer said the sugar market showed technical strength because prices broke above key resistance points of 9.50 cents in the July contract and 9.52 cents in the October contract. Some selling developed at those points, he said, but caused only a slight setback. He added that there was speculation in trade circles that India had bought 100,000 tons of raw sugar.    COPPER: Futures prices closed with modest gains after recovering from an early decline. July delivery copper rose 0.20 cent a pound to 95.45 cents on a rebound from a low of 93.20 cents. One analyst said the premium of the cash position in London over the three-month delivery fell back to $160 a metric ton after being as high as $360 Monday. The high premium reflected a scarcity of copper for nearby delivery, but that situation is easing, the analyst said. This, in turn, put pressure on prices in New York early yesterday, he said. Another bearish factor, he noted, was that copper inventories in warehouses of the Commodity Exchange in New York rose for the second consecutive day, increasing 628 tons yesterday to 11,944 tons. The Commodity Exchange late Wednesday increased the original margin requirement, or good faith deposit to trade, for the May 1988 copper contract to 100% of the full contract value, effective with yesterday's close. This probably caused some liquidation of contracts, an analyst said. The May contract will cease trading Thursday.    COCOA: Futures prices extended Wednesday's advances as some producers continued to be reluctant to sell cocoa beans. July delivery cocoa settled at $1,682 a metric ton, up $17. Separately, the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange said cocoa trading on Wednesday set a daily volume record of 12,776 contracts, topping the previous record of 11,684 contracts set Oct. 19, 1982. The open interest, or contracts that remain to be liquidated either by an opposite trade or delivery of the commodity, set records twice this week. On Tuesday the open interest reached 35,982 contracts, the highest since cocoa futures began trading in May 1925. On Wednesday, open interest rose to a record 36,066 contracts. </TEXT></DOC>