<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880126-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN CALLED for a budget-process overhaul in his State of the Union speech.    The president pledged in the televised address that he wouldn't sign any more cumbersome, catch-all continuing resolutions to fund the government, such as the one Congress sent him before Christmas. Reagan also appealed for more Contra aid, though he said he won't say precisely how much until tomorrow. Officials said Reagan is expected to call for delaying delivery of lethal supplies to the Nicaraguan rebels pending a determination on Managua's adherence to the five-nation Central American peace accord.    A crew member of a DC-6 shot down while dropping rebel supplies was being questioned and others were being hunted, Managua said. Ortega is to meet with Pope John Paul II Friday.    ---   The Senate began deliberations on the proposed pact to ban U.S. and Soviet intermediate and shorter-range missiles, but the debate likely will involve domestic politics as much as arms control. The administration hopes to win ratification before the expected Moscow summit, but the debate could drag on longer.    ---   Bush argued with CBS anchorman Dan Rather in a bitter televised interview on his Iran-Contra role. The vice president said he agreed to the interview because he thought it would be a general political profile, and responded to Iran-Contra queries by taunting Rather for leaving his post during a broadcast last year.    ---   Egypt's President Mubarak is to arrive in Washington today as part of a six-nation tour after winning West German support for Mideast peace proposals involving an international peace conference, a six-month halt in violence and a moratorium on Israeli settlement of occupied territories. Israel's government has split on the proposals.    ---   Defense Secretary Carlucci authorized a reduction in the number of U.S. warships deployed in the Persian Gulf beginning around Feb. 18, Pentagon officials said. The ships involved include the battleship Iowa, the helicopter carrier Okinawa and as many as two other vessels, the officials said.    ---   The State Department praised Haiti's president-elect as a longtime opponent of dictatorships, but said the vote that brought him to power had not been democratic. Leslie Manigat, declared the winner of the boycotted election by Haiti's military-run electoral council, is to take office Feb. 7.    ---   NASA said it would review its announced late-summer launch date for the first post-Challenger space shuttle mission. Space agency officials said they wanted to determine the readiness of the shuttle's redesigned booster rocket and ordered it tested for a third time. Officials said a definite launch date will be set later this week.    ---   Gunmen in Colombia killed Bogota's attorney general and two bodyguards in an attack near Medellin's airport. The government blamed drug traffickers. The official, Carlos Hoyos, recently ordered an inquiry into the release from prison of an alleged cocaine kingpin wanted by the U.S.    ---   An anti-apartheid business leader said he plans to leave South Africa, further weakening liberal white opposition to Pretoria's racial policies. Anthony Bloom, one of the first white businessmen to meet with the banned African National Congress, said he was &quot;sad and worried&quot; about South African liberalism's future.    ---   Mexican authorities said a coal-mine explosion caused by sparks from a faulty generator trapped 138 men near the northern town of La Esperanza. Fire department officials said two workers died, 107 were rescued and 29 were still trapped.    ---   Arizona's secretary of state certified recall petitions against Gov. Mecham, leaving him with a choice of resigning or facing another election. Mecham also faces impeachment proceedings and a March 6 trial on charges of concealing a campaign loan.    ---   A Swedish prosecutor dropped an investigation into allegations that arms-maker AB Bofors paid bribes to win a $1.3 billion field-artillery order from India. The prosecutor said that he had insufficient evidence to continue the inquiry and that he was stymied by Swiss refusal to grant access to secret bank records.    ---   Bangladesh banned rallies after opposition groups vowed to avenge police killings of at least 17 people at a weekend rally in the southeastern city of Chittagong. Opposition leaders seeking the ouster of President Ershad called for a general strike today.    ---   Sri Lanka's President Jayewardene met in New Delhi with Indian Prime Minister Gandhi over enforcement of a pact that has so far failed to end a Tamil separatist rebellion. Gandhi urged limited Tamil autonomy in parts of the island nation, but Jayewardene said peace must be restored first.    ---   British miners re-elected Arthur Scargill as head of the National Union of Mineworkers. Scargill, a Marxist and foe of Conservative Prime Minister Thatcher, led the mineworkers into a failed 1984-85 strike that sapped his authority and split the union.    ---   Italy's government survived two parliamentary votes of confidence as it fought to push through its 1988 budget. The shaky five-party governing coalition collapsed in a November budget dispute, but Prime Minister Goria succeeded in reviving it. </TEXT></DOC>