<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Stock-Index Contracts End Day LowerAfter Recovering Most of Early Losses---By Robert L. RoseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK INDEXES (NDX)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><TEXT>   Afternoon buying helped stock-index futures recover much of their sharp earlier losses in a session marked by arbitrage-related program trading.    The March futures contract on Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index traded as low as 279.00 and as high as 287.00 before closing at 282.85, down 2.80 for the day. The Sandamp;P index itself fell 3.10 to 282.38.    The Dow Jones Industrial Average, down about 46 points earlier in the day, closed with a loss of nearly 19 points.    Steve Chronowitz, director of futures research at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., said the wide swings aren't surprising given the extent of the rally so far this year.    &quot;We've just gotten into a spot where any profit-taking is enough to drive the market down fairly quickly,&quot; he said. &quot;What is important is that good buying seems to come in on these breaks&quot; in prices. That, Mr. Chronowitz added, shows the market's major trend is still up.    Some traders said the initial decline in Sandamp;P futures was sparked by selling by local traders in Chicago. One who took part in the selling said he did so because he figured two news items could be bad for stocks: Brazil's suspension of interest payments on its commercial foreign debt and the agreement between the U.S. and its major allies to help stabilize currency rates. The latter, this trader fears, could pressure stocks of multinational concerns that have benefited from the falling dollar.    The early selling in the Sandamp;P futures pit on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange sent the price of the March futures to a discount under the index itself. This led to program trading as institutions sought to profit on the price difference by selling stocks and buying futures.    Traders said a sharp premium of the futures over the index later in the day led to a reversal of that strategy.    John Andrea, a program trader at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York, said short-covering -- or buying contracts to offset those sold earlier -- plus a willingness of some players to buy on weakness helped lead the market back.    In Chicago, one of the stocks that futures traders watch on a big electronic board above the hectic Sandamp;P pit is that of International Business Machines Corp. J.R. Fredericks, an analyst at E. David Stephens Commodity Corp., said an afternoon surge in the price of that stock helped boost confidence in the market.    In other futures markets yesterday:    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most grain and soybean futures prices fell as Friday's rumors of Soviet grain purchases weren't confirmed, analysts said. There are reports that the Soviets may have purchased 1.5 million to two million tons of corn, according to analysts. Analysts have also speculated that the Soviets might be interested in buying wheat through the export enhancement program. Wheat, which had the largest gains in Friday's session, fell the most yesterday. Corn was down slightly from Friday's gains. The weakness in the corn and wheat markets spilled over into the soybean markets, as soybeans and soybean meal closed lower.    COTTON: Futures prices rose sharply on indications of scant offerings and rumors of a large Soviet purchase, analysts said. The March contract settled at 56.52 cents a pound for a gain of 1.87 cents, after rising as much as 3.85 cents. Profit-taking trimmed more than half the advance, according to analysts. Yesterday was the first day for the issuance of notices of intention to deliver cotton against the March contract, and only 27 were issued, far below what had been expected, analysts said. There were 1,774 contracts open in the March contract as of the close Friday, a drop of 582 from the previous day. A rumor circulated that the Soviet Union had purchased 250,000 bales of cotton from a U.S. trade house, but analysts emphasized that the rumor hasn't been confirmed. &quot;We won't know if the transaction actually took place until a government sales report is issued a few weeks hence,&quot; one analyst said.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices tumbled after two consecutive gains, pressured by sharply lower oil prices and a stronger dollar against most major currencies. In addition, reports that Brazil's huge foreign debt problems may nevertheless be manageable prompted some profit-taking, traders said. Last week, precious metals prices, led by gold, soared on reports, confirmed Friday, that Brazil planned to unilaterally defer interest payments on its commercial foreign debt. The metals &quot;didn't have anything going for them today,&quot; one trader in New York said. On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold prices for April delivery slipped $4.10 an ounce, to $404.60; March silver prices fell six cents an ounce, to $5.475. Platinum contracts for April delivery plunged $9.10 an ounce, to $514.70. For most of the session, the &quot;primary pressure&quot; came from sinking oil prices and a strong dollar, said John Norris, chief of precious metals trading at Citibank, New York. Some analysts and traders speculate that further losses will be triggered if the dollar continues to rise from this weekend's pact by the U.S., Britain, France, West Germany, Japan and Canada to stabilize exchange rates.    COPPER: Reports of a tentative settlement in the four-month strike against a big Noranda Inc. smelter triggered selling that depressed copper futures prices. The March contract, after falling as much as 1.10 cents a pound, settled at 62.65 cents a pound, a decline of 0.85 cent from Friday's settlement price. Union leadership at Noranda's Horne, Ontario, smelter, which accounts for about 3% of world refined copper production, accepted a Noranda proposal to end the strike and urged members to ratify it at a vote yesterday. The impact of the tentative Noranda settlement was softened because the copper industry at the moment is facing near-term tightness of supplies just when demand is seasonally at its peak, said Fred Demler, senior metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. In addition, he noted, as of Friday, inventories of refined copper in London Metal Exchange warehouses fell for the second consecutive week, declining 18,100 metric tons to 151,175 tons, the lowest levels since last June. Further declines are expected, despite the Noranda settlement, he said. </TEXT></DOC>