<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Human Tragedy: How Children's Safety Can Be Put in Jeopardy By Day-Care Personnel --- Ashley Snead, 10 Months Old, Died in the Home of Sitter With Child-Abuse Record --- The Crusade for Regulations </HL><AUTHOR> Cathy Trost (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> SPRINGFIELD, Va.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ashley Snead's room in this elegant two-story town house stands unchanged from the day she died more than a year ago. Her dresses hang in the closet, her toy train is on the shelf, and the Victorian ruffled curtains her mother special-ordered from North Carolina frame the windows. The kitchen playpen where she watched her mother cook finally came down just a few weeks ago.    Her parents, Jane and Ronald Snead -- &quot;unable to put the memories away,&quot; they say -- eagerly show Ashley's baby pictures. Jane Snead cries softly as she talks. Ronald Snead, a 43-year-old lieutenant colonel in the Army, sits subdued. &quot;We loved that little girl,&quot; he says.    On July 28, 1987, 10-month-old Ashley was rushed, not breathing, from her baby sitter's house to Fairfax Hospital. Efforts to revive her failed. Shortly thereafter, her devastated parents were stunned again. An autopsy showed that Ashley had been poisoned by the prescription antidepressant drug imipramine.    Ashley, the Sneads' only child, had been in the care of a kindly, grandmotherly baby sitter who, a neighbor later testified, &quot;liked babies that like to take naps.&quot;    Today, the sitter, Martha Guba, is in prison, sentenced to 10 years for child neglect. Her conviction is on appeal. Ashley's parents are serving a life sentence of anger and bewilderment at a system that they see as failing to ensure a fundamental goal, the safety of children.    The nation passed a momentous marker this year when the Census Bureau reported that 51% of women go to work or actively seek it within a year of having a child. Ashley's mother was one of them. About 10.5 million children younger than six have mothers in the labor force. Most are cared for outside the home, either in organized centers or, as Ashley was, in private &quot;family&quot; day-care homes, where care is typically provided by a mother or, less often, a child-care professional.    The quality of care ranges from &quot;absolutely excellent to absolutely awful,&quot; says Yale University child-care expert Edward Zigler. &quot;You knock on one door and it may be wonderful. You knock on another door and your kid may be dead that night.&quot;    No one can say for certain how many children are killed or injured by the negligence of day-care providers. But &quot;the list of tragedies is growing daily,&quot; says Helen Blank, director of child care for the Children's Defense Fund, a Washington advocacy group. The group offers in evidence a bleak list: children trapped in fires in homes with inadequate exits; children beaten or maimed by untrained, unwatched providers.    No federal regulation governs child care, and state regulation is spotty. Virginia requires licensing only of those who care for six or more children who are not their own or relatives'. There is no limit on the number of these a provider can care for. The state has only 32 inspectors to handle initial, annual and complaint inspections of 267 licensed family day-care homes and 908 licensed day-care centers with a total capacity of 76,579 children.    Like most other states, Virginia requires no training for care-givers. Nor does it check their medical backgrounds or Federal Bureau of Investigation computer files for criminal histories.    Even sweeping regulation, officials say, wouldn't prevent all the tragedies. But, says Fairfax County supervisor Thomas M. Davis, tougher records checks, without doubt, could have helped prevent Ashley Snead's death. The county consequently plans to strengthen its day-care rules. The state also is considering tougher regulation.    The events that led to Ashley's death began shortly after she was born two years ago. Mrs. Snead needed someone to care for the baby when she went back to work as an administrative assistant at a savings-and-loan association. Here as elsewhere, day care is scarce and costly, and Mrs. Snead found few organized centers that could accommodate Ashley. From a list compiled by the Fairfax County Office for Children, she did find Mrs. Guba.    Mrs. Guba seemed perfect. She was a grandmother in her late 50s who had raised three children of her own. She charged a little more than the local going rate -- in Ashley's case, $100 a week -- but she told Mrs. Snead she gave &quot;extra special, loving care.&quot; Mrs. Snead interviewed Mrs. Guba and &quot;liked her right off.&quot;    The Sneads didn't know -- couldn't have known -- that Mrs. Guba had been convicted in Virginia in 1968 of neglecting her own children. She had also been hospitalized in the past for mental problems, and was a heavy user of prescription drugs.    Fairfax County, a booming suburb of Washington, D.C., does some minimal screening. To get on its list of baby sitters, Mrs. Guba had completed a short application and paid a $5 fee. The county conducted a cursory health and fire inspection of her home. A review of a state registry found no history of child-abuse or neglect, but the registry dates back only to 1975. The county also got two letters of reference, filled with praise for Mrs. Guba.    The county says it doesn't recommend or endorse any of the baby sitters it lists -- a disclaimer that the Sneads' lawyer, Quin S. Elson, charges &quot;is like the Surgeon General making cigarettes and saying don't use them.&quot;    In November 1986, Mrs. Guba began to care for six-week-old Ashley.    Parents and neighbors noticed something odd about Mrs. Guba's home: With all the children around, as many as seven at one time, it was pristine and eerily quiet. According to testimony in her trial, some of the children spent an unusual amount of time sleeping or confined in car seats and automatic swings.    At home, Ashley's parents noticed, she wanted to be held a lot, and they say she seemed eager to leave the baby sitter at night. But they never suspected danger. &quot;I see things I should have questioned,&quot; Mrs. Snead testified, &quot;but I didn't.&quot;    At home, the healthy and vivacious baby was learning to crawl and stand, but at Mrs. Guba's, neighbors and parents testified, she was generally kept in her car seat in the living room. Mrs. Guba told a neighbor, Kate Simcox -- according to Ms. Simcox's testimony at the trial -- that Ashley suffered from Down's Syndrome, a birth defect that often results in mental retardation. The baby had to be kept in her car seat, Ms. Simcox said Mrs. Guba told her, &quot;because her tongue was long and she would choke.&quot;    It was Ms. Simcox who also testified that Mrs. Guba &quot;liked babies that like to take naps.&quot;    On the morning of July 28, Mrs. Snead remembers, she and Ashley sat on the deck at home for a time before they went upstairs to get dressed. &quot;Ashley was very happy, and I didn't want to leave her,&quot; Mrs. Snead said later. But she took the baby to Mrs. Guba's house, just as she had many other workday mornings.    About 10 a.m. she got a call at work from Mrs. Guba, who said Ashley had picked a Tylenol off the floor and put it in her mouth. The baby sitter offered to call a doctor, and reported back that the child would be fine.    Her lawyer says she called a pharmacist. But, says Raymond Brownelle, who prosecuted Mrs. Guba, &quot;She didn't get any kind of medical care or attention for that child. I think what she hoped was that it would just pass, that the child would sleep it off.&quot;    At about 1 p.m. Mrs. Snead got another call from Mrs. Guba. Ashley was sweating profusely, the baby sitter said, and she had turned on the air conditioner. &quot;You know, Jane, I wouldn't let anything happen to little Ashley for the world,&quot; Mrs. Snead says Mrs. Guba told her.    Then came a third call from a panic-stricken Mrs. Guba. &quot;Ashley is dying! Ashley is dying!&quot; she cried.    &quot;Martha, call 911!,&quot; Mrs. Snead told her.    &quot;They are here. They are here,&quot; Mrs. Guba answered.    On the tape recording of Mrs. Guba's call to the 911 emergency line, played at the trial, the baby sitter is heard begging for an ambulance. &quot;I've got a dead baby!&quot; she cries before hanging up. &quot;She's not breathing.&quot; The emergency operator called back to relay first-aid instructions to someone else in the house; the baby sitter later admitted she had never received any first-aid training. Her lawyer says she was &quot;hysterical&quot; about the baby and could barely communicate.    The Sneads rushed to Fairfax Hospital. After &quot;an eternity,&quot; doctors told them Ashley was dead. In their grief, they were allowed to hold her for a while, for the last time.    Police interviewed Mrs. Guba after an autopsy revealed the imipramine in Ashley's body. &quot;I didn't give that baby anything,&quot; she said. &quot;I loved that baby.&quot; A police investigator testified that he had never interviewed anyone quite like Mrs. Guba. &quot;She had mood changes right in front of me,&quot; he said. &quot;She would go from happy to sad to happy to sad.&quot;    Ashley was buried in a family plot in Red Springs, N.C., in her christening dress with a Pound Puppy toy, a Bible and a hat to cover the fissure in her head from the autopsy.    Ten days after Ashley's death, Mrs. Guba was arrested. The picture of the woman that emerged from the ensuing investigation was dramatically at odds with the one conveyed by her grandmotherly demeanor. According to the prosecutor and other law-enforcement officials, she had been convicted in 1968 in Virginia for neglect of her own children, and served 90 days in jail. She also had been hospitalized in the 1960s -- voluntarily, her lawyer says -- for depressive neurosis, according to testimony at her sentencing.    In 1973, she was convicted in Arizona of obtaining money by false pretenses and was put on probation, according to Arizona court records. The Arizona court noted that she was already on probation in Allegheny County, Pa., for offenses &quot;related to the same criminal foray.&quot; Pennsylvania court records show she was found guilty in 1972 of six counts of false pretense.    Thomas J. Morris Sr., Mrs. Guba's lawyer, ascribes her prior neglect conviction to domestic problems with her former husband. &quot;Her husband was an alcoholic who was thumping on her,&quot; he says, so &quot;she split.&quot; At the time of the Snead trial, he adds, she hadn't had any legal difficulties for a dozen years.    Beginning in March 1986, a doctor treated Mrs. Guba for severe headaches, depression and other ailments. At her trial he testified that he often prescribed for her the narcotic pain-reliever Demerol, the anti-depressant imipramine (sold as Tofranil) and other medications. He said Mrs. Guba had told him that she was upset because her husband had died of throat cancer. In fact, her current husband is alive; Mrs. Guba's lawyer says she was referring to her former husband.    Once, she came to the doctor's office complaining of vomiting and headaches after seeing a neighbor shoot himself in a back yard. There was no such incident, though her lawyer claims somebody was firing a gun in one of the back yards. She was given more Demerol and anti-nausea medicine. The prescriptions continued: A pharmacist testified that she filled a prescription of 100 imipramine tablets for Mrs. Guba on July 21, a week before Ashley Snead's death.    Mrs. Guba admitted in court prior to sentencing that she realized she had &quot;a bad drug problem.&quot; In spite of her problems, her lawyer argues, she was a good baby sitter, citing testimony on her behalf from other parents whose children she cared for.    A toxicologist testified at the trial that he believed Ashley had suffered a &quot;chronic intoxication&quot; of several days' duration. The prosecution alleged that Mrs. Guba sedated the baby with imipramine to keep her quiet. &quot;That baby went through hell,&quot; says Ashley's father. But Mr. Morris says that &quot;there was no direct evidence that Martha gave this child anything but care.&quot;    Nonetheless, a Fairfax County jury took only two hours last January to convict Mrs. Guba.    Mrs. Guba relayed word through a prison official at the Virginia Correctional Center for Women that she was &quot;not interested&quot; in being interviewed for this article. In appealing her conviction, Mr. Morris argues that the prosecution failed to comply with pretrial discovery orders, that he was restricted in his right to cross-examine, and other matters. He insists that Ashley's death was an accident caused by the child tipping over a trash can and eating discarded pills.    In any event, Mrs. Guba could be eligible for parole in two years. Once out of jail, Mrs. Snead laments, she &quot;can move to another state, change her name, and start baby-sitting tomorrow.&quot; The Sneads have joined with children's advocacy groups and other parents whose children have been killed or hurt to crusade for stronger daycare regulation. &quot;We desperately need reform,&quot; Mrs. Snead testified before a state commission, &quot;so other babies, children and parents will not have to experience and suffer the trauma that Ashley and ourselves have.&quot;    Mrs. Snead suffered a tubal pregnancy the week after Ashley died. The Sneads wonder now if they could bear to have another child. &quot;I don't think,&quot; she says, &quot;I could ever let anyone touch her.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>