<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0175 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: The Revitalization of the Right </HL><AUTHOR> Donald Kagan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   We generally think of the 1950s as a period of conservative domination in the U.S. For eight years the Republicans governed under Mr. Eisenhower, and anti-communism was the common creed, but appearances can be deceiving.    The conservative core in America was small yet divided, backward-looking and devoid of attractive or even interesting ideas. It contained old isolationists, segregationists, anti-Semites and bitter enemies of the New Deal who would not accept any role for the federal government in protecting the economic well-being of the people. It was &quot;the stupid party,&quot; and it had no future in a nation in which the liberalized Republican Party differed from the Democrats chiefly in matters of detail, manner and degree.    The man who did most to change that situation is the subject of a new biography by John B. Judis, &quot;William F. Buckley Jr.: Patron Saint of the Conservatives&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster, 528 pages, $22.95). Mr. Judis, a senior editor at the leftist magazine In These Times, deserves credit for writing a clear and interesting account the fairness and balance of which are especially praiseworthy. If his evaluation of Mr. Buckley as the patron saint of the right seems hyperbolic, such eminent conservatives as John Chamberlain, Pat Buchanan and George Will agree with it, and President Reagan went so far as to call him &quot;the most influential journalist and intellectual in our era . . . {who} changed our country, indeed our century.&quot;    No more than a year after graduating from Yale, this brash and brilliant young man with his aristocratic manner and unique Middle Atlantic speech wrote an attack on his alma mater that swiftly brought him notoriety and a leading position among conservatives. &quot;God and Man at Yale&quot; accused the faculty of undermining traditional values and teaching atheism and socialism, and urged that the offending professors be fired; Yale was to teach not false opinion but established truth, as determined by the presumably sound and conservative alumni. In its recommendations it was the foolish work of an impatient and not sufficiently thoughtful young man, but in its complaints it articulated a concern that was widespread, if poorly understood, about the direction taken by modern universities. The success of Allan Bloom's &quot;Closing of the American Mind&quot; shows that the problem the young Buckley perceived was real and, after almost four decades, has not gone away.    His next book, &quot;McCarthy and His Enemies,&quot; written with Brent Bozell, tried to defend the indefensible and placed him outside the pale even among most anti-communist intellectuals. His two early books and his increasing schedule of public debates brought him national attention but no great influence outside a narrow circle. His most important contribution to the revival of conservatism was surely the foundation in 1955 of National Review, a conservative magazine that meant to fight the battle of ideas against the liberals and to influence makers of opinion.    There can be no doubt that in these goals it has been successful, helping to shape the mind of Ronald Reagan and of many who support and serve him. If it has lost its cutting edge, as Mr. Judis suggests, that is in part the result of the success of its mission. The liberal monopoly on ideas and power has been broken and the hero of the conservatives has been president for almost eight years. The panache of the young Buckley and his young journal tilting at the seemingly unassailable liberal citadel are no longer appropriate nor possible. Mr. Buckley finds himself defending an establishment, something inevitably less heroic and exciting than attacking one.    Meanwhile, in the almost four decades since he left Yale, Mr. Buckley has become a celebrity unmatched in the versatility of his claim on public attention. Apart from his journalism and his political writings, he has created and starred in a successful television show, run for mayor of New York, written a series of popular spy thrillers, befriended other celebrities regardless of their political opinions, and written volumes describing his own activities and diversions, the sure mark of arrival at full celebrity status. All this has distracted him from the management of his magazine and from serious political debate and involvement. Perhaps he is disappointed that he never wrote the &quot;big book&quot; of conservative ideas that he once planned, but if so, he should not be.    Original ideas and new syntheses are not his trade. Like many conservatives, he believes in two things that are probably not ultimately compatible: traditional Christianity and free-market, individualistic capitalism, a dynamic force that constantly erodes tradition. The contradiction between them makes it difficult to construct a theory containing both. It should, however, be enough for one man to have achieved what Mr. Buckley has done: the revitalization of a political movement with powerful roots in the American people, the health of which is essential to the health of the nation.    ---   Mr. Kagan is Richard M. Colgate professor of history and classics, and acting director of athletics at Yale University. </TEXT></DOC>