<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880328-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NICARAGUA RELEASED about 100 political prisoners as part of an amnesty.    The Sandinista government said the prisoners -- mainly workers arrested during illegal strikes -- were freed from the Zona Franca jail on the outskirts of Managua. The move fulfills the first part of a ceasefire pact reached last week between the Nicaraguan government and the Contras. An undisclosed number of rebels are to be released at an unspecified later date. Ortega also urged U.N. peacekeepers to stabilize the Honduran-Nicaraguan border area.    House Speaker Wright said he didn't see &quot;anything wrong&quot; with Nicaragua receiving humanitarian aid from Moscow, as long as military aid is barred.    ---   JACKSON SCORED a landslide victory in Saturday's Michigan caucuses.    Throwing the muddled Democratic presidential race into fresh turmoil, Jackson won 55% of the vote, beating Dukakis, who garnered 28%. Jackson's strong victory ended Dukakis's hopes of becoming the party's inevitable presidential nominee, and is causing many Democrats to realize that Jackson could come to the national convention in Atlanta in July with more delegates than anyone else.    Gephardt, who finished a distant third with 13% of the vote, is expected to drop out of the race and seek re-election to his Missouri congressional seat.    ---   NORIEGA ORDERED Panama's banks to reopen or face legal action.    A communique told the banks to open their doors, even if functions were limited, or the government would &quot;be obliged to use all the legal means at its disposal&quot; to revive the banking system. The message followed Noriega's decision Saturday to send troops to reopen the Pacific port of Balboa, which had been closed since March 14 because of a strike. The military leader also sent police to seize two privately owned flour mills.    A U.S. official said it was up to Panama's military to force Noriega's ouster. Abrams expressed hope that Noriega would leave within &quot;days.&quot;    ---   A three-judge court in Israel sentenced former nuclear technician Mordechai Vanunu to 18 years in prison for treason and espionage. He had faced a life prison term. The sentencing climaxed a seven-month closed-door trial on charges that Vanunu, 34, convicted last week, told a British newspaper that Israel possessed nuclear weapons.    ---   Foreign Minister Peres said he was pleased by Shultz's decision to return to the Mideast to press a U.S. peace initiative. The secretary of state, who held talks Saturday with two university professors linked to the PLO, is expected to arrive in the region Sunday. Israel's government remains split over the Reagan administration's plan.    Israeli soldiers killed four Palestinians in the West Bank as unrest continued in the occupied territories. The shootings occurred as the troops were conducting raids to arrest Arabs suspected of anti-Israeli activities.    ---   The official Soviet press reported that most business had been halted in the Azerbaijan city of Stepanakert, and Armenian dissidents said the stoppage of all but essential industries was the result of a general strike. Militiamen were sent to the cities of Sumgait and Baku. The Armenians are demanding control of a region in Azerbaijan.    ---   Chinese officials outlined plans at the National People's Congress to liberalize several economic areas, including the investment, pricing and foreign-trade systems. Separately, World Bank aides said Beijing will experiment with allowing supply and demand to determine grain prices in two geographic areas.    ---   A prosecutor in South Korea said ex-President Chun's brother will likely be charged this week for embezzlement. Chun Kyung Hwan headed the Seoul-supported rural-development agency, which has been embroiled in a financial and political scandal.    ---   The House Armed Services panel said that of the Reagan administration's three large nuclear-weapons programs, only the submarine-launched Trident II missile is proceeding without serious hitches. The committee has criticized the two other strategic systems: the B-1 bomber and the MX land-based missile.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked an Indian tanker in the Persian Gulf, setting the vessel ablaze and wounding at least one crew member, gulf-based shipping executives reported. Tehran and Baghdad also exchanged missile strikes and ground fighting was reported in northeastern Iraq near a dam that supplies electricity to the Iraqi capital.    ---   Bangladesh's president appointed a 23-member cabinet, naming longtime political ally Moudad Ahmed as prime minister. Officials said Ershad was streamlining the government following the March 3 parliamentary elections, which were marred by violence and an opposition boycott.    ---   Belgium's King Baudouin asked Flemish Christian Democrat Jean-Luc Dehaene to form a government. The country's center-right coalition resigned five months ago in a dispute between French-speaking and Dutch-speaking officials. The palace said Dehaene accepted the mission.    ---   Died: Robert Joffrey, 57, dancer and choreographer, Friday, in New York City, of liver, renal and respiratory failure. . . . James Howard, 60, Democratic congressman of New Jersey, Friday, in Washington, following a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>