<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Tower Panel Lays Iran-Contra Blame at Reagan's Door,Finds He Forgot Decisions, Didn't Know Aides' Actions---Officials in AdministrationChanneled Military AidTo Rebels During Ban---By David Rogers and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Reagan administration officials secretly channeled extensive military aid to Nicaraguan insurgents during a two-year ban on U.S. arms assistance for the rebels, a presidential commission concluded.    The panel's report constitutes the strongest official confirmation that ranking officials in the Reagan administration sought to circumvent the ban by mounting a private war against Nicaragua's government, and repeatedly misled Congress about it. The findings are likely to further fuel opposition on Capitol Hill to the president's policy in Central America and could hobble his broader doctrine of providing arms world-wide to guerrillas fighting pro-Soviet regimes.    The commission, headed by former Sen. John Tower, produced the most detailed portrait yet of the administration's efforts to sustain the guerrillas, including much new information. It documents not only the involvement of the National Security Council staff, but also the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency.    The findings suggest that laws may have been breached, though the commission carefully avoided reaching conclusions on legal issues. The report has major importance for the congressional investigations of the scandal that are now beginning.    &quot;The NSC staff's role in support of the Contras set the stage for its subsequent role in the Iran initiative,&quot; the report concludes. Most of the nearly $20 million in excess proceeds from the U.S. arms sales to Iran are unaccounted for, according to the report.    Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, the fired NSC aide, helped to oversee a supply network that boasted millions of dollars in private assets, including planes, warehouses and a landing strip in Costa Rica, according to the report. Sophisticated communications equipment used to facilitate arms shipments into Nicaragua last year was bought with public funds, the commission said, and NSC memos disclose at least two cases when administration officials proposed to use U.S. foreign aid to reward or threaten Central American governments important to the arms network.    The commission found no record that the NSC staff ever sought authorization from President Reagan to help the Contras. But last May, when the ban on U.S. arms assistance remained in effect, Col. North privately indicated he was acting with the president's knowledge, according to a memo cited in the report.    &quot;The president obviously knows why he has been meeting with several select people to thank them for their 'support for Democracy' in CentAm.,&quot; Col. North wrote to his superior, Vice Adm. John Poindexter, then the national security adviser.    Adm. Poindexter's response didn't reflect any disagreement with the colonel's assessment. But Adm. Poindexter, who resigned when the scandal broke, was fearful in the same period that details about Col. North's role might become known to Congress or the public, NSC memos show.    When Col. North was interviewed in August 1986 by members of the House Intelligence Committee, a subsequent NSC summary indicates, he deliberately misled the panel about the true depth of his involvement with the Contras. Shortly thereafter, the report continues, Adm. Poindexter forwarded the summary to Col. North with the message, &quot;Well Done.&quot;    Beyond the White House, the report says that Elliott Abrams, assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs, and the chief of the CIA's Central American task force, whose name wasn't disclosed, were both intimately involved in efforts to help the Contras build a supply network in Costa Rica and open a southern front. A CIA field officer in Costa Rica told the commission that when former U.S. Ambassador Louis Tambs arrived in Costa Rica in July 1985, he had described his mission as one &quot;to form a Nicaraguan resistance southern front.&quot;    Mr. Tambs, in his own statements to the commission, said that he had been so instructed by Col. North. In subsequent meetings, he said, these directions were confirmed by Mr. Abrams and the CIA's Central American officer in Washington. Last September, a memo by Col. North described telephone calls involving himself, Mr. Abrams and Ambassador Tambs as part of an effort to win the cooperation of Costa Rican authorities by threatening to withhold U.S. assistance.    &quot;Under the circumstances -- and w/Elliott's (Mr. Abrams's) concurrence -- it seemed like the only thing we could do,&quot; Col. North wrote. Adm. Poindexter responded approvingly in a later memo, though both Mr. Abrams and Ambassador Tambs denied to the commission that any such threats were authorized or carried out.    A key part of the secret operations from Costa Rica included the construction of a landing strip used by aircraft ferrying arms to the Contras. By the fall of 1985, the report concludes, Col. North was &quot;actively engaged in private efforts to resupply the Contras with lethal equipment.&quot;    The wealth of internal documents available to the commission provide vivid evidence of the depth of the NSC's involvement in the secret war and the sometimes roller-coaster emotions of Col. North himself. &quot;We are prepared to deliver as soon as you call for it,&quot; reads a message from a CIA field officer, who speaks of his goal to create &quot;a 2,500-man force which can strike northwest. . . . With your help, believe we can pull it off.&quot;    Col. North emerges as a relentless figure, alternately emotional about the Contra cause and then glib, as when he refers to the insurgents' leadership in one memo as the &quot;triple A.&quot; From his office, he moved on a world stage. Last spring he sought to obtain sophisticated anti-aircraft missiles for the guerrillas from a manufacturer in Northern Ireland. His close Israeli connections are reflected in a May 1986 memo outlining a plan in which Jerusalem would provide 20 to 50 Spanish-speaking military advisers for the Contras and the U.S. would bless the sale of an Israeli jet fighter to Honduras.    Assisting Col. North, the commission says, was a network of private individuals who would also play a role in shipping U.S. arms to Iran. The network included retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and his business associate Albert Hakim. Gen. Secord was provided a special encrypting device from the National Security Agency -- the government's electronic eavesdropping agency -- to allow him to better communicate secretly with Col. North, the report says. An internal NSC memo shows that a code used in the Iran operation was similar &quot;to one used to oversee deliveries to the Nicaraguan Resistance.&quot;    NSC memos in the report show that Col. North used such general titles as Democracy Inc. and more often Project Democracy to describe this network, but the commission said it found no information linking this Project Democracy with the better known National Endowment for Democracy, which supports democratic programs abroad. A diagram found among Col. North's documents delineates a series of &quot;operating,&quot; &quot;treasury&quot; and &quot;collecting&quot; companies that were part of this network extending from Europe and the Mideast to Central America.    Lake Resources, Gulf Marketing Consultants and Dolmy Business Inc. are among the most prominent. While giving no title, the same diagram indicates that Col. North's plans envisioned at least one similar company in Africa, where the U.S. is lending covert support to anti-government forces in Angola.    Last July, after Congress was moving toward approval of renewed military aid to the Contras, Col. North estimated the total assets of Project Democracy at more than $4.5 million, according to the report. An NSC memo prepared then by Col. North lists six aircraft, warehouses, and at least one ship among these holdings. He proposed that the CIA purchase the equipment, some of which, he indicated, had been bought from the U.S. Air Force originally under special &quot;proprietary arrangements.&quot;    Though the report didn't deal with the matter, intelligence sources have identified Gen. Secord as part of a network of former Air Force officers who served as private clandestine contractors for the government.    A major issue for Congress is the extent to which public funds were used to assist the arms network. A memo cited by the report shows that Col. North was instrumental as early as March 1985 in obtaining from a Central American government export certificates needed by his private network to ship arms to Central America. He later sought to win additional foreign aid for the Central American nation -- believed to be Guatemala -- the report says.    Within the U.S., private contributions for the Contras appear to have been funneled through a series of nonprofit organizations. A March 1985 memo by Col. North to then-National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane proposes that a new umbrella organization, the Nicaraguan Freedom Fund, take the place of &quot;several existing nonprofit foundations we have established in the course of the last year.&quot;    Notations by Mr. McFarlane indicate he approved, and Internal Revenue Service records show that a nonprofit corporation with this title was in fact registered in May 1985.    A diagram sketched by Col. North on an April 1985 letter shows arrows linking his name to those of F. Andrew Messing, director of the conservative National Defense Council; Robert Owen, a former State Department consultant linked to the Contras; and Linda Guell, director of Western Goals, an organization headed by Carl &quot;Spitz&quot; Channell, a conservative activist. Under Mr. Messing's name, Col. North wrote the word, &quot;funds,&quot; and under Mr. Owen's name, he wrote &quot;weapons.&quot; The report further says that during 1984 and 1985, Col. North's calendar shows he met regularly with both men.    The commission offers no estimate of how much funding was generated inside the U.S., but the bulk of the Contra financing seems to have come from abroad. Mr. McFarlane told the commission that an unidentified foreign official contributed as much as $1 million monthly beginning in 1984 from &quot;personal funds.&quot; The same official, believed to be linked to the Saudi government, doubled his contribution and gave as much as $25 million in 1985.    The arms sales with Iran began the following year. The commission, which interviewed Iranian and Saudi middlemen used in the transactions, estimates that the excess proceeds amounted to $19.8 million. Another $3 million in potential profits is attributed to earlier 1985 sales by Israel, but separately, congressional investigators believe these figures overstate the amount of money available.    An Israeli account was used to transfer some of the funds used even in the 1986 sales overseen by the U.S., and it remains unclear even in the commission's report how much money was deposited and later withdrawn from this account.    Lake Resources, one of the &quot;collecting&quot; companies identified by Col. North, was the central conduit for the U.S. The commission's report diagrams the flow of funds through this account, which has links to Gen. Secord and the Contra network. The clearest example is the sale last October of 500 TOW missiles and various Hawk missile-system spare parts in which an Iranian representative deposited $7 million with Lake Resources, according to the report, and only about $2 million was later paid to the CIA to cover U.S. costs for the weapons.    Any such skimming to pay for aiding the Contras poses major questions of illegal conduct. But more broadly for Congress, the report raises the question of a deliberate policy within the administration to circumvent the ban on U.S. military assistance.    The commission criticizes lawmakers for the vagueness of their own legislation, and the report cites legal documents indicating a desire in the White House to stretch the law to its limits.    An early question was whether the NSC was covered by 1984 legislation prohibiting the Pentagon, the CIA and any other intelligence agency from providing assistance to the Contras. The commission found a classified legal memorandum apparently prepared by the president's Intelligence Oversight Board in 1985 disputing congressional assertions that the NSC was covered.    Even here though, the memo was unclear as to whether Col. North, as a military officer, could be counted as exempt. And as his role expanded, his superiors and patrons, Adm. Poindexter and Mr. McFarlane, expressed private fears in memos cited by the commission.    &quot;From now on, I don't want you to talk to anybody else, including (CIA Director William) Casey, except me about any of your operational roles,&quot; wrote Adm. Poindexter last May. &quot;In fact you need to quietly generate a cover story that I have insisted that you stop.&quot;    (See related story: &quot;Some Advisers Undermined Stated Policies, Sought to Deceive the Public&quot; -- WSJ Feb. 27, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>