<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Management Lessons of Irangate---By Peter F. Drucker</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The policy decisions that led to &quot;Irangate&quot; have been proved by hindsight to have been mistakes. But the management methods that turned Irangate into a scandal should have been seen from the beginning as likely -- indeed almost certain -- to lead to trouble, if not to disaster. They were violations of well-known and amply tested management principles. The Reagan administration violated not just one of these principles -- it violated four.    First -- in one of the most common but also most unforgivable management mistakes -- it confused delegation of authority with abdication of responsibility. A chief executive officer must delegate. Otherwise, he'll end up like Gulliver in Lilliput, ineffectual and ensnared in details, as were Lyndon Johnson and Jimmy Carter. But delegation requires greater accountability and tighter control. Delegation requires clear assignment of a specific task, clear definition of the expected results and a deadline. Above all it requires that the subordinate to whom a task is delegated keep the boss fully informed. It is the subordinate's job to alert the boss immediately to any possible &quot;surprise&quot; -- rather than to try to &quot;protect&quot; the boss against surprises, as Mr. Reagan's subordinates apparently did. If they keep surprises away from the boss, they invariably will end up making him look incompetent or not in control or a liar -- or all three.    The greatest delegator in recent American political history was not Ronald Reagan; he is apparently quite immersed in all kinds of operational matters. The greatest delegator was Franklin D. Roosevelt, who &quot;did&quot; an absolute minimum. Yet FDR always delegated a specific task, defined the desired results, and stipulated when and how the subordinate -- a cabinet member as a rule -- would report back. And he demanded upward responsibility from his subordinates. In particular, they had to inform him immediately if the project deviated from the plan even in the smallest detail. He knew, as every chief executive officer learns sooner or later, that there are no &quot;pleasant surprises.&quot;    The second major management lesson of Irangate is not to confuse, as the Reagan administration did (and apparently still does), two different and actually incompatible roles -- that of the chief operating officer and that of the chief of staff.    Whether a chief operating officer can work in the American constitutional system is by no means clear. The system centralizes all executive authority in the president, after all. None of the cabinet ministers, for instance, have any political or constitutional authority of their own as they have in a cabinet-government, like that of Britain. And the concept of chief operating officer has never worked when tried in Washington. It always gets the president into trouble.    It did not work when Franklin D. Roosevelt put in James Byrnes as the chief domestic operating officer during World War II. And Dwight Eisenhower did not become an effective president until a scandal forced him to get rid of Sherman Adams, his chief operating officer. But if there is a chief operating officer, the chief executive must retain some direct operating responsibility. Otherwise he soon becomes isolated, and loses &quot;feel&quot; and &quot;touch.&quot;    FDR, for all his delegating, never relinquished direct, day-to-day control of congressional relations or of relations with the press. Alfred Sloan at General Motors always had a president and chief operating officer. But he himself kept day-to-day operating responsibility for what he considered the two true &quot;controls&quot; of the corporation: personnel decisions down four levels -- that is, for all appointments to a senior management position even in the smallest accessory division; and allocation of capital, with the chief financial officer reporting directly to him. Both Harry Truman and John F. Kennedy trusted their respective secretaries of state. But both kept day-to-day control of foreign affairs.    It will be argued that Donald Regan was not &quot;chief operating officer&quot;; he was &quot;chief of staff.&quot; If so, he was set up to do exactly what a chief of staff must never do: to keep information from the president. The first job of a chief of staff is to make sure that the chief executive officer gets all dissents, conflicting points of view and alternatives. To do this, he must not himself be a &quot;part of the problem,&quot; must not himself represent one of the contending interests or ideologies, and must, above all, not be in the &quot;line of command.&quot; In the military the chief of staff is never allowed to get between the senior commander and his subordinate commanders -- they always outrank the chief of staff. His job is to make sure that the boss gets all the information he needs to make a decision, rather than only what the chief of staff thinks the boss should hear.    If the two roles are mixed, the chief of staff invariably cuts the boss off from vital information, invariably tries to monopolize access to the boss, invariably ends up making the boss look out of touch. And he also encourages subordinates to do what President Reagan's subordinates at the National Security Council apparently did: keep information away from &quot;upstairs&quot; and bootleg their own policies.    Confusing delegation and abdication, and the chief operating officer with the chief of staff, are structural mistakes. But the Reagan administration also made two elementary mistakes in how it did things. It asked Vice Adm. John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North to carry out the official policy toward Nicaragua sanctioned by Congress -- which was not to give additional aid to the contras. At the same time, these two men also apparently were charged to raise private money for the contras. It does not matter that this hypocrisy was exactly what most members of Congress clearly wanted (including, probably, many who had voted against aid to the contras). If for whatever reason two conflicting policies have to be carried out at the same time -- and that, of course, does happen -- they must be carried out by different people and in separate organizations. The right hand must not know what the left hand is doing, if the two are working at cross-purposes. Otherwise there will always be a scandal and both policies will miscarry, as they did in Nicaragua.    Finally, the Reagan administration violated the simplest rule: There ain't no secrets. If more than one person knows it, it won't stay a secret. And then the only thing to do with bad news -- such as the miscarriage of the McFarlane-Poindexter mission to Tehran -- is for the executive himself to make it public. This way he has control. If he tries to cover up, he will make sure only that the &quot;secret&quot; is published at the worst possible moment, by someone who tries to hurt him, and in a form that gives it the worst possible interpretation.    American presidents in this century have tended toward secret actions in foreign affairs. Only one of these worked: the Kissinger-Nixon rapprochement with China. The other three ended in disaster. President Wilson, in 1916, sent his personal confidant, Colonel House, to Berlin to get the Germans to stop sinking civilian shipping. House succeeded only in convincing the Germans that Wilson was profoundly isolationist and would never go to war -- which then encouraged them, after Wilson's reelection a year later, to launch the unrestricted submarine warfare that forced America into World War I.    President Roosevelt sent Col. Charles Lindbergh to Berlin 20 years later to &quot;establish contact with Nazi moderates.&quot; Lindbergh convinced the Germans only that the U.S. was unprepared, and could not mobilize fast enough to turn the balance in Europe. And the McFarlane-Poindexter mission to Tehran clearly also sent the wrong signals to the Iranians.    Yet, the dilemma created by kidnapping and hostage-taking is a real one, and if -- a big if, of course -- the mission had resulted in the release of the remaining hostages, President Reagan would have been a hero. But when such an endeavor fails, then one does what Franklin D. Roosevelt was particularly good at: make sure that the news is leaked by the president (or, in a business, the chief executive officer), and in a form in which it deflects blame to someone who is sympathetic. But above all one makes sure that there is no secret -- for the only secret no one pays any attention to (as Edgar Allen Poe showed 150 years ago in &quot;The Purloined Letter&quot;) is something that is out in the open.    These are elementary lessons, and obvious ones. But it is not only the politicians in Washington who seem not to know them. There are far too many chief executives in American business who make the same mistakes. Let's hope that they will learn the management lessons of Irangate.    ---   Mr. Drucker is Clarke professor of social sciences at the Claremont Graduate School. </TEXT></DOC>