<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880713-0146 </DOCNO><HL> The New Parkinson's Law </HL><AUTHOR> Herbert Stein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> ECO </IN><TEXT>   Thirty-one years ago we all laughed at a joke called Parkinson's Law, written by a British historian. The Law was that work expands to fill the time available. I call it a joke because, like the stories about the stingy Scotsman and the mean mother-inlaw, it appealed to our sense of the ridiculous but was not true. In fact, Parkinson made little attempt to prove that his Law was a law aside from telling some cute anecdotes.    Today, a version of Parkinson's Law has become an important feature of policy talk, and possibly of policy, in America. Today's Law is that government expenditures rise to meet the revenue available. This is now the primary argument used to demonstrate that a tax increase will not reduce the deficit. It has supplanted the proposition that a tax increase will not raise the revenue.    The new Law is supposed to be a corollary of the proposition that politicians are shortsighted and venal. If they have more money, they will spend it. Of course, that applies only to the other politicians, the &quot;bad&quot; ones -- the liberals, Democrats and congressmen -- not to the &quot;good&quot; ones like us.    But even a moment's reflection raises serious questions about the Law. If expenditures are determined by revenue, where did the $2 trillion debt come from? And if &quot;They&quot; spend all the revenue that the tax system yields, where did the tax cuts of 1948, 1954, 1963, 1969, 1971, 1978 and 1981 come from? Something else seems to be going on besides spending all the revenue available.    During most of our history, until approximately the Reagan administration, expenditures and revenue were fairly close together except in wars and recessions. But that does not show that the expenditures rose to equal the revenue. It also could have been true that the revenue usually rose to equal the expenditures, which were determined by something other than the available revenue. The sequence is important.    In this century there have been three main sources of revenue increases -- tax increases during wars, revenue increases from the existing tax system due to growth and inflation (creep), and tax increases to fund Social Security.    Taxes were raised during World War I, World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War. In no case were taxes raised enough to cover the cost of the war. In no case did expenditures rise enough after the war to absorb the revenue that would have been available if the war taxes had been retained. We did not retain enough of the war taxes even to pay off the debt accumulated during the war.    Expenditures did not rise enough to equal the rise of revenue that was produced by economic growth and inflation since World War II. The tax cuts of 1948, 1963, 1969, 1971, 1978 and 1981 gave back much of that increased revenue. Expenditures did rise during that period, absolutely and relative to gross national product, but there is no clear evidence that the rise was governed by the increased revenue. It is at least equally likely that the amount of the revenue give-back during this period was governed by the actual and prospective expenditures.    The increases in the payroll tax for Social Security were clearly motivated by the desire to pay for benefits under actual or proposed legislation. It was not because there was a lot of money in the Social Security reserves that we got the benefit increases.    For the benefit of those who may be unconvinced by my thumbnail history, I refer to a statistical analysis done by Profs. George von Furstenberg, R. Jeffery Green and Jin-Ho Jeong, &quot;Tax and Spend, or Spend and Tax?&quot; that was published in The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1986. Their conclusion was summarized as follows:   &quot;Assertions about how changes on one side of the federal budget are processed on the other cover the range of possibilities. One such assertion, tax and spend, holds that spending can be moved with prior tax action both up and down. This implies that those who raised taxes invited more spending while those who lower taxes can subdue it. . . . The evidence assembled in this paper provided no support for the first assertion (the one just cited) which was tested with quarterly data for 1954-1982.&quot;    The recent behavior of the budget is impossible to explain on the theory that expenditures closely follow revenue. Between 1980 and 1986 the increase in expenditures was 158% of the increase in receipts. That was how we got the big deficit. Between 1986 and 1988 (Office of Management and Budget estimate) the rise in expenditures was 47% of the rise in revenue. That was how we got the big reduction of the deficit.    If it were literally true that expenditures rise to equal revenue, there would be no way to reduce the deficit. But people who say that the deficit cannot be reduced by raising taxes do not say that the deficit cannot be reduced at all. They claim to have a different way. But their way also depends on expenditures not rising as fast as revenue. For example, the administration's scenario for reducing the deficit to $23 billion by 1993 counts on revenue rising by $349 billion between 1988 and 1993 but expenditures rising by only 65% as much. That is, it counts on &quot;Them,&quot; the other politicians, not spending all the revenue that is expected to come from economic growth.    None of this suggests that the revenue from a tax increase would be automatically and fully reflected in a reduction of the deficit. It means that the proportions in which the revenue would be divided between more spending and a smaller deficit are not determined by an iron law of politics. The proportions will be determined by a struggle between competing claimants and its outcome is not predetermined. The president is a powerful actor in that struggle. He should not believe himself incapable of affecting the result if he makes cutting the deficit a matter of high priority.    ---   Mr. Stein, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under Presidents Nixon and Ford, is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>