<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871202-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's Other Stalled Judgeships---By Tom Bethell</HL><DD> 12/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   With so much attention going to the Supreme Court vacancy, numerous openings at the appellate and district levels of the federal judiciary have largely escaped notice. In the federal appeals courts 11 seats are now empty, candidates having been nominated to fill seven of them. Altogether, 27 judicial nominations are pending before the Senate Judiciary Committee.    &quot;I'm deeply concerned about the way the nominations are being handled,&quot; says Sen. Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, the ranking minority member of the committee. &quot;I've never seen judges held up like this since I've been on the Judiciary Committee.&quot; (He joined it in 1967.)    A statistical comparison strongly suggests that Sen. Thurmond is right and that the Democratic-controlled Judiciary Committee is stalling, as Justice Department officials have charged. &quot;It's totally without precedent,&quot; says Assistant Attorney General Stephen Markman. &quot;Highly qualified candidates have been kept waiting for six, seven or eight months without a hearing.&quot;    Some Republicans believe the strategy is to slow things down so the appointments fall to the next president, and thus maybe to the Democratic senators. (Senators of the president's party have a major say in the appointment of federal district judges.) Bruce Fein, a visiting fellow at the Heritage Foundation, believes the committee is in particular &quot;stalling with nominees who have the intellectual clout to influence people beyond their own chambers.&quot;    One senator who did not wish to be identified suggested that the committee this year may have been playing judicial-nomination politics with a difference. &quot;Sen. {Arlen} Specter got some of his candidates approved,&quot; he said. &quot;The Democrats went along with him. But of course he went along with them&quot; on the vote against Robert Bork for the Supreme Court.    Some fingers are pointed back at the administration, which has yet to send up nominees for 25 district court seats, in addition to the four circuit slots for which no one has been tapped. Introducing a mid-November Judiciary Committee hearing for four nominees to the federal bench, Sen. Patrick Leahy (D., Vt.) maintained that &quot;some in the Justice Department&quot; have been putting out &quot;misinformation&quot; on the committee's go-slow tactics. In fact, Sen. Leahy said, by the end of that day's proceedings the committee would have held hearings &quot;on 50 out of the 63 nominations that we have received this year.&quot; Sen. Leahy heads the subcommittee that screens judicial nominees.    But Sen. Leahy himself may have been guilty of a little misinformation, because a hearing is itself no more than a delaying device masquerading as action if it is merely the prelude to further unscheduled hearings. The best known of a handful to be re-called is University of San Diego law professor Bernard Siegan, who was nominated to the Ninth Circuit (serving the West Coast) on Feb. 5. Nine months elapsed before he was granted a hearing, and then the only Democratic senator to show up was Dennis DeConcini of Arizona. At the end of the hearing, during which nothing untoward emerged and questions were asked on behalf of absent Sen. Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio, Mr. Siegan was sent back to confirmational limbo.    In this way, the Democrats can spin the confirmation process out indefinitely, while at the same time maintaining a semblance of movement on the nominations.    Meanwhile the backlog of cases grows in the federal courts. Democratic Sen. Bill Bradley, appearing on behalf of Alfred Wolin, a nominee to the New Jersey district court, told the committee that there are &quot;over 6,400 pending cases&quot; in that court. According to Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, a Republican member of the Judiciary Committee, &quot;the work of the federal judiciary is being harmed by the delays in confirming new federal judges.&quot;    Three vacancies exist on the 16-judge Fifth (Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi) Circuit Court of Appeals, with appointments to two of them made in June and July, respectively. The seat for which Mr. Siegan is nominated is one of two unfilled slots on the Ninth Circuit. (If Anthony Kennedy is confirmed as an associate justice on the Supreme Court, that will create an additional opening there.) Two vacancies remain on the 10th (Colorado, Kansas, Utah and Wyoming) Circuit, one each on two other regional circuits and two on the Federal Circuit, to one of which International Trade Commissioner Susan Liebeler was appointed in March. She has had two hearings, but not yet a vote.    Democrats claim that the Supreme Court vacancy, in particular the Bork battle, explains the backlog. But this is merely to offer one set of delaying tactics as the justification for another.    Justice Department officials say that a whole new layer of investigation has been added by the Democrats, with endless requests for supplemental information, correspondence back and forth, unexpected questions popping up at hearings to justify further hearings, and so on.    It all takes three or four times longer than formerly, and questions have become more outlandish. With three committee staffers whispering into his ear, Sen. Howell Heflin of Alabama pressed Associate Attorney General Stephen Trott, nominated to the Ninth Circuit, about the &quot;Iran-Contra matter.&quot; (&quot;What exactly do you know of Southern Air's involvement in Iran at this point?&quot;) One candidate was asked if he had committed adultery with the woman he later married. Sen. Edward Kennedy objected to another because he was a white male. David Sentelle, confirmed recently to the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, was held up for months by an inquiry into his alleged Freemasonry.    Moreover, seven of the candidates currently in limbo were nominated before Justice Lewis Powell retired from the Supreme Court, and still the committee has not acted on them. (Mr. Trott and a few others are to get a vote tomorrow.)    In some cases the delays have caused serious disruptions in the lives and legal practices of nominees, who find that clients often will no longer retain them for major cases once they have been nominated to the federal bench. Such clients reasonably presume that counsel will not be in private practice for much longer.    Prof. Siegan's nomination is called &quot;controversial,&quot; meaning that he is suspected of harboring free-market sympathies and of sharing roughly the same philosophy of government as the man who nominated him, President Reagan. Prof. Siegan is the author of a book entitled &quot;Economic Liberties and the Constitution,&quot; published by the University of Chicago Press. Whether the Democrats will permit such a man to join the federal judiciary remains to be seen.    By contrast, consider Seattle lawyer William Dwyer, whose prospects for an appellate seat figured indirectly in the confirmation fight over circuit nominee Daniel A. Manion in 1986. Mr. Dwyer was an active ACLU member, a Walter Mondale fund-raiser and the author of a book, &quot;The Goldmark Case,&quot; attacking Ronald Reagan and Sen. Thurmond as right-wing extremists. &quot;A more ardent liberal it would be difficult to discern in the legal profession,&quot; says Bruce Fein of Heritage. Nonetheless, after a delay in being nominated and a re-hearing requested by Mr. Thurmond, Mr. Dwyer recently was confirmed.    In nearly seven years, 333 Reagan-appointed judges have been confirmed to the federal bench. By contrast, President Carter appointed 265 judges in four years. (There are now 761 judges in the federal system.) There is no doubt that in recent years Republicans have paid far more attention to judicial philosophy than formerly. In the old days, the charge against Republican appointees, often justified, was that of &quot;cronyism.&quot; But the liberals usually liked the result, because such judges, often plucked from the business establishment, were rarely guided by any legal doctrine other than &quot;stare decisis,&quot; by which they considered themselves obliged to rubber-stamp legal precedents set by liberal judges a few years earlier.    &quot;The result was a body of law that moved in only one direction,&quot; said W. Grover Rees III, who until 18 months ago was the Justice Department's special counsel for judicial selection. (Today he is chief justice of American Samoa.) &quot;It institutionalized that part of the liberal social agenda that the electorate refused to enact.&quot; Now that Reagan-appointed judges have begun to entertain &quot;originalist&quot; interpretive doctrines, liberals recognize that the judicial branch may not be available much longer to them for the implementation of policies too unpopular to enact.    While liberal groups have gone to extraordinary ends to block some of Mr. Reagan's judicial nominees, many conservatives have remained on the golf course. Even though their interests are frequently affected by judicial rulings, business executives play little or no role in lobbying for or against judicial nominees.    &quot;Business will gripe when a court renders a 'creative' Title VII decision or environmental decision or product-liability decision, but unlike environmental or civil-rights groups, they show no interest in participating in this process,&quot; says Mr. Markman at the Justice Department.    &quot;We have no involvement in this issue,&quot; Quentin Riegel, assistant general counsel for the National Association of Manufacturers told Forbes magazine this summer. &quot;I haven't found any bias in the judiciary, either for us or against us.&quot; A spokesman for the Business Roundtable said much the same thing.    ---   Mr. Bethell is a media fellow at the Hoover Institution and contributing editor to the American Spectator. </TEXT></DOC>