<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881003-0015 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Olympics: See You in Barcelona in 1992 </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Seoul  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Olympic flame was extinguished without incident here Sunday night, not, as you might suppose, by the collective sighs of relief of visitors and hosts, but because someone turned off the gas. The North Koreans didn't pull anything, nor did the Japanese &quot;Red Army,&quot; IRA, PLO, militant Sikhs or Basques, the local &quot;Death Squadron,&quot; or the Symbionese Liberation gang.    It's ironic that the only extracurricular rough stuff in these Games was supplied by the South Koreans themselves, when several of them, including a coach, took issue with a boxing referee's actions by invading the ring and jostling him.    NBC-TV replayed the incident a few more times than the Koreans liked, and that, in turn, set off a peculiar effort in journalistic hostage-taking. The Korean press played up stories about a couple of American swimmers swiping an ornament from a hotel bar, and of an American runner, kicking a taxi (a taxi?!) during a traffic dispute. At the same time, Koreans of various stripe began expressing public concern about U.S.-Korean relations.    It's tough to know what to make of this, except to observe that, in the Koreans, Americans may have found a people as anxious as ourselves to be loved, and as dismayed, and snappish, when affection isn't forthcoming. Suffice it to say it should take more than a replay or 10 of a boxing-ring flap, or, even, that atrocious decision against U.S. boxer Roy Jones, to hurt the reciprocal sales of Cokes or Hyundais.    In fact, the Koreans did OK with their Olympiad, if you can overlook that it was staged under arms. It turned out that initial reports of 100,000 police and troops being on hand were short by 40,000 or so. They were on the streets, in the stadiums, and in the Olympic residential complexes.    I'd say I walked through 150 metal detectors in my three weeks here, and submitted to 40 or so hand frisks. That's the price of international Sport. The cops stayed off the playing fields, and there things went swimmingly. This was the first almost-universal Olympics since 1972, and world's records were set by the bushelful.    My own, non-statistical list of heroes and heroines includes American diver Greg Louganis, who bounced his head off a springboard, then bounced back to win the event; Tapio Korjus, the Finnish javelin thrower, who hurt a leg during his competition, skipped two turns while he was being taped, and returned to capture the spear chuck on his, and the day's, final throw; and Natalia Pomochtchnikova, a Soviet who pulled a hamstring two-thirds through her final leg of the 4 x 100-meter relay but finished anyway to give her team a bronze medal.    I also liked the way John Ngugi, one of that pack of remarkable Kenyan runners, copped the 5,000 meters on Saturday. Instead of playing the distance runners' dreary game of sticking with the pack until the last lap or two, he ran off by himself early and dared the boys to catch him. They couldn't.    For sheer virtuosity, though, nothing I saw matched the performance of the Soviet men gymnasts. This is the most circus-like of Olympic sports, and they possessed all the showmanship of a troupe of actuaries at their tasks. Yet they posted 42 scores of 9.9 or better, on a 10-point scale, in their 72 team-competition exercises. And the tallies provoked nary a contrary peep about the judging, which, in gymnastics, is amazing in itself.    In terms of news splash, of course, nothing here matched the revelation that Ben Johnson, the record-setting winner of the Olympic fast-draw contest, a.k.a the men's 100-meter dash, had joined Bulgarian weightlifters and sundry others in flunking his drug test. Reactions were several, including a general lack of surprise (Ben's massive musculature long has been a subject of surmise) and some smugness that none of our people got caught.    But comments by some officials, most notably Dr. Robert Voy, medical chief of the U.S. Olympic Committee, indicated that the real wonder was that so few athletes, from any land, botched the battle of the bottle. Separating sports from performance-enhancing chemicals will require the sort of surprise testing that many athletic powers have yet to agree to, he noted.    As for any U.S. smugness, it is sadly inappropriate. Our autumn Saturday and Sunday heroes didn't get their 280-pound frames and 19-inch necks just by drinking milkshakes and doing pushups.    Bottom-line fans will note that the U.S. did about as well in this Olympiad as in previous, well-attended ones: 36 golds, and 94 medals overall. That placed it third in the official-unofficial standings, behind the big U.S.S.R. and little (pop. 16.6 million) East Germany, which is systematic about these things.    USOC president Robert Helmick expressed satisfaction with the effort. &quot;The U.S. still produces superstars and superheroes,&quot; said he, in reference to multi-medal hauls by such as swimmers Matt Biondi and Janet Evans, diver Louganis and sprinter Florence Griffith-Joyner.    Helmick brushed aside suggestions that the U.S. lead a long-overdue movement to sweep the remaining vestiges of amateurism from the Games. He restated his group's position that this be left to the crazy-quilt of individual-sport governing bodies to deal with, one at a time. One reason for the stand is a fear that participation by pros might crimp USOC fund-raising.    But if these Games prove anything it's that the days of the amateur athlete under any label save that of &quot;child&quot; are over. The biography of every medal winner here, from every country, is about identical, based in tales of ceaseless toil in pursuit of excellence. For those not lucky enough to count on dad and mom, this requires an income, even if the NBA is paying it.    Strange as it might seem, the final impetus toward bringing financial frankness to Olympia might come from the U.S.S.R. It announced it will pay all of its medal winners a bounty, ending at 12,000 rubles for golds, cash on the barrelhead. That's the sort of glasnost we could use. </TEXT></DOC>