<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871207-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Bruised Apple:New York City FeelsFirst of Many BlowsStock Crash Will Land---Wall Street's RetrenchmentAffects Jobs, the Budget,Apparently Even Condos---City Hall: We Can Handle It---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)RESTAURANTS, SUPERMARKETS AND DRUGSTORES (RFD)RETAILING (RET)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Wall Street isn't the only part of this city the stock-market crash has shaken.    Two subway stops away in Brooklyn, it has also touched Livingston Street, headquarters of the New York school board, where post-crash city austerity has clouded plans to add 100 much-needed librarians. It has been bad news on Broadway, where, at a recent luncheon, a group of local arts administrators grimly appraised their shrunken endowments. And it landed a blow on West 69th Street, where Grace Maccarone spent an afternoon in tears after a jittery investor backed out of buying her apartment.    Since Oct. 19, New York has become more aware than ever that its pulse is linked directly to the stock market's erratic heartbeat. Financial-services jobs and stock-market gains richly supported the city during the five-year bull market, spreading money and confidence while many other industries were shrinking. Now, after living high off Wall Street for five years, New York City could face an unpleasant letdown.    Just last week it was jolted by several pieces of post-crash news. Salomon Inc. pulled out of a huge real-estate project, meaning that the city, which had already budgeted hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue from it, probably won't get part of that money. Another major investment firm, General Electric's Kidder Peabody unit, announced sweeping job cuts Friday. The crash also spurred E.F. Hutton to agree to a buy-out by Shearson Lehman Brothers that will cost thousands of jobs.    And while the national unemployment rate was declining last month, New York City's climbed steeply. It went to 6.6% from 5.8% in October, the government reported Friday.    New York's finances remain sound, and the city doesn't risk anything like the fiscal squeeze of the 1970s, when it found itself unable to keep rolling over large amounts of short-term debt. In fact, New York has just had its bond ratings raised by Standard andamp; Poor's. Mayor Edward Koch moved fast to head off trouble by imposing a hiring freeze after the crash.    Yet the belt-tightening now needed is apt to strain the city's already overextended social services and make even bleaker the plight of its growing underclass. &quot;Anything that shakes Wall Street is going to send tremors through every nook and cranny of the New York economy,&quot; says Samuel Ehrenhalt, regional commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.    The first tremors already have unsettled some of the luxury businesses that have turned parts of Manhattan into a yuppie amusement park. Since October, apartment prices have dipped from the ionosphere down into the mere stratosphere. Some upscale retailers have lost a bit of zeal about expanding. And many restaurant plans have been tabled; one real-estate broker, Michael Hirschfeld, says he himself knows of eight put on hold since the crash.    So far, little of this is dire news for most New Yorkers; the city, Mr. Hirschfeld observes, &quot;didn't need more bad Cajun food.&quot;    It isn't just the big-spending customers of such businesses that have been hurt, though. The city had tentatively approved a $59 million batch of budget add-ons this fiscal year -- new money for libraries, baby sitters for hospitalized mothers, certain AIDS services, a Harlem infant-mortality program and an anti-drug-abuse fund, among other projects. But budget officials now cite the crash as a reason that this spending is unlikely.    Moreover, more than half of Wall Street's work force consists of nonprofessionals, and many other crash victims are hardly part of the BMW set. The ax is falling on people like Deborah Colaneri, a 27-year-old former bond-desk worker, recently found waiting in an unemployment line just blocks from the office that let her go after the crash. &quot;This is upsetting and depressing,&quot; she sighs. &quot;You never think it's going to happen to you.&quot;    The layoffs create ripples. Each lost Wall Street job will be matched by at least one in other industries, predicts Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates. The consulting firm, whose work New York City uses to plan budgets, forecasts that over the next two years, the Wall Street downturn will cost New York 25,000 securities-industry jobs and 35,000 other ones. The result will be two years of citywide employment declines, the first for New York since the bull market started in 1982, the consultants think. Not all those losing their jobs will be residents of the city, of course, but its economy will feel an effect anyway.    Wharton warns that even its revised forecast may prove too rosy. For instance, it doesn't reflect the almost-certain withering of bonuses for Wall Streeters who keep their jobs.    City officials strenuously dispute Wharton on job losses. &quot;There will be thousands, but it won't be anything like&quot; 25,000 or 50,000, Mayor Edward Koch declares. &quot;We'll be looking to see,&quot; he adds, whether &quot;the Cassandras turn out to be false prophets.&quot;    Finance Commissioner Abraham Biderman recently assured the city council, &quot;The point to remember is that the city has many strengths that go beyond Wall Street, and, should there be a serious economic downturn, the city will be in a position of strength to deal with it.&quot; For one thing, the weak dollar may draw in more tourism and other spending from abroad. And if necessary, Mayor Koch says, he would consider extending his 90-day hiring freeze through June of 1989.    But this sort of fiscal austerity, however reassuring to bond-rating agencies, doesn't come without a price. Those who worry about post-crash New York point to a disturbing paradox about the city's growth during the bull market. Unemployment in New York City plunged nearly 50%, yet the ranks of the neediest have grown.    The number of homeless people in New York nearly quadrupled during those years, from about 7,400 to about 28,000. The figure may be higher, because it counts only those who show up at city shelters. City residents living under the federal poverty line also rose somewhat through the early 1980s, to 23% in 1985, the last year of available data.    Meanwhile, the boom hasn't made a dent in the huge pool of adults who aren't counted in the labor force because they aren't even looking for work. &quot;If New York's comeback didn't serve as a magnet, under what conceivable circumstances can we see these people coming into the mainstream?&quot; asks Mr. Ehrenhalt of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.    Wall Street downturns have always rattled New York's economy, but this time there is less of a cushion from other industries. The city lost jobs in 207 of its 360 industries over the last decade, including 155,000 jobs in manufacturing. Meanwhile, the securities industry was more than doubling its local work force, to about 155,000.    More than a quarter of the new private-sector jobs in the city in the last decade have come in financial services. Wall Street salaries, combining the astronomical with the lowly, averaged out to $66,000 last year. As such, they made up 11% of all the private-sector wages in the city. That is nearly 2 1/2 times the share they provided a decade ago.    Figures like these wouldn't surprise New Yorkers who have watched Wall Street money help to transform Manhattan. Phalanxes of new condo towers with English-sounding names (the Bromley, the Monarch) line the avenues. Once-dingy areas like Chelsea, Tribeca and the East Village now gleam with unspeakably trendy pasta places and booteries. Apartment prices have risen so fast that one room in an iffy neighborhood may cost $100,000, while the city's grandest apartments run more than $5 million. Other forces have driven this trend too, of course, but there's no doubt that stock-market profits and the boom in financial services have been at the heart of it.    The Koch administration grew accustomed to the dizzying growth. Before the crash, its planners mapped out a budget based on estimates that New Yorkers' personal income would rise by 6.9% in 1988 and by 7.7% in 1989. The city plans to announce revised estimates next month. In the meantime, Wharton Econometric, which hadn't been quite so optimistic to begin with, currently sees city residents' personal income rising just 3.5% next year and 4.8% in 1989.    Likewise, the city had been expecting retail-sales gains of 9.4% and 7%, respectively, in the next two years. Wharton's post-crash estimates are only 3.4% and 4.9%.    One chunk of revenue the city has been counting on comes from a huge project that symbolizes both its and Wall Street's go-go outlook: an enormous twin-peaked complex at the Columbus Circle corner of Central Park. New York agreed to sell the city-owned site to a group including Salomon Brothers for $455 million, and it booked half of that price as revenue in the budget for the year ending in June.    Salomon, which had doubled its work force over five years, planned to move to the new colossus. That was before it decided to lay off 800 employees, or 12% of its staff, a decision made even before the crash. The project's other developers plan to proceed alone, but the city's sale price is expected to be scaled back.    Salomon's job cuts, which looked like an aberration at the time, now seem just part of a trend. At least six other major Wall Street firms are doing likewise. Making matters worse, some big commercial banks had already chosen this fall to retrench; Citibank, Chase Manhattan and Chemical Bank plan to slash more than 4,000 jobs in all, many of them in New York. Meanwhile, the city is still unsettled by the news earlier this year that Mobil Corp. and J.C. Penney Co. are moving their headquarters elsewhere.    All this has ruffled the real-estate market. Office rents still appear strong, but there is nervousness in lower Manhattan. As for the residential market, some in the industry deny the crash has hurt. &quot;I read these articles that prices are falling, but that hasn't been our experience at all,&quot; says Carolyn Todd, a salesperson at Ellen David Real Estate Inc. &quot;People seem to be anxious to put their money into real estate.&quot;    Co-op ads and the war stories of sellers give a different picture. &quot;Due to Wall St. Crisis I'll Accept Below Mkt Price!&quot; declares one recent ad. &quot;Wall Street Casualty,&quot; says another, followed by ads headed &quot;Post Black Mon Value&quot; and &quot;Crash victim anxious for immed sale.&quot;    Some of these lines may be just attention-getters. But the last-mentioned ad was placed by Ms. Todd, who says that the owners lowered the asking price on their co-op apartment to $415,000 from $460,000 after the stock debacle led a buyer to back out. &quot;That's the first one I can think of where this was the case,&quot; she adds.    Nancy and Alan Moskowitz offer a second case. They have slashed the asking price of their East Side apartment to $500,000 from $600,000. &quot;The brokers I've been dealing with informed me that all their clients have stopped looking,&quot; Mrs. Moskowitz says.    The Moskowitzes, besides being buffeted by ripples from the stock collapse, are sending out some of their own. First, they lost some of their own money in the downturn, and then Mr. Moskowitz, a textile manufacturer, saw some orders canceled by customers worried about Christmas sales. In turn, the Moskowitzes have changed their mind about buying a $10,000 painting, and now they're considering scrapping plans to hire a nurse for the baby they expect next month.    James Rogers, a New York investor who was an outspoken bear long before the crash, scoffs at the idea that New York apartments will climb in price as they become havens for investors fleeing the stock market. &quot;That's like saying in Houston that people will put their money in real estate because the oil business is bad,&quot; he says.    Mr. Rogers, a finance professor at Columbia, thinks the city's economic situation calls for a special strategy: selling apartments short. Sell to an investor, he advises, and rent the apartment back with an option to buy later at the market price. It will be lower, he promises. </TEXT></DOC>