<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880901-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Mines Left by Departing Soviets Are Maiming Afghans --- Humanitarian Workers, Doctors Seeing Increased Booby-Trap Injuries </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> THAL, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With a hollow face and a ruined body, 14-year-old Rezaq represents the shape of things to come in Afghanistan.    Rezaq comes from a family of corn, wheat and rice farmers in a cluster of Afghan villages called Chawni. Eight years ago, the Soviet Union set up a large military post there, complete with ammunition depots and a hospital. Rezaq's family fled to Pakistan.    This summer, the news swept through the mud-hut refugee camps that blanket the Pakistani frontier: The Soviets were truly pulling their troops out of Afghanistan. Rezaq and his family heard that Chawni was in resistance hands again; they decided to go home and rebuild the neglected farm.    &quot;I can't remember what happened,&quot; says Rezaq, lying in a field-hospital bed here. But his uncle tells the story: When the family arrived, the boy went out exploring near the abandoned base and stepped on a mine. The blast blew off Rezaq's left leg, shattered his right leg, and ripped the fingers off his left hand. That was a month ago. Since then he has been flat on his back, wrapped ankle-to-thigh in bloody gauze. He is thin -- anemic, his doctor says -- and the deep wounds in his remaining leg are slow to heal. He is listless, answering most questions simply by clicking his tongue in his cheek, an Afghan way of saying &quot;I don't care.&quot;    Now that the Soviets are leaving Afghanistan, the three million refugees who came to Pakistan and the million more who sought sanctuary in fortified Afghan cities are itching to return to their villages. In the northern Afghanistan village of Anaba, for instance, a team of visiting doctors and engineers found in July that 450 of the village's 500 original families were already back, just two months after the occupying forces had left.    But the returnees are finding they can't farm, can't tend their sheep, can't even go to the stream for water without risking their lives to exploding mines.    Mines and booby traps have been an important element in Moscow's campaign against the Afghan guerrillas since the Soviets invaded in late 1979. And now, Afghans and relief workers say, millions more mines are being scattered by the outbound Soviet troops and their increasingly nervous Afghan-government successors. Many are simple trip mines -- grenades on sticks with hidden wires attached -- which can be detected by burning off the grass. Others are pressure-sensitive mines, buried around military installations, to guard against guerrilla attacks. They explode when stepped on. There are &quot;wave mines,&quot; set off by vibrations and sensitive enough to detonate at the sound of a human voice. Some mines were planted by the U.S.-backed guerrillas themselves.    But relief workers say that the most common, and most insidious, are the so-called butterfly mines, light camouflaged explosives strewn like autumn leaves from helicopters and planes, and the booby traps planted randomly around villages. These don't protect anything and aren't designed to kill attacking guerrillas.    They are simply there to maim civilians.    &quot;We had a man at our clinic who opened a bag of sugar and it blew up in his face,&quot; says Gay-Leclerc Brenner, project director of Freedom Medicine, which runs the field hospital here in Thal. &quot;We had some people who opened the door of a house and it exploded.&quot;    Ms. Brenner says the number of gunshot wounds her medics are treating has shrunk lately, while her caseload of mine patients has grown. At Freedom Medicine's rough brick hospital, chief doctor Mohammad Hashin Hesham says he had seen only two mine-blast amputations before May. Since then, he has seen 20, including one 13-month-old baby and two impoverished adults who were digging up mines to sell them. Other hospitals report the same trend.    &quot;In 42 days I saw 47 patients injured in mine explosions,&quot; says Dr. Karim Haddy, who works in Chawni's abandoned Soviet hospital and who treated Rezaq before sending him on to Thal. &quot;Forty-six of them lived, but without feet and hands. Some of them are blind. I saw one small child whose feet and spine were destroyed. One hand was blown off. We worked over him for three hours, but he died.&quot;    Officially, the Soviets say mines aren't a problem because their troops are taking them out as they leave. But their statistics are unconvincing.    Louis Dupree, an Afghan-affairs specialist now working in the Pakistani frontier city of Peshawar, says he went to a recent conference in Australia where a Soviet diplomat claimed his country was decommissioning mines. When Mr. Dupree asked him how many so far, the man replied 750 -- a response that convinced Mr. Dupree Soviet bureaucrats haven't any idea what is going on in the field.    &quot;This has nothing to do with Soviet policy,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm sure the Soviets want out of Afghanistan. But you can't trust the poor old {Soviet soldier} who's been fighting for a long time. He's leaving, and he's going to leave a little taste of revenge behind. It's an understandable, human -- and by human I mean rotten -- thing to do.&quot;    The Soviets also say they have handed over minefield maps to the Afghan government to aid future searches. But while the Soviets consider the war over, the Kabul regime is still fighting to hold the country and thus hasn't any interest in decommissioning mines. With the Soviets bowing out, the Afghan government fighting on, and Pakistanis urging the refugees to return home, humanitarian workers can do little more than teach refugees how to recognize mines. It is a slow process.    &quot;There are lots of things you could teach refugees to do now, like establishing village brigades to report mines,&quot; says Ms. Brenner. &quot;But everybody's talking about the problem and nobody's doing anything. It isn't that people don't care. It's that there probably are larger political considerations than I see as a relief worker here on the ground.&quot;    That leaves Afghans to their own mine-removal devices. Bunair, a 25-year-old Afghan mine-defusing expert, tells how he did it: &quot;I used a bayonnet. I dug the area, and when I saw there was a mine, I would scrape the earth away from around it.&quot; Then, he says, he would gently unscrew the top and pull out the trigger. All this, he learned by doing.    One day this summer, when Mr. Bunair was clearing mines from a trail, one exploded and blew off his leg. It took all day for his friends to bring him to the Freedom Medicine hospital in Thal. He almost died. But he has recovered, faster than Rezaq, and now hopes for an artificial leg.    Someone once gave Mr. Bunair a metal detector, but he didn't trust it. He says he couldn't tell if the batteries were charged, and he knew that if they ran down he would almost certainly step on a mine. So he intends to go back to bayonet work, once he can walk again.    &quot;It is my duty to go back and get out all the mines,&quot; he says. In seven years he has scraped up about 500, he says. Western diplomats estimate there are three million to five million mines in Afghanistan. </TEXT></DOC>