<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870623-0093 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   With stock prices strong and interest rates still relatively low, a lot of entrepreneurs reckon the timing is right to sell their businesses.    According to W.T. Grimm andamp; Co., a Chicago firm that tracks acquisitions, private-company sales last year totaled 1,598, nearly twice the number of 10 years earlier. &quot;The markets are very conducive today,&quot; says Jeffrey Kenner of Kenner andamp; Co., a New York investment-banking firm specializing in buyouts.    But he and others who make their livings arranging sales of small, owner-managed companies say conflicting desires and high stakes often make deciding how to sell a company one of the most complicated decisions a business owner ever makes. An owner's desire to get the highest price possible may be tempered by other factors, including the timing of payment and the owner's role, if any, in the firm after the sale.    A &quot;cash-out&quot; -- in its simplest form, a straight cash sale, generally to a larger, public corporation -- is usually the simplest way to sell a company. It produces the quickest payment. In many cases it also offers the highest price. &quot;Leveraged-buyout investors have been more aggressive in recent years,&quot; Mr. Kenner says, &quot;but the corporate buyer always has the ability to pay the most because it uses equity rather than debt to finance the acquisition.&quot;    But the entrepreneur's role after the sale can cause problems. Many corporate buyers find an entrepreneur's experience in a business valuable, and so sign the seller to a contract to stay on for a few years; they often add a bit to the purchase price if he agrees to remain. In practice, however, entrepreneurs without a stake in their former firms' performance rarely last long in a big-company bureaucracy.    One arrangement that offers a sort of compromise -- and can mean substantial additional profits for the seller -- is an &quot;earn-out.&quot; These agreements, which create more of a partnership between buyer and seller, allow a seller who stays on to share in the company's profits, based on earnings performance over several years after the sale.    For instance, when Thomas Hilb and Lawrence Ornitz sold their joint interest in Aspen Skiwear, a Denver-based apparel maker, to Richton International Corp., a jewelry and accessories maker, a decade ago, their three-year earn-out &quot;more than tripled&quot; the agreed minimum purchase price, Mr. Hilb says. By reducing tax rates on personal income, the new tax law makes earn-outs more appealing than in the past.    Mr. Ornitz's subsequent venture, Apparelcraft Associates Inc., a clothing maker that Mr. Hilb joined as a partner, ended in a straight cash-out, this time to Bayly Corp., also a clothing company, for about $11 million. Roughly half the purchase price was in notes. Six months later, Messrs. Ornitz and Hilb took advantage of an opportunity to sell the notes to the buyer at a 15% discount, effectively spacing the profits over two tax years.    Stock swaps are much like cash-outs, except the seller accepts payment in the buyer's stock rather than in cash. The nominal price is often higher than in a cash-out, but because the seller is usually restricted from reselling the stock for a few years, he risks a drop in the value of his holdings if the stock declines.    On the other hand, stock swaps are tax-free. The seller incurs the 28% capital-gains tax only when he sells his stock. In contrast, the new tax code subjects cash-outs and leveraged buyouts to a 34% tax at the corporate level, and then to a 28% capital-gains tax at the seller's level.    As in earn-outs, the seller in a stock swap often stays on at the company, and the stock in the parent firm lets him participate in the company's performance.    Jay Eastman, a 38-year-old entrepreneur, last August sold his optical-scanning-equipment company, Optel Barcode Systems, to Photographic Sciences Corp. of Webster, N.Y., for stock valued at about $3 million. The Photographic Sciences offer promised not only a source of future capital and much-needed marketing muscle to the fledgling Optel, but it also had a face value twice that of rival cash offers, according to Mr. Eastman.    &quot;Of course, this isn't risk-free,&quot; he says. &quot;But we feel it's an acceptable risk, especially since we look on this not as a short-term thing, but as a fairly long-haul proposition.&quot;    Leveraged buyouts and recapitalizations involve the sale of all or part of a company to a group of outside investors, who use mostly borrowed funds to finance the transaction. The main difference between the two is that &quot;in a recapitalization, you keep a larger percentage of the company and still get a significant amount of cash out,&quot; says Al Gordon, a partner at Richland Gordon, a Chicago firm specializing in small-company mergers and acquisitions. These transactions, very popular in recent years because of low interest rates, are best suited to mature companies with strong and secure cash flows.    The owner-manager typically receives payment in cash or a combination of cash and notes; he may also retain a significant stake of the company's new, reduced equity. The nominal price of the sale may be higher than in a cash-out. But the timing of the payment can pose a problem: If the company's situation deteriorates under its heavy debt load, much of the profit from the sale may never be realized. &quot;If you're holding long-term paper that pays no interest for five years in such a highly leveraged situation, it can be like throwing darts,&quot; Mr. Kenner says.    A seller who retains a highly leveraged equity holding has a crucial stake in the company's future. &quot;Leverage isn't for everyone,&quot; says Martin Lewis, chief executive officer of Williamhouse Regency Inc., a stationery company that went private in a leveraged buyout in 1982 and recapitalized late last year. &quot;You need highly motivated management that relates to profits and cash flow, not palaces and perks.&quot;    The buyout of Williamhouse was motivated by the fact that the founding shareholders were passing control to their children and grandchildren, prompting fears among those active in the company, including some family members, that the firm might fall into unfriendly hands. The buyout was completed for about $120 million, or $30 a share in cash, compared with the company's $18 share price at the time on the American Stock Exchange.    Owner-managers in the buyout group were left with &quot;inexpensive equity, which was greatly at risk due to the increased leverage,&quot; Mr. Lewis says. But by last year, the company had paid one-third of its $120 million debt, greatly boosting the value of its equity. That left enough financial room for a recapitalization with a second group of outside investors, a sort of second-round leveraged buyout that allowed some of the participants in the original buyout to take their profits and cash out at that point. </TEXT></DOC>