<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890817-0111 </DOCNO><DD> = 890817 </DD><AN> 890817-0111. </AN><HL> Viewpoint:@  The Killeagh Fields: An Irish War@  Against Chemical Pollution@  ----@  By Alexander Cockburn </HL><DD> 08/17/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> EUROP DOW </CO><IN> CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   When I go back to where I grew up in southern Ireland, the last 10 miles along the road from Cork airport take me through the lush farmlands stretching between the village of Killeagh and the ancient town of Youghal. But there was nothing ancient about the big signs planted in the fields when I drove through the other day: &quot;COW MILK NOT DOW MILK&quot; and &quot;AGENT ORANGE WORKS -- ASK MERRELL DOW.&quot;    What was this? All I could see were cows in the pastures that run down to Youghal Bay. I soon found out. Unless local protest forces a climb-down, that idyllic vista will soon be interrupted by a chemical factory pumping 100,000 gallons of treated effluent into the Womanagh river every day, and by an incinerator chimney 80 feet high.    When they first planned this project, officials at Merrell Dow, or its parent, Dow Chemical, must have felt like foxes being graciously ushered into the chicken coop and told to keep the eggs warm.    A number of years ago an Irish state body, the Industrial Development Authority, decided that the best thing for an area making most of its money off tourism, agriculture and fishing would be to have international pharmaceutical companies settle around Cork harbor. Many duly did so, lured by generous tax breaks and other incentives.    But then the IDA decided to spend $150 million of taxpayer money to build a park for pharmaceutical companies at Ringaskiddy, near Cork -- a colossal flop. And now, a lot of children in the area around the existing companies are coming down with illnesses from toxic emissions and the marine life is beginning to mutate. Up to now, regulation by the Cork County Council has been lax, but even so the court actions have started and a couple of companies -- Penn Chemicals and Angus Fine Chemicals -- have been prosecuted for ignoring anti-pollution guidelines.    So the bureaucrats of the IDA, desperate for some sort of feather to stick in their caps, were delighted that Merrell Dow, after shunning Ringaskiddy, proposed investing $90 million or so in a factory and incinerator amid the meadows of the Womanagh to produce, among other things, the antihistamine Terfenadine. They told the company they had no problem with the proposal and that no local opposition need be expected.    There's a bungalow close to where Merrell Dow wants to build its plant. Once upon a time, the owners of this bungalow were refused permission to build dormers out from the roof, as these would be out of key with the cottage's style and thus would reduce the rural allure of this tourist-rich vista. Oddly, the envisaged chimney and the daily discharge of effluent into some of the most renowned salmon waters in Europe perturbed the authorities less.    Irksome procedures such as baseline studies to determine environmental impact were put aside. The Cork County Council issued planning permission in six weeks flat. (It should be added that the Irish national planning authority, on Bord Planeala, which turned down an appeal from farmers against the council's OK to Merrell Dow, is now the object of a major investigation of corruption in two cases elsewhere in Ireland.)    But there was a hitch. The IDA could not deliver on its promise that there would be no local trouble. The citizens of east Cork and west Waterford, most of all the dairy farmers along the Womanagh, took a keener interest in their prospective neighbor.    Soon such unpleasant episodes on the curriculum vitae of Dow Chemical as its manufacture of Agent Orange and its refusal in the early '80s to let the Environmental Protection Agency inspect its Midland plant in Michigan for dioxin contamination became common currency in this bit of Ireland, as did the distribution by Richardson-Merrell (from which Merrell Dow partly sprang) of thalidomide. This June, the EPA named 13 Dow factories in connection with the release of carcinogens into the atmosphere. In three cases the contaminant was methylene chloride, a chemical that would be used at the Killeagh factory.    The farmers around Killeagh note that in summer there's not much water in the Womanagh, so the stream could scarcely absorb 100,000 gallons of effluent a day; a ditch of industrial sewage would pass through their dairy lands. In winter the Womanagh backs up and floods these same fields; if the factory were running, the waste water from Terfenadine production, which is &quot;contraindicated&quot; for young children and pregnant women, would be dumped on the grass and thus into the milk and butter consumed in the region. Tidal patterns in Youghal Bay would send the effluent up the tidal Blackwater and along the coast into waters to which the Irish tourist board spends a great deal of money each year to lure anglers and tourists.    Merrell Dow's people on the spot have not exactly helped their cause. Thus far the company has refused to divulge details about the incinerator capable of sending dioxins across a large stretch of the southern Irish coastline. A glossy brochure sent to every household in Youghal assuring the populace that the plant would have no unhealthful effects sent suspicions soaring that the reverse was in fact the case.    Maeve Clark, a spokeswoman for the company based in Cork, tells me that it plans to start building next month even though appeals against the project are planned for Irish and European courts. This threat to pre-empt due process has particularly outraged organizations opposing the project.    The Merrell Dow affair has become a political mine field too. For a long time the IDA and Merrell Dow claimed that opposition was confined to a few farmers and enviro-cranks. Then a survey commissioned from the foremost Irish polling organization, MRBI, showed that the population of the area, including Killeagh itself, was against the project by a margin of 2 to 1. In the midst of the recent election, Prime Minister Charles Haughey said the project would not go ahead unless all parties, including local residents, were satisfied about safety and health precautions. If Merrell Dow pushes ahead, there's a very strong possibility that the resistance to the project could turn ugly. Many think that in the end Mr. Haughey will urge Merrell Dow to go elsewhere.    One of the most interesting features in the battle is the fierce local opposition. This is a poor area in which unemployment is high and emigration endemic. But with Merrell Dow the IDA can no longer plant any company down on the landscape under the slogan &quot;Jobs at any cost, growth at any price.&quot; In fact, a company official has conceded that there could be just six jobs for common laborers from Youghal. A study by Ireland's Economic Social Research Institute has just shown that if the present rising curve of profit repatriation by multinationals based here continues, the IDA's tax treats for corporate guests will produce no net benefit to the economy. This study recommends investment in indigenous resource-based industries.    Companies like Merrell Dow, hoping to hunker down peacefully in Third World Ireland, are finding that even poor people want to breathe clean air and swim in untroubled waters.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and the LA Weekly. </TEXT></DOC>