<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880607-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHAMIR SAID Israel wouldn't make any concessions to the Soviet Union.    The Israeli prime minister, who is to meet with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze at the U.N. later this week, said his government wouldn't agree to political concessions in exchange for diplomatic relations with Moscow. Meanwhile, Shultz traveled to Damascus to continue his campaign for Arab-Israeli peace, and said the U.S. and the Soviet Union would continue discussions on a Mideast settlement. The secretary of state met with Syrian President Assad.    Israel's army reopened Arab high schools in the West Bank that had been closed since February in an effort to quell unrest in the occupied territories.    ---   BLACKS DEFIED South Africa's government and launched a three-day strike.    Hundreds of thousands of black workers and students violated Pretoria's emergency regulations and participated in the national walkout to protest restrictions against labor unions and apartheid opponents. Many factories were closed, including all seven of the country's major auto plants. The mining industry, however, said it was unaffected by the strike. Scores of schools were empty. The government said the protest was illegal and that workers might be dismissed. Scattered violence was reported.    The three-day strike would be the longest nationwide protest since a state of emergency was declared in June 1986 to thwart an anti-apartheid revolt.    ---   Dukakis moved closer to the Democratic presidential nomination, picking up 60 delegates who had been uncommitted or supporters of drop-out Gore. His total rose to 1,874 delegates, 207 short of the nomination. Jackson, meanwhile, threatened a convention floor fight unless the Democrats agree to declare South Africa a terrorist nation.    ---   The Supreme Court struck down as unconstitutional a Pennsylvania rule setting a six-year deadline for mothers of illegitimate children to sue alleged fathers for child support. The court also agreed to review federal regulations requiring drug testing of railroad workers involved in accidents or safety-rule violations.    ---   The Iran-Contra case judge rejected a defense request for top-secret government documents relating to such operations as U.S. intelligence gathering in Iran and efforts to free Americans held in Lebanon. The judge, however, again questioned whether North, Poindexter and two other defendants could get a fair trial on conspiracy charges.    ---   Reagan said that while the Moscow summit produced &quot;important additional strides&quot; toward a treaty reducing long-range nuclear missiles, &quot;we still don't know&quot; when such a pact can be achieved. The president, in a post-summit assessment, said his greatest victory at the talks last week was giving &quot;words of faith&quot; to the Soviet people.    ---   The FDA will ban as of July 15 four color additives commonly used in cosmetics and drugs. The additives -- Red Nos. 8, 9 and 19 and Orange No. 17 -- have been proved to cause cancer in animals. The decision was viewed as a victory for Ralph Nader's consumer group, which filed a lawsuit over the dyes in 1976.    ---   Beijing University students called for renewed demonstrations like the pro-democracy rallies of late 1986. Student leaders, speaking to hundreds of students, cited the need for democracy, human rights and a free press and criticized the Communist Party. A protest is expected tomorrow in Tiananmen Square.    ---   U.S. officials said that Iran's recent military and economic setbacks are reviving debate within the Reagan administration over whether to reach out to so-called &quot;pragmatists&quot; in Tehran. The problems are causing Iran to focus on internal revival rather than external aggression, some administration officials believe.    An Iranian member of parliament called for an inquiry into Tehran's recent battlefield defeats in its Persian Gulf war with Iraq. A Tehran newspaper quoted the senior official as saying anyone responsible for Iran's reverses should be punished.    ---   House Speaker Wright used a Washington aide to help edit a book that earned him $54,600, the former aide said. House records show Wright's office paid the ex-aide more than $2,000 &quot;for official business&quot; in Texas. The former employee, confirming a Washington Post report, said he worked on the book during the trip.    ---   Russian Orthodox bishops opened a general church council to commemorate 1,000 years of Christianity in what currently is the Soviet Union. The four-day council in Zagorsk, about 35 miles north of Moscow, is only the third such gathering allowed in the atheist nation since World War II.    ---   Opposition politicians in Sweden plan to call for a no-confidence vote in the government of Prime Minister Carlsson unless Justice Minister Ann-Greta Leijon resigns. Recent disclosures indicate that Leijon bypassed an official police inquiry into the 1986 assassination of Prime Minister Olof Palme, and authorized a privately funded probe.    ---   The Philippine Senate passed legislation that bans nuclear weapons and nuclear-armed ships from the country. A similar measure, aimed at U.S. military bases in the Philippines, is pending in the House. The U.S. opposes such prohibitions.    ---   South Korean police arrested 148 students enroute to a rally for national reunification near the border with North Korea. Meanwhile, authorities said a 24-year-old student who set himself afire during a weekend anti-government protest in Seoul died. </TEXT></DOC>